# Paper: Huck 2000

INTRODUCING THE IA-64
ARCHITECTURE
ADVANCES IN MICROPROCESSOR DESIGN, INTEGRATED CIRCUITS, AND
COMPILER TECHNOLOGY HAVE INCREASED THE INTEREST IN PARALLEL
INSTRUCTION EXECUTION. A JOINT HP-INTEL TEAM DESIGNED THE IA-64
PROCESSOR INSTRUCTION SET ARCHITECTURE WITH PARALLELISM IN MIND.

Jerry Huck
Dale Morris
Jonathan Ross
Hewlett-Packard
Allan Knies
Hans Mulder
Rumi Zahir
Intel

Microprocessors continue on the
relentless path to provide more performance.
Every new innovation in computing—distributed computing on the Internet, data mining, Java programming, and multimedia data
streams—requires more cycles and computing power. Even traditional applications such
as databases and numerically intensive codes
present increasing problem sizes that drive
demand for higher performance.
Design innovations, compiler technology,
manufacturing process improvements, and
integrated circuit advances have been driving
exponential performance increases in microprocessors. To continue this growth in the
future, Hewlett-Packard and Intel architects
examined barriers in contemporary designs
and found that instruction-level parallelism
(ILP) can be exploited for further performance increases.
This article examines the motivation, operation, and benefits of the major features of
IA-64. Intel’s IA-64 manual provides a complete specification of the IA-64 architecture.1

Background and objectives
IA-64 is the first architecture to bring ILP
features to general-purpose microprocessors.
Parallel semantics, predication, data speculation, large register files, register rotation, con-

trol speculation, hardware exception deferral,
register stack engine, wide floating-point exponents, and other features contribute to IA-64’s
primary objective. That goal is to expose,
enhance, and exploit ILP in today’s applications to increase processor performance.
ILP pioneers2,3 developed many of these
concepts to find parallelism beyond traditional architectures. Subsequent industry and
academic research4,5 significantly extended
earlier concepts. This led to published works
that quantified the benefits of these ILPenhancing features and substantially improved
performance.
Starting in 1994, the joint HP-Intel IA-64
architecture team leveraged this prior work and
incorporated feedback from compiler and
processor design teams to engineer a powerful
initial set of features. They also carefully
designed the instruction set to be expandable to
address new technologies and future workloads.

Architectural basics
A historical problem facing the designers of
computer architectures is the difficulty of
building in sufficient flexibility to adapt to
changing implementation strategies. For
example, the number of available instruction
bits, the register file size, the number of
address space bits, or even how much paral-

12
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

0272-1732/00/$10.00  2000 IEEE

lelism a future implementation might employ
have limited how well architectures can evolve
over time.
The Intel-HP architecture team designed
IA-64 to permit future expansion by providing sufficient architectural capacity:
a full 64-bit address space,
• large directly accessible register files,
• enough instruction bits to communicate
information from the compiler to the
hardware, and
• the ability to express arbitrarily large
amounts of ILP.
•

128 GRs

128 FRs

128 ARs

r0
r1

f0
f1

ar0
ar1

r31
r32

f31
f32

Static

Stacked/
rotating

Rotating
r126
r127

f126
f127

ar126
ar127

64 + 1 bit

82 bits

64 bits

64 PRs
p0

p15 p16

p62 p63

Figure 1 summarizes the register state; Figure
2 shows the bundle and instruction formats.

Rotating

Register resources

8 BRs

IA-64 provides 128 65-bit general registers;
64 of these bits specify data or memory
addresses and 1 bit holds a deferred exception
token or not-a-thing (NaT) bit. The “Control speculation” section provides more details
on the NaT bit.
In addition to the general registers, IA-64
contains

b0

128 82-bit floating-point registers,
• space for up to 128 64-bit special-purpose application registers (used to support features such as the register stack and
software pipelining),
• eight 64-bit branch registers for function
call linkage and return, and
• 64 one-bit predicate registers that hold the
result of conditional expression evaluation.
•

1 bit

b6 b7

64 bits

AR Application register
BR Branch register
FR Floating-point register
GR General register
PR Predicate register

Figure 1. IA-64 application state.

Instruction 2

Instruction 1

Instruction 0

Template

41 bits

41 bits

41 bits

5 bits

(a)

Op

Register 1

Register 2

Register 3

Predicate

14 bits

7 bits

7 bits

7 bits

6 bits

(b)

Figure 2. IA-64 bundle (a) and instruction (b) formats.

Instruction encoding
Since IA-64 has 128 general and 128 floating-point registers, instruction encodings use
7 bits to specify each of three register
operands. Most instructions also have a predicate register argument that requires another
6 bits. In a normal 32-bit instruction encoding, this would leave only 5 bits to specify the
opcode. To provide for sufficient opcode space
and to enable flexibility in the encodings, IA64 uses a 128-bit encoding (called a bundle)
that has room for three instructions.
Each of the three instructions has 41 bits
with the remaining 5 bits used for the template. The template bits help decode and route

instructions and indicate the location of stops
that mark the end of groups of instructions
that can execute in parallel.

Distributing responsibility
To achieve high performance, most modern
microprocessors must determine instruction
dependencies, analyze and extract available
parallelism, choose where and when to execute
instructions, manage all cache and prediction
resources, and generally direct all other ongoing activities at runtime. Although intended
to reduce the burden on compilers, out-oforder processors still require substantial

SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2000
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

13

IA-64 ARCHITECTURE

{ .mii
add r1 = r2, r3
sub r4 = r4, r5 ;;
shr r7 = r4, r12 ;;
}
{ .mmi
ld8 r2 = [r1] ;;
st8 [r1] = r23
tbit p1,p2=r4,5
}
{ .mbb
ld8 r45 = [r55]
(p3)br.call b1=func1
(p4)br.cond Label1
}
{ .mfi
st4 [r45]=r6
fmac f1=f2,f3
add r3=r3,8 ;;
}

amounts of microarchitecture-specific compiler support
to achieve their fastest speeds.
IA-64 strives to make the
best trade-offs in dividing
responsibility between what
the processor must do at runtime and what the compiler
can do at compilation time.

ILP

Compilers for all current
mainstream microprocessors
produce code with the understanding that regardless of how
the processor actually executes
those instructions, the results
will appear to be executed one
at a time and in the exact order
Figure 3. Example instruction groups.
they were written. We refer to
such architectures as having
sequential in-order execution
if ( (a==0) || (b<=5) ||
semantics, or simply sequen(c!=d) || (f & 0x2) ){
tial semantics.
r3 = 8;
Conforming to sequential
}
semantics was easy to achieve
when microprocessors executed instructions one at a time
Figure 4. Compound conditional code.
and in their program-specified
order. However, to achieve
acceptable
performance
cmp.ne p1 = r0,r0
add t = -5, b;;
improvements, designers have
had to design multiple-issue,
out-of-order execution procescmp.eq.or p1 = 0,a
cmp.ge.or p1 = 0,t
sors. The IA-64 instruction set
cmp.ne.or p1 = c,d
addresses this split between the
tbit.or p1 = 1,f,1 ;;
architecture and its implementations by providing par(p1) mov r3 = 8
allel execution semantics so
that processors don’t need to
Figure 5. Example parallel compare. The
examine register dependencies
to extract parallelism from a
newly computed predicate is used in the
serial program specification.
third instruction group, shown here in plain
Nor do they have to reorder
type.
instructions to achieve the
shortest code sequence.
IA-64 realizes parallel execution semantics
in the form of instruction groups. The compiler creates instruction groups so that all
instructions in an instruction group can be
safely executed in parallel. While such a
grouping may seem like a complex task, current compilers already have all of the infor-

14

mation necessary to do this. IA-64 just makes
it possible for the compiler to express that
parallelism.
The code in Figure 3 shows four instruction
groups of various sizes. The gray bars indicate
the extent of the instruction groups, which are
terminated by double semicolons (;;).

Control flow parallelism
While instruction groups allow independent computational instructions to be placed
together, expressing parallelism in computation related to program control flow requires
additional support. As an example, many
applications execute code that performs complex compound conditionals like the one
shown in Figure 4.
In this example, the conditional expression
needs to compute the logical Or of four smaller expressions. Normally, such computations
can only be done as a sequence of test/branch
computations or in a binary tree reduction (if
the code meets certain safety requirements).
Since such compound conditionals are common, IA-64 provides parallel compares that
allow compound And and Or conditions to
be computed in parallel.
Figure 5 shows IA-64 assembly code for the
C code in Figure 4. Register p1 is initialized to
false in the first instruction group; the conditions for each of the Or’d expressions is computed in parallel in the second instruction
group; the newly computed predicate is used
in the third instruction group, shown here in
plain type.
The parallel compare operation (the
instructions in boldface) will set p1 to be true
if any of the individual conditions are true.
Otherwise, the value in p1 remains false.
Control parallelism is also present when a
program needs to select one of several possible
branch targets, each of which might be controlled by a different conditional expression.
Such cases would normally need a sequence of
individual conditions and branches. IA-64
provides multiway branches that allow several normal branches to be grouped together and
executed in a single instruction group. The
example in Figure 6 demonstrates a single multiway branch that either selects one of three
possible branch targets or falls through.
As shown in these examples, the use of parallel compares and multiway branches can

IEEE MICRO

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

if ( r1 == r2 )
r9 = r10 - r11;
else
r5 = r6 + r7;

{ .mii
cmp.eq p1,p2 = r1,r2
cmp.ne p3,p4 = 4, r5
cmp.lt p5,p6 = r8,r9
}
{ .bbb
(p1) br.cond label1
(p3) br.cond label2
(p5) br.call b4 = label3
}
// fall through code here
Figure 6. Multiway branch example.

substantially decrease the critical path related
to control flow computation and branching.

Influencing dynamic events
While the compiler can handle some activities, hardware better manages many other areas
including branch prediction, instruction
caching, data caching, and prefetching. For
these cases, IA-64 improves on standard
instruction sets by providing an extensive set
of hints that the compiler uses to tell the hardware about likely branch behavior (taken or not
taken, amount to prefetch at branch target) and
memory operations (in what level of the memory hierarchy to cache data). The hardware can
then manage these resources more effectively,
using a combination of compiler-provided
information and histories of runtime behavior.

Finding and creating parallelism
IA-64 not only provides new ways of
expressing parallelism in compiled code, it also
provides an array of tools for compilers to create additional parallelism.

Predication
Branching is a major cause of lost performance in many applications. To help reduce
the negative effects of branches, processors use
branch prediction so they can continue to execute instructions while the branch direction
and target are being resolved. To achieve this,
instructions after a branch are executed speculatively until the branch is resolved. Once
the branch is resolved, the processor has determined its branch prediction was correct and
the speculative instructions are okay to commit, or that those instructions need to be

(a)
Time
• (if r1 == r2) branch
• Speculative instructions executed
• Branch resolved (misprediction)
• Speculative instructions squashed
• Correct instructions executed
(b)

Figure 7. Example conditional (a) and conditional branch use (b).

thrown away and the correct set of instructions fetched and executed.
When the prediction is wrong, the processor will have executed instructions along both
paths, but sequentially (first the predicted
path, then the correct path). Thus, the cost of
incorrect prediction is quite expensive. For
example, in the code shown in Figure 7a, if
the branch at the beginning of the fragment
mispredicts, the flow of events at runtime will
proceed, as shown in Figure 7b.
To help reduce the effect of branch mispredictions, IA-64 provides predication, a feature that allows the compiler to execute
instructions from multiple conditional paths
at the same time, and to eliminate the branches that could have caused mispredictions. For
example, the compiler can easily detect when
there are sufficient processor resources to execute instructions from both sides of an if-thenelse clause. Thus, it’s possible to execute both
sides of some conditionals in the time it would
have taken to execute either one of them
alone. The following code shows how to generate code for our example in Figure 7a:
cmp.eq p1, p2 = rl, r2;;
(p1) sub r9 = r10, r11
(p2) add r5 = r6, r7

The cmp (compare) generates two predicates that are set to one or zero, based on the
result of the comparison (p1 will be set to the
opposite of p2). Once these predicates are generated, they can be used to guard execution:
the add instruction will only execute if p2 has
a true value, and the sub instruction will only

SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2000
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

15

IA-64 ARCHITECTURE

execute if p1 has a true value.
Figure 8 shows the time flow
for the code with predication
after the branch has been
Figure 8. Using predication.
removed. By using predication
to simplify control flow, the
compiler exposes a larger pool
of instructions in which to find
parallel work. Although some
of these instructions will be
cancelled during execution, the
added parallelism allows the
sequence to execute in fewer
cycles.6
In general, predication is
performed in IA-64 by evaluating conditional expressions
with compare (cmp) operations and saving the resulting
true (1) or false (0) values in a
special set of 1-bit predicate
Figure 9. Control path through a function.
registers. Nearly all instructions can be predicated. This
simple, clean concept provides a very powerful way to increase the ability of an IA-64 processor to exploit parallelism,
reduce the performance penalties of branches
(by removing them), and support advanced
code motion that would be difficult or impossible in instruction sets without predication.
Time

• Compare (r1 == r2)
• Both sides executed simultaneously

Scheduling and speculation
Compilers attempt to increase parallelism
by scheduling instructions based on predictions about likely control paths. Paths are
made of sequences of instructions that are
grouped into basic blocks. Basic blocks are
groups of instructions with a single entry
point and single exit point. The exit point can
be a multiway branch.
If a particular sequence of basic blocks is
likely to be in the flow of control, the compiler can consider the instructions in these
blocks as a single group for the purpose of
scheduling code. Figure 9 illustrates a program
fragment with multiple basic blocks, and possible control paths. The highlighted blocks
indicate those most likely to be executed.
Since these regions of blocks have more
instructions than individual basic blocks, there
is a greater opportunity to find parallel work.
However, to exploit this parallelism, compilers
must move instructions past barriers related to

16

control flow and data flow. Instructions that
are scheduled before it is known whether their
results will be used are called speculative.
Of the code written by a programmer, only
a small percentage is actually executed at runtime. The task of choosing important instructions, determining their dependencies, and
specifying which instructions should be executed together is algorithmically complex and
time-consuming. In non-EPIC architectures,
the processor does much of this work at runtime. However, a compiler can perform these
tasks more efficiently because it has more
time, memory, and a larger view of the program than the hardware.
The compiler will optimize the execution
time of the commonly executed blocks by
choosing the instructions that are most critical to the execution time of the critical region
as a whole. Within these regions, the compiler performs instruction selection, prioritization, and reordering.
Without the IA-64 features, these kinds of
transformations would be difficult or impossible for a compiler to perform. The key features enabling these transformations are
control speculation, data speculation, and
predication.

Control speculation
IA-64 can reduce the dynamic effects of
branches by removing them; however, not all
branches can or should be removed using
predication. Those that remain affect both the
processor at runtime and the compiler during
compilation.
Since loads have a longer latency than most
computational instructions and they tend to
start time-critical chains of instructions, any
constraints placed on the compiler’s ability to
perform code motion on loads can limit the
exploitation of parallelism. One such constraint relates to properly handling exceptions.
For example, load instructions may attempt
to reference data to which the program hasn’t
been granted access. When a program makes
such an illegal access, it usually must be terminated. Additionally, all exceptions must also
be delivered as though the program were executed in the order the programmer wrote it.
Since moving a load past a branch changes the
sequence of memory accesses relative to the
control flow of the program, non-EPIC archi-

IEEE MICRO

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IA-64 virtual memory model
Virtual memory is the core of an operating system’s multitasking and same TLB entries can be shared between different processes, such as
protection mechanisms. Compared to 32-bit virtual memory, management shared code or data.
of 64-bit address spaces requires new mechanisms primarily because of
the increase in address space size: 32 bits can map 4 Gbytes, while 64 bits Protection keys
can map 16 billion Gbytes of virtual space.
While RIDs provide efficient sharing of region-size objects, software
A linear 32-bit page table requires 1 million page table entries (assum- often is interested in sharing objects at a smaller granularity such as in
ing a 4-Kbyte page size), and can reside in physical memory. A linear 64- object databases or operating system message queues. IA-64 protection
bit page table would be 4 billion times larger—too big to be physically key registers (PKRs) provide page-granular control over access while conmapped in its entirety. Additionally, 64-bit applications are likely to popu- tinuing to share TLB entries among multiple processes.
late the virtual address space more sparsely. Due to larger data structures
As shown in Figure A, each TLB entry contains a protection key field that
than those in 32-bit applications, these applications may have a larger is inserted into the TLB when creating that translation. When a memory
footprint in physical memory.
Region
All of these effects result in more
Virtual address
registers
63 61 60
0
pressure on the processor’s address
rr0
translation structure: the translarr1
3
rr2 Region ID
tion look-aside buffer. While growVirtual page number
Offset
Virtual region number (VRN)
ing the size of on-chip TLBs helps,
(VPN)
rr7
IA-64 provides several architectural mechanisms that allow operat24
ing systems to significantly increase
Search
Search
the use of available capacity:
Region ID
Key
VPN
Rights Physical page number (PPN)
• Regions and protection keys
enable much higher degrees
of TLB entry sharing.
• Multiple page sizes reduce
TLB pressure. IA-64 supports
4-Kbyte to 256-Mbyte pages.
• TLB entries are tagged with
address space identifiers
(called region IDs) to avoid
TLB flushing on context
switch.

Translation look-aside buffer (TLB)

24
pkr0
pkr1
pkr2

Key

Search
Rights

Protection
key registers
0

62
PPN

Offset

Physical address

Figure A. Address translation.

Regions
As shown in Figure A, bits 63 to 61 of a virtual address index into eight
region registers that contain 24-bit region identifiers (RIDs). The 24-bit RID
is concatenated with the virtual page number (VPN) to form a unique lookup
into the TLB. The TLB lookup generates two main items: the physical page
number and access privileges (keys, access rights, and access bits among
others). The region registers allow the operating system to concurrently
map 8 out of 224 possible address spaces, each 261 bytes in size. The operating system uses the RID to distinguish shared and private address spaces.
Typically, operating systems assign specific regions to specific uses. For
example, region 0 may be used for user private application data, region 1
for shared libraries and text images, region 2 for mapping of shared files,
and region 7 for mapping of the operating system kernel itself.
On context switch, instead of invalidating the entire TLB, the operating system only rewrites the user’s private region registers with the RID
of the switched-to process. Shared-region’s RIDs remain in place, and the

reference hits in the TLB, the processor looks up the matching entry’s key
in the PKR register file. A key match results in additional access rights
being consulted to grant or deny the memory reference. If the lookup fails,
hardware generates a key miss fault.
The software key miss handler can now manage the PKR contents as a
cache of most recently used protection keys on a per-process basis. This
allows processes with different permission levels to access shared data
structures and use the same TLB entry. Direct address sharing is very useful
for multiple process computations that communicate through shared data
structures; one example is producer-consumer multithreaded applications.
The IA-64 region model provides protection and sharing at a large granularity. Protection keys are orthogonal to regions and allow fine-grain
page-level sharing. In both cases, TLB entries and page tables for shared
objects can be shared, without requiring unnecessary duplication of page
tables and TLB entries in the form of virtual aliasing.

SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2000
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

17

IA-64 ARCHITECTURE

ld8.s r1=[r2]
use r1
instrA
instrB
…
br

instrA
instrB
…
br
Barrier

ld8 r1=[r2]
use r1
(a)

chk.s

(b)

Figure 10. Comparing the scheduling of control speculative
computations in traditional (a) and IA-64 (b) architectures. IA64 allows elevation of loads and their uses above branches.

ld8.a r1=[r2]
instrA
instrB
…
store
Id8 r1=[r2]

use r1
instrA
instrB
…
store
chk.a

use r1
(a)

(b)

Figure 11. Data speculation example in traditional (a) and IA-64
(b) architectures. IA-64 allows elevation of load and use even
above a store.

tectures constrain such code motion.
IA-64 provides a new class of load instructions called speculative loads, which can safely be scheduled before one or more prior
branches. In the block where the programmer
originally placed the load, the compiler schedules a speculation check (chk.s), as shown in
Figure 10. In IA-64, this process is referred to
as control speculation. While the example
shown is very simple, this type of code motion
can be very useful in reducing the execution
time of more complex tasks such as searching
down a linked list while simultaneously checking for NULL pointers.
At runtime, if a speculative load results in
an exception, the exception is deferred, and a
deferred exception token (a NaT) is written
to the target register. The chk.s instruction
checks the target register for a NaT, and if

18

present, branches to special “fix-up” code
(which the compiler also generates). If needed, the fix-up code will reexecute the load
nonspeculatively, and then branch back to the
main program body.
Since almost all instructions in IA-64 will
propagate NaTs during execution (rather than
raising faults), entire calculation chains may be
scheduled speculatively. For example, when one
of the operand registers to an add instruction
contains a NaT, the add doesn’t raise a fault.
Rather, it simply writes a NaT to its target register, thus propagating the deferred exception.
If the results of two or more speculative loads
are eventually used in a common computation,
NaT propagation allows the compiler to only
insert a single chk.s to check the result of multiple speculative computations.
In the event that a chk.s detects a deferred
exception on the result of this calculation chain,
the fix-up code simply reexecutes the entire
chain, this time resolving exceptions as they’re
discovered. This mechanism is termed control
speculation because it permits the expression of
parallelism across a program’s control flow.
Although the hardware required to support control speculation is simple, this mechanism lets
the compiler expose large amounts of parallelism to the hardware to increase performance.

Data speculation
Popular programming languages such as C
provide pointer data types for accessing memory. However, pointers often make it impossible for the compiler to determine what
location in memory is being referenced. More
specifically, such references can prevent the
compiler from knowing whether a store and
a subsequent load reference the same memory location, preventing the compiler from
reordering the instructions.
IA-64 solves this problem with instructions
that allow the compiler to schedule a load
before one or more prior stores, even when the
compiler is not sure if the references overlap.
This is called data speculation; its basic usage
model is analogous to control speculation.
When the compiler needs to schedule a load
ahead of an earlier store, it uses an advanced load
(ld.a), then schedules an advanced load check
instruction (chk.a) after all the intervening store
operations. See the example in Figure 11.
An advanced load works much the same as

IEEE MICRO

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a traditional load. However, at runtime it also
records information such as the target register,
memory address accessed, and access size in
the advanced load address table. The ALAT is
a cachelike hardware structure with contentaddressable memory. Figure 12 shows the
structure of the ALAT.
When the store is executed, the hardware
compares the store address to all ALAT entries
and clears entries with addresses that overlap
with the store. Later, when the chk.a is executed, hardware checks the ALAT for the
entry installed by its corresponding advanced
load. If an entry is found, the speculation has
succeeded and chk.a does nothing. If no entry
is found, there may have been a collision, and
the check instruction branches to fix-up code
to reexecute the code (just as was done with
control speculation).
Because the fix-up mechanism is general,
the compiler can speculate not only the load
but also an entire chain of calculations ahead
of any number of possibly conflicting stores.
Compared to other structures such as
caches, the chip area and effort required to
implement the ALAT are smaller and simpler
than equivalent structures needed in out-oforder processors. Yet, this feature enables the
compiler to aggressively rearrange compiled
code to exploit parallelism.

Register model
Most architectures provide a relatively small
set of compiler-visible registers (usually 32).
However, the need for higher performance has
caused chip designers to create larger sets of
physical registers (typically around 100),
which the processor then manages dynamically even though the compiler only views a
subset of those registers.
The IA-64 general-register file provides 128
registers visible to the compiler. This approach
is more efficient than a hardware-managed
register file because a compiler can tell when
the program no longer needs the contents of
a specific register. These general registers are
partitioned into two subsets: 32 static and 96
stacked, which can be renamed under software control. The 32 static registers (r0 to r31)
are managed in much the same way as registers in a standard RISC architecture.
The stacked registers implement the IA-64
register stack. This mechanism automatically

provides a compiler with a set
Stores CAM on the addr field
of up to 96 fresh registers (r32
to r127) upon procedure
reg #
addr
Size
entry. While the register stack
provides the compiler with
reg #
addr
Size
the illusion of unlimited register space across procedure
calls, the hardware actually
saves and restores on-chip
reg #
addr
Size
physical registers to and from
memory.
By explicitly managing regchk.a/ld.c CAM on reg # field
isters using the register allocation instruction (alloc), the Figure 12. ALAT organization.
compiler controls the way the
physical register space is used.
Figure 13’s example shows a register stack conr42
figured to have eight local registers and three
Out
r40
output registers.
r39
The compiler specifies the number of regLocal
isters that a routine requires by using the alloc
instruction. Alloc can also specify how many
r32
of these registers are local (which are used for
computation within the procedure), and how Figure 13. Initial register
many are output (which are used to pass para- stack frame after using the
meters when this procedure calls another). alloc instruction: eight local
The stacked registers in a procedure always and three output.
start at r32.
On a call, the registers are renamed such
that the local registers from the previous stack
frame are hidden, and what were the output
registers of the calling routine now have register numbers starting at r32 in the called routine. The freshly called procedure would then
perform its own alloc, setting up its own local
registers (which include the parameter registers it was called with), and its own output
registers (for when it, in turn, makes a call).
Figure 14a (next page) shows this process.
On a return, this renaming is reversed, and
the stack frame of the calling procedure is
restored (see Figure 14b).
The register stack really only has a finite
number of registers. When procedures request
more registers than are currently available, an
automatic register stack engine (RSE) stores
registers of preceding procedures into memory in parallel with the execution of the called
procedure. Similarly, on return from a call,
the RSE can restore registers from memory.
As described here, RSE behavior is synchronous; however, IA-64 allows processors
to be built with asynchronous RSEs that can

SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2000
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

19

IA-64 ARCHITECTURE

r43
Out

r42
Out

r42
r41

r42
Out

Out
r40

r34

r39

Local

r32

r40

Local
r32

r32

r39
Local
r32
br.call

alloc 10, 2

(a)

br.ret
(b)

Figure 14. Procedure call (a) and return (b).

speculatively spill and fill registers in the background
Iteration 2
while the processor core con(a)
tinues normal execution.
This allows spills and fills to
be performed on otherwise
unused memory ports before
Time
the spills and fills are actually needed.
(b)
Compared to conventional
Figure 15. Sequential (a) versus pipelined (b)
architectures, IA-64’s register
stack removes all the save and
execution.
restore instructions, reduces
data traffic during a call or
return, and shortens the critical path around
calls and returns. In one simulation performed
on a PA-RISC-hosted database code, adding
RSE functionality to PA-RISC removed 30%
of the loads and stores, while consuming only
5% of the execution ports dynamically.
Iteration 1

Software pipelining
Computers are very good at performing iterative tasks, and for this reason many programs
include loop constructs that repeatedly perform the same operations. Since these loops
generally encompass a large portion of a program’s execution time, it’s important to expose
as much loop-level parallelism as possible.
Although instructions in a loop are executed frequently, they may not offer a sufficient degree of parallel work to take advantage
of all of a processor’s execution resources.
Conceptually, overlapping one loop iteration
with the next can often increase the parallelism, as shown in Figure 15. This is called
software pipelining, since a given loop itera-

20

tion is started before the previous iteration
has finished. It’s analogous to the way hardware pipelining works.
While this approach sounds simple, without sufficient architectural support a number
of issues limit the effectiveness of software
pipelining because they require many additional instructions:
• managing the loop count,
• handling the renaming of registers for the
pipeline,
• finishing the work in progress when the
loop ends,
• starting the pipeline when the loop is
entered, and
• unrolling to expose cross-iteration
parallelism.
In some cases this overhead could increase
code size by as much as 10 times the original
loop code. Because of this, software pipelining
is typically only used in special technical computing applications in which loop counts are
large and the overheads can be amortized.
With IA-64, most of the overhead associated with software pipelining can be eliminated. Special application registers to
maintain the loop count (LC) and the pipeline
length for draining the software pipeline (the
epilog count, or EC) help reduce overhead
from loop counting and testing for loop termination in the body of the loop.
In conjunction with the loop registers, special loop-type branches perform several activities depending on the type of branch (see
Figure 16). They

IEEE MICRO

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

• automatically decrement
the loop counters after
each iteration,
• test the loop count values to determine if the
loop should continue,
and
• cause the subset of the
general, floating, and
predicate registers to be
automatically renamed
after each iteration by
decrementing a register
rename base (rrb) register.

ctop, cexit

LC?

== 0 (epilog)

(Special
unrolled
loops)
>1

(Prolog/kernel)

!= 0

EC?

== 0

== 1

LC--

LC = LC

LC = LC

LC = LC

EC = EC

EC--

EC--

EC = EC

PR[63] = 1

PR[63] = 0

PR[63] = 0

PR[63] = 0

RRB-RRB-RRB-RRB = RRB
For each rotation, all the
rotating registers appear to
move up one higher register
ctop: branch
ctop: fall-through
EC Epilog count
position, with the last rotating
LC Loop count
cexit: fall-through
cexit: branch
register wrapping back around
to the bottom. Each rotation Figure 16. Loop-type branch behavior.
effectively advances the software pipeline by one stage.
The set of general registers that rotate are approach, they require much more complex
programmable using the alloc instruction. The hardware, and do not deal as well with probset of predicate (p16 to p63) and floating (f32 lems such as recurrence (where one loop iterto f127) registers that rotate is fixed. Instruc- ation creates a value consumed by a later loop
tions br.ctop and br.cexit provide support for iteration). Full examples of software-pipelined
counted loops (similar instructions exist to loops are provided elsewhere in this issue.8
support pipelining of while-type loops).
The rotating predicates are important Summary of parallelism features
because they serve as pipeline stage valid bits,
These parallelism tools work in a synergisallowing the hardware to automatically drain tic fashion, each supporting the other. For
the software pipeline by turning instructions example, program loops may contain loads
on or off depending on whether the pipeline and stores through pointers. Data speculation
is starting up, executing, or draining. Mahlke allows the compiler to use the softwareet al. provide some highly optimized specific pipelining mechanism to fully overlap the exeexamples of how software pipelining and cution, even when the loop uses pointers that
may be aliased. Also, scheduling a load early
rotating registers can be used.7
The combination of these loop features and often requires scheduling it out of its basic
predication enables the compiler to generate block and ahead of an earlier store. Speculative
compact code, which performs the essential advanced loads allow both control and data
work of the loop in a highly parallel form. All speculation mechanisms to be used at once.
of this can be done with the same amount of This increased ILP keeps parallel hardware
code as would be needed for a non-software- functional units busier, executing a program’s
pipelined loop. Since there is little or no code critical path in less time.
expansion required to software-pipeline loops
in IA-64, the compiler can use software
hile designers and architects have a
pipelining much more aggressively as a genmodel for how IA-64 features will be
eral loop optimization, providing increased implemented and used, we anticipate new
parallelism for a broad set of applications.
ways to use the IA-64 architecture as software
Although out-of-order hardware approach- and hardware designs mature. Each day
es can approximate a software-pipelined brings discoveries of new code-generation

W

SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2000
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

21

IA-64 ARCHITECTURE

IA-64 floating-point architecture
The IA-64 FP architecture is a unique combination of features targeted at graphical and
scientific applications. It supports both high computation throughput and high-precision formats. The inclusion of integer and logical operations allows extra flexibility to manipulate
FP numbers and use the FP functional units for complex integer operations.
The primary computation workhorse of the FP architecture is the FMAC instruction, which
computes A ∗ B + C with a single rounding. Traditional FP add and subtract operations are
variants of this general instruction. Divide and square root is supported using a sequence of
FMAC instructions that produce correctly rounded results. Using primitives for divide and
square root simplifies the hardware and allows overlapping with other operations. For example, a group of divides can be software pipelined to provide much higher throughput than a
dedicated nonpipelined divider.
The XMA instruction computes A ∗ B + C with the FP registers interpreted as 64-bit integers. This reuses the FP functional units for integer computation. XMA greatly accelerates
the wide integer computations common to cryptography and computer security. Logical and
field manipulation instructions are also included to simplify math libraries and special-case
handling.
The large 128-element FP register file allows very fast access to a large number of FP (or
sometimes integer) variables. Each register is 82-bits wide, which extends a double-extended format with two additional exponent bits. These extra-exponent bits enable simpler math
library routines that avoid special-case testing. A register’s contents can be treated as a single (32-bit), double (64-bit), or double-extended (80-bit) formatted floating-point number that
complies with the IEEE/ANSI 754 standard. Additionally, a pair of single-precision numbers
can be packed into an FP register. Most FP operations can operate on these packed pairs to
double the operation rate of single-precision computation. This feature is especially useful
for graphics applications in which graphic transforms are nearly doubled in performance over
a traditional approach.
All of the parallel features of IA-64—predication, speculation, and register rotation—
are available to FP instructions. Their capabilities are especially valuable in loops. For example, regular data access patterns, such as recurrences, are very efficient with rotation. The
needed value can be retained for as many iterations as necessary without traditional copy
operations. Also, If statements in the middle of software-pipelined loops are simply handled
with predication.
To improve the exposed parallelism in FP programs, the IEEE standard-mandated flags
can be maintained in any of four different status fields. The flag values are later committed
with an instruction similar to the speculative check. This allows full conformance to the standard without loss of parallelism and performance.

techniques and new approaches to old algorithms. These discoveries are validating that
ILP does exist in programs, and the more you
look, the more you find.
ILP is one level of parallelism that IA-64 is
exploiting, but we continue to pursue other
sources of parallelism through on-chip and
multichip multiprocessing approaches. To
achieve best performance, it is always best to
start with the highest performance uniprocessor, then combine those processors into multiprocessor systems.
In the future, as software and hardware tech-

22

nologies evolve, and as the size and computation demands of workloads continue to grow,
ILP features will be vital to allow processors’
continued increases in performance and scalability. The Intel-HP architecture team designed
the IA-64 from the ground up to be ready for
these changes and to provide excellent performance over a wide range of applications. MICRO
References
1. Intel IA-64 Architecture Software Developer’s Manual, Vols. I-IV, Rev. 1.1, Intel Corp.,
July 2000; http://developer.intel.com.
2. R.P. Colwell et al., “A VLIW Architecture for
a Trace Scheduling Compiler,” IEEE Trans.
Computers, Aug. 1988, pp. 967-979.
3. B.R. Rau et al., “The Cydra 5 Departmental
Supercomputer: Design Philosophies,
Decisions, and Trade-Offs,” Computer, Jan.
1989, pp. 12-35.
4. S.A. Mahlke et al., “Sentinel Scheduling for
Superscalar and VLIW Processors,” Proc.
Fifth Int’l Conf. Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, ACM Press, New York, Oct. 1992,
pp. 238-247.
5. D.M. Gallagher et al., “Dynamic Memory
Disambiguation Using the Memory Conflict
Buffer,” Proc. Sixth Int’l Conf. Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, ACM Press, Oct. 1994,
pp. 183-193.
6. J. Worley et al., “AES Finalists on PA-RISC
and IA-64: Implementations & Performance,”
Proc. The Third Advanced Encryption
Standard Candidate Conf., NIST, Washington,
D.C., Apr. 2000, pp. 57-74.
7. S.A. Mahlke et al., “A Comparison of Full and
Partial Predicated Execution Support for ILP
Processors,” Proc. 22nd Int’l Symp. Computer
Architecture, IEEE Computer Society Press,
Los Alamitos, Calif., June 1995, pp. 138-150.
8. J. Bharadwaj et al., “The Intel IA-64 Compiler
Code Generator,” Special Issue: Microprocessors of the 21st Century, Part 2, Intel
IA-64 Architecture, IEEE Micro, this issue.

Jerry Huck is a chief architect in HP’s computer systems organization. He was responsible for managing the HP side of the joint
HP-Intel IA-64 architecture development
group. His team continues to evolve the PARISC and IA-64 architecture definition, while

IEEE MICRO

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jerry currently works on new application
development environments for HP’s e-services
initiatives. His interests include instruction
set design, virtual memory architecture, code
optimization, and floating-point architecture.
Huck received a PhD degree from Stanford
University.
Dale Morris is currently HP’s chief IA-64
processor architect. As a technical contributor at Hewlett-Packard, he has worked on
enterprise-class computer system design,
development, and extension of the PA-RISC
architecture, and the development and realization of the IA-64 architecture. Morris
earned BSEE and MSEE degrees from the
University of Missouri-Columbia.
Jonathan Ross is a senior scientist/software at
Hewlett-Packard, where he was the HP-UX
kernel development team technical lead. His
first responsibilities were implementing and
improving multiprocessor capabilities of HPUX/PA-RISC kernel virtual memory, process
management, and I/O services. He worked as
a processor architect for IA-64 privilegedmode definition and other instruction set definition tasks. Presently, he is working on tools
for IA-64 system performance characterization. Ross obtained a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering/computers from Stanford
University.
Allan Knies is a senior computer architect on
Intel’s IA-64 architecture team, responsible
for the IA-64 application architecture. He currently leads a small development team that
concentrates on understanding and improving IA-64 application performance through
architecture, microarchitecture, and compiler technology improvements. Knies received
a BS degree in computer science and mathematics from Ohio University and MS and
PhD degrees from Purdue University.
Hans Mulder is a principal engineer in the
Enterprise Processor Division of Intel. He is
responsible for the EPIC-technology-based
architecture enhancements in IA-64 and the
performance projections and design support
related to all Intel IA-64 microprocessors under
development. Earlier, he was an architect at
Intel in the 64-bit program and held an acad-

emic position at Delft University in the Netherlands. Mulder holds a PhD degree in electrical
engineering from Stanford University.
Rumi Zahir is a principal engineer at Intel
Corporation. He is one of Intel’s IA-64
instruction set architects, one of the main
authors of the IA-64 Architecture Software
Developer’s Manual, and has worked on the
Itanium processor, Intel’s first IA-64 CPU.
Apart from processor design, his professional
interests also include computer systems
design, operating system technology, and
dynamic code optimization techniques. Zahir
received a PhD degree in electrical engineering from ETH Zurich in Switzerland.

Direct comments about this article to Allan
Knies, Intel Corp., M/S SC12-304, 2200
Mission College Blvd., Santa Clara, CA
95052; allan.knies@intel.com.

Moving?
Please notify us four weeks in advance
Name (Please print)
New Address
City
State/Country

Zip

Mail to:
IEEE Computer Society
Circulation Department
PO Box 3014
10662 Los Vaqueros Circle
Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314

•
•

•

List new address above.
This notice of address change
will apply to all IEEE publications
to which you subscribe.
If you have a question about
your subscription, place label
here and clip this form to your
letter.

ATTACH
LABEL
HERE

SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2000
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on February 11, 2009 at 10:12 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

23

