# Fork Consistency, SUNDR

```text
6.5840 2026 Lecture 19: Secure Untrusted Data Repository (SUNDR) (2004)

We've mostly ignored security
  A big topic, multiple MIT courses
  A few lectures now, intersection with consistency and replication

Why this paper?
  We routinely trust storage services: github, gmail, AFS, Dropbox.
  Google &c may mean well, but:
    Maybe the server s/w or h/w is buggy, even exploitable.
    Maybe an attacker guessed server admin password, modified s/w.
    Maybe an employee of the cloud provider is corrupt or sloppy.

The problem is real!
  Paper cites successful attacks on open source code repositories.
  Troubling: attacker can then modify source, perhaps w/o detection.

Can we obtain trustworthy storage from non-trustworthy servers?
  [diagram: clients, server]

We want "integrity"
  Readers can check that they retrieve correct data.
  Server can't forge or hide updates or change update order.
    e.g. can't hide a critical security patch.

SUNDR goal is integrity -- not secrecy.
  Uses cryptography only to verify data is correct.

What tools does SUNDR use for integrity?
  cryptographic hashes
  digital signatures

Cryptographic hash, e.g. SHA-1
  h = hash(data)
  h is small, data can be large
  for SHA-1, h is 160 bits
  secure = not practical to find two different inputs that have the same hash
  used to name data and/or to verify integrity

Secure storage with cryptographic hashes
  suppose:
    you're using a cloud provider's key/value server
    you want to detect if server corrupts your data
    here's one way
  client write(v):
    k = hash(v)
    put(k, v)  -- RPC to server
    return k
  client read(k):
    v = get(k)  -- RPC to server
    if hash(v) != k: reject!
    return v
  note k is used in two ways: as a name, and as hash for validation

from where does a reading client get the key?
  can't choose keys -- key must be hash(v)
    so reader can't predict keys -- must be told
  can e.g. publish on secure web pages
  often used for e.g. secure software distributions

this is secure storage with an untrusted server
  if server corrupts data, client check will fail
  "content-hash storage"

we can build secure list- and tree-shaped structures from content-hash storage
  [diagram: files... <- directory <- root key]
  root key allows client to retrieve and check the whole structure
  even if blocks are stored in untrusted server
  paper calls this a "hash tree"

content-hash storage is not enough for a read/write file system:
  a key's value cannot change, since key = hash(v)
  "immutable"
 
Digital signatures (e.g. RSA) allow mutable storage
  each user has a public/private key pair
  sig = sign(data, k_priv)
  ok = verify(data, sig, k_pub)
  client write(k,v) OR UPDATE(k,v):
    put(k, v+sign(v, k_priv))
  client read(k):
    v+sig = get(k)
    if verify(v, sig, k_pub) != true: reject!
    return v
  note k and k_priv are totally separate
  the value can be modified w/o changing k
  anyone who knows k and k_pub can fetch the value and
    can check that owner of k_priv signed that value
    (though not quite "v is the correct value for k"!)

Are digital signatures alone enough?
  the server cannot forge a signature, so it cannot create arbitrary fake values
  the server *can* return an old correctly-signed value
    so it can hide an update
    or show different signed versions to different readers
    or show old versions for some keys, new for other keys
    these are serious security problems
  also we'd like a file system, not just individual data items
    file names, directories, multiple users, permissions, &c

Example of a stale value causing a problem:
  Open source project, two files: x.c, NEWS
  Storage server owned by someone else
  X: x.c -- v1
  A: x.c -- v2 fixes a bug
  B: NEWS -- announce "bug fixed!"
  C: read NEWS
  C: read x.c
  Server could provide new NEWS but *old* x.c!
    Signatures would be correct! But it's the wrong x.c.
  SUNDR can prevent this!

One of SUNDR's ideas:
  Each update includes digital signature over entire file-system (FS).
  Thus B's update to NEWS includes a signature reflecting A's updated x.c
  So if C sees B's updated NEWS,
    signature will only check if C also sees A's new x.c

Strawman design (Section 3.1)
  Server stores a complete log of file-system modifications
    create, write, rename, delete, mkdir, &c
  Clients ask server to append new operations.
  Clients reconstruct FS content by fetching and playing entire log.
  Clients also ask server to append "fetch" log entries.

Strawman details
  Log entries: fetch or modify, user, sig.
    Signature covers the entire log up to that point.
  Client step:
    Fetch entire log (other clients now wait).
    Check the log:
      Correct signature in each entry, covering prior log.
      Each operation is allowed by permissions.
      This client's last log entry is present (so client must remember!).
    Construct FS state by replaying logged operations, from start.
    Append client's operation with signature over whole resulting log.
    Upload log (then other clients can proceed).
    Client remembers its signed new entry (on local disk).
  Inefficient but simple to reason about.

Example straw-man log:
  mod(x.c), X, sig   -- X creates x.c
  mod(x.c), A, sig   -- A applies a crucial security patch
  mod(NEWS), B, sig  -- B announces the patch

Could the server forge a log entry?
  No: it would need to know the private key of an authorized user.

How do clients know the public keys of authorized users?
  1. All clients must be told public key of root directory owner.
  2. File system itself stores the public key of each user.

Could the server hide an entry from C?
  Yes.
  Hiding and showing are the only bad things a SUNDR server can do.

What if the server hides A's and B's updates from C?
  C will read,
  see just X's mod(x.c),
  ask to append a fetch() with a signature over what it saw,
    fetch(), C, sig
  and remember its last operation (fetch(), C, sig).
  [diagram: start of a forked log]

Server can continue to let C extend a "forked" log
  I'm assuming server is malicious, and has been modified to trick C

Suppose later the server wants to show B's updated NEWS to C?
  It won't work for the server to show C the "real" log:
    mod(x.c), X, sig
    mod(x.c), A, sig
    mod(NEWS), B, sig
    because C requires that its last operation (its fetch) be in the log.
  It won't work for the server to insert NEWS before C's fetch:
    mod(x.c), X, sig
    mod(NEWS), B, sig
    fetch(), C, sig
    Because C's fetch signature didn't include A's mod(x.c).
  Nor NEWS after C's fetch:
    mod(x.c), X, sig
    fetch(), C, sig
    mod(NEWS), B, sig
    Because B's mod()'s signature didn't include C's fetch.

So the server cannot ever show C B's mod(NEWS).
  Or any future B operation, since B will generate signatures
  that include its mod(NEWS).

The server can't show B any future C operation either.
  Since it can't show B C's fetch(), since it's not compatible
  with B's mod(NEWS).
  And any future C operations will have signature covering C's fetch.

But the server *can* continue to give C a separate view of the file system.
  Containing only C's future operations.
  But not B's operations.

This is SUNDR's "fork consistency":
  A server can permanently fork users, concealing each others' updates.
  But the server cannot heal a fork -- forked forever.

Is fork consistency a good outcome?
  It's not ideal that SUNDR allows fork attacks.
  But a fork will be disruptive, since hiding an update hides
    all future updates from that user.
    So likely to be detected after a while.
  Users can detect if they can communicate outside of SUNDR.
    e.g. e-mail asking "what do you think of my last update?"
  Given assumptions, it seems the best one can do.

The Question: why include fetch() in the log?

Strawman is not practical: the log keeps growing!

Here's a simplified overview of Section 3.3 (Serialized SUNDR).

Idea: store current file-system (FS) state, not log of operations.
  (Figure 2)
  A hash tree mimicing an FS directory/file tree.
    [diagram: files, directories, handle w/ signed root hash]
    Can't be directly updated, but...
  A signed "handle" object containing the current root hash.
    Under a known unchanging key.
  To update: create a new hash tree, sign root hash and update handle,
    delete old tree.

But: multiple users, each with their own public/private key.
     users might not fully trust each other.
     so a single writeable-by-all root is too fragile.

Idea: a tree per user (and signed handle), FS is union of trees.
  Each user's tree holds just that user's files.
  A read fetches all trees, merge to form single FS.

But: we need to enforce fork consistency.
  i.e. detect if server is trying to heal a fork.
  i.e. detect if clients saw different sequences of updates.

User X's tree needs to declare what other trees X saw
  when X last updated or read the file-system.
  So clients can check that different user's trees form a linear sequence.
  (like straw-man's signatures over the whole log)

Idea:
  Each user's tree goes through a sequence of numbered versions.
  User X's signed handle includes (paper's Version Structure, Figure 3):
    X's root hash.
    X's version number.
    A "version vector" with one number for each other user.
      when X last read, the version it saw of each other user's tree.
    signature (just on the handle block)
  Then can compare numbers in X's and Y's version vectors to decide
    do tree updates form a sequence, with each seeing previous?
    is server trying to reveal a previously hidden tree?

Example (when server is well-behaved):
  "A1" is a new signed tree
  "1 0 0" is the version vector in A1
  time flows downward

    A  B  C
    -------
A1  1  0  0
B1  1  1  0
C1  1  1  1
B2  1  2  1

The version vectors advance one slot (user) at a time.
The fact that B's latest vv is "1 2 1" means B saw
  A's version 1 and C's version 1.
Anyone who sees B's latest update will then know to
  demand at least those versions for A's and C's tree.
The server can't forge vv's b/c everything is signed.
  But it can hide the latest trees: serve old signed handles.

Note in example that vv's can be ordered (if server is well-behaved):
  Each is >= than the one before in all positions.
  Meaning that the updates occured in order,
    and each saw the previous updates.
  Clients check that vv's are orderable.

What if the server conceals a tree update?
  suppose it conceals B1 from C (it can do that).

    A  B  C
    -------
A1  1  0  0
B1  1  1  0   C1  1 0 1

The server cannot afterwards reveal C's update to B.
  That would reveal C's vv to B.
  B would see that B's and C's vv's cannot be ordered.
  That is, B1 then C1 is not correct, since then B1 was hid from C.
  And C1 then B1 is not correct, since then C1 was hid from B.

And indeed SUNDR's version vector scheme enforces fork consistency.
  And it's much cheaper than the straw-man signatures over the whole log.

Take-away ideas:
  The dream of trustworthy service from untrusted servers.
  Fork attacks.
  Hash trees.
  Version vectors.

Next lecture:
  Bitcoin versus fork attacks.
```
