# Howard: A Dynamic Excavator for Reverse Engineering Data Structures

**Cited in:** Decompilation Wiki - Type Recovery Overview

Asia Slowinska, Traian Stancescu, and Herbert Bos. "Howard: A Dynamic Excavator for Reverse Engineering Data Structures." Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2011.

**Access:** Open access

**Read it:** https://www.cs.vu.nl/~herbertb/papers/howard_ndss11.pdf

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Full text

Howard: a Dynamic Excavator for Reverse Engineering Data Structures
Asia Slowinska
Traian Stancescu
Herbert Bos
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{asia,tsu500,herbertb}@few.vu.nl

Abstract
Even the most advanced reverse engineering techniques
and products are weak in recovering data structures in
stripped binaries—binaries without symbol tables. Unfortunately, forensics and reverse engineering without data
structures is exceedingly hard. We present a new solution,
known as Howard, to extract data structures from C binaries
without any need for symbol tables. Our results are significantly more accurate than those of previous methods — sufficiently so to allow us to generate our own (partial) symbol
tables without access to source code. Thus, debugging such
binaries becomes feasible and reverse engineering becomes
simpler. Also, we show that we can protect existing binaries
from popular memory corruption attacks, without access to
source code. Unlike most existing tools, our system uses dynamic analysis (on a QEMU-based emulator) and detects
data structures by tracking how a program uses memory.

1. Introduction
State of the art disassemblers are indispensable for reverse engineering and forensics. The most advanced ones,
like IDA Pro [24] and OllyDbg [2], offer a variety of techniques to help elevate low-level assembly instructions to
higher level code. For instance, they recognize known library functions in the binary and translate all calls to these
functions to the corresponding symbolic names in the presentation to the user. Some are sufficiently powerful to handle even binaries that are statically linked and ‘stripped’ so
that they do not contain a symbol table.
However, they are typically weak in reverse engineering
data structures. Since real programs tend to revolve around
their data structures, ignorance of these structures makes
the already complex task of reverse engineering even slower
and more painful.
The research community has been aware of the importance of data structures in reverse engineering for several
years now, but even so, no adequate solution emerged. The
most common approaches are based on static analysis tech-

niques like value set analysis [8], aggregate structure identification [38] and combinations thereof [39]. Some, like
CodeSurfer/x86, are available as experimental plug-ins for
IDA Pro [24]. Unfortunately, the power of static analysis is
quite limited and none of the techniques mentioned above
can adequately handle even some of the most common data
structures – like arrays.
Some recent projects have therefore resorted to dynamic
analysis. Again, success has been limited. The best known
examples are Laika [22] and Rewards [31]. Laika’s detection is both imprecise and limited to aggregates structures
(i.e., it lumps together all fields in a structure). This is not
a problem for Laika’s application domain – estimating the
similarity of different samples of malware by looking at the
approximate similarity of their data structures. However,
for forensics and reverse engineering this is wholly inefficient.
Rewards [31], presented in last year’s NDSS, builds on a
technique originally pioneered by Ramilingam et al. in aggregate structure identification (ASI) [38]. The idea is simple: whenever the program makes a call to a well-known
function (like a system call), we know the types of all the
arguments – so we label these memory locations accordingly. Next, we propagate this type information backwards
and forwards through the execution of the program. For
instance, whenever labeled data is copied, the label is also
assigned to the destination. Rewards differs from ASI in
that it applies this technique to dynamic rather than static
analysis.
Either way, by definition the technique only recovers
those data structures that appear, directly or indirectly, in the
arguments of system calls (or the well-known library functions). This is only a very small portion of all data structures
in a program. All internal variables and data structures in
the program remain invisible.
In this paper, we describe a new technique known as
Howard1 that greatly improves on these existing techniques.
It is complementary to Rewards, but much more powerful
as it also finds internal variables. Like Rewards and Laika,
1 The system was named after Howard Carter, the archaeologist who
excavated the tomb of Tutankhamun.

Howard is based on dynamic analysis
The main goal of Howard is to furnish existing disassem-

blers and debuggers with information about data structures
and types to ease reverse engineering. For this purpose, it
automatically generates debug symbols that can be used by
all common tools. We will demonstrate this with a real analysis example using gdb. This is our first application.
In addition, however, we show that the data structures
allow us to retrofit security onto existing binaries. Specifically, we show that we can protect legacy binaries against
buffer overflows. This is our second application.
High-level overview. Precise data structure recovery is
difficult because the compiler translates all explicitly structured data in the source to chunks of anonymous bytes in the
binary. Data structure recovery is the art of mapping them
back into meaningful data structures. To our knowledge, no
existing work can do this. The problem becomes even more
complicated in the face of common compiler optimizations
(like loop unrolling, inlining, and elimination of dead code
and unused variables) which radically transform the binary.
Howard builds on dynamic rather than static analysis,
following the simple intuition that memory access patterns
reveal much about the layout of the data structures. Something is a structure, if it is accessed like a structure, and an
array, if it is accessed like an array. And so on.
Like all dynamic analysis tools, Howard’s results depend
on the code that is covered at runtime – it will not find data
structures in code that never executes. This paper is not
about code coverage techniques. Rather, as shown in Figure 1, we use existing code coverage tools (like KLEE) and
test suites to cover as much of the application as possible,
and then execute the application to extract the data structures.
In summary, Howard is able to recover most data structures in arbitrary (gcc-generated) binaries with a high degree of precision. While it is too early to claim that the
problem of data structure identification is solved, Howard
advances the state of the art significantly. For instance, we
are the first to extract:
• precise data structures on both heap and stack;
• not just aggregate structures, also individual fields;
• complicated structures like nested arrays.
We implemented all dynamic analysis techniques in
an instrumented processor emulator based on Qemu [10].
Since single process emulation is available only for Linux,
the implementation is also for Linux. However, the approach is not specific to any particular OS.
Outline
lows:

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-

normal
test suites

KLEE replay
program

program

Howard
Emulator

inputs

data
structures

code coverage
(KLEE)

Figure 1. The main stages in Howard.
2.
3.
4.
5.

2

Related work
Challenges
Howard design
Applications

6.
7.
8.
9.

Limitations
Code transformation
Evaluation
Conclusions

Existing work and what we took from it

Recovery of data structures is most obviously relevant
to the fields of debugging and reverse engineering. Still,
even the most advanced tools (like IDA Pro [24], and
CodeSurfer [8]) are weak at identifying data structures.
The limited support for data structure recovery they provide comes exclusively in the form of static analysis. These
techniques are inadequate, as we shall see below. As far
as we know, Howard is very different from any existing approach. Nevertheless, we have been influenced by certain
projects. In this section, we summarize them and their relation to Howard.
Static analysis. A first stab at recovering data without
executing the program is to try to identify all locations
that look like variables and estimate the sets of values that
they may hold [8]. Known as Value Set Analysis (VSA),
this approach uses abstract interpretation to find (overapproximations of) the sets of possible values.
Of course, accurately pinpointing the locations that hold
variables in a program is not simple, but studying the way
in which the program accesses memory helps. Incidentally,
this idea originates in efforts to deal with the Y2K problem
in old COBOL programs and is known as Abstract Structure
Identification (ASI) [38]. Translated into C terms, ASI attempts to partition memory chunks statically in structs of
arrays and variables, depending on accesses. For instance, if
a stack frame holds 40 bytes for local variables, and the program reads the 4 bytes at offset 8 in the range, ASI classifies
the 40 bytes as a struct with one 4-byte variable wedged
between 2 arrays. As more addresses are referenced, ASI
eventually obtains an approximate mapping of variable-like
locations.
ASI has another clever trick to identify data structures
and types, and that is to use the type information from system calls and well-known library functions. As the argu-

ment types of these calls are known, at every such call, ASI
tags the arguments with the corresponding types and propagates these tags through the (static) analysis.
The culmination of these static techniques is a combination of VSA and ASI by Balakrishnan et al. [39]. This powerful static analysis method is also available as an experimental plug-in for IDA Pro, known as CodeSurfer/x86 [7].
At this point, however, we have to mention that all of
these static techniques have problems handling even the
most basic aggregate data structures, like arrays. Nor can
they handle some common programming cases. For instance, if a C struct is copied using a function like
memcpy, VSA/ASI will misclassify it as having many
fields of 4 bytes, simply because memcpy accesses the
memory with a stride of 4 (on a 32 bit machine). Also,
they cannot deal with functions like ‘alloca’. In contrast,
Howard does not depend on static analysis at all.
In a more constrained setting, Christodorescu et al. show
how static analysis of x86 executables can help recover
string values [18]. Their technique detects C-style strings
modified by the libc string functions.
Dynamic analysis. Eschewing static analysis, Laika recovers data structures during execution in a novel way [22].
First, Laika identifies potential pointers in the memory
dump –based on whether the contents of 4 byte words look
like a valid pointer– and then uses them to estimate object
positions and sizes. Initially, it assumes an object to start
at the address pointed to and to end at the next object in
memory. It then converts the objects from raw bytes to sequences of block types (e.g., a value that points into the
heap is probably a pointer, a null terminated sequence of
ASCII characters is probably a string, and so on). Finally,
it detects similar objects by clustering objects with similar
sequences of block types. In this way, Laika detects lists
and other abstract data types.
On the other hand, Laika’s detection is both imprecise
and limited to aggregates. For instance, it may observe
chunks of bytes in what looks like a list, but it does not detect the fields in the structures. For debugging, reverse engineering, and protection against overflows, this is wholly
insufficient. The authors are aware of this and use Laika
instead to estimate the similarity of malware.
Originally, Howard borrowed from Laika the idea of dynamically classifying blocks of null-terminated printable
characters as “probable string blocks” to improve the speed
of string detection. However, as we improved our default
string detection method, the additional accuracy provided
by the Laika method was very small and we therefore removed it.
Rewards [31] builds on the part of ASI that propagates
type information from known parameter types (of system
calls and library functions). Unlike ASI, however, it does

so dynamically, during program execution. Rewards recognizes well-known functions (known as type sinks) and propagates the types of their arguments. All data structures that
are used in, or derived from, system calls or known templates are correctly identified. However, Rewards is (fundamentally) not capable of detecting data structures that are
internal to the program.
Howard emphatically does not need any known type to
recover data structures, but whenever such information is
available, it takes advantage of it to recover semantics.
For instance, it may help to recognize a structure as a
sock addr structure, a file descriptor, or an IP address.
One of the more complicated features of Howard is its
loop detector, which we use to detect array accesses. LoopProf [33] also detects loops dynamically. However, it is
weaker than Howard and cannot detect nested loops.
Dynamic protocol format reverse engineering. Different in nature, but still related is the problem of automatic
protocol reverse engineering. Systems like Polyglot [12],
[44], AutoFormat [30], Tupni [23], ReFormat [43], and
Prospex [20], aim to analyze how applications parse and
handle messages to understand a protocol’s format. They
typically do so dynamically, although some are supplemented by static analysis. While different in various regards, these systems track data coming from the network
and by observing the applications’ behavior try to detect
constant protocol fields, length fields, delimiters, and so
on. The most advanced ones also cluster different types of
messages to recover the protocol’s state machine. One of
Howard’s array detection methods was influenced by that of
Polyglot [12]. Still, it is considerably more advanced. In
addition, we add a second, completely new array detection
technique.
Security. The security application in Section 5 is inspired
by WIT [4] and similar approaches [5, 45]. WIT is a compiler extension that analyzes C source code to detect which
instructions can write which objects. It then generates instrumented object code to prevent instructions from writing
to different objects, thus eliminating memory error exploits.
With Howard, we do something similar, except that we do
not require the source code. Thus, we can apply our technique to legacy binaries (at the cost of some additional overhead).

3

Recovery by access patterns: challenges

Howard aims to answer questions like: “What are the
variables, structs, and arrays in the program and what are
their layouts?” As explained in Section 2, for a subset of
these variables (for which we have type sinks), we are also

able to recover semantics, so that we can answer questions
like: “Is the 4-byte field in this struct an IP address, a
pointer, or an integer?”
Howard recovers data structures by observing how memory is used at runtime. In the CPU, all memory accesses
occur via pointers either using direct addressing or indirectly, via registers. The intuition behind our approach is
that memory access patterns provide clues about the layout
of data in memory. For instance, if A is a pointer, then a
dereference of *(A+4) suggests that the programmer (and
compiler) created a field of size 4 at A. Intuitively, if A is a
function frame pointer, *(A+4) and *(A-8) are likely to
point to a function argument passed via the stack, and a local variable, respectively. Likewise, if A is the address of a
structure, *(A+4) presumably accesses a field in this structure, and finally, in the case of an int[] array, *(A+4) is
its second element. As we shall see, distinguishing between
these three scenarios is one of the challenges we need to
address.
It is not the only issue. In the remainder of this section, we discuss the main obstacles that we had to remove to
make Howard possible. Some are relatively straightforward
and for these we discuss immediately how we solved them.
Others are not, and we postpone their solution to Section 4,
where we discuss our approach in full.
Even though we discuss many details, due to space limitations, we are not able to discuss everything in great depth.
We realize that some readers are interested in all the details,
and for this reason we made available a technical report that
contains enough information to allow one to reproduce our
system [42]. From time to time, we will refer readers interested in details to the report.
Memory allocation context Our work analyzes a program’s use of memory, which includes local function variables allocated on the stack, memory allocated on the heap,
and static variables. Static memory is not reused, so it can
be uniquely identified with just its address. However, both
the runtime stack and heap are reused constantly, and so a
description of their data structures needs to be coupled with
a context.
For the stack, each invocation of a function usually holds
the same set of local variables and therefore start addresses
of functions are sufficient to identify function frames. A
possible exception occurs with memory allocated by calls
to functions like alloca, which may depend on the control flow. As a result, the frames of different invocations
could differ. While Howard handles these cases correctly,
the details are tedious and beyond the scope of this paper
(see [42]). For now, it suffices to think of function start addresses as the frame identifiers.
For heap memory, such simple pointers will not do.
Consider a my malloc wrapper function which invokes

typedef struct {
int x;
int y;
} elem t;
void fun() {
elem t elem, *pelem;
elem.x = 1;
elem.y = 2;
pelem = &elem;
pelem->y = 3;
}

<fun>:
[1] push %ebp
[2] mov %esp, %ebp
[3] sub $0x10, %esp
[4] mov $0x1, -0xc(%ebp)
[5] mov $0x2, -0x8(%ebp)
[6] mov -0x4(%ebp), %eax
[7] mov $0x3, 0x4(%eax)
[8] leave
[9] ret

Figure 2. The function initializes its local variable elem.
Pointer pelem is located at offset -4 in the function frame,
and structure elem at -0xc. Instructions 4 and 5 initialize
x and y, respectively. Register EAX is loaded with the address of pelem in instruction 6, and used to update field y
in 7.

malloc and checks whether the return value is null. Since
my malloc can be used to allocate memory for various

structures and arrays, we should not associate the memory layout of a data structure allocated by my malloc with
my malloc itself, but rather with its caller. As we do not
know the number of such malloc wrappers in advance, we
associate heap memory with a call stack. We discuss call
stacks in detail in Section 4.1.
Pointer identification To analyze memory access patterns, we need to identify pointers in the running program.
Moreover, for a given address B=A+4, we need to know A,
the base pointer from which B was derived (e.g., to find
nested structures). However, on architectures like x86,
there is little distinction between registers used as addresses
and scalars. Worse, the instructions to manipulate them are
the same. We only know that a particular register holds a
valid address when it is dereferenced. Therefore, Howard
must track how new pointers are derived from existing ones.
We discuss our solution in Section 4.2.
Missing base pointers As mentioned earlier, Howard detects new structure fields when they are referenced from the
structure base. However, programs sometimes use fields
without reference to a base pointer, resulting in misclassifications. Figure 2 illustrates the problem. Field elem.y is
initialized via the frame pointer register EBP rather than the
address of elem. Only the update instruction 7 hints at the
existence of the structure. Without it, we would characterize this memory region as composed of 3 separate variables:
pelem, x, and y (but since the program here does not actually use the connection between the fields x and y, this
partially inaccurate result would be innocuous). A missing
base pointer is of course a fundamental limitation, as we
cannot recognize what is not there. In practice, however, it
does not cause many problems (see also Section 8).

Multiple base pointers Conversely, memory locations
can be accessed through multiple base pointers, which
means that we need to decide on the most appropriate one.
Observe that field elem.y from Figure 2 is already referred
to using two different base pointers, the frame pointer EBP
and pelem (EAX). While this particular case is tractable
(as pelem is itself based on EBP), the problem in general
is knotty. For instance, programs often use functions like
memset and memcpy to initialize and copy data structures.
Such functions access all bytes in a structure sequentially,
typically with a stride of one word. Clearly, we should not
classify each access as a separate word-sized field. This is
a serious problem for all approaches to date, even the most
advanced ones [39].
One (bad) way to handle such functions is to blacklist them, so their accesses do not count in the analysis.
The problem with blacklisting is that it can only cope with
known functions, but not with similar ones that are part of
the application itself. Instead, we will see that Howard uses
a heuristic that selects the “less common” layout. For instance, it favors data structures with different fields over an
array of integers.
Code coverage As Howard uses dynamic analysis, its accuracy increases if we execute more of the program’s code.
Code coverage techniques (using symbolic execution and
constraint solving) force a program to execute most of its
code. For Howard, the problem is actually easier, as we do
not need all code paths, as long as we see all data structures. Thus, it is often sufficient to execute a function once,
without any need to execute it in all possible contexts. In
our work, we use KLEE [13]. Recent work at EPFL (kindly
provided to us) allows it to be used on binaries [15]. Figure 1 illustrates the big picture. In reality, of course, KLEE
is not perfect, and there are applications where coverage is
poor. For those applications, we can sometimes use existing
test suites.

4

Howard design and implementation

We now discuss the excavation procedure in detail. In
the process, we solve the remaining issues of Section 3.

4.1

Function call stack

As a first step in the analysis, Howard keeps track of the
function call stack. As Howard runs the program in a processor emulator, it can dynamically observe call and ret
instructions, and the current position of the runtime stack.
A complicating factor is that sometimes call is used not
to invoke a real function, but only as part of a call/pop
sequence to read the value of the instruction pointer. Similarly, not every ret has a corresponding call instruction.

We define a function as the target of a call instruction which returns with a ret instruction. Values of the
stack pointer at the time of the call and at the time of the
return match, giving a simple criterion for detecting uncoupled call and ret instructions2 .
Whenever we see a function call, we push this information on a Howard internal stack, which we refer to as
HStack.

4.2

Pointer tracking

Howard identifies base pointers dynamically by tracking
the way in which new pointers are derived from existing
ones, and observing how the program dereferences them. In
addition, we extract root pointers that are not derived from
any other pointers. Howard identifies different root pointers
for statically allocated memory (globals and static variables
in C functions), heap and stack.
For pointer tracking, we extended the processor emulator so that each memory location has a tag, MBase(addr),
which stores its base pointer. In other words, a tag specifies how the address of a memory location was calculated.
Likewise, if a general purpose register holds an address, an
associated tag, RBase(reg), identifies its base pointer.
We first present tag propagation rules, and only afterward explain how root pointers are determined.
When Howard encounters a new root pointer A, it sets
MBase(A) to a constant value root to mark that A has been
accessed, but does not derive from any other pointer. When
a pointer A (root or not) is loaded from memory to a register
reg, we set RBase(reg) to A.
The program may manipulate the pointer using pointer
arithmetic (add, sub, or and). To simplify the explanation,
we assume the common case, where the program manipulates pointers completely before it stores them to memory,
i.e., it keeps the intermediate results of pointer arithmetic
operations in registers. This is not a limitation; it is easy to
handle the case where a program stores the pointer to memory first, and then manipulates and uses it later.
During pointer arithmetic, we do not update the
RBase(reg), but we do propagate the tag to destination registers. As an example, let us assume that after a number
of arithmetic operations, the new value of reg is B. Only
when the program dereferences reg or stores it to memory,
do we associate B with its base pointer which is still kept
in RBase(reg). In other words, we set MBase(B) to A. After all, the program accessed this memory location via base
pointer A. This way we ensure that base pointers always indicate valid application pointers, and not intermediate results of pointer arithmetic operations.
2 In rare cases, functions are reached by a jump. Howard merges these
functions with the caller. We discuss the impact on the analysis in [42].

Extracting root pointers We distinguish between 3 types
of root pointers: (a) those that point to statically allocated
memory, (b) those that point to newly allocated dynamic
memory, and (c) the start of a function frame which serves
as a pseudo root for the local variables.
Dynamically allocated memory. To allocate memory at
runtime, user code in Linux invokes either one of the memory allocation system calls (e.g., mmap, mmap2) directly, or
it uses one of the libc memory allocation routines (e.g.,
malloc). Since Howard analyzes each memory region as
a single entity, we need to retrieve their base addresses and
sizes. Howard uses the emulator to intercept both. Intercepting the system calls is easy - we need only inspect the
number of each call made. For libc routines, we determine the offsets of the relevant functions in the library, and
interpose on the corresponding instructions once the library
is loaded.
Statically allocated memory. Statically allocated memory includes both static variables in C functions and the
program’s global variables. Root pointers to statically allocated memory appear in two parts of an object file: the data
section which contains all variables initialized by the user
- including pointers to statically allocated memory, and the
code section - which contains instructions used to access
the data. To extract root pointers, we initially load pointers
stored in well-defined places in a binary, e.g., ELF headers,
or relocation tables, if present. Next, during execution, if an
address A is dereferenced, MBase(A) is not set, and A does
not belong to the stack, we conclude that we have just encountered a new root pointer to statically allocated memory.
Later, if we come across a better base pointer for A than A
itself, MBase(A) gets adjusted.
Stack memory. Function frames contain arguments, local variables, and possibly intermediate data used in calculations. Typically, local variables are accessed via the
function frame pointer, EBP, while the remaining regions
are relative to the current stack position (ESP).
As we do not analyze intermediate results on the stack,
we need to keep track of pointers rooted (directly or indirectly) at the beginning of a function frame only (often, but
not always, indicated by EBP). Usually, when a new function is called, 8 bytes of the stack are used for the return
address and the caller’s EBP, so the callee’s frame starts at
(ESP-8). However, other calling conventions are also possible [42]. This means that we cannot determine where the
function frame will start. To deal with this uncertainty, we
overestimate the set of possible new base pointers, and mark
all of them as possible roots. Thus, Howard does not rely on
the actual usage of the EBP register. If, due to optimizations,
EBP does not point to the beginning of the frame, nothing
bad happens.

Figure 3. Example of a memory area accessed using multiple base pointers. The arrows on top illustrate a function
like memset that accesses all fields with a stride of 4 bytes,
while the ’real’ access patterns, below, show accesses to the
individual fields.

1.

variable offsets

2.

stride not equal to wordsize

3.

stride equal to wordsize
32b

32b

32b

32b

32b

32b

32b

32b

Figure 4. Different memory access patterns. When
Howard observes different access patterns to the same object, it prefers pattern 1 over patterns 2 and 3, and 2 over
3.

4.3

Multiple base pointers

As a program often accesses a memory location A
through multiple base pointers, we need to pick the most
appropriate one. Intuitively, selecting the base pointer that
is closest to the location, usually increases the number of
hops to the root pointer, and so provides a more detailed
description of a (nested) data structure.
However, as shown in Figure 3, functions like memset
and memcpy often process composite data structures. These
functions are completely unaware of the actual structure and
access the memory in word-size strides. Thus, for 32 bit
machines, such functions continuously calculate the next
address to dereference by adding 4 to the previous one covering the entire data structure in 4 byte strides. By applying
the aforementioned heuristic of choosing the closest base
pointer, we could easily build a meaningless recursively
nested data structure.
For structs the solution is often simple. When the program accesses the memory twice, once with constant stride
equal to the word size (e.g., in memset) and once in a different manner (when the program accesses the individual
fields), we should pick the latter. In arrays, however, multiple loops may access the array. To deal with this problem,
we use a similar intuition and detect arrays and structures
dynamically with a heuristic preference for non-regular ac-

cesses and/or accesses at strides not equal to the word size.
For instance, if a program accesses a chunk of memory in
two loops with strides 4, and 12, respectively, we will pick
as base pointers those addresses that correspond to the latter
loop. Intuitively, a stride of 12 is more likely to be specific
to a data structure layout than the generic 4.
Our current array detection introduces three categories of
loop accesses (see Figure 4): (1) accesses with non-constant
stride, e.g., an array of strings, (2) accesses with a constant
stride not equal to the word-size, e.g., 1 or 12, and (3) accesses with stride equal to the word-size. Our heuristic,
then, is as follows. First select the base pointers in the best
possible category (lower is better), and next, if needed, pick
the base pointer closest to the memory location. Next, we
discuss arrays and loops in detail.

4.4

Array detection

Array detection is both difficult and important – especially for security. Howard recovers arrays when the program accesses them in loops. Fortunately, this is true for
the vast majority of arrays. In the simplest case, the program would access an array in an inner loop, with one array
element in each loop iteration. However, a general solution must also handle the following scenarios: (a) multiple
loops accessing the same array in sequence, (b) multiple
nested loops accessing the same array, (c) loop unrolling,
resulting in multiple array elements accessed in one loop
iteration, (d) inner loops and outer loops not iterating over
the same array, and (e) boundary array elements handled
outside the loop. Howard uses several complementary array
detection methods to deal with all these cases. We divide
these methods in two major classes depending on the way
array elements are accessed by the program.
Loops in real code implement one of two generic
schemes for deriving array element addresses: (1) relative to the previous element, realized in instructions like
elem=*(prev++), and (2) relative to the base of an array,
elem=array[i]. As we shall see, Howard handles both
cases. We discuss limitations of our array detection method
in Section 6.
4.4.1

Accesses relative to previous elements

To handle loop accesses in a buffer where each element address is relative to a previous one, Howard is set up to track
chained sequences of memory locations. For instance, if
elem = *(pprev++), then the pointer to elem is derived
from pprev. A few of these scenarios are illustrated in Figure 4.
No loop unrolling. We explain what happens for the
non-optimized case first and address loop-unrolling later.

Howard identifies each loop with a timestamp-like id (lid)
which it assigns to the loop head at runtime when the back
edge is taken for the first time. See Figure 5. At this point
this loop head is pushed on HStack. So, if a loop executes
just once and never branches back for a second iteration,
it does not get a new lid. Howard assigns the top lid as
a tag to each memory location A the code accesses: MLid
(A):=lid. Thus, memory accesses in the first iteration of a
loop get the parent lid. Tags are kept similarly to MBase,
in the emulator. If there are no loops on the call stack,
pushed functions are assigned a new lid. Otherwise, new
functions inherit the top loop lid.
Writing B ← A to denote that pointer B is derived from
pointer A, conceptually Howard detects arrays as follows.
When pointer B, with B ← A , is dereferenced in iteration
i, while A was dereferenced in a previous iteration, Howard
treats A as a likely array element3 . It stores information
about the array in the loop head on HStack. The more iterations executed, the more array elements Howard discovers.

Loop unrolling. The algorithm is simple and intuitive and
sketches the main idea fairly accurately, but it is a (slight)
simplification of Howard’s real array detection algorithm.
In reality, we cannot just look at loop iterations, as common
optimizations like loop unrolling force us to look at these
patterns within a single iteration also. For completeness,
we briefly explain the details.
Assume that the loop id of the current loop is LidT , while
the previous element on the call stack has id LidS . Also
assume that the pointer C is dereferenced for the first time
in the loop T, where C ← B and B ← A.
Howard now treats B as a likely array element if the following conditions hold:
1. MLid (B) ≥ LidT , which means that B was accessed in
the current loop (regardless of the iteration),
2. MLid (A) ≥ LidS , which means that A was accessed
either in the current loop or just before it.
It stores information about the array in T, the top loop
head on HStack. Whenever a new piece of information is
added, Howard tries to extend arrays already discovered in
the top loop head. We will discuss shortly how this works
when multiple loops access the same array. First, we look
at boundary elements.
Boundary elements Because the first element of an array
is often accessed before a new id is assigned to the loop
head (remember, a new loop id is assigned only once the
back edge is taken), Howard explicitly checks for extending
3 There is a subtle reason why we do not classify B as an array element
(yet): if the array consists of structs, B may well point to a field in a
struct, rather than an array element.

(a)

U

(b)
1.

S

elem = array

T

* elem
check exit cond

exit

V

2.

3.

elem++

S

T

T

a

b

c

S

T

T

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

i

j

d

e

f

g

h

i

j

g

h

i

j

S

T

T

T

T

T

a

b

c

d

e

f

Figure 5. (a) Control flow graph of a loop that derives array element addresses relative to the previous element. Basic block T
is the loop head, and V→ T the back edge. (b) An example ten-element array accessed by the loop in (a). Three diagrams present
the information about the array gathered by Howard at different points of the loop execution. The dashed squares indicate the most
recently accessed array element. Arrows represent base pointers as determined by the loop. S and T above the array elements are
assigned during the loop execution and indicate loop head ids, MLids. In step 1, Howard checks that a, b, and c were accessed
in the current loop (or just before), and decides (step 2) to store information about a new array [b]. It notes that the array should
possibly be extended later to contain a and c. As more iterations of the loop are executed (step 3), the array contains elements
[b-e] with a and f marked as potential extensions.

the array. It looks for earlier memory accesses at the base
pointers used to recursively derive the first element of the
array. Before we continue with the algorithm, see Figure 5
for an example array detection scenario.

i1

4.4.2

Accesses relative to the base

The above technique helps us detect sequentially accessed
arrays where each next address is relative to the previous
one. Sometimes, however, accesses are relative to the base
pointer. These accesses may or may not be sequential. For
instance, randomly accessed arrays like hash tables fall in
this category.
For this type of access Howard uses a second method
that bears a superficial resemblance to the array detection
method in Polyglot [12], but is considerably more powerful. Essentially, Howard tracks all instructions in a loop

i2

i2

i2

i2

i2

Array A
i1

b.

Multiple loops To handle arrays accessed in multiple
loops or functions, arrays that are found in inner loops are
passed to the previous element on HStack, whether it be a
function or an outer loop node. Howard must decide if the
findings of the inner exiting loop ought to be merged with
the outer loop results or whether they represent internal arrays of nested structures and should be kept separately. Intuitively, Howard waits to determine whether (1) the array
detected in the internal loop will be further extended in the
outer loop – hinting at the existence of an iterator which
prompts Howard to merge the results, or (2) whether the array detected in the internal loop is not extended further, and
kept independent from the outer loop – prompting Howard
to classify it as a nested structure.

i1

a.
i1

Array A

i2

Array B

Figure 6. Array accesses from the base pointer. The labels denote whether the accesses are by instruction i1 or i2.
In (a) we see a single array accessed by multiple instructions
in a single loop, while in (b), the access patterns are similar
except that we now have two arrays. Howard distinguishes
the two cases by looking for a shared base pointer.

that access a set of addresses that can be mapped to a linear space (stride ∗ x + of f set) and that all share the same
base pointer (See Figure 6.a). If the accesses share a base
pointer, they almost certainly belong to the same array, even
if the accesses came from different instructions in the loop.
Moreover, we can easily extend the array to include boundary elements (e.g., a last element that is accessed outside
the loop), because it will share the same base pointer. If the
accesses do not share the base pointer (Figure 6.b), Howard
classifies them as different arrays.
Existing methods like those used in Polyglot [12], and
also Rewards [31], only check whether single instructions
in a loop access an area that can be mapped to a linear space
(stride ∗ x + of f set). Therefore, they can handle only the
simplest of cases. They fail when the program: (1) accesses
arrays in multiple loops/functions, (2) accesses boundary
elements outside the loop, (3) has multiple instructions that

access the same array within one loop (very common with
unrolled loops or loops containing conditional statements
like if or switch), and (4) allocates the arrays on the stack
or statically. These are all common cases.
4.4.3

Are both methods necessary?

The two array detection methods in Howard are complementary. Both are necessary. The first will not detect accesses relative to the base pointer (like hash tables), while
the second does not detect accesses where each next address
is relative to the previous. In contrast, the combination of
our two techniques works quite well in practice. Howard
is able to detect nested arrays, hash tables and many other
complex cases.

4.5

Final mapping

Having detected arrays and the most appropriate base
pointers, Howard finally maps the analyzed memory into
meaningful data structures. For a memory chunk, the mapping starts at a root pointer and reaches up to the most distant memory location still based (directly or indirectly) at
this root. For static memory, the mapping is performed
at the end of the program execution. Memory allocated
with malloc is mapped when it is released using free,
while local variables and function arguments on the stack
are mapped when a function returns.
Mapping a memory region without arrays is straightforward. Essentially, memory locations which share a base
pointer form fields of a data structure rooted at this pointer,
and on the stack, memory locations rooted at the beginning
of a function frame represent local variables and function
arguments.
When a potential array is detected, we check if it matches
the data structure pattern derived from the base pointers. If
not, the array hypothesis is discarded. E.g., if base pointers hint at a structure with variable length fields, while the
presumed array has fields of 4 bytes, Howard assumes the
accesses are due to functions like memset. The analysis
may find multiple interleaving arrays. If such arrays are not
included in one another, we merge them. Otherwise, we
examine the base pointers further to see if the arrays are
nested.

4.6

Partial recovery of semantics

As mentioned earlier, type sinks are functions and system calls with well-known prototypes. Whenever Howard
observes a call to one of these functions, it knows the type
of the arguments, so it can attach this label to the data structure. Howard propagates these type labels, e.g., when a labeled structure is copied. In addition, it also propagates the
type information to the pointers that point into the memory.

In our experience, the recovery works only for a limited
set of all data structures, but some of these are important for
debugging and forensics. For instance, it may be interesting
to see which data structures contain IP addresses. We have
implemented type sinks for libc functions and for system
calls, as these are used by practically all applications. In
general, Howard does not depend on type sinks, but it is
capable of using them when they are available. All results
presented in Section 8 (Evaluation) were obtained without
turning on type sinking at all.

5

Applications

To demonstrate the usefulness of Howard, we describe
two new applications: binary analysis with reconstructed
symbol tables, and retrofitting security to legacy binaries
not designed with security in mind.

5.1

Binary analysis with reconstructed symbols

To aid forensics and reverse engineering, Howard automatically generates new debug symbol tables for stripped
binaries. In this example, we focus primarily on the new
techniques for detection of data structures. However, we
also want to show how we complement Rewards’ method
of recognizing well-known functions (type sinks) and propagating the types of their arguments [31]. For this reason,
we also add a minimal set of type sinks.
The symbol tables Howard generates are generic and we
can use them with any common UNIX tool. Of course, they
are not entirely complete. For instance, we only have exact
semantics for the subset of data structures that derive from
type sinks. Also, we cannot generate out of thin air the correct names of fields and variables. Nevertheless, the recovered symbol table allows us to analyze the data structures
of applications that were practically impossible to analyze
otherwise.
Figure 7 shows a screenshot of a real gdb session with
reconstructed symbols. Suppose we have purchased a program that crashes occasionally. We want to analyze the
program and perhaps reverse engineer parts of it. Without Howard, common disassemblers (like those of gdb or
IDA Pro) help to analyze the instructions, but not the data
structures. In this example, we show that we can now analyze the data also. For demonstration purposes, we use a
stripped version of wget as our demo binary, and show that
we can analyze it with the gdb debugger.
To show both the unadorned data structure recovery and
recovery of semantics, this example uses a truly minimal set
of type sinks. Specifically, our type sinks consist (only) of
inet addr() and gethostbyname().
The scenario is that we have witnessed a crash. Thus,
we start our analysis with an instruction prior to the crash

Figure 7. Analysis and disassembly with recovered symbols

(0x805adb0) 1 and try to find information about the variables in the scope of the current function (info scope
2 and then print variables 3 ). Where the stripped
binary normally does not have any information about the
variables, we see that Howard reconstructed most of them
(structs, pointers, and strings) and even recovered partial semantics. For instance, we find pointers to a struct
hostent and an inetaddr string4 .
We could print out the contents of the struct
hostent, but really we are interested in the data structures
pointed to by the various pointers – for instance the pointer
to a struct identified by pointer struct 1 0. Unfortunately, it currently has the value NULL, so there is nothing
interesting to see and we have to wait until it changes. We
do this by setting a watch point on the pointer 4 . In our
opinion, the ability to inspect data structures and set watch
points clearly shows the usefulness of the data structures
recovered by Howard.
Once the pointer changes, and receives its new value
0x80b2678, we can analyze the corresponding memory

area. We see that it points to a structure containing: an
integer with value 3, a pointer to a struct, a one-byte
field, and a four-byte field 5 . If we follow the pointer,
we see that it points to a struct with two fields, one of four
bytes and one of type in addr t 6 . We can even examine
the value of the IP address and see that it corresponds to
74.125.77.147 7 .
Moreover, we see that our struct is in an array
of size 3 by dividing the amount of memory allocated
(malloc usable size) by the size of an element 8 .
Thus, we can make an educated guess that the integer value
of 3 we found earlier denotes the number of IP addresses in
the array.
To complete the admittedly simple example, we also
print out these IP addresses 9 . For reasons of space, we
stop the scenario here. The purpose of the example is
merely to show that we can debug and analyze stripped binaries in the same way as when debugging and analyzing
binaries with debugging symbols.
We emphasize that by means of type sinks alone (e.g.,
using Rewards [31]), we would have obtained hardly any
data structures as almost all of them are internal to wget.
Eventually, the IP addresses are used, so they would appear,
but no struct or array would have been found. In addition,
connecting the IP addresses to other structures from our entry point into the code (the break point) would have been
completely impossible. In contrast, with Howard we can
progressively dig deeper and trivially find the connections
between the data structures.
4 Names are generated by Howard.
Prefixes like field ,
pointer are for convenience and are not important for this paper.

5.2

Protection against memory corruption

Memory corruption errors such as buffer overflows are
responsible for a large share of the remote attacks on the
Internet. An overflow occurs when a C program reads more
bytes than fit in the buffer, so that important data in the
memory above the buffer is overwritten. The overwritten data can be either control data such as function pointers [36], or non-control data such as clearance levels [14].
Protection of legacy binaries is very hard. Existing solutions tend to be too slow (like taint analysis [35]) or incomplete (ASLR [11], StackGuard [21], NX/DEP/W⊕X
support [25]). For instance, ASLR, StackGuard, and
NX/DEP/W⊕X offer no protection against attacks against
non-control data. In addition, a recent report shows that
both DEP and ASLR in Windows third party applications
are typically either improperly implemented or completely
overlooked [40]. Finally, even if configured correctly, the
protection offered by ASLR is quite limited [41].
To demonstrate the problem and our solution, we use an
example based on a real vulnerability in nullhttpd [1]
as shown in Figure (8.a). Given a CGI command, the Web
server calls ProcessCGIRequest with as arguments the
message it received from the network and its size. The program copies the message in the cgiCommand buffer and
calls ExecuteRequest to execute the command. As the
copy does not check for bounds violations, the buffer may
overflow and overwrite the heap.
Protection Many papers have looked at patching programs (source or binary) after a vulnerability was detected [34], and recent work looked at extending the compiler framework to protect against new memory corruption
attacks given the source [4]. So far, no one has shown how
one can really protect (i) existing binaries, (ii) in production
environments, (iii) against such attacks (on both control and
non-control data), and (iv) pro-actively, without access to
vulnerabilities, source code, or even symbol tables. This
means that all legacy binaries with unknown vulnerabilities
are left at the mercy of attackers. We now describe a promising new way to protect this important class of applications
against memory corruption.
Howard has no problem recovering buffers such as
cgiCommand. However, since we use code coverage to
excavate the array, one might think that Howard would discover an array that is larger than 1024 bytes. After all, since
code coverage can feed the function with arbitrarily long
messages, wouldn’t Howard ‘discover’ an arbitrarily long
buffer? Fortunately, the answer is no and the reason is that
the bytes just beyond the buffer (in this case memory management meta data) are accessed and classified differently.
As a result, Howard sees two conflicting classifications and
picks the safest one, ending the buffer at the right boundary.

(a)

(b)

# code before dereference
void
# ...
ProcessCGIRequest(char *msg,int sz)
_dereference_check_0x80485d4:
{
# %eax may point to data of different
int i = 0;
# color than originally assigned
char* cgiCommand = malloc(1024);
# save registers
while (i < sz) {
push %ecx
cgiCommand[i] = msg[i];
push %edx
i++;
push %eax #key: push addr %eax points to
}
call get_data_color # color of protected
# is placed in %al
ExecuteRequest (cgiCommand);
# the color of %eax (found at index 1 in
free (cgiCommand);
# reg_colors) has to match color of data
}
lea reg_colors, %ebx
cmpb %al, 1(%ebx)
All accesses to the buffer cgiCommand are
protected by the code on the right.The pointer
is initially colored at the malloc.The code on
the right shows what happens when the buffer
is accessed.

je _dereference_check_ok_0x80485d4
# print alert and exit
# ...
_dereference_check_ok_0x80485d4:

In summary: the framework looks up the color
of the buffer and compares it with the pointer’s
color. If the colors match, it will perfrom the
dereference. If not, it raises an alert (and in this
case exits).
All instrumentation is weaved into the original
binary, so all instructions run at native speed.

#reload registers
pop %eax
pop %edx
pop %ecx
# the actual dereference we instrument
mov %dl, (%eax)
# code after dereference
# ...

Figure 8. (a) Buffer overflow vulnerability in a simplified Web server, (b) Instrumentation
In our approach, we protect all buffers which were classified as arrays, and all buffers which were followed by unused memory regions. The latter ones might be either arrays or structures. Since Howard not always has enough
information to choose the correct data structure (also refer
to “missed short arrays” in Section 8), to err on the safe side
we have decided to protect these memory regions as well.
After identifying all potentially vulnerable data structures (mostly arrays), we harden the binary as follows. First
we give each vulnerable data structure a unique color. For
the rest of memory the color is set to 0. The colors are kept
in a memory map. Next, when we initialize a pointer to, say,
buffer B, we give the pointer B’s color. The initialization
varies, depending on the type of memory. For global data,
this happens when the program starts, for stack variables
when the function is called, and for heap data at the time of
the allocation.
Third, we instrument those (and only those) instructions
that dereference the pointer to check whether it is still pointing to memory of the right color B 5 . Fourth, because we do
not wish to maintain also a large memory map of colors for
all pointers, we ensure that only pointers in registers have
a color. Whenever a pointer is stored to memory, we check
5 So it is fine if the pointer points beyond the buffer, as long as it is not
dereferenced.

whether it is still pointing to the right area. If so, everything
is fine and when the pointer is reloaded to a register, we give
it the color of the byte to which it is pointing. If, however,
the pointer does not point to an area of the right color, we
explicitly tag the pointer with a single bit to indicate that it
needs to obtain its color from a table. As this situation is
rare, the overhead is minimal.
To add the instrumentation, we rewrite the binary using
rewriting techniques similar to Dynamos [32]. We emphasize again that the instrumentation is applied only to exactly
those instructions that need to be checked. The rest of the
code is not touched. Figure (8.b) shows how we hardened
the memory dereference in the web server.
To test the practicality of our approach, we applied the
Howard protection to the main array of lighttpd, the popular high-performance web server that, at the time of writing, is used by such popular sites as YouTube, SourceForge,
Wikimedia, Meebo, and ThePirateBay. The protected array is used to store strings, and in our experiment setting
accounts for 80% of the whole heap memory usage. The
runtime overhead of the current implementation is almost a
factor of 2. Although the overhead of instrumentation is not
negligible, we believe that the approach is practical. First,
there are many ways in which we can optimize the instrumentation. Second, there are many legacy applications that
are not extremely time critical, but that should not be com-

promised.
Discussion. Currently, while the instrumentation framework works, it is still an early prototype. For instance, when
instrumenting a binary, some steps are still manual. This
will be remedied shortly. In addition, we have not looked
at all performance optimization yet. Finally, while we have
taken care to avoid possible false positives, more extensive
evaluation is needed across a wide range of applications.
Nevertheless, the important message, in our opinion, is that
with Howard we have a chance to protect arbitrary legacy C
applications against one the most common form of exploits
without any access to source code or even symbol table, and
without knowing in advance about the presence of vulnerabilities in the code. For instance, the Web server of Figure 8
now raises an alert whenever it reads too many bytes in the
cgiCommand buffer.

6

Comments and limitations

Obviously, Howard is not flawless. In this section, we
discuss some generic limitations we have identified.
Limitations in array detection We discuss both the limitations of our array detection techniques and their impact
on our applications – especially on our second application
which uses the data structures to protect legacy binaries. It
is crucial that possible misclassifications do not cause false
positives.
• At least four accesses. To make array detection more
accurate, Howard will not recognize an array if fewer
than four of its elements are accessed in a loop. In
that case, it will be classified as a structure. This misclassification can only cause false negatives, but never
false positives. Indeed, if an array remains undetected,
Howard does not try to protect instructions accessing
it.
• Merging with unused bytes. We merge detected arrays
with any unused bytes that follow the array. Doing so
prevents identification of buffers that are too small (and
thus false positives in the case of protection against
memory corruption). In general, the Howard protection scheme, was designed to err on the safe side. Observe that even if we would add unused bytes that do
not belong to the same buffer, we still protect the next
used field or variable from buffer overflows.
• Incorrect merges. If a structure consists of one field
followed by an array, and the field and array are accessed in sequence, it is impossible to classify it correctly solely based on memory access patterns. As

Howard always extends arrays to include the first el-

ement unless it finds evidence that it does not match
(e.g., if because size or type are different), it could lead
to overestimation of the array length. Again, this can
never cause false positives.
• Separate last element accesses. It may happen that all
but the last elements of an array form a chain, while the
last element is always accessed separately, e.g., when
a string is first copied to a destination buffer, and then
extended with EOL or NULL. Howard misclassifies the
memory as a structure containing an array and a separate field. Even though the last element is not attached
to the array, this does not cause false positives for our
application. Indeed, if the program never exploits the
connection between the last element and the remaining part of the array, it is not important for us to join
them either. Also, if the size of the array varies across
multiple runs of the program, Howard prefers to err on
the safe side, merges the elements, and reports accurate results. In general, even if Howard cannot classify
an array or structure correctly in one particular loop
or function, it may still get it right eventually. Often
data structures are accessed in more than one function,
yielding multiple loops to analyze the layout.
Other limitations
• Howard cannot recognize nested structs if the inner struct is never accessed separately. In that case,
Howard returns a single large structure. As the result
is equivalent, we do not consider this a problem.
• Unions might exhibit more than one memory access
pattern. As a result Howard would report a data structure being a merge (or intersection) of the multiple
structures included in the union. Howard might report
an incorrect (more detailed) interpretation of fields, but
it does not lead to false positives.
• Howard gets confused by certain custom memory allocators. Specifically, it can handle slab-like allocators, but a generic, application-specific memory allocator (such as that of Apache) leads to misclassifications. It stems from the fact that a memory region serving the allocator exhibits mixed access patterns inherited from various different structures/arrays for which
it was used. As a result, Howard would classify such
buffer as either an array of (perhaps) 4-byte fields or a
highly nested structure.
• Howard does not analyze local variables of functions
reached using a jump rather than a call.

7

Code transformation: compiler optimization and obfuscation techniques

In production code, compilers apply optimizations to
improve runtime performance. Such optimizations may
change the code substantially. Likewise, obfuscation tools
change the source code or binary to reduce the ability to understand or reverse engineer the program. In this section,
we introduce popular optimizations and obfuscation techniques and discuss how they influence Howard’s data structure detection results. We treat compiler optimizations in
Section 7.1 and obfuscation techniques in Section 7.2. In
both cases, we limit ourselves to the techniques that are relevant and that may affect data structure detection.

7.1

Loop code:
for(i = 0; i < 64; i++) arr1[i] = i;

And two possible executions:
addr = arr1;
for(i = 0; i < 64; i++){
*addr = i;
addr += 1;
}

addr = arr1;
for(i = 0; i < 16; i++){
*addr = i<<2;
*(addr + 1) = i<<2+1;
*(addr + 2) = i<<2+2;
*(addr + 3) = i<<2+3;
addr += 4;
}

Figure 9. An example loop and two possible ways in
which the loop can be executed: the non-transformed one
on the left hand side, and the unrolled one on the right hand
side.

Compiler optimizations

Howard detects data structures in gcc-generated x86 C

binaries. Even though our techniques were not designed
with any specific compiler in mind and should work with
other binaries also, we conducted all our experiments on
gcc-4.4 binaries. So we focus our discussion on gcc.

1.

2.

Figure 10. Memory access patterns realized in two ex7.1.1

Data layout optimizations

Data layout optimizations [29, 28] adapt the layout of a
data-structure to its access patterns in order to better utilize the cache by increasing spatial locality. They include
structure splitting and field reordering transformations.
In general, Howard detects data structures at runtime, so
the analysis results correspond to the optimized code and
data–which may be different from what is specified in the
source. This is known as WYSINWYX (What You See Is
Not What You eXecute) [9] and while it complicates reverse engineering (for instance, some data structures may
be reordered or transformed), analyzing the code that really
executes is of course ’the right thing’. Without it, we would
not be able to protect buffers from overflows, or perform
proper forensics.
7.1.2

Loop optimizations

Loop transformations [3, 6] reduce loop overhead, increase
instruction parallelism, and improve register, data cache or
TLB locality. Popular transformations include: (1) loop unrolling, where the body of a loop is replicated multiple times
in order to decrease both the number of loop condition tests
and the number of jumps, (2) loop peeling, where a loop
is peeled, a small number of iterations are removed from
the beginning or end of the loop and executed separately to
remove dependencies created by the first of last few loop
iterations, (3) loop blocking, where a loop is reorganized to
iterate over blocks of data sized to fit in the cache.

ecutions of the loop in Figure 9. The top one represents
the non-transformed one, and the bottom one - the unrolled
one. As in the other figures, arrows represent base pointers
as determined by the loop.

As described in Section 4.4, Howard recovers arrays
when the program accesses them in loops. To increase the
accuracy of the analysis, Howard’s algorithm allows for arrays accessed in multiple loops, and checks for array elements accessed before or after the loop body. Basically,
when a transformed loop accesses an array, all its elements
are classified together.
However, loop transformations may change not only the
layout and number of loops, but also the memory access
patterns. As an example, Figure 9 presents a simple loop accessing an array, and two possible ways in which this loop
can be executed. Refer to Figure 10 to observe array arr1
access patterns executions. We can see that depending on
the execution, the array is either classified as an array of
single fields (as desired) or as an array of 4-field structures.
Even though arr1 is possibly misclassified here, it might
be used in other ways somewhere else in the program, and
we might eventually get it right. In all similar cases, Howard
cannot do anything about not entirely accurate classifications, as its analysis is based solely on memory access patterns.

7.1.3

Optimizations affecting function frame

There are numerous compiler optimization which affect the
way we perceive a function’s frame. First, functions can
be inlined, which means that they are integrated into their
callers. In this case the small inlined function is not called
separately, but its function frame extends the caller’s one.
Second, (some of) the input function arguments might be
passed through the registers and not through the stack. Also,
gcc might analyse the program to determine when values
passed to functions are constants. These are optimized accordingly.
Howard is expected to reflect functions in the way they
appear in the binary. In the case of inlined functions we get
just one extended function frame. Likewise, since Howard
analyzes memory access patterns only, it cannot spot function parameters passed through the registers or precomputed
by the compiler. As this inaccuracy does not affect our applications, we did not worry about it.

7.2

Obfuscation techniques

Code obfuscation techniques aim to reduce the ability to
understand or reverse engineer the program. Data transformations [19] that obscure data structures used in the source
application are the most relevant to Howard, and we focus our discussion on them. We also briefly mention antidynamic analysis techniques (Section 7.2.3).
7.2.1

Obfuscating arrays

Numerous transformations can be devised for obscuring operations performed on arrays [16, 46, 26]. Popular techniques include: (1) array splitting, where an array is split
into several subarrays, (2) array merging, where two or
more arrays are merged into one array, (3) array folding and
flattening, where the number of dimensions is increased or
decreased, respectively.
As before, Howard is expected to reflect arrays in the
way they appear and are accessed in the binary. In the case
of split, folded or flattened arrays, Howard is supposed to report the new transformed data structures. When two or more
arrays are merged to form a new array, the results of the
analysis greatly depend on the merging method. For example, one could combine arrays arr1[N1] and arr2[N2]
in such a way that the new array arr3 contains N1 elements
of arr1 followed by N2 elements of arr2. In this case,
it is very probable that Howard reports arr3 as a structure
containing two arrays: an N1- and an N2-element long. Another merging technique could interleave arr1’s elements
with arr2’s elements. Here, we perhaps expect Howard to
report one array of [N1+N2] elements.
Since Howard analyzes memory access patterns only,
it cannot recognize that certain arrays are used in similar

ways by similar functions, and containing similar elements.
Thus, it cannot say that some arrays might share a higher
level data type. Howard concerns itself with low level data
structures only, and limits itself to recognizing sizes and basic types of data structures. Understanding contents and usage scenarios is part of our future work.
7.2.2

Obfuscating variables

There is a lot of work on hiding values of sensitive variables
from static and dynamic analysis [17, 47]. For example, instead of using a variable, one can use a piece of code that
generates the value dynamically. Also, like arrays, variables
may be split or merged. None of our test applications contain such obfuscation, so we left this for future work.
7.2.3

Anti-dynamic analysis techniques

Howard observes the behavior of a program in runtime, and

so it is crucial that the program does not refuse to run in
the instrumented processor emulator. However, there exist
techniques that could be used by programs running in virtualized environments to determine that they are running in
a virtual machine rather than on native hardware [37, 27].
When this happens, Howard cannot perform its analysis.

8

Evaluation

Howard can analyze any application on the Linux
guest on our (QEMU-based) emulator. For instance, we
successfully applied Howard to games like glines and
gnometris, but also to complex binaries like the Linux
loader ld-2.9.so, and huge ones like Apache6 . However, for good results we need code coverage and for code
coverage we currently depend on what is supported by
KLEE [13] and existing test suites.
Our experimental setup is shown in Figure 1. We conduct the code coverage runs offline, using KLEE on LLVM
version 2.6 with home-grown modifications to handle networking. All applications run on a Linux-2.6.31-19 kernel.
We then use klee-replay to replay the application on
top of our Howard analyzer with the inputs generated by
KLEE. If our coverage is low, we use normal test suites for
the applications.
Starting out with small applications (fortune), we
worked towards progressively larger applications. In the
plots below, we include results for programs of several tens
of thousands LoC, including the wget download program
and the lighttpd high-performance web server. Table 1
shows the applications and the coverage we obtained with
6 244.000

lines of code (LoC), as reported by David Wheeler’s

sloccount (www.dwheeler.com/sloccount/).

KLEE and the test suites. We also applied Howard to utilities in CoreUtils, but these tend to be so small (a few hundred lines, typically) that they are not representative of real
applications, and we do not discuss them here.
Results To verify Howard’s accuracy, we compare the results to the actual data structures in the programs. This
is not entirely trivial. We cannot compare to the original
source code since aggressive compiler optimizations may
change the binary significantly (“what you see is not what
you execute” [9]). Thus, all the results presented in this
section were obtained for binaries for which we could also
generate symbol tables to compare our results with. This
way we were able to get ground truth for real world applications.
We will start with a few quick observations. First,
Howard cannot discover variables that always remain unused, but this probably should not count as a ‘missed’ data
structure. Second, all these results were obtained solely
with Howard’s ‘core’ data structure excavation techniques.
In other words, we turned off all type sinking for these tests.
Figure 11 presents our results in terms of accuracy for
both the stack and the heap. The accuracy is calculated both
for the number of variables, and for the total number of allocated bytes. In the case of stack memory we evaluated the
accuracy of Howard’s analysis for all functions used during
our experiments. Thus we did not count the stack variables
used by functions that were never invoked. In the case of
heap, we simply considered all allocated memory regions.
The plots show Howard’s results in five categories:
• OK: Howard identified the entire data structure correctly (i.e., a correctly identified structure field is not
counted separately).
• Flattened: fields of a nested structure are counted as a
normal field of the outer structure. On the stack these
are usually structures accessed via EBP, as explained
in Section 3.
• Missed: Howard misclassified the data structure.
• Unused: single fields, variables, or entire structures
that were never accessed during our tests.
• Unused array: this is a separate category that counts
all arrays not recognized because there were insufficient accesses to the array.
The general conclusion is that practically all memory is
either detected correctly or unused. Moreover, for practically all arrays and structs the lengths were identified
correctly.
The stack has more unused memory than the heap. This
is expected. Whenever a function is called, the whole frame

is allocated on the stack, regardless of the execution path
taken in the function’s code. Heap memory is usually allocated on demand. Much of the unused bytes are due to the
limited coverage. As we never ran KLEE for a longer than
a few hours, it may be that by running it longer7 we obtain
better coverage.
The stack also counts more structures that are flattened.
Again, this is not surprising. As explained in Section 3,
structure field addresses may be calculated relative to the
beginning of the function frame. In that case, Howard has
no means of classifying the region as a structure. On the
heap this is less common. Indeed, if an application allocates
memory for a structure, it refers to the structure’s fields
from the base of the structure, i.e., the beginning of the allocated region. However, Howard may still misclassify in
the case of a nested structure. This happens for instance in
fortune, where a 88-byte FILEDESC structure contains
a nested 24-byte STRFILE structure.
The main source of missed are data structures occasionally classified as arrays of 4-byte fields. Assume that an
application uses a simple structure with 4-byte fields based
at the beginning of the structure (i.e., no inner structures).
If none of the fields is 1-byte long, nor is a pointer, while a
memset function is used for the structure initialization, we
have no means for discarding the array hypothesis.
As the vast majority of structs and arrays reside on
the heap, we zoom in on these results for more details.
Figure 12 breaks down the overall results to show how
well Howard discovers individual fields and different types
of arrays. The two plots correspond to structures that are
separately allocated on the heap and on arrays (possibly
containing structures). We label the results as follows:
• Structures
– OK: fields correctly identified.
– Missed: fields incorrectly identified.
– Unused: fields missed because the program did
not use them.
– Flattened: fields in nested structures that
Howard placed at the wrong nesting level.
• Arrays
– OK: arrays correctly identified.
– Missed: arrays incorrectly identified.
– Missed short: arrays missed because they were
accessed fewer than 4 times.
– Unused: arrays missed by Howard because they
were not used at all.
7 Or running it better. Driving KLEE down the right execution path is
not always trivial.

Prog
wget
fortune
grep
gzip
lighttpd

LoC
46K
2K
24K
21K
21K

Size
200 KB
15 KB
100 KB
40 KB
130 KB

Funcs%
298/576 (51%)
20/28 (71%)
89/179 (50%)
74/105 (70%)
199/360 (55%)

Vars%
1620/2905 (56%)
87/113 (77%)
609/1082 (56%)
352/436 (81%)
883/1418 (62%)

How tested?
KLEE + test suite
test suite
KLEE
KLEE
test suite

KLEE%
24%
N/A
46%
54%
N/A

Table 1. Applications analyzed with Howard. LoC indicates the lines of code according to sloccount. Size is the approximate
size of the text segment. Func% is the fraction of functions that the tests exercised (KLEE or test suite). Vars% is the fraction of
variables used in the tests (KLEE or test suites), and KLEE% is the coverage offered by KLEE (if any).

Heap Memory
100

80

80
% of total

% of total

Stack Memory
100

60
40

unused arrays
flattened
unused
missed
ok

60
40

20

20

0

0

d

ne

rtu

fo

ep

gr

tp

ip

ht

gz

lig

d

ne

t

rtu

ge

w

fo

ep

gr

t

tp

ip

ht

gz

lig

ge

w

Figure 11. The accuracy of the analysis per application. For each application the first bar denotes the accuracy in number of
variables, and the second in number of bytes.

Arrays
100

80

80
% of total

% of total

Structures
100

60
40

flattened
unused
missed short
missed
ok

60
40

20

20

0

0

d

ne

ep

rtu

fo

gr

ip

tp

ht

gz

lig

t

ge
w

d

ne

ep

rtu

fo

gr

ip

tp

ht

gz

lig

t

ge
w

Figure 12. The accuracy of the analysis per application. For each application the first bar denotes the accuracy in number of
variables, and the second in number of bytes.

– Flattened: fields of structs in arrays classified
as separate elements.
If an array contains structs and any field of any
struct is missed, we count it as a missed array. A flattened
array means at least one of the structs was flattened. In
other words, we analyze structs that were allocated individually separately from structs in arrays. The reason
for doing so is that otherwise the arrays would completely
dominate the analysis of structs. For instance, if all fields
in an array of 1000 structures were classified correctly, this
would artificially inflate the number of correctly identified
fields.
In the plots in Figure 12 we see that Howard mostly detects fields and structures quite accurately, provided they are
used at all. Most of the misclassifications are also minor.
For instance, the flattened structure in fortune consists of
an 88-byte FILEDESC structure that contains a nested 24byte STRFILE structure, where the inner structure is never
used separately. Examples of the arrays missed in wget are
a char* array that is reallocated and then not used anymore.
Howard classifies it as an int* array. There are also misclassifications when the last element is accessed outside the
loop and relative to the base pointer, rather than the previous
element. For grep, some arrays of structs were classified
as arrays of individual fields. As explained above, we decided to count them in the flattened arrays, rather than in the
structures. Also, for grep (and gzip) no structures appear
on the heap except in arrays (hence the lack of data in the
plot on the left).
Performance. Most of the overhead in Howard is due to
code coverage. It takes several hours to obtain reasonable
coverage of real-life applications. Howard is considerably
cheaper. Still, since we either re-run the KLEE experiments or the test suites on a heavily instrumented binary,
the analysis takes more time than running the applications
natively. For instance, programs like gzip and grep took 5
and 15 minutes to analyze, respectively. Of all the applications we tried, grep took the longest. As Howard performs
a once-only, offline analysis, these results show that even
with the current unoptimized version, we can realistically
extract data structures from real applications.

9

Conclusions

We have described a new technique, known as Howard,
for extracting data structures from binaries dynamically
without access to source code or symbol tables by observing
how program access memory during execution. We have
shown that the extracted data structures can be used for analyzing and reverse engineering of binaries that previously
could not be analyzed, and for protecting legacy binaries

against memory corruption attacks. As until now data structure extraction for C binaries was not possible, we expect
Howard to be valuable for the fields of debugging, reverse
engineering, and security.
Future work Our focus throughout this project was on
detecting low level data structures in stripped binaries. We
have demonstrated that with Howard we have a chance to
protect arbitrary legacy C binary against one of the most
common form of exploits. We plan to make our current
instrumentation framework fully automated, and to further
evaluate our approach.
Future research also addresses the issue of lifting the
current low level analysis to higher level data structures.
We intend to observe connections between structures, and
based on that information reason about pointer structures
like linked lists, trees and hash tables.

10

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the European Commission through projects FP7-ICT-216026-WOMBAT and
FP7-ICT-257007 SYSSEC. Also, this project has been
funded with the support of the Prevention, Preparedness
and Consequence Management of Terrorism and other
Security-related Risks Programme European Commission
- Directorate-General Home Affairs. This publication reflects the views only of the authors, and the Commission
cannot be held responsible for any use which may be made
of the information contained therein.

References
[1] Null httpd remote heap overflow vulnerability.
http://www.securityfocus.com/bid/5774l.
[2] Ollydbg. http://www.ollydbg.de/.
[3] A. V. Aho, M. S. Lam, R. Sethi, and J. D. Ullman. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools, Second Edition.
Pearson Education, Addison Wesley, 2007.
[4] P. Akritidis, C. Cadar, C. Raiciu, M. Costa, and M. Castro.
Preventing memory error exploits with WIT. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2008.
[5] P. Akritidis, M. Costa, M. Castro, and S. Hand. Baggy
bounds checking: An efficient and backwards-compatible
defense against out-of-bounds errors. In Proceedings of the
18th Usenix Security Symposium, August 2009.
[6] D. F. Bacon, S. L. Graham, and O. J. Sharp. Compiler transformations for high-performance computing. ACM Comput.
Surv., 26:345–420, 1994.
[7] G. Balakrishnan, R. Gruian, T. Reps, and T. Teitelbaum.
Codesurfer/x86—a platform for analyzing x86 executuables. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 250–
254. Springer, 2005.

[8] G. Balakrishnan and T. Reps. Analyzing memory accesses
in x86 binary executables. In Proc. Conf. on Compiler Construction (CC), April 2004.
[9] G. Balakrishnan, T. Reps, D. Melski, and T. Teitelbaum.
WYSINWYX: What you see is not what you execute. In In
Verified Software: Theories, Tools, Experiments, page 1603,
2007.
[10] F. Bellard. QEMU, a fast and portable dynamic translator.
In Proc. of the USENIX Annual Technical Conference, 2005.
[11] S. Bhatkar, R. Sekar, and D. C. DuVarney. Efficient techniques for comprehensive protection from memory error exploits. In SSYM’05: Proceedings of the 14th conference on
USENIX Security Symposium, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2005.
USENIX Association.
[12] J. Caballero, H. Yin, Z. Liang, and D. Song. Polyglot:
automatic extraction of protocol message format using dynamic binary analysis. In CCS ’07: Proceedings of the 14th
ACM conference on Computer and communications security, 2007.
[13] C. Cadar, D. Dunbar, and D. Engler. KLEE: Unassisted
and automatic generation of high-coverage tests for complex
systems programs. In USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 2008), 2008.
[14] S. Chen, J. Xu, E. C. Sezer, P. Gauriar, and R. K. Iyer. Noncontrol-data attacks are realistic threats. In SSYM’05: Proceedings of the 14th conference on USENIX Security Symposium, 2005.
[15] V. Chipounov, V. Kuznetsov, and G. Candea. S2E: A platform for in vivo multi-path analysis of software systems. In
16th Intl. Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), 2011.
[16] S. Cho, H. Chang, and Y. Cho. Implementation of an obfuscation tool for C/C++ source code protection on the XScale
architectures. In Proceedings of the 6th IFIP WG 10.2 International Workshop on Software Technologies for Embedded
and Ubiquitous Systems, 2008.
[17] S. Chow, P. A. Eisen, H. Johnson, and P. C. v. Oorschot.
White-box cryptography and an aes implementation. In Revised Papers from the 9th Annual International Workshop on
Selected Areas in Cryptography (SAC ’02), 2002.
[18] M. Christodorescu, N. Kidd, and W.-H. Goh. String analysis for x86 binaries. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM
SIGPLAN-SIGSOFT Workshop on Program Analysis for
Software Tools and Engineering (PASTE 2005), 2005.
[19] C. Collberg, C. Thomborson, and D. Low. A taxonomy of
obfuscating transformations. Technical report, Department
of Computer Sciences, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, 1997.
[20] P. M. Comparetti, G. Wondracek, C. Kruegel, and E. Kirda.
Prospex: Protocol specification extraction. In SP ’09: Proceedings of the 2009 30th IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, 2009.
[21] C. Cowan, C. Pu, D. Maier, H. Hintony, J. Walpole,
P. Bakke, S. Beattie, A. Grier, P. Wagle, and Q. Zhang.
Stackguard: Automatic adaptive detection and prevention
of buffer-overflow attacks. In 7th USENIX Security Symposium, 1998.

[22] A. Cozzie, F. Stratton, H. Xue, and S. T. King. Digging for
data structures. In USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 2008, pages 255–
266, San Diego, CA, December 2008.
[23] W. Cui, M. Peinado, K. Chen, H. J. Wang, and L. Irun-Briz.
Tupni: automatic reverse engineering of input formats. In
CCS ’08: Proceedings of the 15th ACM conference on Computer and communications security, 2008.
[24] DataRescue.
High level constructs width IDA
Pro.
http://www.hex-rays.com/idapro/
datastruct/datastruct.pdf, 2005.
[25] T. DeRaadt. Advances in openbsd. CanSecWest, http://
www.openbsd.org/papers/csw03/index.html,
April 2003.
[26] S. Drape. Generalising the array split obfuscation. Information Sciences, 177:202–219, 2007.
[27] P. Ferrie. Attacks on virtual machine emulators. White paper, Symantec advanced threat research, 2007.
[28] O. Golovanevsky and A. Zaks. Struct-reorg: current status
and future perspectives. In Proceedings of the GCC Developers Summit, 2007.
[29] M. Hagog and C. Tice. Cache aware data layout reorganization optimization in gcc. In Proceedings of the GCC
Developers Summit, 2005.
[30] Z. Lin, X. Jiang, D. Xu, and X. Zhang. Automatic protocol format reverse engineering through context-aware monitored execution. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Network
and Distributed System Security Symposium, 2008.
[31] Z. Lin, X. Zhang, and D. Xu. Automatic reverse engineering
of data structures from binary execution. In Proceedings of
the 17th Annual Network and Distributed System Security
Symposium (NDSS’10), San Diego, CA, March 2010.
[32] K. Makris and K. D. Ryu. Dynamic and adaptive updates of
non-quiescent subsystems in commodity operating system
kernels. In EuroSys, pages 327–340, 2007.
[33] T. Moseley, V. Tovinkere, R. Ramanujan, D. A. Connors,
and D. Grunwald. Loopprof: Dynamic techniques for loop
detection and profiling. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Binary Instrumentation and Applications (WBIA), 2006.
[34] J. Newsome, D. Brumley, and D. X. Song. Vulnerabilityspecific execution filtering for exploit prevention on commodity software. In Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symp osium, NDSS 2006, San
Diego, California, USA, February 2006.
[35] J. Newsome and D. Song. Dynamic taint analysis: Automatic detection, analysis, and signature generation of exploit
attacks on commodity software. In Proceedings of the Network and Distributed Systems Security Symposium, 2005.
[36] A. One. Smashing the stack for fun and profit. Phrack,
7(49), 1996.
[37] T. Raffetseder, C. Krügel, and E. Kirda. Detecting system
emulators. In Information Security, 10th International Conference, ISC 2007, 2007.
[38] G. Ramalingam, J. Field, and F. Tip. Aggregate structure
identification and its application to program analysis. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT symposium on
Principles of Programming Languages, 1999.

[39] T. Reps and G. Balakrishnan. Improved memory-access
analysis for x86 executables. In CC’08/ETAPS’08: Proceedings of the Joint European Conferences on Theory and
Practice of Software 17th international conference on Compiler construction, 2008.
[40] Secunia.
DEP/ASLR implementation progress in
popular third-party windows applications.
White
paper,
http://secunia.com/gfx/pdf/
DEPASLR2010paper.pdf, June 2010.
[41] H. Shacham, M. Page, B. Pfaff, E.-J. Goh, N. Modadugu,
and D. Boneh. On the effectiveness of address-space randomization. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM conference on
Computer and communications security (CCS’04), 2004.
[42] A. Slowinska, T. Stancescu, and H. Bos. Precise data structure excavation. Technical Report IR-CS-55, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, February 2010.
[43] Z. Wang, X. Jiang, W. Cui, X. Wang, and M. Grace. Reformat: automatic reverse engineering of encrypted messages.
In ESORICS’09: Proceedings of the 14th European conference on Research in computer security, 2009.
[44] G. Wondracek, P. Milani Comparetti, C. Kruegel, and
E. Kirda. Automatic network protocol analysis. In 15th
Symposium on Network and Distributed System Security
(NDSS), 2008.
[45] Y. Younan, P. Philippaerts, L. Cavallaro, R. Sekar,
F. Piessens, and W. Joosen. PAriCheck: an efficient pointer
arithmetic checker for C programs. In ASIACCS ’10: Proceedings of the 5th ACM Symposium on Information, Computer and Communications Security, 2010.
[46] Y. Zhong, M. Orlovich, X. Shen, and C. Ding. Array regrouping and structure splitting using whole-program reference affinity. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2004
conference on Programming language design and implementation (PLDI ’04), 2004.
[47] Y. Zhou, A. Main, Y. X. Gu, and H. Johnson. Information hiding in software with mixed boolean-arithmetic transforms. In Proceedings of the 8th international conference on
Information security applications, WISA ’07, 2007.
