# LEC 1: Introduction

```text
6.5840 2026 Lecture 1: Introduction

6.5840: Distributed Systems Engineering

A "distributed system":
  a group of computers cooperating to provide a service

Examples:
  popular apps' back-ends, e.g. for messaging
  big web sites
  cloud providers

Focus here is distributed infrastructure:
  storage
  transaction systems
  "big data" processing frameworks

Hard to build:
  concurrency
  complex interactions
  performance bottlenecks
  partial failure

Why useful?
  to increase capacity via parallel processing
  to tolerate faults via replication
  to match distribution of physical devices e.g. sensors
  to increase security via isolation

Why take this course?
  interesting -- hard problems, powerful solutions
  big demand -- driven by the rise of big Web sites
  active research area -- important unsolved problems
  challenging -- the labs

COURSE STRUCTURE

http://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.5840

Course staff:
  Frans Kaashoek and Robert Morris, lecturers
  Baltasar Dinis, TA
  Ayana Alemayehu, TA
  Upamanyu Sharma, TA
  Yun-Sheng Chang, TA
  Danny Villanueva, TA
  Brian Shi, TA
  Nour Massri, TA
  Beshr Islam Bouli, TA

Lectures:
  paper discussion, context, lab guidance

Papers:
  one per lecture
  research papers, some classic, some new
  ideas, problems, implementation details, evaluation
  please read papers before class!
  web site has a question about each paper
    submit your answer before start of lecture
  optionally, submit a question for us

Exams:
  Mid-term exam in class
  Final exam during finals week
  papers, lectures, and labs
  You must attend the exams!

Labs:
  goal: deeper grasp of some important techniques
  goal: experience with distributed programming
  first lab is due a week from Friday
  one per week after that for a while

Lab 1: distributed big-data framework (like MapReduce)
Lab 2: client/server vs unreliable network
Lab 3: fault tolerance using replication (Raft)
Lab 4: a fault-tolerant database
Lab 5: scalable database performance via sharding

We grade the labs using a set of tests
  we give you all the tests; none are secret

Optional final project at the end, in groups of 2 or 3.
  The final project substitutes for Lab 5.
  You think of a project and clear it with us.
  Code, short write-up, demo on last day.

Warning: debugging the labs can be time-consuming
  start early
  ask questions on Piazza
  TA office hours

MAIN TOPICS

This is a course about infrastructure.
  * Storage.
  * Communication.
  * Computation.

A big goal: hide the complexity of distribution from applications.

Topic: fault tolerance
  1000s of servers, big network -> constant failures
    We'd like to hide these failures.
    "High availability": service continues despite failures
  Big idea: replication.
    If one server crashes, can proceed using the other(s).

Topic: consistency
  General-purpose infrastructure needs well-defined behavior.
    E.g. "read(x) yields the value from the most recent write(x)."
  Guaranteeing specified behavior is hard!
    e.g. "replica" servers are hard to keep identical.

Topic: performance
  A common goal: scalable throughput
    Nx servers -> Nx total throughput via parallel CPU, RAM, disk, net.
  Scaling gets harder as N grows
    e.g. load imbalance.

Topic: tradeoffs
  Fault-tolerance, consistency, and performance are enemies.
  Fault tolerance and consistency require communication
    e.g., send data to backup server
    e.g., check if cached data is up-to-date
    but communication is often slow and hard to scale up
  Many designs sacrifice consistency to gain speed.
    e.g. read(x) might *not* yield the latest write(x)!
    Painful for application programmers (or users).
  We'll see many consistency/performance design points.

Topic: implementation
  RPC, threads, concurrency control.
  The labs...

CASE STUDY: MapReduce

Let's talk about MapReduce (MR)
  a good illustration of 6.5840's main topics
  hugely influential
  the focus of Lab 1

Context: multi-hour computations on multi-terabyte data-sets
  e.g. build search index, or sort, or analyze structure of web
  only practical with 1000s of computers

A big goal: easy for non-specialist programmers
  programmer just defines Map and Reduce functions
  often simple sequential code
  MR manages, and hides, all aspects of distribution!
  MR is a framework / library; "application" is just Map()/Reduce()
  
Abstract view of a MapReduce job -- word count
  Input1 -> Map -> a,1 b,1
  Input2 -> Map ->     b,1
  Input3 -> Map -> a,1     c,1
                    |   |   |
                    |   |   -> Reduce -> c,1
                    |   -----> Reduce -> b,2
                    ---------> Reduce -> a,2
  1) input is (already) split into M pieces
  2) MR calls Map() for each input split, produces list of k,v pairs
     "intermediate" data
     each Map() call is a "task"
  3) when Maps are done,
     MR gathers all intermediate v's for each k,
     and passes each key + values to a Reduce call
  4) final output is set of <k,v> pairs from Reduce()s

Word-count code
  Map(d)
    chop d into words
    for each word w
      emit(w, "1")
  Reduce(k, v[])
    emit(len(v[]))

MapReduce scales well:
  N "worker" computers (might) get you Nx throughput.
    Maps()s can run in parallel, since they don't interact.
    Same for Reduce()s.
  Thus more computers -> more throughput -- very nice!

MapReduce hides much complexity:
  sending map+reduce code to servers
  tracking which tasks have finished
  "shuffling" intermediate data from Maps to Reduces
  balancing load over servers
  recovering from crashed servers

To get these benefits, MapReduce restricts applications:
  Only one pattern (Map -> shuffle -> Reduce).
  No interaction or state (other than via intermediate output).
  Only batch: no real-time or streaming processing.

Some details (paper's Figure 1)

Input and output are stored on the GFS cluster file system
  MR needs huge parallel input and output throughput.
  GFS splits files over many servers, many disks, in 64 MB chunks
    Maps read in parallel
    Reduces write in parallel
  GFS replicates data on 2 or 3 servers, for fault tolerance
  GFS is a big win for MapReduce

MR writes Map() output to local disk
  MR splits into files by hash(key) mod R
  each "hash bucket" contains multiple keys
  The map workers all hash the same way

The shuffle
  each Reduce task processes one hash bucket
  MR fetches each Reduce tasks' bucket from every Map worker
  merge, sort by key, call Reduce() for each key
  each Reduce task writes a separate output file on GFS

The "Coordinator" manages all the steps in a job.
  tracks state of each task
  hands out tasks to worker machines

What will limit performance?
  We care since that limit is the thing to optimize.
  CPU? memory? disk? network?

In 2004 authors were limited by network speed.
  What does MR send over the network?
    Maps read input from GFS.
    Reduces fetch Map intermediate output.
      Often as large as input, e.g. for sorting.
    Reduces write output files to GFS.

How fast was the paper's network?
  Section 5.1: 1800 machines, two-level switched network
  [diagram: root switch, 2nd level of switches, machines]
    each switch must have had ~42 ports (square root of 1800)
  MR's shuffle requires every worker to fetch data from every other
    Only 1/42nd stays in local switch
  So MR's shuffle sends most data through root switch.
  Paper's root switch: 100 to 200 gigabits/second, total
    1800 machines, so ~55 megabits/second/machine.
    55 is small: less than disk or RAM speed.

How does MR minimize network use?
  Coordinator tries to run each Map task on GFS server that stores its input.
    All computers run both GFS and MR workers
    So Map input is usually read from GFS data on local disk, not over network.
  Intermediate data goes over network just once.
    Map worker writes to local disk.
    Reduce workers read from Map worker disks over the network.
    (Storing it in GFS would require at least two trips over the network.)

How does MR get good load balance?
  Why do we care about load balance?
    If one server has more work than others, or is slower,
    then other servers will lie idle (wasted) at the end, waiting.
  So ideally MR divides work so that all workers finish at same time.
  But tasks vary in size, and computers vary in speed.
  Solution: many more tasks than worker machines.
    Coordinator hands out new tasks to workers who finish previous tasks.
    So faster servers do more tasks than slower ones.
    And slow servers are given less work, reducing impact on total time.

What about fault tolerance?
  What if a worker computer crashes?
  We want MR framework to hide failures.
  Does MR have to re-run the whole job from the beginning?
    Why not?
  Coordinator re-runs just the failed Map()s and Reduce()s.

Suppose MR runs a Map task twice, one Reduce sees first run's output,
    but another Reduce sees the second run's output?
  The two Map executions had better produce identical intermediate output!
  Map and Reduce should be pure deterministic functions:
    they are only allowed to look at their arguments/input.
    no state, no file I/O, no interaction, no external communication,
      no random numbers.
  Programmer is responsible for ensuring this determinism.

Other failures/problems:
  * What if the coordinator gives two workers the same Map() task?
    perhaps the coordinator incorrectly thinks one worker died.
    it will tell Reduce workers about only one of them.
  * What if the coordinator gives two workers the same Reduce() task?
    they will both try to write the same output file on GFS!
    atomic GFS rename prevents mixing; one complete file will be visible.
  * What if a single worker is very slow -- a "straggler"?
    perhaps due to flakey hardware.
    coordinator starts a second copy of last few tasks.
  * What if a worker computes incorrect output, due to broken h/w or s/w?
    too bad! MR assumes "fail-stop" CPUs and software.
  * What if the coordinator crashes?

Performance?
  Figure 2
  X-Axis is time
  Y-Axis is total rate at which a "grep"-style job reads its input
  A terabyte (1000 GB) of input
  1764 workers
  30,000 MB/s (30 GB/s) is huge!
  Why 30,000 MB/s?
    17 MB/s per worker machine -- 140 megabits/second
    more than our guess (55 mbit/s) of net bandwidth
    input probably read direct from two local GFS disks
    so each disk probably could read at about 9 MB/second
  Why is the main period of activity about 30 seconds?
  Why does it take 50 seconds for throughput to reach maximum?

Current status?
  Hugely influential (Hadoop, Spark, Lab 1, &c).
  Probably no longer in use at Google.
    Replaced by Flume / FlumeJava (see paper by Chambers et al).
    GFS replaced by Colossus (no good description), and BigTable.

Next lecture:
  Programming: Go, Threads, RPC
```
