# Paper: On-demand Container Loading

On-demand Container Loading in AWS Lambda
Marc Brooker, Mike Danilov, Chris Greenwood, and
Phil Piwonka, Amazon Web Services
https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc23/presentation/brooker

This paper is included in the Proceedings of the
2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference.
July 10–12, 2023 • Boston, MA, USA
978-1-939133-35-9

Open access to the Proceedings of the
2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
is sponsored by

On-demand Container Loading in AWS Lambda
Marc Brooker
Amazon Web Services

Mike Danilov
Amazon Web Services

Chris Greenwood
Amazon Web Services

Phil Piwonka
Amazon Web Services

Abstract
AWS Lambda is a serverless event-driven compute service,
part of a category of cloud compute offerings sometimes
called Function-as-a-service (FaaS). When we first released
AWS Lambda, functions were limited to 250MB of code and
dependencies, packaged as a simple compressed archive. In
2020, we released support for deploying container images
as large as 10GiB as Lambda functions, allowing customers
to bring much larger code bases and sets of dependencies
to Lambda. Supporting larger packages, while still meeting
Lambda’s goals of rapid scale (adding up to 15,000 new containers per second for a single customer, and much more in
aggregate), high request rate (millions of requests per second),
high scale (millions of unique workloads), and low start-up
times (as low as 50ms) presented a significant challenge.
We describe the storage and caching system we built, optimized for delivering container images on-demand, and our
experiences designing, building, and operating it at scale. We
focus on challenges around security, efficiency, latency, and
cost, and how we addressed these challenges in a system
that combines caching, deduplication, convergent encryption,
erasure coding, and block-level demand loading.
Since building this system, it has reliably processed hundreds of trillions of Lambda invocations for over a million
AWS customers, and has shown excellent resilience to load
and infrastructure failures.

1

Introduction

AWS Lambda is a serverless event-driven compute service,
part of a category of cloud compute offerings sometimes
called Function-as-a-service (FaaS). First launched in 2015,
today AWS Lambda functions run millions of times per second over millions of unique customer workloads. One factor
that attracts customers to Lambda is its ability to scale up
to handle increased load, typically in less than one second
(and often as quickly as 50ms). This scale-up time, which
customers have come to refer to as cold-start time, is one of

USENIX Association

the most important metrics that determine the customer experience in FaaS systems. When we launched AWS Lambda,
we recognized that reducing data movement during these cold
starts was critical. Customers deployed functions to Lambda
in compressed archives (.zip files), which were unpacked as
each function instance was provisioned. As Lambda evolved,
and customers increasingly looked to deploy more complex
applications, there was significant demand for larger deployments, and the ability to use container tooling (such as Docker)
to create and manage these deployment images. Customers
also wanted Lambda to support these images without compromising on cold-start performance.
Adding container support to AWS Lambda without regressing on cold-start time presented a significant technical challenge for our team. The core challenge is simply one of data
movement. Today, Lambda can start up to 15,000 containers a
second [18] for production workloads, and we expect to scale
further for future workloads. Simply moving and unpacking
a 10GiB image for each of these 15,000 containers would
require 150Pb/s of network bandwidth. To achieve scalability
and cold-start latency goals, we needed to take advantage of
three factors which simplify this problem:
Cacheability While Lambda serves hundreds of thousands
of unique workloads, large scale-up spikes tend to be
driven by a smaller number of images, suggesting that
the workload is highly cacheable.
Commonality Many popular images are based on common
base layers (such as our own AWS base layers, or open
source offerings like Alpine). Caching and deduplicating
these common base layers reduce data movement for all
containers that build on them.
Sparsity Most container images contain a lot of files, and
file contents, that applications don’t need at startup (or
potentially never need). Harter et al [15] found that on
average only 6.4% of container data is needed at startup.
Our solution combines caching, deduplication, erasure coding, and sparse loading to take advantage of our needs. With-

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

315

Customer Code

Frontend

Micro
Manager

λ Shim
Linux Kernel

Function
Metadata

Worker
Manager

Monitoring,
Logging, etc.

MicroVM “slot”
virtio

Firecracker

Workers
Workers
Workers

Figure 2: Architecture of the AWS Lambda worker

Figure 1: Architecture of the AWS Lambda invoke path
out adding any customer visible complexity (they simply upload a container image to a convenient repository), we were
able to achieve our scale and cold-start latency goals, while
having significant headroom for future scaling.
In this section, we present the existing architecture of AWS
Lambda, and the overall architecture of our system. Section 2
presents the low-level implementation of our sparse loading
solution. The cache architecture, and use of erasure coding
to improve scalability and tail latency is presented in Section
4. Section 3 presents our convergent encryption-based secure
deduplication architecture. Finally Section 6 compares our
solution to other approaches from academia and industry.

1.1

Existing Architecture Overview

To reduce risk and optimize time-to-market, we wanted to
introduce these new capabilities to Lambda with the minimum
amount of change to the existing architecture, as shown in
Figure 1. Requests to execute a certain function (we call
these invokes) arrive via a load-balanced stateless frontend
service. This service loads the metadata associated with the
request, performs authentication and authorization, and then
sends a request to the Worker Manager, requesting capacity.
Worker Manager is a stateful, sticky, load balancer. For every
unique function in the system, it keeps track of what capacity
is available to run that function, where that capacity is in
the fleet, and predicts when new capacity may be needed.
If capacity is available, the Worker Manager instructs the
frontend to forward the request payload to a Worker, where
the function is executed. If no capacity is available, the Worker
Manager identifies a Worker with available CPU and RAM,
and sends a request to start a sandbox for the relevant function.
Once this is complete, the frontend is notified and the function
is executed.
Each Lambda worker, as shown in Figure 2, includes a
small controller process, the Micro Manager, some additional
agents for logging and monitoring, and a large number of
MicroVMs. Each MicroVM, based on our Firecracker [3]
hypervisor, contains the code for a single Lambda function
for a single customer. Inside the MicroVM is a minimized

316

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

Linux guest kernel, a small shim that provides Lambda’s
programming model, any provided runtime (e.g. the JVM for
Java or CoreCLR for .NET), and the customer’s code and
libraries. As described in our Firecracker paper [3], the key
concern here is security: customer code and data is not trusted,
and the only communication between the workload inside
the MicroVM and the shared worker components is over a
simple, well tested, and formally verified implementation of
virtio [27, 32] (specifically virtio-net and virtio-blk).
In the first generation architecture (before this work), when
a new MicroVM is created with new capacity for a particular
function, the Worker downloads the function image (a .zip file
up to 250MiB in size) from Amazon S3, and unpacks it into
the MicroVM guest’s filesystem. This model is simple, and
works well for small images, but requires the full archive to be
downloaded and unpacked before the new MicroVM can do
any work. To support larger images, we wanted to avoid this
blocking download, and avoid the storage cost of unpacking
the entire archive if only part of it is used.

2

Block-Level Loading

To take advantage of the sparsity property of containers, we
needed to allow the system to load (and store) only the data the
application needs, ideally at the time it needs it. Approaches
like Slacker [15] and Starlight [8] have approached this problem at the filesystem level - a natural fit for containers, which
are built as an overlayed stack of file-level archives. This approach isn’t the right one for our environment. We believed
that the inherent complexity of filesystems, and additional
complexity of overlaying multiple filesystems, would unacceptably increase the attack surface of the shared components
in Lambda. Instead, we decided to keep the block-level virtioblk interface between the MicroVM guest and the hypervisor,
perform all filesystem operations inside the guest. This requires performing sparse loading at the block, rather than file,
level.
Figure 3 shows our high-level architecture, showing the
Lambda worker (shown in detail in Figure 4) where customer’s code is run, container registry which contains the
primary copy of customer’s container images, and the chunk

USENIX Association

Scale: per
new function

Scale: per
invoke

Container
Registry

Distributed
Cache

To shared cache

Customer Code
λ Shim
ext4 Filesystem

Deterministic
Flatten

Lambda
Lambda
Worker
Worker

Guest Linux Kernel
MicroVM “slot”

Worker Local
Cache
Key Store
(KMS)

Keys

Chunk Origin
(S3)

Chunks

Container
Images

Figure 3: High-level system architecture.

creation and caching infrastructure.
Our first step in supporting block-level loading is to collapse the container image into a block device image. As described in the OCI image specification [1], a container image
is a stack of tarball layers. In the typical container stack, these
layers are overlayed at at runtime using overlayfs. In our implementation, we perform this overlaying operation at the
time the function is initially created, following a deterministic flattening process which applies each tarball in order to
create a single ext4 filesystem. Function creation is a low-rate
control-plane process, that is typically only triggered by customers when they make changes to their code, configuration,
or architecture. Even the most aggressive adoptees of continuous integration only make these changes on the order of
minutes, while function invocation can happen up to millions
of times a second.
The flattening process is designed so that blocks of the
filesystem that contain unchanged files will be identical, allowing for block-level deduplication of the flattened images
between containers that share common base layers. We’ll
revisit this in Section 3, but the high-level reason is that differences between functions (and even more so between versions
of the same function) are typically much smaller than the
functions themselves. The flattening process proceeds by unpacking each layer onto an ext4 filesystem, using a modified
filesystem implementation that performs all operations deterministically. Most filesystem implementations take advantage
of concurrency to improve performance, introducing nondeterminism. Ours is serial, and deterministically chooses
normally-variable parameters like modification times.
Following the flattening process, the flattened filesystem
is broken up into fixed-size chunks, and those chunks are
uploaded to the origin tier of a three-tiered cache for later use

USENIX Association

Worker

virtio

Local Agent

Firecracker

Per-function resources

Figure 4: Lambda worker with per-worker, per-customer, and
in-guest components
(we use S3 as this origin tier). Chunks in the shared storage
are named according the their content, ensuring that chunks
with the same content have the same name and can be cached
once. This scheme, described in detail in Section 3, allows
efficient deduplication of chunk content in storage and cache
layers without requiring a central directory or index of chunks.
Each fixed-size chunk is 512KiB. Smaller chunks lead to
better deduplication by minimizing false-sharing, and can accelerate loading for workloads with highly random access patterns. Larger chunks reduce metadata size, reduce the number
of requests needed to load data (hence improving throughput),
and provide natural read-ahead for sequential workloads. The
optimal value will change over time as the system evolves,
and we expect that future iterations of the system may choose
a different chunk size as our understanding of how customers
use the system evolves.

2.1

Per-MicroVM Snapshot Loading

Once chunks are created, the system needs to be able to access
the data they require from the chunks that contain that data.
As shown in Figure 4, we added two new components to
support this loading:
• A per-function local agent which presents a block device
to the per-function Firecracker hypervisor (via FUSE),
which is then forwarded using the existing virtio interface into the guest, where it is mounted by the guest
kernel.
• A per-worker local cache which caches chunks of data
that are frequently used on the worker, and interacts with
the remote cache (see Section 4 for details)
When a new Lambda function is started on a worker, the
Micro Manager creates a new local agent, and a new Firecracker MicroVM which contains two virtio block devices: a

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

317

root device which is the same for all MicroVMs, and a block
device backed by the FUSE filesystem exposed by the local
agent. The MicroVM boots, starts some supervisory components, and then starts executing the customer code in the
container image. Each IO that this code performs (unless it
can be served from the page cache kept by the guest kernel)
turns into a virtio-blk request, which is then processed by
Firecracker, and handed off to the local agent.
The local agent handles reads by reading directly from the
local cache, if the chunk that contains the requested offset
is already present there. If not, the relevant chunk is fetched
from the tiered cache, as described in Section 4. The local
agent handles write by writing them to block overlay, backed
by encrypted storage on the worker. A bitmap is maintained
at page granularity, indicating whether data should be read
from the overlay, or from the backing container image. The
page granularity of the bitmap requires a read-modify-write
for writes from the guest which don’t cover an entire page.
This page-level copy-on-write approach allows the MicroVM guest to handle both reads and writes, while keeping
the data in the local cache (and all other caching tiers) immutable, allowing it to be shared across multiple guests.

3

Deduplication Without Trust

Base container images, such as the official Docker alpine,
ubuntu, and nodejs are extremely widely used: each boasts
over a billion aggregate downloads from the popular DockerHub container repository1 . Starting from one of these base
images, and customizing it to the special needs of the application, is a common way to create new container images. When
a popular base image is used, the deterministic flattening process described in Section 2 produces unique chunks for the
customized parts, and chunks for the common parts that are
identical to those produced for other images with the same
base. These shared chunks create a significant opportunity for
deduplication: if only a single copy of these chunks is stored,
less data movement is needed, less storage is consumed, and
caches are more effective.
Approximately 80% of newly uploaded Lambda functions
result in zero unique chunks, and are just re-uploads of images
that had been uploaded in the past. This appears to be primarily driven by automated testing and deployment (CI/CD)
systems. Of the remaining 20% of functions that create at
least one unique chunk (and therefore aren’t just trivial reuploads), the mean upload contains 4.3% unique chunks, and
the median 2.5% unique chunks. Trivial all-zero chunks are
not included in these numbers: they are excluded entirely
from images at creation time.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of deduplication effectiveness, for the top quartile (by image size) and remainder of the
population. This breakdown shows that the majority of func1 statistics from https://hub.docker.com/, accessed July 2022

318

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

Figure 5: Empirical CDF of deduplication effectiveness at
chunk creation time, among functions that aren’t trivial reuploads.
tions of all sizes are heavily deduped, and a significant tail
where deduplication is not as effective. While large functions
are still effectively deduplicated, they have a smaller tail of
unique chunks. This data clearly suggests that deduplication
is worth the complexity, reducing storage by as much as 23x,
and improving effectiveness of the cache tiers (how much
cache effectiveness is improved depends on the correlation
between probability of deduplication and frequency of access). While the 80% of functions with no unique chunks
aren’t statistically interesting, deduplicating these has a large
practical benefit, including reducing storage costs by another
5x, and boosting cache effectiveness.

3.1

Convergent Encryption

Deduplication of plaintexts is relatively straightforward.
Venti [30], dating back to 2002, used a hash of block contents and a separate index to deduplicate blocks. Introducing
encryption, however, significantly complicates deduplication.
As Storer, et al [33] write:
Unfortunately, deduplication exploits identical content, while encryption attempts to make all content
appear random; the same content encrypted with
two different keys results in very different ciphertext. Thus, combining the space efficiency of deduplication with the secrecy aspects of encryption is
problematic.
One solution is to have a shared key, or keys, that can be
used to decrypt shared blocks, but this either introduces single
keys that can access a large number of blocks, or a significant
key management problem. Perhaps the hardest problem is

USENIX Association

minimizing trust. While AWS Lambda runs user code with
strong isolation [3], we still wish to restrict each Lambda
worker host to only being able to access the data it needs for
the functions that have been sent to it.
The authors of Farsite [2, 11] developed convergent encryption as a solution to this problem. A cryptographic hash of
each block (in the case of Farsite a file block, in our case a
chunk of a flattened container image) is used to deterministically derive a cryptographic key that is used for encryptng
the block. We follow this same scheme, but mix additional
metadata into the key derivation (as described in Section 3.3).
The flattening process described in Section 2 takes each
chunk, derives a key from it by computing its SHA256 digest,
and then encrypts the block using AES-CTR (with the derived
key). Here, AES-CTR is used with a deterministic (all zero)
IV, ensuring that the same ciphertext always leads to the same
plaintext. Using a deterministic IV in this context is safe,
because due to the collision resistance of SHA256, a key, IV
pair is only used on for one plaintext block [12]. A manifest of
chunks is then created, containing the offset, unique key, and
SHA256 hash of each chunk2 . The manifest is then encrypted,
using AES-GCM, using a unique per-customer key managed
by AWS Key Management Service (AWS KMS). Chunks are
then named based on a function of the hash of their ciphertext,
and uploaded to the backing store (AWS S3) using that name
if no chunk of that name already exists.
In our scheme, we do not encrypt the entire manifest with
the customer’s unique key. Instead, only the key table (the
keys of each encrypted chunk) is encrypted, and the whole
document is authenticated (i.e. included in the calculation
of the AES-GCM tag as additional data). This allows the
garbage collection process to access the list of chunks in the
manifest, while having no access to the chunk keys. The size
of manifests, stored in an efficient binary format, is negligible: less than 3MiB for a 16GiB container image, or 0.02%
overhead.
This approach provides a number of desirable properties:
• Data can be deduplicated with no sharing of keys: the
keys to decrypt the customer’s manifest are unique to that
customer, and access to them (via AWS KMS) is only
provided to the workers that that particular customer’s
functions are placed on.
• Data can be deduplicated with no coordination or special access provided to the flattening process. Flattening
processes operate independently, and the only special
operation they need is "upload this file to storage if it
doesn’t already exist".
• The scheme provides strong end-to-end integrity protection for chunks. Workers check the chunks they down2 It may appear attractive to use an AEAD mode like AES-GCM rather
than the more expensive SHA256 in this application, but these modes do not
commonly provide collision resistance against attackers who know the data
key [10], an important property in our security scheme.

USENIX Association

load against the MAC in the manifest, ensuring that modified ciphertexts can be detected and rejected.

3.2

Compression

Our system does not compress chunk plaintexts prior to encryption. This is for two reasons. First, given the network
bandwidth available to our caches and workers the additional
latency of decompression, and difficulty of allowing random
access to compressed data, makes the latency benefit of compression marginal. Second, compression before encryption
allows potential attackers to infer plaintext contents from compressed sizes, a compression side channel. This risk, and the
relatively small expected benefit, means that we decided not
to implement compression (beyond trivial elision of all-zero
chunks).

3.3

Limiting Blast Radius

While deduplication has value in cost and cache performance,
it also adds some risks. Some popular chunks are widely referenced, meaning that anything that causes access to those
chunks to break or become slow, also has a very wide impact
on the system. Risks include partial (gray) failures of cache
nodes, operational issues that cause unavailability of data,
bugs in garbage collection, or corruption of data in the cache
hierarchy. Highly popular chunks also cause hot-spotting in
distributed storage. While our cryptographic scheme detects
corruption and will prevent readers from seeing corrupt data,
it does not correct it, and so corrupted data will become unavailable.
To solve this problem, we include a varying salt in the key
derivation step of our convergent encryption scheme. This
salt value can vary in time, with chunk popularity, and with
infrastructure placement (such as using different salts in different availability zones or datacenters). Otherwise-identical
chunks with different salt values will end up with different
keys, and therefore difference ciphertexts, and will not deduplicate against each other. By controlling the frequency with
which the salt is rotated, we can continuously trade off deduplication efficiency with blast radius. Salt allows us to encapsulate the control of deduplication entirely within the chunk
creation layer, without any other component needing to be
aware of its decisions. Salt rotation is an operational concern,
and is not needed for the security of the deduplication scheme.

3.4

Garbage Collection

A key challenge of any distributed deduplication scheme is
garbage collection: removing data from the backing store
when it is no longer actively referenced. Garbage collecting
the wrong chunk could cause wide impact across multiple customers. Our deduplication scheme does not maintain a central

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

319

R1

active
read &
write

retired
read
only

expired
alarm on
access

deleted

expired

deleted

Copy active data

R2

active

retired

Figure 6: Lifecycle of data chunks used by the generational
garbage collector.
directory of chunk references or manifests, making exact reference counting infeasible. Past experience with distributed
garbage collection has taught us that the problem is both
complex (because the tree of chunk references is changing
dynamically) and uniquely risky (because it is the one place
in our system where we delete customer data). The approach
we took to garbage collection is based on this experience.
Our approach to garbage collection is based on the concept of roots. A root is a self-contained manifest and chunk
namespace, analogous to the roots used in traditional garbage
collection algorithms. Unlike traditional GC roots, in our
system we periodically create new roots (which then get all
new data), and retire old roots (after moving any still-needed
data into a fresh root).When a customer’s container image
is converted, the manifest and set of chunks are placed in an
active root, for example R1 . An active root handles both reads
and writes of data. Periodically, a new root R2 is created and
becomes active, while root R1 enters a retired state at which
point it only serves reads of data. While R1 is retired, any
manifest that is still referenced in R1 is migrated, along with
any chunks it references, to R2 . Over time the manifests and
chunks in R1 that are in active use will be migrated to R2 ,
allowing R1 to be safely deleted. This process is repeated: R2
is retired and R3 becomes the active root and so on. Figure 6
shows this lifecycle. Moving chunks along with their manifest
ensures that if a manifest exists in root R, then all the chunks
it references do to. A unique identifier for the currently active
root is also included in the deduplication salt (Section 3.3),
ensuring that newly-created chunks in the active root are not
shared with previous roots.
Instead of deleting roots immediately after data migration
is complete, we put them into an expired state. In this state,
data is still allowed to be read, but any attempt to access data
leads to an alarm. These alarms both engage an operator and
automatically stop further deletion of data. This approach
allows us to robustly detect garbage collection issues (especially incomplete copying) in production, and quickly and
automatically stop any data from being deleted. While this
mechanism is inexact (data could be accessed after the period
the root is expired), it provides a valuable additional layer of
protection against data loss. While software bugs are rare, and
we test garbage collection changes carefully, multiple layers
of protection against customer data loss are critical in any

320

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

distributed storage system.
Having data in multiple roots does drive up storage costs,
however that additional cost is palatable for Lambda as customers often update their functions and a large majority of
data is never migrated to a new root. The system is also capable of having multiple roots active simultaneously, which
reduces the blast radius of bugs and provides the ability to
roll out new garbage collection changes and algorithms to a
subset of manifests and their chunks.

4

Tiered Caching

When workers don’t have chunks in their local cache, they
attempt to pull them from a remote availability-zone-level
(AZ-level) shared cache (as shown in Figure 3). If chunks
aren’t in this cache, workers download them from S3, and
upload them into the cache. This AZ-level cache is a custom
implementation of a fairly standard design: chunks are fetched
over HTTP2, data storage is two-tiered with an in-memory
tier for hot chunks and a flash tier for colder chunks, and eviction is LRU-k [29] (a scan-resistant variant of Least Recently
Used). Chunks are distributed to the AZ-level cache using a
variant of a consistent hashing [19] scheme, with optimizations to improved load spreading (similar to the approach of
Chen et al [7]). The caching tier improves fetch performance
considerably: from the worker’s perspective, a hit on the AZlevel cache takes a median time of 550µs, versus 36ms for a
fetch from the origin in S3 (99.9th percentile 3.7ms versus
175ms).
Figure 7 shows the effectiveness of these three cache tiers.
Over a week of production usage in one large AWS region,
a median of 67% of chunks were loaded from the on-worker
cache, 32% from the AZ-level distributed cache, and the remaining 0.06% from the backing store.
The per-worker cache has a median hit rate of 67%, and a
10th percentile low hit rate over the week in question of 65%.
The in-AZ cache is even more effective, with a median hit
rate of 99.9% and 10th percentile low hit rate over the week
of 99.4%. Figure 8 shows the empirical CDF of the hit rate
of the in-AZ cache over the week, measured in one-minute
buckets across one at-scale production availability zone. The
left tail of the distribution is associated with large spikes in
traffic to newly created functions. We are evaluating priming
the in-AZ caches during the chunk creation process to flatten
this left tail and further improve hit rates, primarily with the
goal of reducing load-time latency for new functions.

4.1

Optimizing for Tail Latency

While data in the AZ-level cache is not required to be durable
(durability is ensured using S3 as the origin), a simple unreplicated cache scheme (where each object is stored in a single
node) didn’t meet our needs for three reasons.

USENIX Association

Figure 7: One week of hit rates on each of the cache tiers:
on-worker (L1), distributed in-AZ (L2), and backing store
(L3)

debugging slowness and partial failure is much harder than
debugging outright failure. Even if this slowness is only in the
long tail, it still matters in production because each container
start needs to fetch a large number of chunks. For example,
a start which fetches 1000 chunks will experience the 99.9th
percentile tail latency of the cache on 63% of tasks. The
difference is material: in one deployment of the cache we
observe a median client-measured latency of 500µs, and a
99.9th percentile latency of 4ms.
Replication, combined with redundant requests is a wellestablished [13, 37, 39] technique to drive down tail latency,
and would also solve our throughput and hit-rate problems.
Unfortunately, replication increases costs proportionally to
the replication factor, an important concern in a primarily inmemory cache. Instead, we chose erasure coding, following
a similar scheme to EC-Cache [31]. Erasure coding is not
widely used in caches, but provides compelling solutions for
all three of our concerns. When a worker misses the cache,
it fetches the chunk it needs from the origin, then uploads
erasure-coded stripes of that chunk into the cache. When a
worker needs to fetch a chunk, it requests more stripes than
are strictly needed to reconstruct the chunk, and then reconstructs the chunk as soon as enough stripes are returned. Our
current production deployment uses a 4 of 5 code, achieving
25% storage overhead, and a 25% increase in request rate in
exchange for a significant decrease in tail latency. Figure 9
compares the empirical latency CDF of the 4 of 5 code versus
a hypothetical 4 of 4 scheme using latency measurements
from one deployment of our production system.
This scheme prevents any drop in hit rate from occurring
when cache nodes fail, or are taken down for deployment.
A common approach in similar systems is to use retries to
hide the effects of deployments and failed nodes, an approach
which is known to lead to metastable failure modes in large
systems [5, 17]. Erasure coding allows us to achieve a similar
level of resiliency while performing the same amount of work
in success and failure cases (a design philosophy we call
constant work [23]).

Figure 8: Empirical CDF of in-AZ cache hit rate

4.2
Tail latency A single slow cache server can cause
widespread impact. Slowness could be caused by congestion at the host or in the network, or by partial hardware
or software failure.
Hit Rate Drops Having each item cached in a single server
means that the hit rate drops if that server fails, or is
taken down for deployment.
Throughput Bounds Having each item cached in a single
server means that the bandwidth available to fetch the
object is bounded by a single server’s bandwidth.
Of these, tail latency is the largest practical concern. Our
experience operating these types of systems suggests that

USENIX Association

Stability and Metastability

Caches with high hit rates, such as ours, are desirable from a
latency and efficiency perspective, but have a hidden downside. If the cache becomes empty (such as due to power loss or
operational issue), or the hit rate suddenly drops (such as due
to a change in customer behavior), the downstream services
can see significantly more traffic than they are used to. In the
case of our cache, with an end-to-end hit rate typically exceeding 99.8%, this downstream traffic increase could be up to 500
times normal. S3 is an extremely scalable backing store, and
can tolerate the full uncached load. However, the increased
latency leads to higher concurrency demand from customer’s
applications (due to Little’s Law [21]), and therefore higher
demand for new Lambda slots, increasing load and changing

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

321

Figure 9: Comparative empirical CDFs of client-side latency
of 4-of-4 parallel cache load, versus 4-of-5 erasure coded
cache load.
the size and composition of the system’s working set. This
can lead to metastable behavior [5, 6, 17], where the system
isn’t able to refill the cache when it is empty3 .
We have built mitigations for this risk into higher layers of
Lambda. Primarily, the system is designed to be concurrencylimited. When container starts slow down and the number of
concurrent tasks exceeds this limit, new starts are rejected until in-flight ones complete. We also actively test the system’s
ability to cold start from an empty cache at the maximum
concurrency. This testing allows us to be confident that the
system is able to restart from a cold cache, or tolerate workload changes that significantly reduce hit rate.

4.3

Cache Eviction and Sizing

Traditional cache replacement policies like Least Recently
Used (LRU) and First In First Out (FIFO) are simple and
easy to implement, but have a significant downside for this
application: a lack of scan resistance. In our case, this means
that a large number of infrequently used functions starting up
3 Related effects have been observed in computer systems since at least the
1960s. In the 1968 paper ‘The Working Set Model for Program Behavior’ [9],
Peter J Denning observed a similar effect in paging systems:

This can create a self-intensifying crisis. Programs, deprived
of still-needed pages, generate a plethora of page faults; the
resulting traffic of returning pages displaces still other useful
pages, leading to more page faults, and so on.

322

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

can replace all the hot entries in the cache with recently-used
entries belonging to those functions, dropping cache hit rates
for more frequently-used entries, and filling the cache with
entries that will never be read again. This happens periodically
in our environment, driven by weekly, daily, and hourly spikes
of periodic cron job functions. These functions are large in
number, but each runs at a low scale (typically only using one
sandbox), making caching their chunks relatively unimportant.
To avoid the hit-rate drops caused by this periodic work, we
use the LRU-k [29] eviction algorithm, which tracks the last
k times an item in the cache was used, rather than only the
most recent time.
Eviction and hit rates are also related to the size of our local
and AZ-level caches. Following the logic of Gray and Putzolu’s classic Five Minute Rule [14], the minimum desirable
cache size is the one that makes the cost of cache retention
equal to the cost of fetching chunks from S3. However, because our cache is not only aimed at reducing costs but also
improving customer-observed latency, we also set a hit rate
goal and increase the cache size if we fall below that goal.
The total cache size, then, is the larger of the size needed
to achieve our hit rate goal, and the size needed to optimize
costs.

5

Implementation and Production Experience

We built the local agent (the FUSE implementation that backs
the sparse block device for each MicroVM), the worker-local
cache, and the remote cache server in the Rust programming
language. We used the tokio runtime, and reqwest and hyper
for HTTP. At the time we started this project, the invoke path
of AWS Lambda includes components written in Java, Go,
C, and Rust. We chose Rust because of our good experiences
with the Rust components we had built in the past, especially
around performance and stability, and have again been happy
with our choice of Rust, encountering no major production
bugs in the libraries we chose. We were also attracted to Rust
because of the successes other AWS teams (such as the Amazon S3 team [4]) have had applying formal methods to verify
code correctness in Rust, even with non-expert programmers.
One interesting stumbling block with Rust (version 1.46.0,
current at the time of implementation) is brittle optimization,
especially autovectorization, of hotspots. Unsurprisingly, we
found that the parity calculations we use for erasure coding
are nearly 5x faster when performed 64 bytes at a time (with
AVX512) or 32 bytes at a time (with AVX or NEON) than
when performed 8 bytes at a time, and 10x faster than when
performed byte-at-a-time. Unfortunately, the naive Rust loop
emitted the byte-at-a-time code (as shown in Listing 1), despite the compiler being capable of autovectorization. Small
changes to the code would change autovectorization behavior, even changes outside the function of interest. Reluctant
to move to assembly for this code, we finally settled on the
code in Listing 2, which robustly emits appropriately unrolled

USENIX Association

AVX, AVX512, or vectorized ARM code depending on the target platform. Seemingly small changes to this function (such
as removing the assert, changing any of the assignments, or
allowing it be inlined) cause autovectorization to be disabled.
This is a small issue with Rust, and one that we expect to be
improved in future compiler versions.
Listing 1 Naive byte-by-byte x86 assembly code as emitted
by the Rust compiler for straightforward loop implementation (with annotations by perf showing percent of runtime).
Note significant missed opportunities for optimizations like
vectorization and loop unrolling.
0.08 |350:
cmp
%rax,%rsi
|
↓ jae
3f4
49.18 |
movzbl (%rdi,%rsi,1),%ebx
0.13 |
xor
%bl,(%rcx,%rsi,1)
50.52 |
lea
0x1(%rsi),%rbp
0.08 |
mov
%rbp,%rsi
|
cmp
%rax,%rbp
|
↑ jb
350

Listing 2 Implementation of parity calculation in Rust, showing extra lines needed for reliable autovectorization.
#[inline(never)]
fn parity(target: &mut [u8], source: &[u8]) {
assert_eq!(source.len(), target.len());
let len = target.len();
let _ = target[len-1];
let _ = source[len-1];
for i in 0..len {
target[i] ^= source[i];
}
}

On the other hand, the Rust ecosystem’s support for buildtime microbenchmarks (such as with the criterion crate)
makes it fast and easy to iterate on this type of performance
work, and even assert at build time that autovectorization has
succeeded (effectively stopping regressions from entering production). This is a significant boon in a cloud environment,
where performance regressions can cause production outages,
and performance is tied to both cost and carbon efficiency.

5.1

Latency and Multimodality

As with any storage system, performance was an important
goal for the design and implementation of our snapshot chunk
loading system. While throughput, CPU efficiency, and other
bandwidth measures contribute to the cost of running the
system, its scale-out nature make latency and scalability the

USENIX Association

Figure 10: Empirical CDF of server-side measured latency of
the L2 cache server
most important factors of performance. The local agent and
on-worker caches trivially scale out, due to the fact that they
do not communicate off their worker, except in interacting
with S3 (to pull chunks from the origin), and the L2 AZ-level
cache.
Figure 10 shows the latency for GETs and PUTs on this
cache, measured from the server side, across all of the cache
nodes in a production deployment over the course of one
week. Each GET or PUT is of a 512kB chunk. As discussed
in Section 4, the L2 cache is a flash-based cache with a significant local memory tier (about 10% of cache size). GET
latency is very consistent, with a median of below 50µs. PUT
latency is less consistent, with some multi-modality apparently caused by writeback behavior on the cache host. Despite
this multi-modality, performance is still excellent, with a median latency of 125µs, a 99th percentile latency below 300µs,
and a 99.99th percentile of 413µs4 . When building this cache
server, we chose HTTP2 as a wire protocol for convenience
with the intention of replacing it with an efficient binary protocol later. In production, we’ve found the overhead of HTTP
(implemented with hyper and reqwest) so low that we have
not yet been motivated to replace the protocol.
Figure 11 shows the end-to-end latency for returning a read
from the perspective of the local agent (that is the FUSE implementation). This doesn’t show the end-to-end IO latency
experienced by guests, because it’s from the perspective of
the worker and does not include the (significant) hit rate on
the page cache maintained by the MicroVM guest’s kernel,
and read-ahead performed by the guest to populate that cache.
Like the L2 server latency, this end-to-end latency shows sig4 Having a 99.99th percentile at less than 4x the median is a very desirable
property, and difficult to achieve with garbage collected languages like Java
and Go

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

323

in a MicroVM reads a new chunk, control is passed to the
guest kernel, then Firecracker, then the host kernel’s FUSE
layer, then the local agent, before flowing back through the
same path. This introduces context switch overhead, but more
importantly requires four different threads to be scheduled
by the host kernel’s scheduler. This introduces inefficiency in
steady state, and significant jitter under load. We are moving
away from FUSE for this application, primarily due to this
effect. Our new implementation uses userfaultfd and mmap,
removing two layers from the architecture.
We don’t regret starting with FUSE. It provided a convenient interface, a clear security and operational isolation story,
and allowed a team without deep systems-level programming
experience to build an acceptably high performance system.

6
Figure 11: Empirical CDF of end-to-end read latency observed at the local agent (FUSE implementation).
nificant multi-modality: a mode below 100µs which represent
local cache hits, a mode around 2.75ms which represent L2
hits (and the subsequent work like decryption), and mode
(trimmed from the graph) showing rare fetches from the origin (see Figure 7 for the relative frequencies of these modes).
We are working on an optimized cryptographic scheme which
reduces the latency of decryption.
Multi-modality like this is the norm in storage systems,
but presents a few practical challenges to operators. First,
as discussed in Section 7 a small change in the relative frequencies of each mode can significantly change the mean
latency observed by clients (and so change the concurrency
and throughput of the system). Second, latency percentiles and
trimmed means are the summary statistics most commonly
used by operators at AWS, and they tend to obscure multimodality. Plots like empirical CDFs (eCDFs, as presented
here) can be valuable, but don’t show change-over-time as
time series of summary statistics do. We have experimented
with heat maps, day-over-day eCDFs, and others, but have
yet to find a succinct way to present these data to operators.
Third, multi-modality makes the decision of where to spend
optimization resources more complex. Which mode should
the team work to improve? Or should they work to reduce the
relative frequencies of higher modes?

5.2

Production experience with FUSE

Our experiences with FUSE match those reported by Vangoor
et al [36], showing relatively little throughput overhead when
well tuned. However, we have found that the choice to use
FUSE to present a file which is then subsequently used as a
block device by Firecracker’s virtio-blk implementation, has
introduced significant overhead. When an application running

324

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

Related work

Mirroring the rise in popularity of serverless and containers accelerated container loading has been a highly active
area of research, and industry implementation, over the last
decade. Before that, accelerating VM loading through faster
disc image movement was an active area of research. For
example, Frisbee [16] in 2003. Amazon EC2 has taken advantage of common data to accelerate VM image loading,
through tracking lineage of EBS snapshot chunks [28], since
2009. With Slacker [15] Harter et al studied access patterns in
container loading, and presented a system which takes advantage of these patterns by performing layer-level lazy loading.
Starlight [8] takes a fairly similar filesystem-orientated approach, optimized for loading at the edge where minimizing
round-trips to the datacenter is a significant contributor to
performance. eStargz [35] extends common container image
formats to make lazy loading at the layer level more efficient,
building on the approach of Google’s CRFS.
DADI [20] uses a block-level approach fairly similar to our
own, but with a peer-to-peer approach rather than a dedicated
cache layer, and without the ability to deduplicate as widely
as our system is able to. FaaSNet [38] approaches a similar
problem to the one we were solving, but works on the layer
level (rather than flattening images as we do), and does not
appear to perform deduplication. Cntr [34] and Yolo [26] take
the approach of breaking down container images into different
classes of data, some needed urgently on start up and some
likely to be accessed less urgently. This explicit approach
may be more efficient than the simple block-based approach,
but also requires a deeper introspection of the contents of
the container. Wharf [41] and CFS [22] take the distributed
filesystem approach, showing that can significantly improve
loading performance at the cost of increased coordination
between containers.
Accelerating storage performance and loading with deduplication has an even longer history, for example in 2001
with Muthitacharoen et al [25] and 2002 with Venti [30], and
Farsite [2].

USENIX Association

7

Conclusion

We present AWS Lambda’s solution for accelerated loading
of container images, and approach that combines deduplication, erasure coding, tiered caching, userspace filesystems,
and convergent encryption. We have operated this system for
several years, and are extending its use into other areas of
AWS. While our solution on the surface appears to have a lot
of moving parts, it is optimized for what we believe to be the
realities of building massive scale cloud systems: failures are
frequent, failures are often partial and complex, and security
is the top priority.

7.1

Broader Lessons and Future Work

While Lambda’s snapshot loading infrastructure is a specialized system for a rather specialized application, we believe
that there are some broader lessons from our experiences that
apply to the systems community as a whole.
• Containers are most popularly used by Lambda customers as “static linking in the large” dependency closures. Customers want to build, test, and deploy a function with all its dependencies in one atomic unit, but
traditional static linking is either unavailable or inconvenient. However, containers are also highly inefficient in
this context, necessitating the deduplication and sparse
loading we describe here. We believe that there is a significant need for a lighter-weight dependency closure
mechanism, which comes closer to traditional static linking in the size of the artifacts that it creates.
• Caches reduce costs, improve latency, and reduce load
on durable storage, and are a critical component of nearly
any stateful system. However, they also introduce risks
such as metastable failures (due to unexpectedly empty
caches, or sudden shifts in workloads), and challenges
for users like multi-modal latency distributions. While
work such Yang et al [40], and Huang et al [17] have
made steps towards deeply understanding these effects,
we believe that significantly more work is needed to
understand the dynamic behaviors of caching in large
systems, and to develop patterns to mitigate the risks of
caches.
• MicroVMs provide an isolation mechanism which is
nearly as lightweight as containers, or even processes [3,
24], while providing additional interfaces for plugging
in both local and distributed operating system logic. MicroVMs provide a powerful new tool in the operating
system researcher’s or builder’s toolbox. We believe that
operating system support for virtualization, and virtualization support for applications, operating systems, and
databases are ripe areas of research which are not yet
receiving sufficient attention.

USENIX Association

Our future work is focused on optimizing the system further
for cost, performance, and especially customer-experienced
cold-start latency. This same system is used in Lambda SnapStart, a feature of AWS Lambda which reduces cold-start
latency using memory snapshots, to store and load memory
snapshot contents. That use-case is especially latency sensitive, motivating significant investments in both average case
and tail latency. We expect this work to include optimizing
cache retention and data placement policies, optimizing client
and server performance, and completing the migration from
FUSE to userfaultfd.

Acknowledgements
Any system of this size requires a team to build and operate, and in this case we’re deeply thankful to the AWS
Lambda team for their work and contributions. Holly Mesrobian, David R. Richardson, Ajay Nair, and David Nasi were
instrumental in supporting this work. Shay Gueron, Osman
Surkatty, and Derek Manwaring helped ground our cryptographic ambitions, and provided valuable feedback.

References
[1] Oci image format specification. Accessed: 2022-04-15.
URL: https://github.com/opencontainers/imag
e-spec.
[2] Atul Adya, William J. Bolosky, Miguel Castro, Gerald
Cermak, Ronnie Chaiken, John R. Douceur, Jon Howell,
Jacob R. Lorch, Marvin Theimer, and Roger P. Wattenhofer. FARSITE: Federated, available, and reliable
storage for an incompletely trusted environment. In
5th Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 02), Boston, MA, December 2002.
USENIX Association. URL: https://www.usenix.o
rg/conference/osdi-02/farsite-federated-a
vailable-and-reliable-storage-incompletel
y-trusted-environment.
[3] Alexandru Agache, Marc Brooker, Alexandra Iordache,
Anthony Liguori, Rolf Neugebauer, Phil Piwonka, and
Diana-Maria Popa. Firecracker: Lightweight virtualization for serverless applications. In 17th {USENIX}
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation ({NSDI} 20), pages 419–434, February 2020.
[4] James Bornholt, Rajeev Joshi, Vytautas Astrauskas,
Brendan Cully, Bernhard Kragl, Seth Markle, Kyle
Sauri, Drew Schleit, Grant Slatton, Serdar Tasiran, Jacob
Van Geffen, and Andrew Warfield. Using lightweight
formal methods to validate a key-value storage node in
amazon s3. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 28th
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP ’21,

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

325

page 836–850, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association
for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3477132.34
83540.
[5] Nathan Bronson, Abutalib Aghayev, Aleksey Charapko,
and Timothy Zhu. Metastable failures in distributed
systems. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems, HotOS ’21, page 221–227,
New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing
Machinery. doi:10.1145/3458336.3465286.
[6] Marc Brooker. Some risks of coordinating only sometimes. In High Performance Transaction Systems 2019
(HPTS’19), November 2019.
[7] John Chen, Ben Coleman, and Anshumali Shrivastava.
Revisiting consistent hashing with bounded loads, 2019.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.08762, doi:
10.48550/ARXIV.1908.08762.
[8] Jun Lin Chen, Daniyal Liaqat, Moshe Gabel, and Eyal
de Lara. Starlight: Fast container provisioning on the
edge and over the WAN. In 19th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI
22), pages 35–50, Renton, WA, April 2022. USENIX
Association. URL: https://www.usenix.org/confe
rence/nsdi22/presentation/chen-jun-lin.
[9] Peter J. Denning. The working set model for program
behavior. Commun. ACM, 11(5):323–333, may 1968.
doi:10.1145/363095.363141.
[10] Yevgeniy Dodis, Paul Grubbs, Thomas Ristenpart, and
Joanne Woodage. Fast message franking: From invisible
salamanders to encryptment. In Advances in Cryptology
– CRYPTO 2018: 38th Annual International Cryptology
Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 19–23,
2018, Proceedings, Part I, page 155–186, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2018. Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-3
-319-96884-1_6.
[11] John R. Douceur, Atul Adya, William J. Bolosky, Dan
Simon, and Marvin Theimer. Reclaiming space from
duplicate files in a serverless distributed file system. In
Proceedings of the 22 Nd International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS’02), ICDCS
’02, page 617, USA, 2002. IEEE Computer Society.
[12] Morris J Dworkin. NIST SP 800-38D. recommendation
for block cipher modes of operation: Galois/counter
mode (gcm) and gmac. National Institute of Standards
& Technology, 2007.
[13] Kristen Gardner, Samuel Zbarsky, Sherwin Doroudi,
Mor Harchol-Balter, and Esa Hyytia. Reducing latency via redundant requests: Exact analysis. SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., 43(1):347–360, jun 2015.
doi:10.1145/2796314.2745873.

326

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

[14] Jim Gray and Franco Putzolu. The 5 minute rule for
trading memory for disc accesses and the 10 byte rule
for trading memory for cpu time. In Proceedings of
the 1987 ACM SIGMOD international conference on
Management of data, pages 395–398, 1987.
[15] Tyler Harter, Brandon Salmon, Rose Liu, Andrea C.
Arpaci-Dusseau, and Remzi H. Arpaci-Dusseau.
Slacker: Fast distribution with lazy docker containers.
In 14th USENIX Conference on File and Storage
Technologies (FAST 16), pages 181–195, Santa Clara,
CA, February 2016. USENIX Association. URL:
https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast16/t
echnical-sessions/presentation/harter.
[16] Mike Hibler, Leigh Stoller, Jay Lepreau, Robert Ricci,
and Chad Barb. Fast, scalable disk imaging with
frisbee. In 2003 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 03), San Antonio, TX, June 2003.
USENIX Association. URL: https://www.usenix.o
rg/conference/2003-usenix-annual-technical
-conference/fast-scalable-disk-imaging-fri
sbee.
[17] Lexiang Huang, Matthew Magnusson, Abishek Bangalore Muralikrishna, Salman Estyak, Rebecca Isaacs,
Abutalib Aghayev, Timothy Zhu, and Aleksey Charapko. Metastable failures in the wild. In 16th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22), pages 73–90, Carlsbad, CA, July
2022. USENIX Association. URL: https://www.us
enix.org/conference/osdi22/presentation/hu
ang-lexiang.
[18] Vlad Ionescu. Scaling containers on aws in 2022. Accessed: 2022-04-15. URL: https://www.vladionesc
u.me/posts/scaling-containers-on-aws-in-2
022/.
[19] David Karger, Eric Lehman, Tom Leighton, Rina Panigrahy, Matthew Levine, and Daniel Lewin. Consistent
hashing and random trees: Distributed caching protocols for relieving hot spots on the world wide web. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’97, page 654–663,
New York, NY, USA, 1997. Association for Computing
Machinery. doi:10.1145/258533.258660.
[20] Huiba Li, Yifan Yuan, Rui Du, Kai Ma, Lanzheng Liu,
and Windsor Hsu. DADI: Block-Level image service
for agile and elastic application deployment. In 2020
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
20), pages 727–740. USENIX Association, July 2020.
URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc2
0/presentation/li-huiba.

USENIX Association

[21] John DC Little. A proof for the queuing formula: L= λ
w. Operations research, 9(3):383–387, 1961.
[22] Haifeng Liu, Wei Ding, Yuan Chen, Weilong Guo, Shuoran Liu, Tianpeng Li, Mofei Zhang, Jianxing Zhao,
Hongyin Zhu, and Zhengyi Zhu. Cfs: A distributed
file system for large scale container platforms. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD ’19, page 1729–1742, New
York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3299869.3314046.
[23] Colm MacCárthaigh. Reliability, constant work, and a
good cup of coffee, 2020. URL: https://aws.amaz
on.com/builders-library/reliability-and-c
onstant-work/.
[24] Filipe Manco, Costin Lupu, Florian Schmidt, Jose
Mendes, Simon Kuenzer, Sumit Sati, Kenichi Yasukata,
Costin Raiciu, and Felipe Huici. My vm is lighter (and
safer) than your container. In Proceedings of the 26th
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP ’17,
page 218–233, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association
for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3132747.31
32763.
[25] Athicha Muthitacharoen, Benjie Chen, and David Mazières. A low-bandwidth network file system. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth ACM Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, SOSP ’01, page 174–187, New York,
NY, USA, 2001. Association for Computing Machinery.
doi:10.1145/502034.502052.
[26] Thuy Linh Nguyen, Ramon Nou, and Adrien Lebre.
Yolo: Speeding up vm and docker boot time by reducing i/o operations. In European Conference on Parallel
Processing, pages 273–287. Springer, 2019.
[27] OASIS. Virtual i/o device (virtio) version 1.0, March
2016.
[28] Marc Olson and Prarthana Karmakar. Amazon ebs under
the hood: A tech deep dive, December 2021. URL: ht
tps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kaWzAEVZ6k8.
[29] Elizabeth J O’neil, Patrick E O’neil, and Gerhard
Weikum. The lru-k page replacement algorithm for
database disk buffering. Acm Sigmod Record, 22(2):297–
306, 1993.
[30] Sean Quinlan and Sean Dorward. Venti: A new approach
to archival data storage. In Conference on File and
Storage Technologies (FAST 02), Monterey, CA, January
2002. USENIX Association. URL: https://www.us
enix.org/conference/fast-02/venti-new-app
roach-archival-data-storage.

USENIX Association

[31] K. V. Rashmi, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Jack Kosaian, Ion
Stoica, and Kannan Ramchandran. EC-Cache: LoadBalanced, Low-Latency cluster caching with online erasure coding. In 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 16), pages
401–417, Savannah, GA, November 2016. USENIX Association. URL: https://www.usenix.org/confere
nce/osdi16/technical-sessions/presentation
/rashmi.
[32] Rusty Russell. Virtio: Towards a de-facto standard for
virtual i/o devices. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev., 42(5):95–
103, July 2008. URL: http://doi.acm.org/10.114
5/1400097.1400108, doi:10.1145/1400097.1400
108.
[33] Mark W. Storer, Kevin Greenan, Darrell D.E. Long,
and Ethan L. Miller. Secure data deduplication. In
Proceedings of the 4th ACM International Workshop
on Storage Security and Survivability, StorageSS ’08,
page 1–10, New York, NY, USA, 2008. Association for
Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/1456469.1456
471.
[34] Jörg Thalheim, Pramod Bhatotia, Pedro Fonseca, and
Baris Kasikci. Cntr: Lightweight OS containers. In 2018
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
18), pages 199–212, Boston, MA, July 2018. USENIX
Association. URL: https://www.usenix.org/confe
rence/atc18/presentation/thalheim.
[35] Kohei Tokunaga. Startup containers in lightning speed
with lazy image distribution on containerd. Accessed:
2022-04-15. URL: https://medium.com/nttlabs
/startup-containers-in-lightning-speed-wit
h-lazy-image-distribution-on-containerd-2
43d94522361.
[36] Bharath Kumar Reddy Vangoor, Vasily Tarasov, and
Erez Zadok. To FUSE or not to FUSE: Performance of
User-Space file systems. In 15th USENIX Conference on
File and Storage Technologies (FAST 17), pages 59–72,
Santa Clara, CA, February 2017. USENIX Association.
URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast
17/technical-sessions/presentation/vangoor.
[37] Ashish Vulimiri, Philip Brighten Godfrey, Radhika Mittal, Justine Sherry, Sylvia Ratnasamy, and Scott Shenker.
Low latency via redundancy. In Proceedings of the
Ninth ACM Conference on Emerging Networking Experiments and Technologies, CoNEXT ’13, page 283–294,
New York, NY, USA, 2013. Association for Computing
Machinery. doi:10.1145/2535372.2535392.
[38] Ao Wang, Shuai Chang, Huangshi Tian, Hongqi Wang,
Haoran Yang, Huiba Li, Rui Du, and Yue Cheng. FaaSNet: Scalable and fast provisioning of custom serverless

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

327

container runtimes at alibaba cloud function compute. In
2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX
ATC 21), pages 443–457. USENIX Association, July
2021. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conferenc
e/atc21/presentation/wang-ao.
[39] Zhe Wu, Curtis Yu, and Harsha V. Madhyastha.
CosTLO: Cost-Effective redundancy for lower latency
variance on cloud storage services. In 12th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 15), pages 543–557, Oakland, CA,
May 2015. USENIX Association. URL: https://
www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi15/technical
-sessions/presentation/wu.
[40] Juncheng Yang, Yao Yue, and K. V. Rashmi. A large

328

2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference

scale analysis of hundreds of in-memory cache clusters
at twitter. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20), pages
191–208. USENIX Association, November 2020. URL:
https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/p
resentation/yang.
[41] Chao Zheng, Lukas Rupprecht, Vasily Tarasov, Douglas
Thain, Mohamed Mohamed, Dimitrios Skourtis, Amit S.
Warke, and Dean Hildebrand. Wharf: Sharing docker
images in a distributed file system. In Proceedings of
the ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing, SoCC ’18,
page 174–185, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association
for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3267809.
3267836.

USENIX Association

