# 11 Sorting & Aggregations Algorithms (notes)

Lecture #11: Sorting & Aggregation Algorithms
15-445/645 Database Systems (Fall 2025)
https://15445.courses.cs.cmu.edu/fall2025/
Carnegie Mellon University
Andy Pavlo

1

Query Plan

Up to this point we have talked about access methods. Now we need to actually execute queries.
The database system will compile SQL into a query plan, which is a tree or DAG of operators. We will
cover more details about operators etc. in later lectures.
For a disk-oriented database system, we will use the buffer pool to implement algorithms that need to spill
to disk. We want to minimize I/O for an algorithm and prefer sequential over random I/O.

2

Sorting

DBMSs need to sort because tuples in a table have no specific order under the relational model, so ORDER
BY requires it. Also, operators like GROUP BY, JOIN, and DISTINCT potentially use sorting. If the data that
needs to be sorted fits in memory, then the DBMS can use a standard sorting algorithm (e.g., quicksort,
vergesort). If the data does not fit, then the DBMS needs to use external sorting that keeps in mind the cost
of disk operations. The sorting algorithm sorts a given input run, that is a list of key-value pairs, and sort
it based on comparison function and sorting parameters. The key is the attributes to compare to compute
the sort order, and the value could be the whole tuple (early materialization) or the record ID only (late
materialization).

Top-N Heap Sort
If a query contains an ORDER BY with a LIMIT and an optional WITH TIES, then to find the top-N elements,
the DBMS only needs to scan the data once. During the scan, the DBMS can maintain a priority queue
storing the top-N elements seen so far. If the query contains WITH TIES, the priority queue would be
extended on-demand to keep the ties. The ideal scenario is when the top-N elements fit in memory, so the
DBMS can maintain the entire priority queue in-memory.

External Merge Sort
This is the standard algorithm for sorting data which is too large to fit in memory. It is a divide-andconquer sorting algorithm that splits the data set into separate runs and then sorts them individually. It
can spill runs to disk as needed then read them back in one at a time. The algorithm is comprised of two
phases:
• Phase #1 – Sorting: First, the algorithm sorts small chunks of data that fit in main memory, and
then writes the sorted pages back to disk.
• Phase #2 – Merge: Then, the algorithm combines the sorted runs into larger sorted runs.
A sorted run can be early-materialized, which means that the entire tuple is stored in the pages, or can be
late-materialized, which means we only store record IDs in the pages and read them later.

Fall 2025 – Lecture #11

Sorting & Aggregation Algorithms

Two-way Merge Sort: The most basic version of the external merge sort algorithm is the two-way merge
sort. During the sorting phase, the algorithm reads each page, sorts it, and writes the sorted version back
to disk. Then, in the merge phase, it uses three buffer pages. It reads two sorted pages in from disk, and
merges them together into a third buffer page. Whenever the third page fills up, it is written back to disk
and replaced with an empty page. Each set of sorted pages is called a run. The algorithm then recursively
merges the runs together.
Let N be the total number of data pages. The algorithm makes 1 + ⌈log2 N ⌉ total passes through the data
(1 for the first sorting step then ⌈log2 N ⌉ for the recursive merging). The total I/O cost is 2N × (# of passes)
since each pass performs a read and a write for each page.
General (K-way) Merge Sort: The generalized version of the algorithm allows the DBMS to take advantage of more than three buffer pages. Let B be the total number of buffer pages available.
  Then, during
the sort phase, the algorithm can read and sort B pages at a time, so the DBMS writes N
B sorted runs of
length B pages back to disk. The merge phase can combine up to B − 1 runs in each pass, using B − 1
buffer pages to step through the runs and using one buffer page for the combined data, writing back to
disk as needed.

 
In the generalized version, the algorithm performs 1 + logB−1 N
passes (one for the sorting phase
B

 N 
and logB−1 B for the merge phase. Then, the total I/O cost is 2N × (# of passes) since it again has to
make a read and write for each page in each pass.
Double Buffering Optimization: One optimization for external merge sort is prefetching the next run
in the background and storing it in a second set of buffers while the system is processing the current run.
This reduces the wait time for I/O requests at each step by continuously utilizing the disk. However, it
reduces effective buffers available by half. This optimization requires the use of multiple threads, since the
prefetching should occur while the computation for the current run is happening.
Comparison Optimizations: Comparing keys in the sorting algorithm can be expensive. DBMSs can
implement different optimizations to speed up this process:
• Code Specialization: Instead of providing the comparator as a function pointer to the sorting
algorithm, the sorting function can be hard-coded to the specific key type. An example of this is
template specialization in C++.
• Suffix Truncation: Another optimization for string-based comparisons is only compare part of
keys first. This first compares binary prefixes of long VARCHAR keys, falling back to an entire string
comparison if the prefixes are equal.
• Key Normalization: This converts variable-length keys into a single encoded / padded fixed-length
string that preserves sort order.

Using B+Trees
It is sometimes advantageous for the DBMS to use an existing B+tree index to aid in sorting rather than
using the external merge sort algorithm. Some DBMSs support prefix key scans for sorting. In particular,
if the index is a clustered index, the DBMS can just traverse the B+tree. Since the index is clustered, the I/O
access will be sequential. This means it is always better than external merge sort since no computation is
required. On the other hand, if the index is unclustered, traversing the tree is almost always worse, since
each record could be stored in any page, so nearly all record accesses will require a disk read. The only
exception might be Top-N queries, when N is small relative to the total number of tuples in a table.

15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 2 of 3

Fall 2025 – Lecture #11

3

Sorting & Aggregation Algorithms

Aggregations

An aggregation operator in a query plan collapses the values of one or more tuples into a single scalar
value. There are two approaches for implementing an aggregation: (1) sorting and (2) hashing.

Sorting
The DBMS first sorts the tuples on the GROUP BY key(s). It can use either an in-memory sorting algorithm
if everything fits in the buffer pool (e.g., quicksort) or the external merge sort algorithm if the size of the
data exceeds memory. The DBMS then performs a sequential scan over the sorted data to compute the
aggregation. The output of the operator will be sorted on the keys.
When performing sorting aggregations, it is important to order the query operations to maximize efficiency. For example, if the query requires a filter, it is better to perform the filter first and then sort the
filtered data to reduce the amount of data that needs to be sorted.

Hashing
Hashing can be computationally cheaper than sorting for computing aggregations, especially when the
order of the output does not matter. If the hash table fits in memory, build an ephemeral hash table while
scanning the table. For each record, check whether there is already an entry in the hash table and perform
the appropriate modification. If the hash table is too large, then the DBMS has to spill it to disk and do
External Hashing Aggregate. This is a divide-and-conquer approach to compute the aggregation, with two
phases:
• Phase #1 – Partition: Use a hash function h1 to split tuples into partitions on disk based on the
target hash key. This will put tuples that must be compared for the aggregation into the same partition. Assume B buffer pages in total. We will have B-1 output buffer pages for partitions and 1
buffer page for input data. If any partition is full, the DBMS will spill it to disk. Thus, this phase
results in B − 1 partitions.
• Phase #2 – ReHash: For each partition on disk, read its pages into memory and build an in-memory
hash table based on a second hash function h2 (where h1 ̸= h2 ). This will put all tuples that match
into the same bucket. Then go through each bucket of this hash table to bring together matching
tuples to compute the aggregation. This assumes that each partition fits in memory, which can be
achieved by recursively partitioning until this is true.
During the ReHash phase, the DBMS can store pairs of the form (GroupByKey→RunningValue) to compute
the aggregation. The contents of RunningValue depends on the aggregation function (e.g. (COUNT, SUM)
for AVG). To insert a new tuple into the hash table:
• If it finds a matching GroupByKey, then update the RunningValue appropriately.
• Else insert a new (GroupByKey→RunningValue) pair.
The choice between sorting and hashing aggregate is subtle and depends on optimizations done in each
case, but in general hashing is often more efficient unless the data is already sorted beforehand or the
output is required to be sorted (e.g. following ORDER BY).

15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 3 of 3

