# 04 Memory Management (notes)

Lecture #04: Memory & Disk Management
15-445/645 Database Systems (Fall 2025)
https://15445.courses.cs.cmu.edu/fall2025/
Carnegie Mellon University
Andy Pavlo

1

Introduction

This semester, our focus will be on disk-oriented database management systems. A disk-oriented architecture means
that the DBMS’s primary storage location is in persistent storage, like a hard drive (HDD) or flash storage (SSDs).
This is different from an in-memory DBMS, where data is stored in volatile memory.
In the Von Neumann architecture, data must be in memory before we can operate on it (a few exceptions apply for
running operations directly on persistent storage). Any DBMS must be able to efficiently move data back and forth
between disk and memory if it wants to operate on large amounts of data. The DBMS can achieve this with a Buffer
Pool Manager. A diagram of this interaction is shown in Figure 1.
At a high level, the buffer pool manager is responsible for moving physical pages of data back and forth from buffers
in main memory to persistent storage. It also behaves as a cache, keeping frequently used pages in memory for faster
access, and evicting unused or cold pages back out to storage.
From the DBMS’s perspective, it should “appear” as if the entire database resides in memory, when in reality the
database might occupy more space than the available memory in the system. It should not have to worry about how
data is fetched into memory or how it is managed. The DBMS only requires valid pointers to memory locations to
perform its operations.

Figure 1: Disk-oriented DBMS.
There are two main things that we will try to optimize for:
1. Spatial Control, which refers to where pages are physically located on disk. The goal of spatial control is to
keep pages that are used together often as physically close together as possible on disk. This can potentially
help with prefetching and other optimizations.
2. Temporal Control, which refers to when pages have been brought into memory and when they should be
written back out to disk. Temporal control aims to minimize the number of stalls from having to read data
from disk.

Fall 2025 – Lecture #04

2

Memory & Disk Management

Buffer Pool

The buffer pool is an in-memory cache of pages between memory and disk. It is essentially a large memory region
allocated inside of the database to temporarily store pages. It is organized as an array of fixed-size frames. When
the DBMS requests a page, the buffer pool manager first checks if the page is already stored in a frame of memory,
and if it is not found, the page is read / copied into a free frame from disk. We consider the buffer pool manager
as a write-back cache, where dirty pages are buffered and not written to disk immediately on mutation. This is in
contrast to a write-through cache, where any changes are immediately propagated to disk.
The DBMS needs this buffer pool memory for many different things (just as most computer programs need memory
for different types of data structures):
• Tuple Storage and Indexes
• Sorting and Join Buffers
• Query and Dictionary Caches
• Maintenance and Log Buffers
Depending on the implementation, the things listed above do not always have to be backed by disk / the buffer pool
manager, and can simply rely on memory allocators like malloc.
A page directory is also maintained on disk, which is the mapping from page IDs to page locations in database
files. All changes to the page directory must be recorded on disk to allow the DBMS to find on restart. It is often (not
always) kept in memory to minimize latency to page accesses since it has to be read before accessing any physical
page.
See Figure 2 for a diagram of the buffer pool’s memory organization.

Figure 2: Buffer pool organization and meta-data

Buffer Pool Metadata
The buffer pool must maintain certain meta-data in order to be used efficiently and correctly.
The page table is an in-memory hash table that keeps track of pages that are currently in memory. It maps page
IDs to frame locations in the buffer pool. Since the order of pages in the buffer pool does not necessarily reflect the
order on the disk, this extra indirection layer allows for the identification of page locations in the pool. The page
15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 2 of 5

Fall 2025 – Lecture #04

Memory & Disk Management

table also maintains additional meta-data per page, a dirty flag, and a pin / reference counter.
The dirty flag is set by a thread whenever it modifies a page. This indicates to the storage manager that the page
must be written back to disk before eviction.
The Pin / reference counter tracks the number of threads that are currently accessing that page (either reading or
modifying it). A thread has to increment the counter before they access the page. If a page’s pin count is greater
than zero, then the storage manager is not allowed to evict that page from memory. Pinning does not prevent other
transactions from accessing the page concurrently. If the buffer pool runs out of non-pinned pages to evict and the
buffer pool is full, an out-of-memory error will be thrown.
The Access Tracking Information tracks what transactions/who is accessing the page.

Page Table vs. Page Directory
To clarify the difference between the page table and the page directory in database management systems:
• The page directory is the mapping from page ids to page locations on the physical database files. All changes
must be recorded on disk to allow the DBMS to find them on restart.
• The page table is the mapping from page ids to a copy of the page in buffer pool frames. This is an in-memory
data structure that does not need to be stored on disk.

3

Operating Systems vs. Database Management Systems

Locks vs. Latches
We need to make a distinction between locks and latches when discussing how the DBMS protects its internal
elements.
Locks: A lock is a higher-level, logical primitive that protects the contents of a database (e.g., tuples, tables, databases)
from other transactions. Database systems can expose to the user which locks are being held as queries are run. Locks
need to be able to roll back changes.
Latches: A latch is a low-level protection primitive that the DBMS uses for the critical sections in its internal data
structures (e.g., hash tables, regions of memory). Latches are held for only the duration of the operation being made.
Latches do not need to be able to roll back changes. This is often implemented with simple language primitives like
mutexes and/or conditional variables.

Why not use the OS?
You may wonder why we need to use a buffer pool manager instead of simply relying on the Operating System’s
page cache. There are several problems with using something like memory-mapped files (mmap):
1. Transaction Safety: The OS can flush dirty pages at any time.
2. I/O Stalls: The DBMS doesn’t know which pages are in memory. The OS might stall a thread on a page fault.
3. Error Handling: It is difficult to validate pages. Any page access can cause a SIGBUS signal that the DBMS then
must handle.
4. Performance Issues: Internal OS data structure contention. TLB shootdowns.
The are some solutions to some of these problems (madvise, mlock, msync), but using these syscalls to get the OS to
behave correctly is just as onerous as managing memory yourself.
The DBMS almost always wants to control things itself and can do a better job than the OS:
1. Flushing dirty pages to disk in the correct order.
2. Specialized prefetching.
3. Better buffer replacement policies.
4. Thread / process scheduling.
The Operating System is not your friend.

15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 3 of 5

Fall 2025 – Lecture #04

4

Memory & Disk Management

Buffer Replacement Policies

When the DBMS needs to free up a frame to make room for a new page, it must decide which page to evict from the
buffer pool, and uses a replacement policy to make this decision. The implementation goals of replacement policies
are correctness, accuracy, speed, and metadata overhead.
Note: Remember that a pinned page cannot be evicted.

Least Recently Used (LRU)
The Least Recently Used replacement policy maintains a timestamp of when each page was last accessed. The DBMS
evicts the page with the oldest timestamp. This timestamp can be stored in a separate data structure, such as a queue
that keeps pages in sorted order to reduce the search time on eviction. However, keeping the data structure sorted
and storing a large timestamp has a prohibitive overhead.

CLOCK
The CLOCK policy is an approximation of LRU without needing a separate timestamp per page. In the CLOCK policy,
each page is given a reference bit. When a page is accessed, it is set to 1. Note: Some implementations may allow
an actual ref counter greater than 1.
To visualize this, organize the pages in a circular buffer with a “clock hand”. When an eviction is requested, sweep
the hand and check if a page’s bit is set to 1. If yes, set it to zero, if no, then evict, bring in the new page in its place,
and move the hand forward. Additionally, the clock remembers the position between evictions.

Figure 3: Visualization of CLOCK replacement policy. Page 1 is referenced and set to 1.
When the clock hand sweeps, it sets the reference bit for page 1 to 0 and evicts page 5.

Issues
There are a number of problems with LRU and CLOCK replacement policies.
LRU and CLOCK are both susceptible to sequential flooding, where the buffer pool’s contents are polluted due
to a sequential scan. Since sequential scans read many pages quickly, the buffer pool fills up and pages from other
queries are evicted as they would have earlier timestamps. In this scenario (or for analytical workloads), the most
recently used page is often the best page to evict.
LRU also does not account for the frequency of accesses. For example, if we have a page that is frequently accessed
over time, we do not want to evict it if it wasn’t accessed recently. Least-Frequently Used maintains an access
count for each page and then evicts pages with the lowest count. However, it ignores time and may accumulate stale
pages.

Alternatives
There are three solutions to address the shortcomings of LRU and CLOCK policies.
15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 4 of 5

Fall 2025 – Lecture #04

Memory & Disk Management

One solution is LRU-K which tracks the history of the last K references as timestamps and computes the interval
between subsequent accesses. This history is used to predict the next time a page is going to be accessed. However,
this again has a higher storage overhead. Additionally, need to maintain an in-memory “ghost cache” of recently
evicted pages to prevent thrashing and have some history for recently evicted pages.
An approximation for LRU-2 done by MySQL is to have single linked list with two entry points. Whenever a page
is accessed and it is already in the old list put it at the start of the young queue, else put it at the start of the old list.
Evictions always are taken from end of the old list.
Another optimization is localization per query. The DBMS chooses which pages to evict on a per query / transaction
basis. This minimizes the pollution of the buffer pool from each query.
Lastly, priority hints allow transactions to tell the buffer pool whether page is important or not based on the context
of each page during query execution.

ARC: Adaptive Replacement Cache
ARC was developed by IBM Research and supports both LRU and LFU by dynamically adjusting the sizes of two lists
based on workload access patterns. ARC uses ghost lists to remember recent evictions. ARC relies on a target size
parameter p to adjust how much to favor recency versus frequency.
1. Recency List T1: Holds pages that have been acccessed once recently.
2. Frequency List T2: Holds pages that have been accessed at least twice.
3. Target Size Parameter p adjusts how much to favor recency (T1) versus frequency (T2)

Dirty Pages
Pages / frames keep track of a dirty flag / bit that denotes a page that has been modified by the DBMS. There are two
cases in handling eviction of dirty pages. The fast path is when the page is not dirty, and the buffer pool manager
can simply drop it. The slow path is when the page is dirty, and the buffer pool manager must write the changes
back to disk to ensure data synchronization between memory and disk.
One way to avoid the problem of having to incur the cost of writing out pages is background writing. Through
background writing, the DBMS can periodically walk through the page table and write dirty pages to disk. When a
dirty page is safely written, the DBMS can either evict the page or just unset the dirty flag.

5

Disk I/O and OS Cache

The OS / hardware will try to maximize disk bandwidth by reordering and batching I/O requests. But they do not
know which I/O requests are more important than others.
The DBMS maintains internal queue(s) to track page read/write requests from the entire system. The priority of the
tasks are determined based on several factors:
• Sequential vs. Random I/O
• Critical Path Task vs. Background Task
• Table vs. Index vs. Log vs. Ephemeral Data
• Transaction Information
• User-based SLAs
The OS doesn’t know these things and is going to get into the way. Most disk operations go through the OS API.
Unless explicitly told otherwise, the OS maintains its own filesystem cache (aka page / buffer cache).
Most DBMS use Direct I/O (via the O DIRECT flag) to bypass the OS’s cache to avoid redundant copies of pages and
having to manage different eviction policies. PostgreSQL is an example of a database system that uses the OS’s page
cache.
Side Note: fsync by default has silent errors and on errors marks the page as clean.
Again, the Operating System is not your friend.
15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 5 of 5

