# Paper: SUNDR

Secure Untrusted Data Repository (SUNDR)
Jinyuan Li, Maxwell Krohn∗, David Mazières, and Dennis Shasha
NYU Department of Computer Science

Abstract
SUNDR is a network file system designed to store data
securely on untrusted servers. SUNDR lets clients detect any attempts at unauthorized file modification by
malicious server operators or users. SUNDR’s protocol
achieves a property called fork consistency, which guarantees that clients can detect any integrity or consistency
failures as long as they see each other’s file modifications.
An implementation is described that performs comparably with NFS (sometimes better and sometimes worse),
while offering significantly stronger security.

1 Introduction
SUNDR is a network file system that addresses a longstanding tension between data integrity and accessibility.
Protecting data is often viewed as the problem of building a better fence around storage servers—limiting the
number of people with access, disabling unnecessary software that might be remotely exploitable, and staying current with security patches. This approach has two drawbacks. First, experience shows that people frequently do
not build high enough fences (or sometimes entrust fences
to administrators who are not completely trustworthy).
Second and more important, high fences are inconvenient;
they restrict the ways in which people can access, update,
and manage data.
This tension is particularly evident for free software
source code repositories. Free software projects often
involve geographically dispersed developers committing
source changes from all around the Internet, making it
impractical to fend off attackers with firewalls. Hosting
code repositories also requires a palette of tools such as
CVS [4] and SSH [35], many of which have had remotely
exploitable bugs.
Worse yet, many projects rely on third-party hosting services that centralize responsibility for large
numbers of otherwise independent code repositories.
sourceforge.net, for example, hosts CVS repositories
∗ now at MIT CS & AI Lab

for over 20,000 different software packages. Many of
these packages are bundled with various operating system distributions, often without a meaningful audit. By
compromising sourceforge, an attacker can therefore introduce subtle vulnerabilities in software that may eventually run on thousands or even millions of machines.
Such concerns are no mere academic exercise. For example, the Debian GNU/Linux development cluster was
compromised in 2003 [2]. An unauthorized attacker used
a sniffed password and a kernel vulnerability to gain superuser access to Debian’s primary CVS and Web servers.
After detecting the break-in, administrators were forced
to freeze development for several days, as they employed
manual and ad-hoc sanity checks to assess the extent of
the damage. Similar attacks have also succeeded against
Apache [1], Gnome [32], and other popular projects.
Rather than hope for invulnerable servers, we have developed SUNDR, a network file system that reduces the
need to trust storage servers in the first place. SUNDR
cryptographically protects all file system contents so that
clients can detect any unauthorized attempts to change
files. In contrast to previous Byzantine-fault-tolerant file
systems [6, 27] that distribute trust but assume a threshold fraction of honest servers, SUNDR vests the authority
to write files entirely in users’ public keys. Even a malicious user who gains complete administrative control of a
SUNDR server cannot convince clients to accept altered
contents of files he lacks permission to write.
Because of its security properties, SUNDR also creates
new options for managing data. By using SUNDR, organizations can outsource storage management without fear
of server operators tampering with data. SUNDR also enables new options for data backup and recovery: after a
disaster, a SUNDR server can recover file system data
from untrusted clients’ file caches. Since clients always
cryptographically verify the file system’s state, they are
indifferent to whether data was recovered from untrusted
clients or resided on the untrusted server all along.
This paper details the SUNDR file system’s design and
implementation. We first describe SUNDR’s security protocol and then present a prototype implementation that
gives performance generally comparable to the popular

Client

NFS file system under both an example software development workload and microbenchmarks. Our results show
that applications like CVS can benefit from SUNDR’s
strong security guarantees while paying a digestible performance penalty.

Server

application

consistency server

syscall

2 Setting
SUNDR provides a file system interface to remote storage, like NFS [29] and other network file systems. To secure a source code repository, for instance, members of a
project can mount a remote SUNDR file system on directory /sundr and use /sundr/cvsroot as a CVS repository. All checkouts and commits then take place through
SUNDR, ensuring users will detect any attempts by the
hosting site to tamper with repository contents.
Figure 1 shows SUNDR’s basic architecture. When applications access the file system, the client software internally translates their system calls into a series of fetch and
modify operations, where fetch means retrieving a file’s
contents or validating a cached local copy, and modify
means making new file system state visible to other users.
Fetch and modify, in turn, are implemented in terms of
SUNDR protocol RPCs to the server. Section 3 explains
the protocol, while Section 5 describes the server design.
To set up a SUNDR server, one runs the server software
on a networked machine with dedicated SUNDR disks
or partitions. The server can then host one or more file
systems. To create a file system, one generates a public/private superuser signature key pair and gives the public key to the server, while keeping the private key secret.
The private key provides exclusive write access to the root
directory of the file system. It also directly or indirectly
allows access to any file below the root. However, the
privileges are confined to that one file system. Thus, when
a SUNDR server hosts multiple file systems with different
superusers, no single person has write access to all files.
Each user of a SUNDR file system also has a signature
key. When establishing an account, users exchange public
keys with the superuser. The superuser manages accounts
with two superuser-owned file in the root directory of the
file system: .sundr.users lists users’ public keys and
numeric IDs, while .sundr.group designates groups and
their membership. To mount a file system, one must specify the superuser’s public key as a command-line argument to the client, and must furthermore give the client access to a private key. (SUNDR could equally well manage
keys and groups with more flexible certificate schemes;
the system only requires some way for users to validate
each other’s keys and group membership.)
Throughout this paper, we use the term user to desig-

block store
RP
C

cache layer
fetch/
modify
security layer

Figure 1: Basic SUNDR architecture.
nate an entity possessing the private half of a signature
key mapped to some user ID in the .sundr.users file.
Depending on context, this can either be the person who
owns the private key, or a client using the key to act on
behalf of the user. However, SUNDR assumes a user is
aware of the last operation he or she has performed. In the
implementation, the client remembers the last operation it
has performed on behalf of each user. To move between
clients, a user needs both his or her private key and the last
operation performed on his or her behalf (concisely specified by a version number). Alternatively, one person can
employ multiple user IDs (possibly with the same public
key) for different clients, assigning all file permissions to
a personal group.
SUNDR’s architecture draws an important distinction
between the administration of servers and the administration of file systems. To administer a server, one does not
need any private superuser keys.1 In fact, for best security, key pairs should be generated on separate, trusted machines, and private keys should never reside on the server,
even in memory. Important keys, such as the superuser
key, should be stored off line when not in use (for example on a floppy disk, encrypted with a passphrase).

3

The SUNDR protocol

SUNDR’s protocol lets clients detect unauthorized attempts to modify files, even by attackers in control of the
server. When the server behaves correctly, a fetch reflects
exactly the authorized modifications that happened before
it.2 We call this property fetch-modify consistency.
If the server is dishonest, clients enforce a slightly
1 The server does actually have its own public key, but only to prevent network attackers from “framing” honest servers; the server key is
irrelevant to SUNDR’s security against compromised servers.
2 Formally, happens before can be any irreflexive partial order that
preserves the temporal order of non-concurrent operations (as in Linearizability [11]), orders any two operations by the same client, and orders a modification with respect to any other operation on the same file.

2

weaker property called fork consistency. Intuitively, under
fork consistency, a dishonest server could cause a fetch by
a user A to miss a modify by B. However, either user will
detect the attack upon seeing a subsequent operation by
the other. Thus, to perpetuate the deception, the server
must fork the two user’s views of the file system. Put
equivalently, if A’s client accepts some modification by
B, then at least until B performed that modification, both
users had identical, fetch-modify-consistent views of the
file system.
We have formally specified fork consistency [16], and,
assuming digital signatures and a collision-resistant hash
function, proven SUNDR’s protocol achieves it [17].
Therefore, a violation of fork consistency means the underlying cryptography was broken, the implementation
deviated from the protocol, or there is a flaw in our mapping from high-level Unix system calls to low-level fetch
and modify operations.
In order to discuss the implications of fork consistency
and to describe SUNDR, we start with a simple straw-man
file system that achieves fork consistency at the cost of
great inefficiency (Section 3.1). We then propose an improved system with more reasonable bandwidth requirements called “Serialized SUNDR” (Section 3.3). We finally relax serialization requirements, to arrive at “concurrent SUNDR,” the system we have built (Section 3.4).

3.1

validates each user’s most recent signature. The client
also checks that its own user’s previous operation is in
the downloaded history (unless this is the user’s very first
operation on the file system).
The client then traverses the operation history to construct a local copy of the file system. For each modify encountered, the client additionally checks that the operation
was actually permitted, using the user and group files to
validate the signing user against the file’s owner or group.
If all checks succeed, the client appends a new operation
to the list, signs the new history, sends it to the server, and
releases the lock. If the operation is a modification, the
appended record contains new contents for one or more
files or directories.
Now consider, informally, what a malicious server
can do. To convince a client of a file modification, the
server must send it a signed history. Assuming the server
does not know users’ keys and cannot forge signatures,
any modifications clients accept must actually have been
signed by an authorized user. The server can still trick
users into signing inappropriate histories, however, by
concealing other users’ previous operations. For instance,
consider what would happen in the last operation of the
above history if the server failed to show user B the most
recent modification to file f2 . Users A and B would sign
the following histories:

user A:

fetch(f2 )
user A
sig

mod(f3 )
user B
sig

fetch(f3 )
user A
sig

user B:

fetch(f2 )
user A
sig

mod(f3 )
user B
sig

fetch(f3 ) fetch(f2 )
user A
user B
sig
sig

A straw-man file system

In the roughest approximation of SUNDR, the straw-man
file system, we avoid any concurrent operations and allow
the system to consume unreasonable amounts of bandwidth and computation. The server maintains a single,
untrusted global lock on the file system. To fetch or modify a file, a user first acquires the lock, then performs the
desired operation, then releases the lock. So long as the
server is honest, the operations are totally ordered and
each operation completes before the next begins.
The straw-man file server stores a complete, ordered
list of every fetch or modify operation ever performed.
Each operation also contains a digital signature from the
user who performed it. The signature covers not just the
operation but also the complete history of all operations
that precede it. For example, after five operations, the
history might appear as follows:
fetch(f2 )
user A
sig

mod(f3 )
user B
sig

fetch(f3 )
user A
sig

mod(f2 )
user A
sig

mod(f2 )
user A
sig

Neither history is a prefix of the other. Since clients
always check for their own user’s previous operation in
the history, from this point on, A will sign only extensions
of the first history and B will sign only extensions of the
second. Thus, while before the attack the users enjoyed
fetch-modify consistency, after the attack the users have
been forked.
Suppose further that the server acts in collusion with
malicious users or otherwise comes to possess the signature keys of compromised users. If we restrict the analysis
to consider only histories signed by honest (i.e., uncompromised) users, we see that a similar forking property
holds. Once two honest users sign incompatible histories, they cannot see each others’ subsequent operations
without detecting the problem. Of course, since the server
can extend and sign compromised users’ histories, it can
change any files compromised users can write. The re-

fetch(f2 )
user B
sig

To fetch or modify a file, a client acquires the global
lock, downloads the entire history of the file system, and
3

maining files, however, can be modified only in honest
users’ histories and thus continue to be fork consistent.

network file system. This subsection explains SUNDR’s
solution to the first problem; we describe a simplified file
system that still serializes operations with a global lock,
but is in other respects similar to SUNDR. Subsection 3.4
3.2 Implications of fork consistency
explains how SUNDR lets clients execute non-conflicting
Fork consistency is the strongest notion of integrity possi- operations concurrently.
ble without on-line trusted parties. Suppose user A comes
Instead of signing operation histories, as in the strawon line, modifies a file, and goes off line. Later, B comes man file system, SUNDR effectively takes the approach
on line and reads the file. If B doesn’t know whether A of signing file system snapshots. Roughly speaking, users
has accessed the file system, it cannot detect an attack in sign messages that tie together the complete state of all
which the server simply discards A’s changes. Fork con- files with two mechanisms. First, all files writable by a
sistency implies this is the only type of undetectable attack particular user or group are efficiently aggregated into a
by the server on file integrity or consistency. Moreover, if single hash value called the i-handle using hash trees [18].
A and B ever communicate or see each other’s future file Second, each i-handle is tied to the latest version of every
system operations, they can detect the attack.
other i-handle using version vectors [23].
Given fork consistency, one can leverage any trusted
parties that are on line to gain stronger consistency, even 3.3.1 Data structures
fetch-modify consistency. For instance, as described later
in Section 5, the SUNDR server consists of two pro- Before delving into the protocol’s details, we begin by degrams, a block store for handling data, and a consistency scribing SUNDR’s storage interface and data structures.
server with a very small amount of state. Moving the con- Like several recent file systems [9, 20], SUNDR names
sistency server to a trusted machine trivially guarantees all on-disk data structures by cryptographic handles. The
fetch-modify consistency. The problem is that trusted ma- block store indexes most persistent data structures by their
chines may have worse connectivity or availability than 20-byte SHA-1hashes, making the server a kind of large,
high-performance hash table. It is believed to be compuuntrusted ones.
To bound the window of inconsistency without placing tationally infeasible to find any two different data blocks
a trusted machine on the critical path, one can use a “time with the same SHA-1 hash. Thus, when a client requests
stamp box” with permission to write a single file. The the block with a particular hash, it can check the integrity
box could simply update that file through SUNDR every of the response by hashing it. An incidental benefit of
5 seconds. All users who see the box’s updates know they hash-based storage is that blocks common to multiple files
could only have been partitioned from each other in the need be stored only once.
SUNDR also stores messages signed by users. These
past 5 seconds. Such boxes could be replicated for Byzanare indexed by a hash of the public key and an index numtine fault tolerance, each replica updating a single file.
Alternatively, direct client-client communication can ber (so as to distinguish multiple messages signed by the
be leveraged to increase consistency. Users can write same key).
Figure 2 shows the persistent data structures SUNDR
login and logout records with current network addresses
to files so as to find each other and continuously ex- stores and indexes by hash, as well as the algorithm
change information on their latest operations. If a mali- for computing i-handles. Every file is identified by a
cious server cannot disrupt network communication be- hprincipal, i-numberi pair, where principal is the user or
tween clients, it will be unable to fork the file system state group allowed to write the file, and i-number is a peronce on-line clients know of each other. Those who deem principal inode number. Directory entries map file names
malicious network partitions serious enough to warrant onto hprincipal, i-numberi pairs. A per-principal data
service delays in the face of client failures can conserva- structure called the i-table maps each i-number in use
to the corresponding inode. User i-tables map each itively pause file access during communication outages.
number to a hash of the corresponding inode, which we
call the file’s i-hash. Group i-tables add a level of indi3.3 Serialized SUNDR
rection, mapping a group i-number onto a user i-number.
The straw-man file system is impractical for two reasons. (The indirection allows the same user to perform multiple
First, it must record and ship around complete file sys- successive writes to a group-owned file without updating
tem operation histories, requiring enormous amounts of the group’s i-handle.) Inodes themselves contain SHA-1
bandwidth and storage. Second, the serialization of oper- hashes of file data blocks and indirect blocks.
ations through a global lock is impractical for a multi-user
Each i-table is stored as a B+-tree, where internal nodes
4

user u2 ’s
i-handle

inode i4

user u2 ’s i-table (tu2 )
(maps i#→i-hash)

(maps offset→data)

2 → H(i2 )

metadata

group g’s i-table (tg )

3 → H(i3 )

0K→ H(d0 )

(maps i#→ huser,i#i)

4 → H(i4 )

2 → hu1 , 7i

5 → H(i5 )

8K→ H(d1 )
..
.

3 → hu2 , 4i

6 → H(i6 )
..
.

H ∗ (tu2 )

group g’s
i-handle
H ∗ (tg )

4 → hu1 , 2i
..
.

inode i6
..
.

...

data block d0

directory block
(maps name→ hu/g, i#i)
"locore.S"

→ hu2 , 5i

"main.c"

→ hg, 4i

Figure 2: User and group i-handles. An i-handle is the root of a hash tree containing a user or group i-table. (H
denotes SHA-1, while H ∗ denotes recursive application of SHA-1 to compute the root of a hash tree.) A group i-table
maps group inode numbers to user inode numbers. A user i-table maps a user’s inode numbers to i-hashes. An i-hash
is the hash of an inode, which in turn contains hashes of file data blocks.

u2 ’s version
structure (yu2 )

contain the SHA-1 hashes of their children, thus forming
a hash tree. The hash of the B+-tree root is the i-handle.
Since the block store allows blocks to be requested by
SHA-1 hash, given a user’s i-handle, a client can fetch
and verify any block of any file in the user’s i-table by recursively requesting the appropriate intermediary blocks.
The next question, of course, is how to obtain and verify
a user’s latest i-handle.
3.3.2

u2

2 → H(i2 )

H ∗ (tu2 )

3 → H(i3 )
..
.

g : H ∗ (tg )
version vector:
hu1 -7 u2 -3
g-5 . . .i

Protocol

u2 ’s signature

i-handles are stored in digitally-signed messages known
as version structures, shown in Figure 3. Each version
structure is signed by a particular user. The structure must
always contain the user’s i-handle. In addition, it can optionally contain one or more i-handles of groups to which
the user belongs. Finally, the version structure contains
a version vector consisting of a version number for every
user and group in the system.
When user u performs a file system operation, u’s client
acquires the global lock and downloads the latest version
structure for each user and group. We call this set of version structures the version structure list, or VSL. (Much
of the VSL’s transfer can be elided if only a few users and
groups have changed version structures since the user’s
last operation.) The client then computes a new version
structure z by potentially updating i-handles and by setting the version numbers in z to reflect the current state of
the file system.
More specifically, to set the i-handles in z, on a fetch,

u2 ’s i-table (tu2 )

g’s i-table (tg )
2 → hu1 , 7i
3 → hu2 , 4i
..
.

Figure 3: A version structure containing a group i-handle.

the client simply copies u’s previous i-handle into z, as
nothing has changed. For a modify, the client computes
and includes new i-handles for u and for any groups
whose i-tables it is modifying.
The client then sets z’s version vector to reflect the version number of each VSL entry. For any version structure
like z, and any principal (user or group) p, let z[p] denote
p’s version number in z’s version vector (or 0 if z contains
no entry for p). For each principal p, if yp is p’s entry in
the VSL (i.e., the version structure containing p’s latest
i-handle), set z[p] ← yp [p].
Finally, the client bumps version numbers to reflect the
i-handles in z. It sets z[u] ← z[u] + 1, since z always
5

1. A hA hA-1i

sig

2. B hB hA-1 B-1i sig

group g’s
i-handle

group g’s i-table (tg )

∗

2 → hu1 , 7i

(maps i#→ huser,i#i)

(t′g )

H
change log:
∆1
∆2
..
.

3. A hA hA-2 B-1i sig

4. A h′A hA-3 B-1i sig

3 → hu2 , 4i
4 → hu1 , 2i
5 → hu3 , 4i
..
.

Figure 5: i-table for group g, showing the change log. t′g
is a recent i-table; applying the log to t′g yields tg .

5. B hB hA-2 B-2i sig
Figure 4: Signed version structures with a forking attack.

when re-validating a cached file that has not changed since
the hash tree root was last computed.
contains u’s i-handle, and for any group g whose i-handle
z contains, sets z[g] ← z[g] + 1.
The client then checks the VSL for consistency. Given
two version structures x and y, we define x ≤ y iff
∀p x[p] ≤ y[p]. To check consistency, the client verifies
that the VSL contains u’s previous version structure, and
that the set of all VSL entries combined with z is totally
ordered by ≤. If it is, the user signs the new version structure and sends it to the server with a COMMIT RPC. The
server adds the new structure to the VSL and retires the
old entries for updated i-handles, at which point the client
releases the file system lock.
Figure 4 revisits the forking attack from the end of Section 3.1, showing how version vectors evolve in SUNDR.
With each version structure signed, a user reflects the
highest version number seen from every other user, and
also increments his own version number to reflect the
most recent i-handle. A violation of consistency causes
users to sign incompatible version structures—i.e., two
structures x and y such that x 6≤ y and y 6≤ x. In this
example, the server performs a forking attack after step 3.
User A updates his i-handle from hA to h′A in 4, but in 5,
B is not aware of the change. The result is that the two
version structures signed in 4 and 5 are incompatible.
Just as in the straw-man file system, once two users
have signed incompatible version structures, they will
never again sign compatible ones, and thus cannot ever
see each other’s operations without detecting the attack
(as proven in earlier work [16]).
One optimization worth mentioning is that SUNDR
amortizes the cost of recomputing hash trees over several
operations. As shown in Figure 5, an i-handle contains
not just a hash tree root, but also a small log of changes
that have been made to the i-table. The change log furthermore avoids the need for other users to fetch i-table blocks

3.4

Concurrent SUNDR

While the version structures in SUNDR detect inconsistency, serialized SUNDR is too conservative in what it
prohibits. Each client must wait for the previous client’s
version vector before computing and signing its own, so
as to reflect the appropriate version numbers. Instead, we
would like most operations to proceed concurrently. The
only time one client should have to wait for another is
when it reads a file the other is in the process of writing.3
3.4.1

Update certificates

SUNDR’s solution to concurrent updates is for users to
pre-declare a fetch or modify operation before receiving
the VSL from the server. They do so with signed messages called update certificates. If yu is u’s current VSL
entry, an update certificate for u’s next operation contains:
¡
• u’s next version number ¢yu [u] + 1, unless u is
pipelining multiple updates ,
• a hash of u’s VSL entry (H(yu )), and
• a (possibly empty) list of modifications to perform.
Each modification (or delta) can be one of four types:
• Set file huser, i#i to i-hash h.
• Set group file hgroup, i#i to huser, i#i.
• Set/delete entry name in directory huser/group, i#i.
3 One might wish to avoid waiting for other clients even in the event

of such a read-after-write conflict. However, this turns out to be impossible with untrusted servers. If a single signed message could atomically
switch between two file states, the server could conceal the change initially, then apply it long after forking the file system, when users should
no longer see each others’ updates.

6

• Pre-allocate a range of group i-numbers (pointing
them to unallocated user i-numbers).

modifying, the client simply signs a new version structure
and sends it to the server for inclusion in the VSL.

The client sends the update certificate to the server in an
UPDATE RPC. The server replies with both the VSL and a
list of all pending operations not yet reflected in the VSL,
which we call the pending version list or PVL.
Note that both fetch and modify operations require UP DATE RPCs, though fetches contain no deltas. (The RPC
name refers to updating the VSL, not file contents.) Moreover, when executing complex system calls such as rename, a single UPDATE RPC may contain deltas affecting
multiple files and directories, possibly in different i-tables.
An honest server totally orders operations according to
the arrival order of UPDATE RPCs. If operation O1 is
reflected in the VSL or PVL returned for O2 ’s UPDATE
RPC, then we say O1 happened before O2 . Conversely,
if O2 is reflected in O1 ’s VSL or PVL, then O2 happened
before O1 . If neither happened before the other, then the
server has mounted a forking attack.
When signing an update certificate, a client cannot predict the version vector of its next version structure, as
the vector may depend on concurrent operations by other
clients. The server, however, knows precisely what operations the forthcoming version structure must reflect.
For each update certificate, the server therefore calculates
the forthcoming version structure, except for the i-handle.
This unsigned version structure is paired with its update
certificate in the PVL, so that the PVL is actually a list of
hupdate certificate, unsigned version structurei pairs.
The algorithm for computing a new version structure,
z, begins as in serialized SUNDR: for each principal p,
set z[p] ← yp [p], where yp is p’s entry in the VSL. Then,
z’s version vector must be incremented to reflect pending
updates in the PVL, including u’s own. For user version
numbers, this is simple; for each update certificate signed
by user u, set z[u] ← z[u] + 1. For groups, the situation is
complicated by the fact that operations may commit out of
order when slow and fast clients update the same i-table.
For any PVL entry updating group g’s i-table, we wish to
increment z[g] if and only if the PVL entry happened after yg (since we already initialized z[g] with yg [g]). We
determine whether or not to increment the version number by comparing yg to the PVL entry’s unsigned version
vector, call it ℓ. If ℓ 6≤ yg , set z[g] ← z[g] + 1. The result
is the same version vector one would obtain in serialized
SUNDR by waiting for all previous version structures.
Upon receiving the VSL and PVL, a client ensures that
the VSL, the unsigned version structures in the PVL, and
its new version structure are totally ordered. It also checks
for conflicts. If none of the operations in the PVL change
files the client is currently fetching or group i-tables it is

3.4.2

Update conflicts

If a client is fetching a file and the PVL contains a modification to that file, this signifies a read-after-write conflict.
In this case, the client still commits its version structure
as before but then waits for fetched files to be committed to the VSL before returning to the application. (A
FETCHPENDING RPC lets clients request a particular version structure from the server as soon as it arrives.)
A trickier situation occurs when the PVL contains a
modification to a group i-handle that the client also wishes
to modify, signifying a write-after-write conflict. How
should a client, u, modifying a group g’s i-table, tg , recompute g’s i-handle, hg , when other operations in the
PVL also affect tg ? Since any operation in the PVL happened before u’s new version structure, call it z, the handle hg in z must reflect all operations on tg in the PVL.
On the other hand, if the server has behaved incorrectly,
one or more of the forthcoming version structures corresponding to these PVL entries may be incompatible with
z. In this case, it is critical that z not somehow “launder”
operations that should have alerted people to the server’s
misbehavior.
Recall that clients already check the PVL for read-afterwrite conflicts. When a client sees a conflicting modification in the PVL, it will wait for the corresponding
VSL entry even if u has already incorporated the change
in hg . However, the problem remains that a malicious
server might prematurely drop entries from the PVL, in
which case a client could incorrectly fetch modifications
reflected by tg but never properly committed.
The solution is for u to incorporate any modifications
of tg in the PVL not yet reflected in yg , and also to record
the current contents of the PVL in a new field of the version structure. In this way, other clients can detect missing
PVL entries when they notice those entries referenced in
u’s version structure. Rather than include the full PVL,
which might be large, u simply records, for each PVL entry, the user performing the operation, that user’s version
number for the operation, and a hash of the expected version structure with i-handles omitted.
When u applies changes from the PVL, it can often do
so by simply appending the changes to the change log of
g’s i-handle, which is far more efficient than rehashing the
i-table and often saves u from fetching uncached portions
of the i-table.
7

u1 ’s update certificate
u1

version 7

H(yu1 )

∆1 : set hu1 , 7i → hX
∆2 : add entry (“X” → hu1 , 7i)
to directory hg, 4i
∆3 : set hg, 4i → hu1 , 8i
u1 ’s signature

g’s i-table at T1
...

u1 ’s inode 8
(/sundr/tmp)

4 → hu1 , 8i

metadata

...

...

...

“X” → hu1 , 7i

user u1

user u2

Server
UP

u2 ’s update certificate
version 3

u2

DA
TE

H(yu2 )

∆1 : set hu2 , 10i → hY
∆2 : add entry (“Y” → hu2 , 10i)
to directory hg, 4i

,
AT E
)
UPD
L pdate cture
S
V s u tru
’
s
(u 1 ion
=
L vers
un PVL
V
sig = VSL
P ned
ned (u
g
i
s
n
ver 1 , u
u
sio 2 ’s u
n s pd
tru ate
CO
ctu s,
MM
res
)
IT

∆3 : set hg, 4i → hu2 , 11i
u2 ’s signature

g’s i-table at T2
...

T1

CO

MM

IT

T2

u2 ’s inode 11
(/sundr/tmp)

4 → hu2 , 11i

metadata

...

“X” → hu1 , 7i

...

“Y” → hu2 , 10i

Figure 6: Concurrent updates to /sundr/tmp/ by different users.
3.4.3

u1 ’s update
certificate

Example

Figure 6 shows an example of two users u1 and u2 in the
group g modifying the same directory. u1 creates file X
while u2 creates Y, both in /sundr/tmp/. The directory
is group-writable, while the files are not. (For the example, we assume no other pending updates.)
Assume /sundr/tmp/ is mapped to group g’s inumber 4. User u1 first calculates the i-hash of file X,
call it hX , then allocates his own i-number for X, call it 7.
u1 then allocates another i-number, 8, to hold the contents
of the modified directory. Finally, u1 sends the server an
update certificate declaring three deltas, namely the mapping of file hu1 , 7i to i-hash hX , the addition of entry
(“X” → hu1 , 7i) to the directory, and the re-mapping of
g’s i-number 4 to hu1 , 8i.
u2 similarly sends the server an update certificate for
the creation of file Y in /sundr/tmp/. If the server orders
u1 ’s update before u2 ’s, it will respond to u1 with the VSL
and a PVL containing only u1 ’s update, while it will send
u2 a PVL reflecting both updates. u2 will therefore apply
u1 ’s modification to the directory before computing the
i-handle for g, incorporating u1 ’s directory entry for X.
u2 would also ordinarily incorporate u1 ’s re-mapping of
the directory hg, 4i → hu1 , 7i, except that u2 ’s own remapping of the same directory supersedes u1 ’s.
An important subtlety of the protocol, shown in Figure 7, is that u2 ’s version structure contains a hash of u1 ’s
forthcoming version structure (without i-handles). This
ensures that if the server surreptitiously drops u1 ’s update
certificate from the PVL before u1 commits, whoever sees
the incorrect PVL must be forked from both u1 and u2 .

u1
version 7
H(yu1 )
∆1 , ∆2 , ∆3
u1 ’s signature

u1 ’s unsigned
version
structure
(ℓu1 )
..
.
hu1 -7 u2 -2
g-4 . . .i
..
.

u2 ’s version
structure
u2
∗

H (tu2 )
g : H ∗ (tg )
hu1 -7 u2 -3
g-5 . . .i
hu1 -7-H(ℓu1 )i
u2 ’s signature

Figure 7: A pending update by user u1 , reflected in user
u2 ’s version structure.

4

Discussion

SUNDR only detects attacks; it does not resolve them.
Following a server compromise, two users might find
themselves caching divergent copies of the same directory tree. Resolving such differences has been studied
in the context of optimistic file system replication [13,
22], though invariably some conflicts require applicationspecific reconciliation. With CVS, users might employ
CVS’s own merging facilities to resolve forks.
SUNDR’s protocol leaves considerable opportunities
for compression and optimization. In particular, though
version structure signatures must cover a version vector
with all users and groups, there is no need to transmit entire vectors in RPCs. By ordering entries from most- to
8

least-recently updated, the tail containing idle principals
can be omitted on all but a client’s first UPDATE RPC.
Moreover, by signing a hash of the version vector and
hashing from oldest to newest, clients could also pre-hash
idle principals’ version numbers to speed version vector
signatures. Finally, the contents of most unsigned version
structures in the PVL is implicit based on the order of the
PVL and could be omitted (since the server computes unsigned version structures deterministically based on the
order in which it receives UPDATE RPCs). None of these
optimizations is currently implemented.
SUNDR’s semantics differ from those of traditional
Unix. Clients supply file modification and inode change
times when modifying files, allowing values that might be
prohibited in Unix. There is no time of last access. Directories have no “sticky bit.” A group-writable file in
SUNDR is not owned by a user (as in Unix) but rather
is owned by the group; such a file’s “owner” field indicates the last user who wrote to it. In contrast to Unix
disk quotas, which charge the owner of a group-writable
file for writes by other users, if SUNDR’s block store enforced quotas, they would charge each user for precisely
the blocks written by that user.
One cannot change the owner of a file in SUNDR.
However, SUNDR can copy arbitrarily large files at the
cost of a few pointer manipulations, due to its hash-based
storage mechanism. Thus, SUNDR implements chown by
creating a copy of the file owned by the new user or group
and updating the directory entry to point to the new copy.
Doing so requires write permission on the directory and
changes the semantics of hard links (since chown only affects a single link).
Yet another difference from Unix is that the owner of a
directory can delete any entries in the directory, including
non-empty subdirectories to which he or she does not have
write permission. Since Unix already allows users to rename such directories away, additionally allowing delete
permission does not appreciably affect security. In a similar vein, users can create multiple hard links to directories, which could confuse some Unix software, or could
be useful in some situations. Other types of malformed
directory structure are interpreted as equivalent to something legal (e.g., only the first of two duplicate directory
entries counts).
SUNDR does not yet offer read protection or confidentiality. Confidentiality can be achieved through encrypted
storage, a widely studied problem [5, 10, 12, 34].
In terms of network latency, SUNDR is comparable
with other polling network file systems. SUNDR waits
for an UPDATE RPC to complete before returning from an
application file system call. If the system call caused only

modifies, or if all fetched data hit in the cache, this is the
only synchronous round trip required; the COMMIT can be
sent in the background (except for fsync). This behavior is
similar to systems such as NFS3, which makes an ACCESS
RPC on each open and writes data back to the server on
each close. We note that callback- or lease-based file systems can actually achieve zero round trips when the server
has committed to notifying clients of cache invalidations.

5

File system implementation

The SUNDR client is implemented at user level, using a
modified version of the xfs device driver from the ARLA
file system [33] on top of a slightly modified FreeBSD
kernel. Server functionality is divided between two programs, a consistency server, which handles update certificates and version structures, and a block store, which
actually stores data, update certificates, and version structures on disk. For experiments in this paper, the block
server and consistency server ran on the same machine,
communicating over Unix-domain sockets. They can also
be configured to run on different machines and communicate over an authenticated TCP connection.

5.1

File system client

The xfs device driver used by SUNDR is designed for
whole-file caching. When a file is opened, xfs makes an
upcall to the SUNDR client asking for the file’s data. The
client returns the identity of a local file that has a cached
copy of the data. All reads and writes are performed on
the cached copy, without further involvement of SUNDR.
When the file is closed (or flushed with fsync), if it has
been modified, xfs makes another upcall asking the client
to write the data back to the server. Several other types of
upcalls allow xfs to look up names in directories, request
file attributes, create/delete files, and change metadata.
As distributed, xfs’s interface posed two problems for
SUNDR. First, xfs caches information like local file bindings to satisfy some requests without upcalls. In SUNDR,
some of these requests require interaction with the consistency server for the security properties to hold. We therefore modified xfs to invalidate its cache tokens immediately after getting or writing back cached data, so as to
ensure that the user-level client gets control whenever the
protocol requires an UPDATE RPC. We similarly changed
xfs to defeat the kernel’s name cache.
Second, some system calls that should require only a
single interaction with the SUNDR consistency server result in multiple kernel vnode operations and xfs upcalls.
For example, the system call “stat ("a/b/c", &sb)”
9

results in three xfs GETNODE upcalls (for the directory
lookups) and one GETATTR. The whole system call should
require only one UPDATE RPC. Yet if the user-level client
does not know that the four upcalls are on behalf of the
same system call, it must check the freshness of its ihandles four separate times with four UPDATE RPCs.
To eliminate unnecessary RPCs, we modified the
FreeBSD kernel to count the number of system call invocations that might require an interaction with the consistency server. We increment the counter at the start of every
system call that takes a pathname as an argument (e.g.,
stat, open, readlink, chdir). The SUNDR client
memory-maps this counter and records the last value it
has seen. If xfs makes an upcall that does not change the
state of the file system, and the counter has not changed,
then the client can use its cached copies of all i-handles.

5.2

Signature optimization

The cost of digital signatures on the critical path in
SUNDR is significant. Our implementation therefore uses
the ESIGN signature scheme,4 which is over an order
of magnitude faster than more popular schemes such as
RSA. All experiments reported in this paper use 2,048-bit
public keys, which, with known techniques, would require
a much larger work factor to break than 1,024-bit RSA.
To move verification out of the critical path, the consistency server also processes and replies to an UPDATE RPC
before verifying the signature on its update certificate. It
verifies the signature after replying, but before accepting
any other RPCs from other users. If the signature fails
to verify, the server removes the update certificate from
the PVL and and drops the TCP connection to the forging
client. (Such behavior is acceptable because only a faulty
client would send invalid signatures.) This optimization
allows the consistency server’s verification of one signature to overlap with the client’s computation of the next.
Clients similarly overlap computation and network latency. Roughly half the cost of an ESIGN signature is attributable to computations that do not depend on the message contents. Thus, while waiting for the reply to an UP DATE RPC, the client precomputes its next signature.

5.3

Consistency server

The consistency server orders operations for SUNDR
clients and maintains the VSL and PVL as described in
Section 3. In addition, it polices client operations and rejects invalid RPCs, so that a malicious user cannot cause

an honest server to fail. For crash recovery, the consistency server must store VSL and PVL to persistent storage before responding to client RPCs. The current consistency server stores these to the block server. Because the
VSLs and PVLs are small relative to the size of the file
system, it would also be feasible to use non-volatile RAM
(NVRAM).

6

Block store implementation

A block storage daemon called bstor handles all disk
storage in SUNDR. Clients interact directly with bstor
to store blocks and retrieve them by SHA-1 hash value.
The consistency server uses bstor to store signed update
and version structures. Because a SUNDR server does
not have signature keys, it lacks permission to repair the
file system after a crash. For this reason, bstor must
synchronously store all data to disk before returning to
clients, posing a performance challenge. bstor therefore
heavily optimizes synchronous write performance.
bstor’s basic idea is to write incoming data blocks to
a temporary log, then to move these blocks to Venti-like
storage in batches. Venti [24] is an archival block store
that appends variable-sized blocks to a large, append-only
IDE log disk while indexing the blocks by SHA-1 hash
on one or more fast SCSI disks. bstor’s temporary log
relaxes the archival semantics of Venti, allowing shortlived blocks to be deleted within a small window of their
creation. bstor maintains an archival flavor, though, by
supporting periodic file system snapshots.
The temporary log allows bstor to achieve low latency
on synchronous writes, which under Venti require an index lookup to ensure the block is not a duplicate. Moreover, bstor sector-aligns all blocks in the temporary log,
temporarily wasting an average of half a sector per block
so as to avoid multiple writes to the same sector, which
would each cost at least one disk rotation. The temporary
log improves write throughput even under sustained load,
because transferring blocks to the permanent log in large
batches allows bstor to order index disk accesses.
bstor keeps a large in-memory cache of recently used
blocks. In particular, it caches all blocks in the temporary
log so as to avoid reading from the temporary log disk.
Though bstor does not currently use special hardware, in
Section 7 we describe how SUNDR’s performance would
improve if bstor had a small amount of NVRAM to store
update certificates.

6.1

Interface

4 Specifically, we use the version of ESIGN shown secure in the ran-

dom oracle model by [21], with parameter e = 8.

bstor exposes the following RPCs to SUNDR clients:
10

STORE (header, block)
RETRIEVE (hash)
VSTORE (header, pubkey, n, block)
VRETRIEVE (pubkey, n, [time])
DECREF (hash)
SNAPSHOT ()

The STORE RPC writes a block and its header to stable storage if bstor does not already have a copy of the
block. The header has information encapsulating the
block’s owner and creation time, as well as fields useful in concert with encoding or compression. The RE TRIEVE RPC retrieves a block from the store given its
SHA-1 hash. It also returns the first header STOREd with
the particular block.
The VSTORE and VRETRIEVE RPCs are like STORE
and RETRIEVE, but for signed blocks. Signed blocks are
indexed by the public key and a small index number, n.
VRETRIEVE , by default, fetches the most recent version
of a signed block. When supplied with a timestamp as an
optional third argument, VRETRIEVE returns the newest
block written before the given time.
DECREF (short for “decrement reference count”) informs the store that a block with a particular SHA-1 hash
might be discarded. SUNDR clients use DECREF to discard temporary files and short-lived metadata. bstor’s
deletion semantics are conservative. When a block is first
stored, bstor establishes a short window (one minute by
default) during which it can be deleted. If a client STOREs
then DECREFs a block within this window, bstor marks
the block as garbage and does not permanently store it.
If two clients store the same block during the dereference
window, the block is marked as permanent.
An administrator should issue a SNAPSHOT RPC periodically to create a coherent file system image that clients
can later revert to in the case of accidental data disruption. Upon receiving this RPC, bstor simply immunizes
all newly-stored blocks from future DECREF’s and flags
them to be stored in the permanent log. SNAPSHOT and
VRETRIEVE ’s time argument are designed to allow browsing of previous file system state, though this functionality
is not yet implemented in the client.

6.2

sible with commodity components, we are not convinced
that memory will keep up with hard disks in the future.
We instead use Venti’s strategy of striping a diskresident hash table over multiple high-speed SCSI
disks. bstor hashes 20-byte SHA-1 hashes down to
hindex-disk-id, index-disk-offseti pairs. The disk offsets
point to sector-sized on-disk data structures called buckets, which contain 15 index-entries, sorted by SHA-1
hash. index-entries in turn map SHA-1 hashes to offsets
on the permanent data log. Whenever an index-entry is
written to or read from disk, bstor also stores it in an inmemory LRU cache.
bstor accesses the index system as Venti does when
answering RETRIEVE RPCs that miss the block cache.
When bstor moves data from the temporary to the permanent log, it must access the index system sometimes
twice per block (once to check a block is not a duplicate,
and once to write a new index entry after the block is committed the permanent log). In both cases, bstor sorts these
disk accesses so that the index disks service a batch of
requests with one disk arm sweep. Despite these optimizations, bstor writes blocks to the permanent log in the
order they arrived; randomly reordering blocks would hinder sequential read performance over large files.

6.3

Data management

To recover from a crash or an unclean shutdown, the system first recreates an index consistent with the permanent
log, starting from its last known checkpoint. Index recovery is necessary because the server updates the index
lazily after storing blocks to the permanent log. bstor then
processes the temporary log, storing all fresh blocks to the
permanent log, updating the index appropriately.
Venti’s authors argue that archival storage is practical
because IDE disk capacity is growing faster than users
generate data. For users who do not fit this paradigm,
however, bstor could alternatively be modified to support
mark-and-sweep garbage collection. The general idea is
to copy all reachable blocks to a new log disk, then recycle
the old disk. With two disks, bstor could still respond to
RPCs during garbage collection.

Index

bstor’s index system locates blocks on the permanent log,
keyed by their SHA-1 hashes. An ideal index is a simple in-memory hash table mapping 20-byte SHA-1 block
hashes to 8-byte log disk offsets. If we assume that the
average block stored on the system is 8 KB, then the index must have roughly 1/128 the capacity of the log disk.
Although at present such a ratio of disk to memory is pos-

7

Performance

The primary goal in testing SUNDR was to ensure that
its security benefits do not come at too high a price relative to existing file systems. In this section, we compare
SUNDR’s overall performance to NFS. We also perform
microbenchmarks to help explain our application-level re11

Operation
STORE (burst)
STORE (sustained)

sults, and to support our claims that our block server outperforms a Venti-like architecture in our setting.

7.1

VENTI STORE

Experimental setup

We carried out our experiments on a cluster of 3 GHz
Pentium IV machines running FreeBSD 4.9. All machines were connected with fast Ethernet with ping times
of 110 µs. For block server microbenchmarks, we additionally connected the block server and client with gigabit Ethernet. The machine running bstor has 3 GB of
RAM and an array of disks: four Seagate Cheetah 18 GB
SCSI drives that spin at 15,000 RPM were used for the index; two Western Digital Caviar 180 GB 7200 RPM EIDE
drives were used for the permanent and temporary logs.

7.2

Microbenchmarks

7.2.1

bstor

Our goals in evaluating bstor are to quantify its raw performance and justify our design improvements relative to
Venti. In our experiments, we configured bstor’s four
SCSI disks each to use 4 GB of space for indexing. If
one hopes to maintain good index performance (and not
overflow buckets), then the index should remain less than
half full. With our configuration (8 GB of usable index
and 32-byte index entries), bstor can accommodate up to
2 TB of permanent data. For flow control and fairness,
bstor allowed clients to make up to 40 outstanding RPCs.
For the purposes of the microbenchmarks, we disabled
bstor’s block cache but enabled an index cache of up to
100,000 entries. The circular temporary log was 720 MB
and never filled up during our experiments.
We measured bstor’s performance while storing and
fetching a batch of 20,000 unique 8 KB blocks. Figure 8
shows the averaged results from 20 runs of a 20,000 block
experiment. In all cases, standard deviations were less
than 5% of the average results. The first two results show
that bstor can absorb bursts of 8 KB blocks at almost twice
fast Ethernet rates, but that sustained throughput is limited
by bstor’s ability to shuffle blocks from the temporary to
the permanent logs, which it can do at 11.9 MB/s. The
bottleneck in STOREing blocks to the temporary log is currently CPU, and future versions of bstor might eliminate
some unnecessary memcpys to achieve better throughput.
On the other hand, bstor can process the temporary log
only as fast as it can read from its index disks, and there
is little room for improvement here unless disks become
faster or more index disks are used.
To compare with a Venti-like system, we implemented
a Venti-like store mechanism. In VENTI STORE, bstor

RETRIEVE (random + cold index cache)
RETRIEVE (sequential + cold index cache)
RETRIEVE (sequential + warm index cache)

MB/s
18.4
11.9
5.1
1.2
9.1
25.5

Figure 8: bstor throughput measurements with the block
cache disabled.
first checks for a block’s existence in the index and stores
the block to the permanent log only if it is not found.
That is, each VENTI STORE entails an access to the index
disks. Our results show that VENTI STORE can achieve
only 27% of STORE’s burst throughput, and 43% of its
sustained throughput.
Figure 8 also presents read measurements for bstor. If
a client reads blocks in the same order they are written
(i.e., “sequential” reads), then bstor need not seek across
the permanent log disk. Throughput in this case is limited
by the per-block cost of locating hashes on the index disks
and therefore increases to 25.5 MB/s with a warm index
cache. Randomly-issued reads fare poorly, even with a
warm index cache, because bstor must seek across the
permanent log. In the context of SUNDR, slow random
RETRIEVE s should not affect overall system performance
if the client aggressively caches blocks and reads large
files sequentially.
Finally, the latency of bstor RPCs is largely a function of seek times. STORE RPCs do not require seeks
and therefore return in 1.6 ms. VENTI STORE returns in
6.7 ms (after one seek across the index disk at a cost of
about 4.4 ms). Sequential RETRIEVEs that hit and miss
the index cache return in 1.9 and 6.3 ms, respectively. A
seek across the log disk takes about 6.1 ms; therefore random RETRIEVEs that hit and miss the index cache return
in 8.0 and 12.4 ms respectively.
7.2.2

Cryptographic overhead

SUNDR clients sign and verify version structures and update certificates using 2,048-bit ESIGN keys. Our implementation (based on the GNU Multiprecision library
version 4.1.4) can complete signatures in approximately
150 µs and can verify them 100 µs. Precomputing a signature requires roughly 80 µs, while finalizing a precomputed signature is around 75 µs. We observed that these
measurements can vary on the Pentium IV by as much as a
factor of two, even in well-controlled micro-benchmarks.
By comparison, an optimized version of the Rabin signature scheme with 1,280-bit keys, running on the same
12

NFS2
NFS3
SUNDR
SUNDR / NVRAM

7.3

Run Time (s)

hardware, can compute signatures in 3.1 ms and can verify them in 27 µs.

End-to-end evaluation

In end-to-end experiments, we compare SUNDR to both
NFS2 and NFS3 servers running on the same hardware.
To show NFS in the best possible light, the NFS experiments run on the fast SCSI disks SUNDR uses for indexes, not the slower, larger EIDE log disks. We include
NFS2 results because NFS2’s write-through semantics are
more like SUNDR’s. Both NFS2 and SUNDR write all
modified file data to disk before returning from a close
system call, while NFS3 does not offer this guarantee.
Finally, we described in Section 5.3 that SUNDR
clients must wait for the consistency server to write small
pieces of data (VSLs and PVLs) to stable storage. The
consistency server’s storing of PVLs in particular is on
the client’s critical path. We present result sets for consistency servers running with and without flushes to secondary storage. We intend the mode with flushes disabled
to simulate a consistency server with NVRAM.
All application results shown are the average of three
runs. Relative standard deviations are less than 8% unless
otherwise noted.
7.3.1

10

5

0
create

read

unlink

Figure 9: Single client LFS Small File Benchmark. 1000
operations on files with 1 KB of random content.

LFS small file benchmark

The LFS small file benchmark [28] tests SUNDR’s performance on simple file system operations. This benchmark
creates 1,000 1 KB files, reads them back, then deletes
them. We have modified the benchmark slightly to write
random data to the 1 KB files; writing the same file 1,000
times would give SUNDR’s hash-based block store an unfair advantage.
Figure 9 details our results when only one client is accessing the file system. In the create phase of the benchmark, a single file creation entails system calls to open,
read and close. On SUNDR/NVRAM, the open call involves two serialized rounds of the consistency protocol,
each of which costs about 2 ms; the write call is a noop, since file changes are buffered until close; and the
close call involves one round of the protocol and one
synchronous write of file data to the block server, which
the client can overlap. Thus, the entire sequence takes
about 6 ms. Without NVRAM, each round of the protocol
takes approximately 1-2 ms longer, because the consistency server must wait for bstor to flush.
Unlike SUNDR, an NFS server must wait for at least
one disk seek when creating a new file because it synchronously writes metadata. A seek costs at least 4 ms on
our fast SCSI drives, and thus NFS can do no better than

4 ms per file creation. In practice, NFS requires about
6 ms to service the three system calls in the create stage.
In the read phase of the benchmark, SUNDR performs
one round of the consistency protocol in the open system
call. The NFS3 client still accesses the server with an
ACCESS RPC, but the server is unlikely to need any data
not in its buffer cache at this point, and hence no seeking is
required. NFS2 does not contact the server in this phase.
In the unlink stage of the benchmark, clients issue a
single unlink system call per file. An unlink for SUNDR
triggers one round of the consistency protocol and an
asynchronous write to the block server to store updated
i-table and directory blocks. SUNDR and SUNDR/
NVRAM in particular can outperform NFS in this stage
of the experiment because NFS servers again require at
least one synchronous disk seek per file unlinked.
We also performed experiments with multiple clients
performing the LFS small file benchmark concurrently in
different directories. Results for the create phase are reported in Figure 10 and the other phases of the benchmark
show similar trends. A somewhat surprising result is that
SUNDR actually scales better than NFS as client concurrency increases in our limited tests. NFS is seek-bound
even in the single client case, and the number of seeks
the NFS servers require scale linearly with the number of
concurrent clients. For SUNDR, latencies induced by the
consistency protocol limit individual client performance,
but these latencies overlap when clients act concurrently.
SUNDR’s disk accesses are also scalable because they are
sequential, sector-aligned writes to bstor’s temporary log.
7.3.2

Group contention

The group protocol incurs additional overhead when folding other users’ changes into a group i-table or directory.
We characterized the cost of this mechanism by measur-

13

30

20

40
20

10

0

untar

config

make

install

clean

Figure 11: Installation procedure for emacs 20.7

0
1

2
Concurrent Clients

3

Real workloads

Figure 11 shows SUNDR’s performance in untaring, configuring, compiling, installing and cleaning an emacs 20.7
distribution. During the experiment, the SUNDR client
sent a total of 42,550 blocks to the block server, which
totaled 139.24 MB in size. Duplicate blocks, which bstor
discards, account for 29.5% of all data sent. The client
successfully DECREFed 10,747 blocks, for a total space
savings of 11.3%. In the end, 25,740 blocks which totaled
82.21 MB went out to permanent storage.
SUNDR is faster than NFS2 and competitive with
NFS3 in most stages of the Emacs build process. We believe that SUNDR’s sluggish performance in the install
phase is an artifact of our implementation, which serializes concurrent xfs upcalls for simplicity (and not correct-

Average Run Time (s)

ing a workload with a high degree of contention for a
group-owned directory. We ran a micro-benchmark that
simultaneously created 300 new files in the same, groupwritable directory on two clients. Each concurrent create
required the client to re-map the group i-number in the
group i-table and apply changes to the user’s copy of the
directory.
The clients took an average of 4.60 s and 4.26 s on
SUNDR/NVRAM and NFS3 respectively. For comparison, we also ran the benchmark concurrently in two separate directories, which required an average of 2.94 s
for SUNDR/NVRAM and 4.05 s for NFS3. The results
suggests that while contention incurs a noticeable cost,
SUNDR’s performance even in this case is not too far out
of line with NFS3.

NFS2
SUNDR
NFS3
SUNDR / NVRAM

100

Figure 10: Concurrent LFS Small File Benchmark, create phase. 1000 creations of 1 KB files. (Relative standard deviation for SUNDR in 3 concurrent clients case is
13.7%)

7.3.3

NFS2
NFS3
SUNDR
SUNDR / NVRAM

60

Run Time (s)

Average Run Time (s)

NFS2
NFS3
SUNDR
SUNDR / NVRAM

80
60
40
20
1

2
Concurrent Clients

3

Figure 12: Concurrent untar of emacs 20.7.tar
ness). Concurrent xfs upcalls are prevalent in this phase of
the experiment due to the install command’s manipulation
of file attributes.
Figure 12 details the performance of the untar phase of
the Emacs build as client concurrency increases. We noted
similar trends for the other phases of the build process.
These experiments suggest that the scalability SUNDR
exhibited in the LFS small file benchmarks extends to real
file system workloads.
7.3.4

CVS on SUNDR

We tested CVS over SUNDR to evaluate SUNDR’s performance as a source code repository. Our experiment
follows a typical progression. First, client A imports an
arbitrary source tree—in this test groff-1.17.2, which
has 717 files totaling 6.79 MB. Second, clients A and B
check out a copy to their local disks. Third, A commits
groff-1.18, which affects 549 files (6.06 MB). Lastly,
B updates its local copy. Figure 13 shows the results.
SUNDR fares badly on the commit phase because CVS
repeatedly opens, memory maps, unmaps, and closes each
14

Phase
Import
Checkout
Commit
Update

SUNDR
13.0
13.5
38.9
19.1

SUNDR
NVRAM
10.0
11.5
32.8
15.9

NFS3

SSH

4.9
11.6
15.7
13.3

7.0
18.2
11.5
11.5

Figure 13: Run times for CVS experiments (in seconds).

file block’s integrity without touching the entire file system. Duchamp [8], BFS [6], SFSRO [9] and TDB [14]
have all made use of hash trees for comparing data or
checking the integrity of part of a larger collection of data.
SUNDR uses version vectors to detect consistency violations. Version vectors were used by Ficus [22] to detect
update conflicts between file system replicas, and have
also been used to secure partial orderings [26, 30]. Our
straw-man file system somewhat resembles timeline entanglement [15], which reasons about the temporal ordering of system states using hash chains.

repository file several times in rapid succession. Every open requires an iteration of the consistency protocol in SUNDR, while FreeBSD’s NFS3 apparently elides
or asynchronously performs ACCESS RPCs after the first
of several closely-spaced open calls. CVS could feasibly
cache memory-mapped files at this point in the experi- 9 Conclusions
ment, since a single CVS client holds a lock on the directory. This small change would significantly improve SUNDR is a general-purpose, multi-user network file system that never presents applications with incorrect file
SUNDR’s performance in the benchmark.
system state, even when the server has been compromised.
SUNDR’s protocol provably guarantees fork consistency,
8 Related work
which essentially ensures that the server either behaves
correctly or that its failure will be detected after commuA number of non-networked file systems have used cryp- nication among users. In any event, the consequences of
tographic storage to keep data secret [5, 34] and check an undetected server compromise are limited to concealintegrity [31]. Several network file systems provide ing users’ operations from each other after some forking
varying degrees integrity checks but reduce integrity on point; the server cannot tamper with, inject, re-order, or
read sharing [25] or are vulnerable to consistency at- suppress file writes in any other way.
tacks [10, 12, 19]. SUNDR is the first system to proMeasurements of our implementation show perforvide well-defined consistency semantics for an untrusted mance that is usually close to and sometimes better than
server. An unimplemented but previously published ver- the popular NFS file system. Yet by reducing the amount
sion of the SUNDR protocol [16] had no groups and thus of trust placed in the server, SUNDR both increases peodid not address write-after-write conflicts.
ple’s options for managing data and significantly imThe Byzantine fault-tolerant file system, BFS [6], uses proves the security of their files.
replication to ensure the integrity of a network file system. As long as more than 2/3 of a server’s replicas are
uncompromised, any data read from the file system will Acknowledgments
have been written by a legitimate user. SUNDR, in contrast, does not require any replication or place any trust Thanks to Michael Freedman, Kevin Fu, Daniel Giffin,
in machines other than a user’s client. However, SUNDR Frans Kaashoek, Jinyang Li, Robert Morris, the anonyprovides weaker freshness guarantees than BFS, because mous reviewers, and our shepherd Jason Flinn.
of the possibility that a malicious SUNDR server can fork
This material is based upon work supported by the
the file system state if users have no other evidence of National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant CCReach other’s on-line activity.
0093361. Maxwell Krohn is partially supported by an
Several projects have investigated storing file systems NSF Graduate Fellowship, David Mazières by an Alfred
on peer-to-peer storage systems comprised of potentially P. Sloan research fellowship, and Dennis Shasha by NSF
untrusted nodes. Farsite [3] spreads such a file system grants IIS-9988636, MCB-0209754, and MCB-0115586.
across people’s unreliable desktop machines. CFS [7] is
a secure read-only file P2P system. Ivy [20], a read-write
version of CFS, can be convinced to re-order operations References
clients have already seen. Pond [27] relies on a trusted [1] Apache.org compromise report. http://www.apache.org/
“inner core” of machines for security, distributing trust in
info/20010519-hack.html, May 2001.
a BFS-like way.
[2] Debian investigation report after server compromises. http://
SUNDR uses hash trees, introduced in [18], to verify a
www.debian.org/News/2003/20031202, December 2003.
15

[3] Atul Adya, William J. Bolosky, Miguel Castro, Gerald Cermak,
Ronnie Chaiken, John R. Douceur, Jon Howell, Jacob R. Lorch,
Marvin Theimer, and Roger P. Wattenhofer. FARSITE: Federated,
available, and reliable storage for an incompletely trusted environment. In Proceedings of the 5th Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation, pages 1–14, December 2002.
[4] Brian Berliner. CVS II: Parellizing software development. In
Proceedings of the Winter 1990 USENIX, Colorado Springs, CO,
1990. USENIX.

[22] T. W. Page, Jr., R. G. Guy, J. S. Heidemann, D. H. Ratner, P. L.
Reiher, A. Goel, G. H. Kuenning, and G. J. Popek. Perspectives
on optimistically replicated peer-to-peer filing. Software Practice
and Experience, 28(2):155–180, February 1998.

[6] Miguel Castro and Barbara Liskov. Practical byzantine fault tolerance. In Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation, pages 173–186, New Orleans, LA,
February 1999.

[23] D. Stott Parker, Jr., Gerald J. Popek, Gerard Rudisin, Allen
Stoughton, Bruce J. Walker, Evelyn Walton, Johanna M. Chow,
David Edwards, Stephen Kiser, and Charles Kline. Detection of
mutual inconsistency in distributed systems. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, SE-9(3):240–247, May 1983.

[7] Frank Dabek, M. Frans Kaashoek, David Karger, Robert Morris,
and Ion Stoica. Wide-area cooperative storage with cfs. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, pages 202–215, Chateau Lake Louise, Banff, Canada, October 2001. ACM.
[8] Dan Duchamp. A toolkit approach to partially disconnected operation. In Proceedings of the 1997 USENIX, pages 305–318.
USENIX, January 1997.

[10] Eu-Jin Goh, Hovav Shacham, Nagendra Modadugu, and Dan
Boneh. SiRiUS: Securing Remote Untrusted Storage. In Proceedings of the Tenth Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS)
Symposium, pages 131–145. Internet Society (ISOC), February
2003.
[11] Maurice P. Herlihy and Jeannette M. Wing. Linearizability: a correctness condition for concurrent objects. ACM Transactions on
Programming Languages Systems, 12(3):463–492, 1990.
[12] M. Kallahalla, E. Riedel, R. Swaminathan, Q. Wang, and K. Fu.
Plutus: Scalable secure file sharing on untrusted storage. In 2nd
USENIX conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST ’03),
San Francisco, CA, April 2003.
[13] James J. Kistler and M. Satyanarayanan. Disconnected operation
in the coda file system. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems,
10(1):3–25, 1992.
[14] Umesh Maheshwari and Radek Vingralek. How to build a trusted
database system on untrusted storage. In Proceedings of the 4th
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation,
San Diego, October 2000.
[15] Petros Maniatis and Mary Baker. Secure history preservation
through timeline entanglement. In Proceedings of the 11th
USENIX Security Symposium, San Francisco, CA, August 2002.

[20] Athicha Muthitacharoen, Robert Morris, Thomer M. Gil, and Benjie Chen. Ivy: A read/write peer-to-peer file system. In Proceedings of the 5th Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, pages 31–44, December 2002.
[21] Tatsuaki Okamoto and Jacques Stern. Almost uniform density of
power residues and the provable security of ESIGN. In Advances
in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT, pages 287–301, 2003.

[5] Matt Blaze. A cryptographic file system for unix. In 1st ACM
Conference on Communications and Computing Security, pages
9–16, November 1993.

[9] Kevin Fu, M. Frans Kaashoek, and David Mazières. Fast and secure distributed read-only file system. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, 20(1):1–24, February 2002.

[19] Ethan Miller, Darrell Long, William Freeman, and Benjamin Reed.
Strong security for distributed file systems. In Proceedings of the
20th IEEE International Performance, Computing, and Communications Conference, pages 34–40, Phoenix, AZ, April 2001.

[24] Sean Quinlan and Sean Dorward. Venti: a new approach to archival
storage. In First USENIX conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST ’02), Monterey, CA, January 2002.
[25] David Reed and Liba Svobodova. Swallow: A distributed data storage system for a local network. In A. West and P. Janson, editors,
Local Networks for Computer Communications, pages 355–373.
North-Holland Publ., Amsterdam, 1981.
[26] Michael Reiter and Li Gong. Securing causal relationships in distributed systems. The Computer Journal, 38(8):633–642, 1995.
[27] Sean Rhea, Patrick Eaton, and Dennis Geels.
Pond: The
OceanStore prototype. In 2nd USENIX conference on File and
Storage Technologies (FAST ’03), San Francisco, CA, April 2003.
[28] M. Rosenblum and J. Ousterhout. The design and implementation
of a log-structured file system. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, pages 1–15, Pacific
Grove, CA, October 1991. ACM.
[29] Russel Sandberg, David Goldberg, Steve Kleiman, Dan Walsh, and
Bob Lyon. Design and implementation of the Sun network filesystem. In Proceedings of the Summer 1985 USENIX, pages 119–130,
Portland, OR, 1985. USENIX.
[30] Sean W. Smith and J. D. Tygar. Security and privacy for partial
order time. In Proceedings of the ISCA International Conference
on Parallel and Distributed Computing Systems, pages 70–79, Las
Vegas, NV, October 1994.
[31] Christopher A. Stein, John H. Howard, and Margo I. Seltzer. Unifying file system protection. In Proceedings of the 2001 USENIX.
USENIX, June 2001.
[32] Owen Taylor.
Intrusion on www.gnome.org.
http:/
/mail.gnome.org/archives/gnome-announce-list/
2004-March/msg00114.html, March 2004.

[16] David Mazières and Dennis Shasha. Building secure file systems
out of Byzantine storage. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual ACM
SIGACT-SIGOPS Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pages 108–117, July 2002.

[33] Assar Westerlund and Johan Danielsson. Arla—a free AFS client.
In Proceedings of the 1998 USENIX, Freenix track, New Orleans,
LA, June 1998. USENIX.

[17] David Mazières and Dennis Shasha. Building secure file systems
out of Byzantine storage. Technical Report TR2002–826, NYU
Department of Computer Science, May 2002.

[34] Charles P. Wright, Michael Martino, and Erez Zadok. NCryptfs: A
secure and convenient cryptographic file system. In Proceedings
of the Annual USENIX Technical Conference, pages 197–210, June
2003.

[18] Ralph C. Merkle. A digital signature based on a conventional
encryption function. In Carl Pomerance, editor, Advances in
Cryptology—CRYPTO ’87, volume 293 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 369–378, Berlin, 1987. Springer-Verlag.

[35] Tatu Ylönen. SSH – secure login connections over the Internet. In
Proceedings of the 6th USENIX Security Symposium, pages 37–42,
San Jose, CA, July 1996.

16

