# [IR] Linear Scan Register Allocation (Poletto, Sarkar) (Paper)

Linear Scan Register Allocation
MASSIMILIANO POLETTO
Laboratory for Computer Science, MIT
and
VIVEK SARKAR
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center



We describe a new algorithm for fast global register allocation called linear scan. This algorithm
is not based on graph coloring, but allocates registers to variables in a single linear-time scan of
the variables’ live ranges. The linear scan algorithm is considerably faster than algorithms based
on graph coloring, is simple to implement, and results in code that is almost as efficient as that
obtained using more complex and time-consuming register allocators based on graph coloring.
The algorithm is of interest in applications where compile time is a concern, such as dynamic
compilation systems, “just-in-time” compilers, and interactive development environments.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: D.3.4 [Programming Languages]: Processors—compilers;
code generation; optimization
General Terms: Algorithms, Performance
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Code optimization, compilers, register allocation




1. INTRODUCTION
Register allocation is an important optimization affecting the performance of com-
piled code. For example, good register allocation can improve the performance
of several SPEC benchmarks by an order of magnitude relative to when they are
compiled with poor or no register allocation. Unfortunately, most aggressive global
register allocation algorithms are computationally expensive due to their use of the
graph coloring framework [Chaitin et al. 1981], in which the interference graph can
have a worst-case size that is quadratic in the number of live ranges.
   We describe a global register allocation algorithm, called linear scan, that is not
based on graph coloring. Rather, given the live ranges of variables in a function, the
algorithm scans all the live ranges in a single pass, allocating registers to variables
in a greedy fashion. The algorithm is simple, efficient, and produces relatively
good code. It is useful in situations where both compile time and code quality


This research was supported in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency under contracts
N00014-94-1-0985 and N66001-96-C-8522. Max Poletto was also supported by an NSF National
Young Investigator Award awarded to Frans Kaashoek.
A synopsis of this algorithm first appeared in Poletto et al. [1997].
Permission to make digital/hard copy of all or part of this material without fee for personal
or classroom use provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial
advantage, the ACM copyright/server notice, the title of the publication, and its date appear, and
notice is given that copying is by permission of the ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish,
to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
 c 1999 ACM 0164-0925/99/0900-0895 $5.00

 ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999, Pages 895–913.
896     ·     Massimiliano Poletto and Vivek Sarkar

are important, such as dynamic compilation systems, just-in-time compilers, and
interactive development environments.
   We evaluate both the compile-time performance of the linear scan algorithm
and the run-time performance of its resulting code. To evaluate the compile-time
speed of the algorithm, we compare it to a fast graph coloring allocator used in the
tcc dynamic compiler [Poletto et al. 1997]. To further evaluate the quality of the
generated code, we implemented the algorithm in the Machine SUIF compiler back-
end [Smith 1996; Amarasinghe et al. 1993], and compare the resulting code with the
code obtained from an aggressive graph coloring algorithm that performs iterated
register coalescing [George and Appel 1996]. In addition, we compare linear scan to
second-chance binpacking [Traub et al. 1998], a type of linear scan algorithm that
invests more work at compile time in order to produce better code.
   The linear scan algorithm is up to several times faster than even a fast graph
coloring register allocator that performs no coalescing. Nonetheless, the resulting
code is quite efficient: on the benchmarks we studied, it is within 12% as fast as code
generated by an aggressive graph coloring algorithm for all but two benchmarks.
By comparison, other simple and comparably fast register allocation schemes, such
as allocating the k available registers to the k most frequently used variables, result
in code that is several times slower.
   The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes related
work on global register allocation, while Section 3 outlines the program model
and representation assumed in this work. The details of the register allocation
algorithm appear in Section 4. Section 5 presents measurements of the algorithm’s
performance. Finally, Section 6 discusses some extensions to the algorithm and
directions for future work, and Section 7 summarizes the main results of this work.


2. RELATED WORK
Global register allocation has been studied extensively in the literature. The pre-
dominant approach, first proposed by Chaitin et al. [1981], is to abstract the register
allocation problem as a graph coloring problem. Nodes in the graph represent live
ranges (variables, temporaries, virtual/symbolic registers) that are candidates for
register allocation. Edges connect live ranges that interfere, i.e., live ranges that are
simultaneously live at at least one program point. Register allocation then reduces
to the graph coloring problem in which colors (registers) are assigned to the nodes
such that two nodes connected by an edge do not receive the same color. If the
graph is not colorable, some nodes are deleted from the graph until the reduced
graph becomes colorable. The deleted nodes are said to be spilled because they are
not assigned to registers. The basic goal of register allocation by graph coloring
is to find a legal coloring after deleting the minimum number of nodes (or more
precisely, after deleting a set of nodes with minimum total spill cost).
   Chaitin’s algorithm also features coalescing, a technique that can be used to
eliminate redundant moves. When the source and destination of a move instruction
do not share an edge in the interference graph, the corresponding nodes can be
coalesced into one, and the move eliminated. Unfortunately, aggressive coalescing
can lead to uncolorable graphs, in which additional live ranges need to be spilled
to memory. More recent work on graph coloring [Briggs et al. 1994; George and
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
                                               Linear Scan Register Allocation     ·     897

Appel 1996] has focused on removing unnecessary moves in a conservative manner
so as to avoid introducing spills.
   Some simpler heuristic solutions also exist for the global register allocation prob-
lem. For example, lcc [Fraser and Hanson 1995] allocates registers to the variables
with the highest estimated usage counts, places all others on the stack, and allocates
temporary registers within an expression by doing a tree walk.
   Linear scan can be viewed as a global extension of a special class of local register
allocation algorithms that have been considered in the literature [Freiburghouse
1974; Hsu et al. 1989; Fraser and Hanson 1995; Motwani et al. 1995], which in
turn take their inspiration from an optimal off-line replacement algorithm that was
studied for virtual memory [Belady 1966].
   Since our original description of the linear scan algorithm in Poletto et al. [1997],
Traub et al. have proposed a more complex linear scan algorithm, which they call
second-chance binpacking [Traub et al. 1998]. This algorithm is an evolution and
refinement of binpacking, a technique used for several years in the DEC GEM op-
timizing compiler [Blickstein et al. 1992]. At a high level, the binpacking schemes
are similar to linear scan, but they invest more time in compilation in an attempt
to generate better code. The second-chance binpacking algorithm both makes al-
location decisions and rewrites code in one pass. The algorithm allows a variable’s
lifetime to be split multiple times, so that the variable resides in a register in some
parts of the program and in memory in other parts. It takes a lazy approach to
spilling, and never emits a store if a variable is not live at that particular point or
if the register and memory values of the variable are consistent. At every program
point, if a register must be used to hold the value of a variable v1 , but v1 is not
currently in a register and all registers have been allocated to other variables, the
algorithm evicts a variable v2 that is allocated to a register. It tries to find a v2
that is not currently live (to avoid a store of v2 ), and that will not be live before
the end of v1 ’s live range (to avoid evicting another variable when both v1 and v2
become live).
   Binpacking can emit better code than linear scan, but it does more work at
compile time. Unlike linear scan, binpacking keeps track of the “lifetime holes”
of variables and registers (intervals when a variable maintains no useful value, or
when a register can be used to store a value), and maintains information about the
consistency of the memory and register values of a reloaded variable. The algorithm
analyzes all this information whenever it makes allocation or spilling decisions.
Furthermore, unlike linear scan, it must perform an additional “resolution” pass to
resolve any conflicts between the nonlinear structure of the control flow graph and
the assumptions made during the linear register allocation pass. Section 5 compares
the performance of the two algorithms and of the code that they generate.


3. PROGRAM MODEL
Throughout the article, we assume a program intermediate representation that con-
sists of RTL-like quads or pseudo-instructions. Register candidates (live ranges) are
represented by an unbounded set of variable names or “virtual registers.” Arith-
metic operations are performed directly on these virtual registers; no load/store
instructions are necessary for accessing virtual registers. By convention, variables
       ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
898     ·     Massimiliano Poletto and Vivek Sarkar

are not live on entry to the start node in the flow graph; the initialization of pro-
cedure parameters is captured by explicit assignments within the start node.
   No variable renaming or live range splitting is performed by our linear scan
algorithm. It may be beneficial to perform a renaming phase (such as renaming
into “webs” [Muchnick 1997] or computing the “right number of names” [Auslander
and Hopkins 1982]) as an optional prepass to our linear scan algorithm. Further
study is required to determine the extent to which the compile-time overhead of an
extra renaming phase is justified by its accompanying run-time improvement.
   The linear scan algorithm assumes that the intermediate representation pseudo-
instructions are numbered according to some order. One possible ordering is that in
which the pseudo-instructions appear in the intermediate representation. Another
is depth-first ordering, the reverse of the order in which nodes are last visited in a
preorder traversal of the flow graph [Aho et al. 1986]. Throughout the rest of this
article we use depth-first order. The choice of instruction ordering does not affect
the correctness of the algorithm, but it may affect the quality of allocation. We
discuss alternative orderings in Section 6.
   Central to the linear scan algorithm is the notion of a live interval. Given some
numbering of the intermediate representation, [i, j] is said to be a live interval for
variable v if there is no instruction with number j 0 > j such that v is live at j 0 , and
there is no instruction with number i0 < i such that v is live at i0 . This information
is a conservative approximation of live ranges: there may be subranges of [i, j] in
which v is not live, but they are ignored. The “trivial” live interval for any vari-
able v is [1, N ], where N is the number of pseudo-instructions in the intermediate
representation: this live interval is correct and takes no time to compute, but it
also yields no information. All other live intervals lie on the spectrum between the
trivial live interval and accurate live interval information. The order chosen for
numbering pseudo-instructions influences the extent and accuracy of live intervals,
and hence the quality of register allocation, but the definition of live intervals does
not rely on or make assumptions about a particular numbering.

4. THE LINEAR SCAN ALGORITHM
Given live variable information (obtained, for example, via data-flow analysis [Aho
et al. 1986]), live intervals can be computed easily with one pass through the inter-
mediate representation. Interference among live intervals is captured by whether
or not they overlap. Given R available registers and a list of live intervals, the
linear scan algorithm must allocate registers to as many intervals as possible, but
such that no two overlapping live intervals are allocated to the same register. If
n > R live intervals overlap at any point, then at least n − R of them must reside
in memory.
4.1 Details
The number of overlapping intervals changes only at the start and end points of an
interval. Live intervals are stored in a list that is sorted in order of increasing start
point. Hence, the algorithm can quickly scan forward through the live intervals by
skipping from one start point to the next.
   At each step, the algorithm maintains a list, active, of live intervals that overlap
the current point and have been placed in registers. The active list is kept sorted
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
                                                  Linear Scan Register Allocation     ·     899

LinearScanRegisterAllocation
    active ← {}
    foreach live interval i, in order of increasing start point
         ExpireOldIntervals(i)
         if length(active) = R then
               SpillAtInterval(i)
         else
               register[i] ← a register removed from pool of free registers
               add i to active, sorted by increasing end point

ExpireOldIntervals(i)
    foreach interval j in active, in order of increasing end point
         if endpoint[j] ≥ startpoint[i] then
              return
         remove j from active
         add register[j] to pool of free registers

SpillAtInterval(i)
     spill ← last interval in active
     if endpoint[spill] > endpoint[i] then
           register[i] ← register[spill]
           location[spill] ← new stack location
           remove spill from active
           add i to active, sorted by increasing end point
     else
           location[i] ← new stack location



Fig. 1. Linear scan register allocation. Indentation denotes nesting level. We assume that live
intervals (including startpoint and endpoint information) have been computed by a prior liveness
analysis phase.



in order of increasing end point. For each new interval, the algorithm scans active
from beginning to end. It removes any “expired” intervals—those intervals that no
longer overlap the new interval because their end point precedes the new interval’s
start point—and makes the corresponding register available for allocation. Since
active is sorted by increasing end point, the scan needs to touch exactly those
elements that need to be removed, plus at most one: it can halt as soon as it
reaches the end of active (in which case active remains empty) or encounters an
interval whose end point follows the new interval’s start point.
   The length of the active list is at most R. The worst case scenario is that active
has length R at the start of a new interval and no intervals from active are expired.
In this situation, one of the current live intervals (from active or the new interval)
must be spilled. There are several possible heuristics for selecting a live interval
to spill. The heuristic described in this paper is based on the remaining length
of live intervals. Our algorithm spills the interval that ends last, furthest away
from the current point. We can find this interval quickly because active is sorted
by increasing end point: the interval to be spilled is either the new interval or
the last interval in active, whichever ends later. In straight-line code, and when
each live interval consists of exactly one definition followed by one use, this heuristic
produces code with the minimal possible number of spilled live ranges [Belady 1966;
        ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
900     ·     Massimiliano Poletto and Vivek Sarkar

                    A

                    B

                    C

                    D
                    E
                        1    2   3        4   5


Fig. 2. An example set of live intervals. Letters on the left are variable names; the corresponding
live intervals appear to the right. Numbers in italics refer to steps in the linear scan algorithm
described in the text.

Motwani et al. 1995]. Although in our case a live interval may cover arbitrarily many
definitions and uses spread over different basic blocks, the heuristic still appears to
work well. Figure 1 contains the pseudocode for the linear scan algorithm with this
heuristic. All results in Section 5 are also based on this heuristic.

4.2 An Example
Consider, for example, the live intervals in Figure 2 for the case when the number
of available registers is R = 2. The algorithm performs allocation decisions 5 times,
once per live interval, as denoted by the italicized numbers at the bottom of the
figure. By the end of step 2, active = hA, Bi and both A and B are therefore in
registers. At step 3, three live intervals overlap, so one variable must be spilled.
The algorithm therefore spills C, the one whose interval ends furthest away from
the current point, and does not change active. As a result, at step 4, A is expired
from active, making a register available for D, and at step 5, B is expired, making
a register available for E. Thus, in the end, C is the only variable not allocated to
a register. Had the algorithm not spilled the longest interval, C, at step 3, both
one of A and B and one of D and E would have been spilled to memory.

4.3 Complexity
Let V be the number of variables (live intervals) that are candidates for register
allocation, and R be the number of registers available for allocation. As can be
seen from the pseudocode in Figure 1, the length of active is bounded by R, so the
linear scan algorithm takes O(V ) time if R is assumed to be a constant.
   Since R can be large in some current or future processors, it is worthwhile under-
standing how the complexity depends on R. Recall that the live intervals in active
are sorted in order of increasing endpoint. The worst-case execution time complex-
ity of the linear scan algorithm is dictated by the time taken to insert a new interval
into active. If a balanced binary tree is used to search for the insertion point, then
the insertion takes O(log R) time and the entire algorithm takes O(V × log R) time.
An alternative is to do a linear search for the insertion point, which takes O(R)
time, thus leading to a worst case complexity of O(V × R) time. This is asymp-
totically slower than the previous result, but may be faster for moderate values of
R because the data structures involved are much simpler. The implementations
evaluated in Section 5 use a linear search.

ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
                                               Linear Scan Register Allocation     ·     901

5. EVALUATION
This section evaluates linear scan register allocation in terms of both compile-time
performance and the quality of the resulting code.

5.1 Methodology
We use two different infrastructures, one primarily to measure compile-time per-
formance, and one primarily to measure the run-time performance of the generated
code.

   5.1.1 The icode Infrastructure. A convincing benchmark of compile-time per-
formance requires that the algorithm be implemented as part of a compiler that
is already well-tuned for efficient compile times. As a result, we implemented the
algorithm in icode, a runtime system of the tcc dynamic compiler [Poletto et al.
1999]. tcc is an implementation of ‘C, an extension to ANSI C that enables dy-
namic code generation. icode is an optimizing dynamic code generation system
that produces good quality code with low compile-time overhead (approximately
600 cycles per generated instruction).
   We use two sets of benchmarks to evaluate our icode implementation. The first
is the same as that used in previous experimental studies with icode: it consists
of several dynamic code kernels, such as numerical methods, matrix multiplication,
sorting, etc. For each of these benchmarks, we compare linear scan register allo-
cation against (1) a well-tuned graph coloring algorithm and (2) a simple “usage
count” register allocation scheme. The graph coloring algorithm tries to be fast
without overly penalizing code quality: it does not do coalescing, but takes refer-
ence counts into consideration when removing nodes from the interference graph.
The “usage count” algorithm allocates the k available registers to the k variables
and compiler-generated temporaries with the highest estimated usage counts, and
places all others on the stack.
   The second set of benchmarks consists of pathological programs that perform
no useful computation but have huge numbers of simultaneously live variables that
make register allocation difficult. We use these benchmarks to compare the per-
formance of graph coloring and linear scan as the size of the allocation problem
increases.
   All experiments were made on an unloaded Sun Ultra 2 Model 2170 workstation
with 384MB of main memory and a 168MHz UltraSPARC-I CPU. Times were the
sum of system and user times reported by the UNIX getrusage system call. Values
for each benchmark were obtained by taking the mean of ten trials. The standard
deviation for each set of trials was negligible. The value for each trial was computed
by timing a large number of runs (so as to provide several seconds of granularity),
and dividing the result by the number of runs.

   5.1.2 The SUIF Infrastructure. Since the ‘C benchmarks discussed above are
all relatively small, their run-time performance is similar for all the register alloca-
tion algorithms. In order to measure the effect of linear scan on the performance of
larger programs, we implemented it in Machine SUIF [Smith 1996], an optimizing
scalar back end infrastructure for SUIF [Amarasinghe et al. 1993]. We used this
implementation to compile various SPEC benchmarks (from both the SPEC92 and
       ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
  902                                ·           Massimiliano Poletto and Vivek Sarkar


                                                 Register allocation
                               800
                                                 Allocation setup

                                                 Live variable analysis                                                                                                C
Cycles/generated instruction




                                                                      C                                               C
                               600                                                                                                C
                                                                                                                                               C


                                                                                                          C
                                                                                                                                                           C
                               400           C
                                                                                                                                                                   L
                                         L                C                   L                                   L
                                                                                                      L                                    L                                       C
                                                                                              C                                                        L
                                                      L                                                                       L                                                L
                                                                                  C
                               200                                                        L                                            U                       U
                                                                  L                                                       U                                                U
                                                              U                                               U
                                                                                      U                                                            U
                                     U            U                                               U
                                                                          U
                                 0
                                         ms       hash        dp          binary      pow         dfa         heap        mshl        unmshl       ntn         ilp         query

                                                                                                      Benchmark


  Fig. 3. Register allocation overhead for dynamic code (‘C) kernels. U denotes a simple algorithm
  based on usage counts. L denotes linear scan. C denotes graph coloring.


  SPEC95 suites) and two UNIX utilities. As before, we compare linear scan register
  allocation against a graph coloring algorithm and the simple algorithm based on
  usage counts. We also compare it against second-chance binpacking [Traub et al.
  1998]. The graph coloring allocator is an implementation of iterated register coa-
  lescing [George and Appel 1996] developed at Harvard. For completeness, we also
  report the compile-time performance of the SUIF implementation of binpacking
  and linear scan in Section 5.2.2, even though the underlying SUIF infrastructure
  has not been designed for efficient compile times.
     All benchmarks were compiled with SUIF and Machine SUIF. Measurements are
  the user time from the best of ten runs on an unloaded DEC Alpha workstation
  with a 500MHz Alpha 21164 processor and 128MB of RAM.

  5.2 Compile-Time Performance
    5.2.1 icode Implementation. Figure 3 illustrates the overhead of register allo-
  cation for the dynamic code kernels described in Section 5.1.1. The vertical axis
  measures compilation overhead, in cycles per generated instruction. Larger values
  indicate larger overhead. The horizontal axis of the figure denotes different bench-
  marks written in ‘C. For each benchmark, there are three bars: U refers to the
  usage count algorithm; L refers to linear scan register allocation; C refers to graph
  coloring.
    Each bar contains up to three different regions:
  (1) Live variable analysis: refers to traditional iterative live variable analysis,
      and hence does not appear in the U column.
  (2) Allocation setup: refers to work necessary prior to register allocation. It does
      not apply to U. In the case of L, it refers to the construction of live intervals
  ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
                                               Linear Scan Register Allocation      ·    903

                 Table I.   Allocation Times for Linear Scan and Binpacking
        File (Benchmark)           Time in seconds                   Ratio
                                Linear scan Binpacking      (Binpacking / linear scan)
       swim.f (swim)                   0.42          1.07                         2.55
       xllist.c (li)                   0.31          0.60                         1.94
       xleval.c (li)                   0.14          0.29                         2.07
       tomcatv.f (tomcatv)             0.19          0.48                         2.53
       compress.c (compress)           0.14          0.32                         2.29
       cvrin.c (espresso)              0.61          1.14                         1.87
       backprop.c (alvinn)             0.07          0.19                         2.71
       fpppp.f (fpppp)                 3.35          4.26                         1.27
       twldrv.f (fpppp)                1.70          3.49                         2.05



    by coarsening live variable information obtained through live variable analysis.
    In the case of C, it refers to construction of the interference graph.
(3) Register allocation: in the case of U, it involves sorting variables by usage
    count, and allocating registers to the most used ones until none are left. In the
    case of L, it refers to linear scan of the live intervals. In the case of C, it refers
    to coloring the interference graph.

   Liveness analysis and allocation setup for the U case are essentially null function
calls. Small positive values for these two phases, as well as small differences in the
live variable analysis overheads in the L and C cases, are due to slight variability
in the getrusage measurements. Times for individual compilation phases were
obtained by repeatedly interrupting compilation after the phase of interest, sub-
tracting the time required up to the previous phase, and dividing by the number
of (interrupted) compiles.
   The figure indicates that linear scan allocation (L) can be considerably faster
than even a simple and fast graph coloring algorithm (C). In particular, although
creating live intervals from live variable information is roughly similar to building
an interference graph from live variable information, linear scan of live intervals is
always much faster than coloring the interference graph. The one benchmark in
which graph coloring is faster than linear scan is binary. In this case, the code uses
very few variables but consists of many basic blocks, so it is faster to build the small
interference graph than to extract live intervals from liveness information at each
basic block. However, note that even for binary the actual time spent on register
allocation is smaller for linear scan (L) than for graph coloring (C).
  5.2.2 SUIF Implementation. Table I compares the compile-time performance of
the SUIF implementation of binpacking and linear scan on representative files from
the benchmark set. We do not present data for graph coloring: [Traub et al. 1998]
and Section 5.2.3 provide convincing evidence that both binpacking and linear scan
are much faster than graph coloring, especially as the number of register candidates
grows.
  The times in Table I refer to only the core allocation routines: they include
neither setup activities such as CFG construction and liveness analysis, nor any
compilation phase after allocation. In most cases, linear scan is roughly two to
three times faster than binpacking.
       ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
904     ·     Massimiliano Poletto and Vivek Sarkar



                   n
                                             m

                                                             k
                            (a)                             (b)

                         Fig. 4.   Two types of pathological programs.


   These results, however, underrepresent the difference between the two algorithms.
For simplicity, the linear scan implementation uses the binpacking routine for com-
puting “lifetime holes” [Traub et al. 1998]. However, linear scan does not need or
use full information on lifetime holes—it just considers the start and end of each
variable’s live interval. As a result, an aggressive linear scan implementation could
be considerably faster. For example, if one does not count lifetime hole computa-
tion, the compilation overhead for fpppp.f is 2.79s with binpacking and 1.88s with
linear scan, and that of twldrv.f is 2.28s with binpacking and 0.49s with linear scan.

   5.2.3 Pathological Cases. We also employed the icode framework used in Sec-
tion 5.2.1 to compile pathological programs intended to stress register allocators.
We compiled programs with two different kinds of structure, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 4. One kind, labeled (a) in the figure, contains some number, n, of overlapping
live intervals (simultaneously live variables). The other kind, labeled (b), contains
k staggered “sets” of live intervals in which no more than m live intervals overlap.
   Figure 5 illustrates the overhead of graph coloring and linear scan as a function
of the number n of overlapping live intervals in code of type (a). Both axes are
logarithmic. The horizontal axis indicates problem size; the vertical axis indicates
time. Although the costs of graph coloring and linear scan are comparable when the
number of overlapping live intervals is small, linear scan scales much more gracefully
to large problem sizes. With 512 simultaneously live variables, linear scan is over
600 times faster than graph coloring. Unlike linear scan, graph coloring appears to
suffer from the O(n2 ) time required to build and color the interference graph. Im-
portantly, the reported overhead is for the entire code generation process—not just
allocating registers, but also setting up the intermediate representation, computing
live variables, and generating code, so both algorithms share a common fixed cost
that reduces the relative performance gap between them. Furthermore, the code
generated by both allocators for this pathological case contains the same number
of spills.
   Figure 6 compares the overhead of graph coloring and linear scan for programs
with live interval patterns of type (b). As in the previous experiment, linear scan
in this case generates the same number of spills as graph coloring. Again, the axes
are logarithmic and the vertical axis indicates time. The horizontal axis denotes
the number of successive staggered sets of live intervals, k in Figure 4(b). Different
curves denotes different numbers of simultaneously live variables (m in Figure 4(b):
for example, “Linear Scan (m=24)” refers to linear scan allocation with m = 24.
With increasing k, the overhead of graph coloring grows more quickly than that
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
                                                                                Linear Scan Register Allocation                  ·   905

                           256
                           128
                            64
                            32
                            16
                                                   Graph coloring
                              8                    Linear scan
          Time (seconds)




                              4
                              2
                              1
                            0.5
                           0.25
                      0.125
              0.0625
              0.0312
              0.0156
         0.00781

                                      1        2         4          8      16       32        64         128        256   512
                                                               Size (Simultaneously live variables, n)



Fig. 5. Overhead of graph coloring and linear scan as a function of the number of simultaneously
live variables for programs of type (a).


                              64
                                              Graph coloring (m=24)
                              32
                                              Graph coloring (m=16)
                              16              Graph coloring (m=8)
                                              Graph coloring (m=4)
                                  8
                                              Linear scan (m=24)
                                  4           Linear scan (m=16)
                                              Linear scan (m=8)
                                  2
                                              Linear scan (m=4)
         Time (seconds)




                                  1
                              0.5
                             0.25
                            0.125
                           0.0625
                           0.0312
                           0.0156
                    0.00781
                    0.00391
                    0.00195
                                          1                                     5            10                20           40
                                                                 Size (Number of successive sets, k)



Fig. 6. Overhead of graph coloring and linear scan as a function of program size for programs
of type (b). The horizontal axis denotes the number of staggered sets of intervals (k in Fig-
ure 4(b)). Different curves denote values for different numbers of simultaneously live variables (m
in Figure 4(b)).


of linear scan. Moreover, the vertical space between graph coloring curves for
increasing m grows more quickly than for the corresponding linear scan curves.
This data is consistent with the results in Figure 5: the performance of graph
coloring degrades as the number of simultaneously live variables increases.

5.3 Run-Time Performance
        ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
 906                    ·          Massimiliano Poletto and Vivek Sarkar

                            U LC

                      10
                                                                   U


                                                                       LC
Run time (seconds)




                                                            U LC            U
                       1
                                                                                LC                                 U LC
                                     U LC

                                                                                             U LC           U LC
                                                   U LC
                                                                                     U LC
                      0.1                                                                            U LC
                                            U LC




                     0.01
                            ms      hash    dp     binary   pow    dfa      heap     mshl   unmshl   ntn    ilp    query
                                                                       Benchmark


 Fig. 7. Run time of ‘C benchmarks compiled with different register allocation algorithms. U
 denotes the simple scheme based on usage counts. L denotes linear scan. C denotes graph coloring.


    5.3.1 icode Implementation. Figure 7 shows the run-time performance of code
 compiled with the icode implementation (described in Section 5.1.1) of the algo-
 rithms. As before, the horizontal axis denotes different benchmarks, and for each
 benchmark the different bars denote different register allocation algorithms, labeled
 as in Figure 3. The vertical axis is logarithmic, and indicates run time in seconds.
 Unfortunately, these dynamic code kernels are small, and do not have enough regis-
 ter pressure to illustrate the differences among the allocation algorithms. The three
 algorithms generate code of similar quality for all benchmarks other than dfa and
 heap. In these two cases, the code emitted by the simple allocator based on usage
 count is considerably slower than that created by graph coloring or linear scan.

    5.3.2 SUIF Implementation. Figure 8 presents the run time of several large
 benchmarks compiled with the SUIF implementation of the algorithms. Once again,
 the horizontal axis denotes different benchmarks, and the logarithmic vertical axis
 measures run time in seconds. In addition to the three algorithms (U, L, and C)
 measured so far, we also present data for second-chance binpacking [Traub et al.
 1998], which we label B. Table II contains the same data, and also provides the ratio
 of the run time of each benchmark compiled with each register allocation method
 relative to the run time of that benchmark compiled with graph coloring.
    The measurements in Figure 8 and Table II indicate that linear scan makes a
 fair performance tradeoff. It is considerably simpler and faster than graph coloring
 and binpacking, yet it usually generates code that runs within 10% of the speed of
 that generated by the two more complicated algorithms, and several times faster
 than that generated by the simple usage count allocator.


 ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
                                                                                 Linear Scan Register Allocation                     ·    907


                                                                                                                               U
                     1000


                                                                                          U                        U
Run time (seconds)




                                                                                                        U
                      100                                                                                                          LC B
                                                                                                                       LC B
                                                                                              LC B          LC B
                                                                              U LC B
                             U                      U
                                        U
                                                                 U
                       10
                                            LC B        L
                                 L B                        CB       LC B
                                  C



                        1
                            espresso        li          wc       sort         alvinn      swim         compress    tomcatv     fpppp

                                                                               Benchmark


 Fig. 8. Run times of static C benchmarks compiled with different register allocation algorithms.
 U, L, and C are as before. B denotes second-chance binpacking.

 Table II. Run Times of Benchmarks, as a Function of the Register Allocation Algorithm Used
 when Compiling Them
                                 Benchmark              Time in seconds (ratio to graph coloring)
                                                   Usage counts  Linear scan Graph coloring  Binpacking
                                 espresso             21.3 (6.26)            4.0 (1.18)               3.4 (1.00)        4.0 (1.18)
                                 compress            131.7 (3.42)           43.1 (1.12)              38.5 (1.00)       42.9 (1.11)
                                 li                   13.7 (2.80)            5.4 (1.10)               4.9 (1.00)        5.1 (1.04)
                                 alvinn               26.8 (1.15)           24.8 (1.06)              23.3 (1.00)       24.8 (1.06)
                                 tomcatv             263.9 (4.62)           60.5 (1.06)              57.1 (1.00)       59.7 (1.05)
                                 swim                273.6 (6.66)           44.6 (1.09)              41.1 (1.00)       44.5 (1.08)
                                 fpppp             1039.7 (11.64)           90.8 (1.02)              89.3 (1.00)       87.8 (0.98)
                                 wc                   18.7 (4.67)            5.7 (1.43)               4.0 (1.00)        4.3 (1.07)
                                 sort                  9.8 (2.97)            3.5 (1.06)               3.3 (1.00)        3.3 (1.00)



 6. DISCUSSION
 This section addresses various extensions and issues related to linear scan alloca-
 tion. In particular, we describe a fast algorithm for conservative (approximate) live
 interval analysis, discuss the effect of different flow graph numberings and spilling
 heuristics, mention some architectural considerations, and outline possible future
 refinements to linear scan allocation.

 6.1 Fast Live Interval Analysis
 Figure 3 shows that most of the overhead of linear scan register allocation is due to
 live variable analysis and “allocation setup,” the coarsening of live variable infor-
 mation into live intervals. As a result, we have experimented with an alternative
 algorithm that trades accuracy for speed, and quickly builds a conservative approx-
 imation of live intervals without requiring full iterative live variable analysis.
                             ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
908     ·        Massimiliano Poletto and Vivek Sarkar

                                                 1


                                   2             3
                                       v = ...

                                                 4
                                                     v = ...

                                                 5


                                   6                           7
                                       ... = v                     ... = v

                                                 8




       Fig. 9.    An acyclic flow graph. Nodes are labeled with their depth-first numbers.




   We call this algorithm “SCC-based liveness analysis” because it is based on the
decomposition of the flow graph into strongly connected components. It relies on
two simple observations, which we present here without proof. First, consider an
acyclic flow graph in which nodes are numbered in depth-first order (also known
as “reverse postorder” [Aho et al. 1986]), as shown in the example in Figure 9.
Recall that this order is the reverse of the order in which nodes are last visited,
or “finished” [Cormen et al. 1990], in a preorder traversal of the graph. If the
assignment to a variable v with the smallest depth-first number (DFN) has DFN
i, and the use with the greatest DFN has DFN j, then [i, j] is a live interval of
v. For example, in Figure 9, a conservative live interval of v is [2, 7]. The second
observation pertains to cyclic flow graphs: when all the definitions and uses of a
variable v appear within a single strongly connected component, C, of the flow
graph, the live interval of v will span at most exactly C.
   As a result, we can compute conservative live intervals as follows. (1) Compute
SCCs of the flow graph, and for each SCC, construct the set of variables used or
defined in it. Also obtain each SCC’s DFN in the (acyclic) SCC graph. (2) Traverse
the SCCs once, extending the live interval of each variable v to [i, j], where i and j
are, respectively, the smallest and largest DFNs of any SCCs that use or define v.
   This algorithm is appealing because it is simple and it minimizes expensive bit-
vector operations common in live variable analysis. The improvements in compile-
time relative to linear scan are impressive, as illustrated in Figure 10.
   Unfortunately, however, the quality of generated code suffers from this approxi-
mate analysis. The difference is minimal for the small ‘C benchmarks presented in
Section 5.1.1, but becomes prohibitive for large benchmarks. Table III compares
the run time of applications compiled with full live variable analysis to that of ap-
plications compiled with SCC-based liveness analysis. These results indicate that
SCC-based liveness analysis may be of interest for quickly compiling small func-
tions, but that it is not suitable as a replacement for full live variable analysis in
large programs.



ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
                                                                                             Linear Scan Register Allocation                  ·       909


                                             Register allocation
                               800
                                             Allocation setup

                                             Live variable analysis
Cycles/generated instruction




                               600




                               400
                                                                                                                                          L
                                         L                          L                              L
                                                                                         L                          L
                                                                                                                               L
                                                 L                                                         L    S                                 L

                               200                                           L                                                        S
                                     S                                                                 S                                      S
                                                          L                          S         S
                                             S                  S                                                          S
                                                      S                  S


                                 0
                                     ms      hash      dp       binary   pow         dfa       heap    mshl    unmshl       ntn       ilp     query

                                                                                         Benchmark


  Fig. 10. Comparison of register allocation overhead of linear scan with full live variable analysis
  (L) and SCC-based liveness analysis (S).


  Table III. Run Time of Programs Compiled with Linear Scan Allocation, as a Function of Liveness
  Analysis Technique
                                              Benchmark             Time in seconds (ratio to graph coloring)
                                                                    SCC-based analysis     Full liveness analysis
                                              espresso                            22.7 (6.68)                            4.0 (1.18)
                                              compress                           134.4 (3.49)                           43.1 (1.12)
                                              li                                  14.2 (2.90)                            5.4 (1.10)
                                              alvinn                              40.2 (1.73)                           24.8 (1.06)
                                              tomcatv                            290.8 (5.09)                           60.5 (1.06)
                                              swim                               303.5 (7.38)                           44.6 (1.09)
                                              fpppp                              484.7 (5.43)                           90.8 (1.02)
                                              wc                                  23.2 (5.80)                            5.7 (1.43)
                                              sort                                10.6 (3.21)                            3.5 (1.06)




  6.2 Numbering Heuristics
  As mentioned in Section 3, the definition of live intervals used in linear scan alloca-
  tion holds for any numbering of flow graph nodes, not just the depth-first numbering
  discussed so far.
     We have used depth-first order in the paper because it is the most natural, and
  it supports SCC-based liveness analysis. Another reasonable alternative is linear,
  or layout, order, i.e. the order in which the pseudo-instructions appear in the
  intermediate representation. As shown in Table IV, linear and depth-first order
  produce roughly similar code for our set of benchmarks.


                                     ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
910     ·     Massimiliano Poletto and Vivek Sarkar

Table IV. Run Time of Programs Compiled with Linear Scan Allocation, as a Function of Flow
Graph Numbering
                         Benchmark           Time in seconds
                                         Depth-first Linear (layout)
                         espresso               4.0               4.0
                         compress              43.3              43.6
                         li                     5.3               5.5
                         alvinn                24.9              25.0
                         tomcatv               60.9              60.4
                         swim                  44.8              44.4
                         fpppp                 90.8              91.1
                         wc                     5.7               5.8
                         sort                   3.5               3.6



Table V. Run Time of Programs Compiled with Linear Scan Allocation, as a Function of Spilling
Heuristic
                       Benchmark              Time in seconds
                                       Interval length Interval weight
                       espresso                   4.0               4.0
                       compress                  43.1              43.0
                       li                         5.4               5.4
                       alvinn                    24.8              24.8
                       tomcatv                   60.5              60.2
                       swim                      44.6              44.6
                       fpppp                     90.8             198.6
                       wc                         5.7               5.7
                       sort                       3.5               3.5



6.3 Spilling Heuristics
The spilling heuristic presented in Section 4 uses interval length. We also considered
an alternative spilling heuristic based on interval weight, or estimated usage count.
In this case, the algorithm spills the interval with the least estimated usage count
among the new interval and the intervals in active.
   Table V compares the run time of programs compiled using interval length and
interval weight spilling heuristics. In general, the results are similar; only in one
benchmark, fpppp, does the interval length heuristic significantly outperform inter-
val weight. Of course, the relative performance of the two heuristics depends en-
tirely on the structure of the program being compiled. The interval length heuristic
has the additional advantage that it is slightly simpler, since it does not require
maintaining usage count information.

6.4 Architectural Considerations
Many machines place restrictions on the use of registers: for instance, only certain
registers may be used to pass arguments or return results, or certain operations
must target specific registers.
   Operations that target specific registers can be handled by pre-allocating the
register candidates that are targets of these instructions, and modifying the alloca-
tion algorithm to take the pre-allocation into account. In the case of linear scan,
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
                                               Linear Scan Register Allocation     ·     911

if the scan encounters a pre-allocated live interval, it must spill (or assign to a
different register) the interval in active, if any, that already uses the register of the
pre-allocated interval. However, because live intervals are so coarse, it is possible
that two intervals that both need to use a particular register overlap: in this case,
the best solution is to extend linear scan so that a variable may reside in different
locations throughout its lifetime, as in binpacking [Traub et al. 1998].
   The issue of when to use caller-saved registers is solved elegantly by the bin-
packing algorithm, which extends the concept of lifetime holes to physical regis-
ters [Traub et al. 1998]. The lifetime hole of a register is any region in which that
register is available for allocation; the lifetime holes of caller-saved registers simply
do not include function calls. Linear scan does not use lifetime holes. The sim-
plest solution is to use all registers, and insert saves and restores where appropriate
around function calls after register allocation. Another solution is to actually intro-
duce the binpacking concept of register lifetime hole, and to allocate a live interval
to a register only if it fits entirely within the register’s lifetime hole. We use the
former solution in the icode implementation (Section 5.1.1), and the latter solution
in the SUIF implementation (Section 5.1.2).
6.5 Optimizations
Since it is so simple, linear scan allocation lends itself to several refinements and
optimizations. The most beneficial in terms of code quality is probably live interval
splitting. Splitting does not involve changes to linear scan itself, but only to the
definition of live intervals. With splitting, a variable has one live interval for each
region of the flow graph throughout which it is uninterruptedly live, rather than
one interval for the entire flow graph. This definition takes advantage of holes
in variable lifetimes, and is analogous to binpacking without the second-chance
technique [Traub et al. 1998]. Past work on renaming scalar variables, including
renaming into SSA form [Cytron et al. 1989], can be useful in subsuming much of
the splitting that might be useful for register allocation.
  Another possible optimization is coalescing of register moves. If the live interval
of a variable v1 ends where the live interval of another variable, v2 , begins, and
the program at that point contains a copy v2 ← v1 , then v2 can be assigned v1 ’s
register, and if v2 is not subsequently spilled, the move can be eliminated after
register allocation. It is not difficult to extend the routine ExpireOldIntervals
in Figure 1 to enable this optimization. However, in order to be effective, move
coalescing depends on live interval splitting: without splitting, the opportunities
for coalescing are few and can occur only outside of loops.
  We have considered these and other optimizations, but have not yet implemented
them. The key advantage of the linear scan algorithm is that it is fast and simple,
yet can produce relatively good code. Additions to linear scan would make it slower
and more complicated, and may not improve the generated code much. If one is
willing to sacrifice some compile-time performance to obtain better code, then the
second-chance binpacking algorithm might be a good solution.

7. CONCLUSION
The linear scan algorithm is a fast and simple technique for global register alloca-
tion. Rather than coloring an interference graph, the algorithm allocates registers
       ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
912     ·     Massimiliano Poletto and Vivek Sarkar

by making a single pass over coarse live interval information.
   Measurements indicate that the linear scan algorithm is significantly faster than
graph coloring algorithms, and that it generally emits code that runs within ap-
proximately 10% of the speed of that generated by an aggressive graph coloring
algorithm.
   Linear scan register allocation is being used as part of the tcc dynamic compila-
tion system. It should also be well suited to other applications where compile time
and code quality are important, such as “just-in-time” compilers and interactive
development environments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Omri Traub, Glenn Holloway, and Michael Smith at Harvard University
for their willingness to discuss their binpacking algorithm and to share their Ma-
chine SUIF register allocation infrastructure. We are grateful to Frans Kaashoek
at MIT for his comments and feedback, and for his support of this research. We
also thank the anonymous referees for their helpful comments, which improved the
evaluation and discussion sections.

REFERENCES
Aho, A. V., Sethi, R., and Ullman, J. D. 1986. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools.
  Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Amarasinghe, S. P., Anderson, J. M., Lam, M. S., and Lim, A. W. 1993. An overview of the
  SUIF compiler for scalable parallel machines. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Languages
  and Compilers for Parallel Computing. Portland, OR.
Auslander, M. and Hopkins, M. 1982. An overview of the PL.8 compiler. In Proceedings of the
  ACM SIGPLAN ’82 Symposium on Compiler Construction. 22–31.
Belady, L. A. 1966. A study of replacement algorithms for a virtual storage computer. IBM
  Systems Journal 5, 2, 78–101.
Blickstein, D., Craig, P., Davidson, C., Faiman, R., Glossop, K., Grove, R., Hobbs, S.,
  and Noyce, W. 1992. The GEM optimizing compiler system. Digital Equipment Corporation
  Technical Journal 4, 4, 121–135.
Briggs, P., Cooper, K., and Torczon, L. 1994. Improvements to graph coloring register allo-
  cation. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 16, 3 (May), 428–455.
Chaitin, G. J., Auslander, M. A., Chandra, A. K., Cocke, J., Hopkins, M. E., and Mark-
  stein, P. W. 1981. Register allocation via coloring. Computer Languages 6, 47–57.
Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., and Rivest, R. L. 1990. Introduction to Algorithms. MIT
  Press, Cambridge, MA.
Cytron, R., Ferrante, J., Rosen, B. K., Wegman, M. N., and Zadeck, F. K. 1989. An efficient
  method of computing static single assignment form. In Conference Record of the 16th Annual
  ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages. Austin, TX, 25–35.
Fraser, C. W. and Hanson, D. R. 1995. A Retargetable C Compiler: Design and Implementa-
  tion. Benjamin/Cummings, Redwood City, CA.
Freiburghouse, R. A. 1974. Register allocation via usage counts.       Communications of the
  ACM 17, 11 (November), 638–642.
George, L. and Appel, A. 1996. Iterated register coalescing. ACM Transactions on Programming
  Languages and Systems 18, 3 (May), 300–324.
Hsu, W.-C., Fischer, C. N., and Goodman, J. R. 1989. On the minimization of loads and stores
  in local register allocation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 15, 10 (October),
  1252–1260.
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
                                                Linear Scan Register Allocation      ·     913

Motwani, R., Palem, K. V., Sarkar, V., and Reyen, S. 1995. Combining Register Allocation
  and Instruction Scheduling (Technical Summary). Tech. rep., Courant Institute, New York
  University. July. TR 698.
Muchnick, S. S. 1997. Advanced compiler design and implementation. Morgan Kaufmann, San
  Francisco, CA.
Poletto, M., Engler, D. R., and Kaashoek, M. F. 1997. tcc: A system for fast, flexible, and
  high-level dynamic code generation. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN ’97 Conference on
  Programming Language Design and Implementation. Las Vegas, NV, 109–121.
Poletto, M., Hsieh, W. C., Engler, D. R., and Kaashoek, M. F. 1999. ‘C and tcc: A language
  and compiler for dynamic code generation. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and
  Systems. (To appear).
Smith, M. 1996. Extending SUIF for machine-dependent optimizations. In Proceedings of the First
  SUIF Compiler Workshop. Stanford, CA, 14–25. http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/machsuif.
Traub, O., Holloway, G., and Smith, M. D. 1998. Quality and speed in linear-scan register
  allocation. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN ’98 Conference on Programming Language
  Design and Implementation.


Received February 1998; revised July 1998; accepted September 1998




        ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5, September 1999.
