# 08 Indexes & Filters I (notes)

Lecture #08: Indexes & Filters I
15-445/645 Database Systems (Fall 2025)
https://15445.courses.cs.cmu.edu/fall2025/
Carnegie Mellon University
Andy Pavlo

1

Indexes

!ere are several data structure choices in DBMS for purposes such as internal metadata, core data storage,
temporary data structures, or indexes. Our focus in this lecture will be on indexes. In the previous lecture
we considered hash tables, which is not always the best option for indexes since they cannot support range
scans nor partial key look-ups.
An index is a replica of a subset of a table’s a”ributes that is organized and/or sorted for e#cient access to
the location of speci$c tuples. So instead of performing a sequential scan, the DBMS can perform a lookup
on the index to $nd certain tuples more quickly. !e DBMS ensures that the contents of the tables and the
indexes are always logically in sync.
!ere exists a trade-o% between the number of indexes to create per database. Although having more
indexes makes looking up queries faster, indexes also use storage and require maintenance. Plus, there are
concurrency concerns with respect to keeping them in sync. It is the DBMS’s job to $gure out the best
indexes to use to execute queries.

2

B+Tree

A B+Tree is a self-balancing tree data structure that keeps data sorted and allows searches, sequential
access, insertions, and deletions in O(log(n)). It is optimized for disk-oriented DBMSs that read/write
large blocks of data as it converts what would have potentially been random I/O to sequential I/O.
Almost every modern DBMS that supports order-preserving indexes uses a B+Tree. !ere is a speci$c data
structure called a B-Tree, but people also use the term to generally refer to a class of data structures. !e
primary di%erence between the original B-Tree and the B+Tree is that B+Trees store values only in leaf
nodes. Modern B+Tree implementations combine features from other B-Tree variants, such as the sibling
pointers used in the Blink -Tree.
Formally, a B+Tree is an m-way search tree (where m represents the fanout, or the maximum number of
children a node can have) with the following properties:
• It is perfectly balanced (i.e., every leaf node is at the same depth).
• Every inner node other than the root is at least half full ( m
2 → 1 ↑ num of keys ↑ m → 1).
• Every inner node with k keys has k+1 non-null children.
Every node in a B+Tree contains an array of key/value pairs.
For leaf nodes, the keys are derived from the a”ribute(s) that the index is based on. Although it is not
necessary according to the de$nition, arrays at every node are almost always sorted by the keys. Two
approaches for representing leaf node values are record IDs and tuple data. Record IDs refer to a pointer
to the location of the tuple, usually the primary key. Leaf nodes that have tuple data store the the actual
contents of the tuple in each node.

Fall 2025 – Lecture #08

Indexes & Filters I

Inner Node

<node*>|<key>

1

5

<5

<9

3

6

9

≥9
7

9

13

Sibling Pointers

<value>|<key>

Figure 1: B+ Tree diagram
For inner nodes, the values contain pointers to other nodes, and the keys can be thought of as guide posts.
!ey guide the tree traversal but do not represent the keys (and hence their values) on the leaf nodes. What
this means is that you could potentially have a key in an inner node (as a guide post) that is not found on
the leaf nodes.
Depending on the index speci$cation, the DBMS will place null keys in either the $rst leaf node (i.e., NULL
FIRST) or the last leaf node (i.e., NULL LAST). Sibling pointers (introduced by Blink -Tree) can be added
across each level of the B+Tree, enabling range scans to be performed without backtracking and allowing
e#cient splits and merges during insertions and deletions from the B+Tree.

Insertion

To insert a new entry into a B+Tree, one must traverse down the tree and use the inner nodes to $gure
out which leaf node to insert the key into.
1. Find correct leaf L.
2. Add new entry into L in sorted order:
• If L has enough space, the operation is done.
• Otherwise split L into two nodes L1 and L2 . Redistribute entries evenly and copy up the middle
key. Insert an entry pointing to L2 into the parent of L.
3. To split an inner node, redistribute entries evenly, but push up the middle key.

Deletion

Whereas in inserts we occasionally had to split leaves when the tree got too full, if a deletion causes a tree
to be less than half-full, we must merge in order to re-balance the tree.
1. Find correct leaf L.
2. Remove the entry:
• If L is at least half full, the operation is done.
• Otherwise, you can try to borrow from a sibling.
• If borrowing fails, merge L and a sibling.
3. If a merge occurred, you must delete the entry in the parent pointing to L.

15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 2 of 7

Fall 2025 – Lecture #08

Indexes & Filters I

Composite Index

!e key is composed of multiple a”ributes. We can create composite index like:
CREATE INDEX abc_index ON table (a, b DESC, c NULLS FIRST);

!en we can use the index for queries like:
SELECT a, b, c FROM table
WHERE a = 1 AND b = 2 AND c = 3;

Note that the ‘AND’ operator is mostly necessary. Conditions with ‘OR’ are generally not supported.

Selection Conditions

Because B+Trees are in sorted order, look-ups have fast traversal and also do not require the entire key.
!e DBMS can use a B+Tree index if the query provides any of the a”ributes of the search key. !is di%ers
from a hash index, which requires all a”ributes in the search key.
Find Key=(A,*)
A≤A
A,C

A,A

A,B

A,C

B,A

B,B

C,C

B,B

B,C

C,C

C,D

A≤B

Figure 2: To perform a pre$x search on a B+Tree, one looks at the $rst a”ribute on
the key, follows the path down, and performs a sequential scan across the leaves to
$nd all the keys that one wants.

Duplicate Keys

!ere are two approaches to duplicate keys in a B+Tree.
!e $rst approach is to append record IDs as part of the key. Since each tuple’s record ID is unique, this
will ensure that all the keys are identi$able. !e DBMS can use partial key lookup to $nd tuples.
!e second approach is to allow leaf nodes to spill into over!ow nodes that contain the duplicate keys.
Although no redundant information is stored, this approach is more complex to maintain and modify.

Clustered Indexes

!e table is stored in the sorted order speci$ed by the primary key, as either heap- or index-organized
storage. Since some DBMSs always use a clustered index, they will automatically make a hidden row id
primary key if a table doesn’t have an explicit one, but others cannot use them at all.

Index Scan Page Sorting

Since directly retrieving tuples from an unclustered index is ine#cient, the DBMS can $rst $gure out all
the tuples that it needs and then sort them based on their page id. !is way, each page will only need to
be fetched exactly once.
15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 3 of 7

Fall 2025 – Lecture #08

3

Indexes & Filters I

B+Tree Design Choices

3.1 Node Size

Depending on the storage medium, we may prefer larger or smaller node sizes. For example, nodes stored
on hard drives are usually in the order of megabytes in size to reduce the number of seeks needed to $nd
data and amortize the expensive disk read over a large chunk of data, while in-memory databases may use
page sizes as small as 512 bytes in order to $t the entire page into the CPU cache as well as to decrease data
fragmentation. !is choice can also be dependent on the type of workload, as point queries would prefer
as small a page as possible to reduce the amount of unnecessary extra info loaded, while a large sequential
scan might prefer large pages to reduce the number of fetches it needs to do.

3.2 Merge !reshold

While B+Trees have a rule about merging under$lled nodes a&er a delete, sometimes it may be bene$cial
to temporarily violate the rule to reduce the number of deletion operations. For instance, eager merging
could lead to thrashing, where a lot of successive delete and insert operations lead to constant splits and
merges. It also allows for batched merging where multiple merge operations happen all at once, reducing
the amount of time that expensive write latches have to be taken on the tree.
!ere are merge strategies that keep under$lled nodes in the tree and rebuild the tree later, which make
the tree unbalanced (as in Postgres). We will not discuss this in the lecture.

3.3 Variable Length Keys

Currently we have only discussed B+Trees with $xed length keys. However we may also want to support
variable length keys, such as the case where a small subset of large keys lead to a lot of wasted space. !ere
are several approaches to this:
1. Pointers
Instead of storing the keys directly, we could just store a pointer to the key. Due to the ine#ciency
of having to chase a pointer for each key, the only place that uses this method in production is
embedded devices, where its tiny registers and cache may bene$t from such space savings.
2. Variable Length Nodes
We could also still store the keys like normal and allow for variable length nodes. !is is generally
infeasible and largely not used due to the signi$cant memory management overhead of dealing with
variable length nodes.
3. Padding
Instead of varying the key size, we could set each key’s size to the size of the maximum key and pad
out all the shorter keys. In most cases this is a massive waste of memory, so you don’t see this used
by anyone either.
4. Key Map/Indirection
!e method that nearly everyone uses is replacing the keys with an index to the key-value pair in
a separate dictionary. !is o%ers signi$cant space savings and potentially shortcuts point queries
(since the key-value pair the index points to is the exact same as the one pointed to by leaf nodes).
Some databases (e.g. PostgreSQL) allow over’ow within a given node to maintain a $xed number
of keys by storing excess data in over’ow pages.

3.4 Intra-Node Search

Once we reach a node, we still need to search within the node (either to $nd the next node from an inner
node, or to $nd our key value in a leaf node). While this is relatively simple, there are still some tradeo%s
15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 4 of 7

Fall 2025 – Lecture #08

Indexes & Filters I

to consider:
1. Linear
!e simplest solution is to just scan every key in the node until we $nd our key. On the one hand,
we don’t have to worry about sorting the keys, making insertions and deletes much quicker. On
the other hand, this is relatively ine#cient and has a complexity of O(n) per search. !is can be
vectorized using SIMD (or equivalent) instructions.
2. Binary
A more e#cient solution for searching would be to keep each node sorted and use binary search to
$nd the key. !is is as simple as jumping to the middle of a node and pivoting le& or right depending
on the comparison between the keys. Searches are much more e#cient this way, as this method only
has the complexity of O(ln(n)) per search. However, insertions become more expensive as we must
maintain the sort of each node.
3. Interpolation
Finally, in some circumstances we may be able to utilize interpolation to $nd the key. !is method
takes advantage of any metadata stored about the node (such as max element, min element, average,
etc.) and uses it to generate an approximate location of the key. For example, if we are looking for 8
in a node and we know that 10 is the max key and 10 → (n + 1) is the smallest key (where n is the
number of keys in each node), then we know to start searching 2 slots down from the max key, as
the key one slot away from the max key must be 9 in this case. Despite being the fastest method we
have given, this method is only seen in academic databases due to its limited applicability to keys
with certain properties (like integers) and complexity.

15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 5 of 7

Fall 2025 – Lecture #08

4

Indexes & Filters I

Optimizations

4.1 Pre”x Compression

Most of the time when we have keys in the same node there will be some partial overlap of some pre$x of
each key (as similar keys will end up right next to each other in a sorted B+Tree). Instead of storing this
pre$x as part of each key multiple times, we can simply store the pre$x once at the beginning of the node
and then only include the unique sections of each key in each slot.
robbed

robbing

robot

Prefix:rob

bed

bing

ot

Figure 3: An example of pre$x compression. Since the keys are in lexicographic
order, they are likely to share some pre$x.

4.2 Deduplication

In the case of an index which allows non-unique keys, we may end up with leaf nodes containing the same
key over and over with di%erent values a”ached. One optimization of this could be only writing the key
once and then following it with all of its associated values.

4.3 Su#x Truncation

For the most part the key entries in inner nodes are just used as signposts and not for their actual key
value (as even if a key exists in the index we still have to search to the bo”om to ensure that it hasn’t been
deleted). We can take advantage of this by only storing the minimum pre$x that is needed to correctly
route probes into the correct node.

4.4 Pointer Swizzling

Because each node of a B+Tree is stored in a page from the bu%er pool, each time we load a new page we
need to fetch it from the bu%er pool, requiring latching and lookups. To skip this step entirely, we could
store the actual raw pointers in place of the page IDs (known as ”swizzling”), preventing a bu%er pool
fetch entirely. Rather than manually fetching the entire tree and placing the pointers manually, we can
simply store the resulting pointer from a page lookup when traversing the index normally. Note that we
must track which pointers are swizzled and deswizzle them back to page ids when the page they point to
is unpinned and victimized.

4.5 Bulk Insert

When a B+Tree is initially built, having to insert each key the usual way would lead to constant split
operations. Since we already give leaves sibling pointers, initial insertion of data is much more e#cient
if we construct a sorted linked list of leaf nodes and then easily build the index from the bo”om up using
the $rst key from each leaf node. Note that depending on our context we may wish to pack the leaves
15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 6 of 7

Fall 2025 – Lecture #08

Indexes & Filters I

as tightly as possible to save space or leave space in each leaf to allow for more inserts before a split is
necessary.

4.6 Write-Optimized B+ Tree

Split / merge node operation are expensive. !erefore, some variants of B-Tree, such as Bω-Tree, logs
changes in the internal node and lazily propagates the updates down to the leaf node later.

15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 7 of 7

