# Cache Consistency: Memcached at Facebook

```text
6.5840 2026 Lecture 16: Scaling Memcache at Facebook

Scaling Memcache at Facebook, by Nishtala et al, NSDI 2013

why are we reading this paper?
  it's an experience paper
  how did the authors scale up a big system?
  problems? solutions?
  a window into the real world
  performance vs consistency vs practicality

the big facebook infrastructure picture
  lots of data: friend lists, status, posts, likes, photos
  fresh/consistent data not critical -- humans are tolerant
  read-heavy (helpful)
  little locality (not helpful)
  high load: billions of storage operations per second
    much higher than a single storage server can handle
      ~100,000 simple queries/s for mysql
      ~1,000,000 get/puts/s  for memcached
  multiple data centers (at least west and east coast)
  [diagram]
  each data center -- "region":
    "real" data sharded over MySQL DBs -- ACID, but slow
    memcached layer (mc) -- in RAM: fast but limited size
    web servers (clients of memcached and DB) -- "stateless"
  each data center's DBs contain full replica
  west coast is primary, others are replicas via MySQL async log replication

let's talk about performance first
  much of paper is about avoiding stale cached data
  but staleness arose from efforts to increase performance

what is memcached?
  a simple key/value server: put(k,v), get(k), delete(k).
  in RAM: fast, not durable, no replication.
  LRU eviction, since RAM size limited
  stores what clients tell it to.
  usually lots of memcached servers are deployed.
    clients decide what to store where.

how do FB apps use mc? Figure 1.
  FB uses mc as a "look-aside" cache
    real data is in the DB
    application talks separately to mc and (if miss or write) to DB
    mc doesn't know about the DB
  read(k):
    h = hash(k) % n  -- hash chooses which memcache server to talk to
    v = mc[h].get(k)
    if v is nil:
      v = fetch from DB
      put(k, v)
  write(k,v):
    send k,v to DB
    h = hash(k) % n
    mc[h].delete(k)

memcached very popular!
  look-aside makes it easy to add to existing web applications
  cache anything from DB rows to entire computed html pages
  flexible, simple, fast

what is the benefit of using mc?
  it's only helpful for reads -- but that's by far the majority of operations
  high hit rate -> reduces load on DB servers
    Table 2 says about 99% hit rate, i.e. 100x reduction in DB read load
    wow; but watch out: a 1% decrease in hit rate *doubles* DB load
  this caching is not about reducing user-visible delay,
    it's about protecting the DB servers from massive overload.

lots of mc servers are needed to handle the total load
  CPU/network parallelism
  total RAM
  how to divide the load among the memcache servers?

the client hash function determines how keys are assigned to mc servers
  can shard (partition), or replicate, or some combination
  all web servers use the same hash(k) function
    so if C1 caches key k, C2 will see it!
  central configuration manager tells clients how to hash

will sharding or replication yield most mc throughput?
  this is a central concern in many designs
  [two little diagrams]
  sharding: divide keys over mc servers
  replicate: divide clients over mc servers
  sharding:
    + memory-efficient (only one copy of each k/v pair)
    - not effective if a few keys are extremely popular
    - each web server must talk to many mc servers (high packet overhead)
    - risk of "in-cast congestion"
  replication:
    + useful if a few keys are very popular for reads
    + can pack many requests/responses per packet (low overhead)
    + few servers need be contacted, reducing per-packet costs
    + easier to design supporting network (2 x-capacity nets easier than 1 2x)
    - uses more memory, so fewer distinct items can be cached
    - writes are more expensive

performance and multiple regions (Section 5)

[diagram: west, db primary shards, mc servers, clients |
 east, db secondary shards, ...,
 feed from db primaries to secondaries ]

Q: what is the point of regions -- multiple complete replicas?
   lower RTT to users (east coast, west coast)
   quick local reads, from local mc and DB
   (though writes are expensive: must be sent to primary region)
   hot replica in case primary site fails

Q: why not divide users over regions?
   i.e. why not east-coast users' data in east-coast region, &c
   then no need to replicate: might cut hardware costs in half!
   but: social net -> not much locality
   might work well for e.g. e-mail

Q: why OK performance despite writes sent to the primary region?
   writes are much rarer than reads
   users do not wait for writes to finish
   
performance within a region (Section 4)

[diagram: db shards, multiple clusters, each w/ mc's and clients ]

multiple mc clusters *within* each region
  cluster = complete set of mc cache servers + web servers
  each web server hashes keys over just the mc servers in its cluster

why multiple clusters per region?
  why not a single big cluster in each region?
    divide the load among many parallel mc servers?
  1. more mc servers don't help very popular keys
     replicating (one copy per cluster) does help
  2. more mcs in cluster -> sharded more finely ->
       each web view sends more packets (to more mc servers)
     and more in-cast congestion from replies
     client requests fetch 20 to 500 keys! over many mc servers
     MUST request in parallel (total latency too large if serial)
     but then all replies come back at the same time
     network switches, NIC run out of buffers
  3. hard to build network for single big cluster
     any-to-any client/server access
     so cross-section b/w must be large -- expensive
     two clusters -> 1/2 the cross-section b/w

but -- replicating is a waste of RAM for less-popular items
  "regional pool" shared by all clusters
  unpopular objects (no need for many copies)
  the application s/w decides what keys to put in regional pool
  frees mc servers to replicate more popular objects

bringing up new mc cluster is a performance problem
  new cluster has 0% hit rate
  so its clients could generate big spike in DB load
  thus the clients of new cluster first get() from existing cluster (4.3)
    and put() into new cluster
    basically lazy copy of existing cluster to new cluster

another overload problem: thundering herd
  one client updates DB and delete()s a key
  lots of clients get() but miss
    they all fetch the same data from DB
  not good: needless DB load
  solution: mc gives just the first missing client a "lease"
    lease = permission to refresh from DB
    mc remembers set of valid leases
    mc tells others "try get() again in a few milliseconds"
  effect: only one client reads the DB and does put()
    others re-try get() later and hopefully hit
    
what if an mc server fails (Section 3.3)?
  can't have DB servers handle the misses -- too much load
  can't shift load to another mc server -- too much load
  Gutter -- pool of idle mc servers, clients only use after mc server fails
    separate Gutter per cluster
  after a while, failed mc server will be replaced
  as long as only a few mc servers are down at any one time,
    a small Gutter pool can act as backups for a large set of mc servers

The Question:
  why aren't invalidates (deletes) sent to Gutter servers?
    from web servers and MySQL/McSqueal
  my guess:
    Gutter can hold *any* key
    so all invalidates would have to be sent to Gutter 
    this at least doubles delete traffic
    and may place a heavy load on small # of Gutter servers

let's talk about consistency now

what is the paper's consistency plan?
  writes go direct to primary DB, with transactions, so DB stays consistent
    e.g. incrementing a "like" count will be correct
  what about reads?
    reads not guaranteed to see the latest write
    different clients not guaranteed to see the same values
    but not too stale! only a few seconds
    i.e. eventual consistency
  *and* "read-your-own-writes"

this is a common pattern:
  updates are ACID -- and slow
  reads are not very consistent -- but fast

why is it OK that reads can yield stale data?
  the data is news feed items, postings, likes, &c
  users may see web pages with content that lags the DB a little
  few people will notice or care as long as it's only a little
  next time they look, mc will likely have caught up to the DB

what does the paper mean by "consistency"?
  they mean how out-of-date a read might be
  "more consistent" means reads don't lag recent writes by too much
  it's a given that reads can be stale; just trying to limit how stale
  this is a user-experience view of consistency
    it is not about correctness / guaranteed properties

how are DB replicas kept in sync across regions?
  one region is primary
  all clients send updates only to primary region's DB servers
  primary DBs distribute log of updates to DBs in secondary regions
  secondary DBs apply
  secondary DBs are complete replicas (not caches)
  DB replication delay can be considerable (many seconds)

Q: why do clients send updates only to primary region's DB servers?
   why not to local region DB server?

what do they do about now-stale cached data when DB is written?
  there can be many cached copies of an item in a given region:
    one per cluster
  1. DBs send invalidates (delete()s) to relevant mc servers in region
     this is McSqueal in Figure 6
  2. writing client also invalidates mc in local cluster
     for read-your-own-writes
  secondary DBs hear updates, send out invalidates

they ran into a number of DB-vs-mc consistency problems
  due to concurrent updates affecting different cached copies in different orders
  dangerous if can lead to permanently stale cached data

example race (Section 2, Figure 1):
  suppose client write(k,v) looked like (this is broken):
    send k,v to DB
    put(k,v) in mc -- rather than delete(k)
  what if two clients write the same key at the same time?
    updates might arrive at DB in one order
    but at mc server in the other order!
    leading to perhaps-permanent cached incorrect data
  solution: they delete(k), not update; delete is correct in either order

example race (Section 3.2.1):
  k not in cache
  C1 get(k), misses
  C1 v1 = read k from DB
    C2 writes k = v2 in DB
    C2 delete(k)
  C1 put(k, v1)
  now mc has stale data, delete(k) has already happened
  will stay stale indefinitely, until k is next written
  solved with leases:
    mc gives C1 a lease on k with the "miss" -- permission to write k.
    C2's delete(k) invalidates C1's lease.
    so mc ignores C1's put(k).
    key still missing, so next reader will refresh it from DB

Q: aren't the consistency problems caused by clients copying DB data to mc?
   why not have only DB install values in mc, and never clients?
     then there would be no racing client updates &c, just ordered writes

A: that's correct in principle, but:
  1. DB doesn't generally know how to compute values for mc
     generally client app code computes cached items from DB results,
       i.e. mc content is often not simply a literal DB record
  2. DB doesn't know what's cached, would end up sending lots
     of values for keys that aren't cached

FB/mc lessons for storage system designers?
  cache is vital for surviving high load, not just to reduce latency
  need flexible tools for controlling partition vs replication
  linearizability is too much; eventual often not enough

next tuesday:
  guest lecture from an AWS designer!

--- references

http://cs.cmu.edu/~beckmann/publications/papers/2020.osdi.cachelib.pdf
https://engineering.fb.com/2008/08/20/core-data/scaling-out/
https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/atc13/atc13-bronson.pdf
```
