# 01 Relational Model & Algebra (notes)

Lecture #01: Relational Model & Algebra
15-445/645 Database Systems (Fall 2025)
https://15445.courses.cs.cmu.edu/fall2025/
Carnegie Mellon University
Andy Pavlo

1

Databases

A database is an organized collection of inter-related data that models some aspect of the real-world (e.g
modeling the students in a class or a digital music store). Databases are the core component of most
computer applications. Computer Science is essentially taking in some input, performing some operations,
and then producing the output, which can be seen as a database on a high level as well.
People often confuse “databases” with “database management systems” (e.g. MySQL, Oracle, MongoDB,
Snowflake). A database management system (DBMS) is the software that manages a database. Among
many things, a DBMS is responsible for inserting, deleting, and retrieving data from a database.

2

Flat File Strawman

Consider that we want to store data for a music store like Spotify. We want to hold information about the
artists and which albums those artists have released. This database has two entities: an Artists entity and
an Albums entity.
We choose to store the database’s records as comma-separated value (csv) files that the DBMS manages,
and each entity is stored in its own file (an artists.csv and albums.csv).
In this example, artists each have a name, year, and country attribute. Albums have name, artist, and
year attributes.
The following is an example CSV file for information about artists with the schema (name, year, country):
"Wu-Tang Clan", 1992, "USA"
"Notorious BIG", 1992, "USA"
"GZA", 1990, "USA"
The application has to parse these files each time it wants to read or update any records. As an example,
if we want to get the year that GZA went solo, we will need some program like the following to open the
file, read it, and then parse each line to check for a match in the artist name.
for line in file.readlines():
record = parse(line)
if record[0] == "GZA" :
print(int(record[1]))

Issues with Flat Files
There are several problems with using flat files as our database. Here are some questions to consider:

Fall 2025 – Lecture #01

Relational Model & Algebra

• Data Integrity How do we ensure that the artist is the same for each album entry? What if somebody overwrites the album year with an invalid string? What if there are multiple artists on an
album? What happens if we delete an artist that has albums?
• Implementation How do you find a particular record? What if we now want to create a new
application that uses the same database? What if that application is running on a different machine?
What if two threads try to write to the same file at the same time?
• Durability What if the machine crashes while our program is updating a record? What if we want
to replicate the database on multiple machines for high availability? Some database systems will
sacrifice safety and durability by default to make database operations appear faster.

3

Database Management System

A DBMS is software that allows applications to store and analyze information in a database.
A general-purpose DBMS is designed to allow the definition, creation, querying, update, and administration of databases in accordance with some data model.
A data model is a collection of concepts for describing the data in database. Some examples include:
• Relational (most common)
• NoSQL (key/value, document, graph)
• Array / Matrix / Vector (for machine learning)
A schema is a description of a particular collection of data using a given data model. This defines the
structure of data for a data model. Otherwise, you have random bits with no meaning.

Common Data Models
• Relational (Most DBMSs)
• Key/Value (Simple Apps/Caching)
• Graph (NoSQL)
• Document/XML/Object (NoSQL)
• Wide-Column/Column-family (NoSQL)
• Array / Matrix / Vector (Machine Learning/Science)
• Hierarchical (Obsolete/Legacy/Rare)
• Network (Obsolete/Legacy/Rare)
• Multi-Value (Obsolete/Legacy/Rare)

Early DBMSs
In the late 1960s, early DBMSs required developers to write queries using procedural code (e.g. IDS,
IMS, CODASYL). The developers had to choose access paths and execution ordering based on the current
database contents. So, if the data changes, then the developer must rewrite the query code.
And writing queries looks like manually coding loops to traverse data structures (e.g., a nested loop over
artists and albums to find matches). You must explicitly tell the system how to navigate the data such as
the order of traversal. Certain assumptions about the database (e.g. data size) may hold today but can
change over time. Since the execution plan is hard-coded, queries can become inefficient or even invalid
as the data grows or changes.

15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 2 of 6

Fall 2025 – Lecture #01

4

Relational Model & Algebra

Relational Model

Ted Codd at IBM Research in the late 1960s noticed that people were rewriting DBMSs every time they
wanted to change the physical layer. In 1969, he proposed the relational model as a potential solution to
this.
The relational data model defines three concepts:
• Structure: The definition of relations and their contents independent of their physical representation. Each relation has a set of attributes. Each attribute has a domain of values.
• Integrity: Ensure the database’s contents satisfy certain constraints. An example of a constraint
would be that the age of a person cannot be a negative number.
• Manipulation: Declarative API for accessing and modifying a database’s contents via relations(sets).
Programmers only specify the desired result; the database system will decide the most efficient query
plan to execute.
The relational model provides data independence that isolates the user/application from low-level data
representation. The user only worries about high-level application logic. DBMS optimizes the layout
according to operating environment, database contents, and workload. And it will re-optimize if/when
these factors change. So the change in the physical data will not break the applications.
A relation is an unordered set that contains the relationship of attributes that represent entities. Since the
relationships are unordered, the DBMS can store them in any way it wants, allowing for optimization. It
is possible to have repeated / duplicated elements in a relation as long as their primary key is different.
A tuple is a set of attribute values (also known as its domain) in the relation. In the past, values had to be
atomic or scalar, but now values can also be lists or nested data structures. Every attribute can be a special
value, NULL, which means for a given tuple the attribute is undefined.
A relation with n attributes is called an n-ary relation. We will interchangeably use relation and table in
this course. An n-ary relation is equivalent to a table with n columns.
A relation’s primary key uniquely identifies a single tuple in a table. Some DBMSs automatically create an
internal primary key if you do not define one. It can auto-generate unique primary keys via an identity
column.
A foreign key specifies that an attribute from one relation maps to a tuple in another relation. Generally,
the foreign key will point / be equal to a primary key in another table.
A constraint is a user-defined condition that must hold for any instance of the database. Unique key and
referential (foreign key) constraints are the most common. Another common example of constraint would
be to prohibit a column from having NULL values.

15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 3 of 6

Fall 2025 – Lecture #01

5

Relational Model & Algebra

Data Manipulation Languages (DMLs)

DMLs refer to the API that a DBMS exposes to applications to store and retrieve information from a
database. There are two classes of languages for Manipulating a database:
• Procedural: The query specifies the (high-level) execution strategy the DBMS should use to find
the desired result based on sets / bags. For example, use a for loop to scan all records and count
how many records are there to retrieve the number of records in the table.
• Non-Procedural (Declarative): The query specifies only what data is wanted and not how to find
it. For example, we can use SQL SELECT COUNT(*) FROM artist to count how many records are
there in the table.

6

Relational Algebra

Relational Algebra is a set of fundamental operations to retrieve and manipulate tuples in a relation. Each
operator takes in one or more relations as inputs, and outputs a new relation. To write queries we can
”chain” these operators together.

Select
Select takes in a relation and outputs a subset of the tuples from that relation that satisfy a selection
predicate. The predicate acts as a filter, and we can combine multiple predicates using conjunctions and
disjunctions.
Syntax: σpredicate (R).
Example: σa id=’a2’ (R)
SQL: SELECT * FROM R WHERE a_id = 'a2'

Projection
Projection takes in a relation and outputs a relation with tuples that contain only specified attributes. You
can rearrange the ordering of the attributes in the input relation as well as manipulate the values.
Syntax: πA1,A2,. . . ,An (R).
Example: πb id-100, a id (σa id=’a2’ (R))
SQL: SELECT b_id-100, a_id FROM R WHERE a_id = 'a2'

Union
Union takes in two relations and outputs a relation that contains all tuples that appear in at least one of
the input relations. Note: The two input relations have to have the exact same attributes.
Syntax: (R ∪ S).
SQL: (SELECT * FROM R) UNION ALL (SELECT * FROM S)

Intersection
Intersection takes in two relations and outputs a relation that contains all tuples that appear in both of the
input relations. Note: The two input relations have to have the exact same attributes.
Syntax: (R ∩ S).

15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 4 of 6

Fall 2025 – Lecture #01

Relational Model & Algebra

SQL: (SELECT * FROM R) INTERSECT (SELECT * FROM S)

Difference
Difference takes in two relations and outputs a relation that contains all tuples that appear in the first
relation but not the second relation. Note: The two input relations have to have the exact same attributes.
Syntax: (R − S).
SQL: (SELECT * FROM R) EXCEPT (SELECT * FROM S)

Product
Product takes in two relations and outputs a relation that contains all possible combinations for tuples
from the input relations.
Syntax: (R × S).
SQL: (SELECT * FROM R) CROSS JOIN (SELECT * FROM S), or simply SELECT * FROM R, S

Join
Join takes in two relations and outputs a relation that contains all the tuples that are a combination of two
tuples where for each attribute that the two relations share, the values for that attribute of both tuples is
the same.
Syntax: (R ▷◁ S).
SQL: SELECT * FROM R JOIN S USING (ATTRIBUTE1, ATTRIBUTE2...)

Observation
Relational algebra defines the fundamental operations to retrieve and manipulate tuples in a relation. It
also defines an ordering of the high-level steps to compute a query.
For example, σb id=102 (R ▷◁ S) represents joining R and S and then selecting / filtering the result. However,
(R ▷◁ (σb id=102 (S))) will do the selection on S first, and then join the result of the selection with R.
These two statements will always produce the same answer. However, if S has 1 billion tuples and there is
only 1 tuple in S with b id=102, then (R ▷◁ (σb id=102 (S))) will be significantly faster than σb id=102 (R ▷◁ S).
How would you know this if you were using Pandas or another procedural DML?
A better approach is to state the high-level result you want (retrieve the joined tuples from R and S where
bid equals 102), and let the DBMS decide the steps it should take to compute the query.
In SQL (a declarative language) we only express what we want to be computed and we do not specify how
to compute the result. The DBMS is responsible for finding the best strategy to execute the query (through
Query Optimization). This powerful abstraction has made SQL the de facto standard for writing queries
on a relational DBMS since the user of the DBMS does not need to know anything about the internals and
can query the database in the most efficient way.

7

Other Data Models

Document Data Model
The document data model is a collection of record documents containing a hierarchy of named field/value
pairs.
15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 5 of 6

Fall 2025 – Lecture #01

Relational Model & Algebra

A field’s value can be either a scalar type, an array of values, or a pointer to another document.
Modern implementations use JSON. Older systems use XML or custom object representations.
The Document Model has some use cases but still runs into many of the problems discussed in the flat flie
strawman example.

Vector Data Model
The vector data model represents one-dimensional arrays used for nearest-neighbor search (exact or approximate).
Vector databases are generally used for semantic search on embeddings generated by ML-trained transformer models (think ChatGPT), and native integration with modern ML tools and APIs (e.g., LangChain,
OpenAI). At their core, these systems use specialized indexes to perform NN searches quickly.
Recently, many relational DBMSs have shipped vector index features or extensions (pgvector) that allow
NN search within the relational model.

15-445/645 Database Systems
Page 6 of 6

