# Design of a Retargetable Decompiler for a Static Platform-Independent Malware Analysis

*Cited in the Decompilation Wiki: Schema-based Structuring*

Lukáš Ďurfina, Jakub Křoustek, Petr Zemek, Dušan Kolář, Tomáš Hruška, Karel Masařík, and Alexander Meduna. "Design of a Retargetable Decompiler for a Static Platform-Independent Malware Analysis." Brno University of Technology, Faculty of Information Technology. In T.-h. Kim et al. (Eds.): ISA 2011, CCIS 200, pp. 72-86, 2011. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.

## Abstract

The paper responds to the growing number of malware threats targeting smartphones, tablets, and other smart devices, a diversity of platforms that security companies are poorly prepared for. The authors propose the concept of a retargetable reverse compiler (a decompiler), described as being "in an early stage of development," that transforms platform-specific binary applications into a high-level language (HLL) representation that can be analyzed uniformly. The stated goal is to support static, platform-independent malware analysis. The distinctive element of their approach is the reuse of two systems that were not originally intended for this purpose: the architecture description language (ADL) ISAC for describing platforms, and the LLVM Compiler System as the decompiler core. They claim the tool can already produce "highly readable HLL code." Keywords: decompilation, reverse engineering, malware, LLVM, Lissom, ISAC.

## 1. Introduction

The authors distinguish the two basic kinds of malware analysis. Dynamic analysis inspects run-time behavior by monitoring the system and network (for example WinAPI calls, registry modifications, new services, network traffic). Static analysis instead views and walks the code with reverse-engineering tools such as disassemblers or decompilers, giving the analyst the source either at the assembly level (disassembly) or at a higher level such as C (decompilation). Static analysis is emphasized as crucial because some malware (for example polymorphic and metamorphic code) cannot be properly analyzed dynamically.

The motivation is that for roughly 20 years malware primarily targeted personal computers (x86 and x86-64), where analysis techniques were well optimized and security companies could keep pace. The rapid expansion of smart devices, which run varied processors and operating systems and now hold sensitive user data, has broken this: existing solutions are oriented toward classical platforms and cannot protect new ones, so malware for the new platforms grows steadily.

The paper's contribution is an overview of a retargetable decompiler not tied to any particular target platform, whose primary use is static platform-independent malware analysis. By producing a more abstract, unified representation while preserving functional equivalence, it frees analysts from needing deep knowledge of each target instruction set and architecture. The decompiler's front-end is generated from an ISAC platform description, and its core is based on LLVM, which is used to reverse-translate a binary into a Python-like language. The authors outline the paper structure: state of the art (Section 2), the two enabling technologies ISAC (Section 3) and LLVM (Section 4), the decompiler design (Section 5), experimental results (Section 6), and future work (Section 7).

## 2. State of the Art

The authors trace machine-code decompilation back more than 50 years to the D-Neliac decompiler (1960), the first to show that programs working "in a reverse way to compilers" were feasible. The closest project in spirit is the PILER System (1974), which used three parts and two intermediate representations: an interpreter running on the source machine that emits a three-address low-level "Micro Form," an analyzer (using data-flow and timing analyses) that produces a high-level "Intermediate Form" suited to FORTRAN, COBOL, and similar languages, and a converter that emits HLL source. PILER was designed to be flexible and general but, according to available information, was never completed.

Four contemporary decompilers are discussed and compared in Table 1:

- **dcc** (C. Cifuentes): targets a single architecture and OS (i80286 MS-DOS executables) but is well structured, with a compiler-like front-end, middle-end, and back-end, two intermediate representations (a low one between front-end and middle-end, a high one between middle-end and back-end producing C), and a control-flow graph built in the front-end. It also recognizes compilers and library routines so that start-up and library code need not be decompiled. No longer developed.
- **Boomerang** (M. van Emmerik): the open-source successor idea, a retargetable decompiler with a modular architecture emphasizing easy substitution of parts. Supports x86 (except SIMD), Sparc, and PowerPC inputs in ELF or PE, targeting C. No longer developed.
- **REC Decompiler**: not open source but free, with published design. Supports the most architectures and formats of the group (x86, x86-64, MIPS, m68k, Sparc, PowerPC; PE, ELF, MachO), implements complex control-flow-graph algorithms, and can reconstruct advanced constructs such as switch statements.
- **Hex-Rays Decompiler**: proprietary, sold as an add-on to IDA Pro. Well-developed recognition of compilers, start-up and statically-linked code via FLIRT (Fast Library Identification and Recognition Technology), which allows adding new library and compiler signatures.

The authors also note projects that are not complete decompilers but only generate source from an intermediate representation, citing emscripten (LLVM bitcode to JavaScript) and llvm-js-backend.

## 3. ISAC Language

ISAC was developed within the Lissom project at Brno University of Technology. The project has two scopes: developing an ADL for describing Multiprocessor Systems-on-Chip (MPSoC), and transforming MPSoC descriptions into software tools (C compiler, simulator, etc.) or into a hardware realization. ISAC is a "mixed ADL," meaning a processor model has several parts. The **resource part** declares resources such as registers and memory hierarchy; the **operation part** describes the instruction set with instruction behavior and micro-architecture. A model can be written instruction-accurate or cycle-accurate; the decompiler currently uses the instruction-accurate level.

Within operations, the **assembler** and **coding** sections capture instruction format in assembly and machine language (textual and binary forms), and the **behavior** section defines the semantics of each operation using a subset of ANSI C. Figure 1 gives a worked example: a `RESOURCES` block declaring a program counter, a 16-entry register file, and RAM, and an `op_add` operation whose `ASSEMBLER`, `CODING { 0b0001 rd rs rt }`, and `BEHAVIOR { regs[rd] = regs[rs] + regs[rt]; }` sections define the instruction textually, in binary, and semantically.

## 4. LLVM Compiler System

LLVM was originally a compiler framework for transparent, lifelong program analysis and transformation, providing high-level information at compile-, link-, run-, and idle-time. Its uses now span compilation, video decoding, signal processing, static checking, and language implementation. Key features include a universal, language-independent instruction set and type system, the intermediate representation LLVM IR, many built-in optimization passes, link-time optimization, JIT code generation, and APIs for several languages.

Using a factorial function in C (Figure 2) compiled to LLVM IR (Figure 3), the authors highlight IR properties central to their design:

- A **RISC-like instruction set** captures ordinary processor operations while avoiding machine-specific constraints. Most instructions are three-address (one or two operands, one result), covering arithmetic (`add`, `mul`), bitwise (`shl`, `and`), memory access (`load`, `store`, `alloca`), conversion (`trunc`, `zext`), and others (`icmp`, `call`). Every basic block ends with a terminator instruction (`br`, `ret`) that names its successor blocks.
- Virtual registers are in **Static Single Assignment (SSA)** form (evidenced by the `phi` instruction), where each variable is assigned exactly once, simplifying many optimizations.
- A **language-independent type system** gives every instruction and SSA register a type under strict rules, enabling optimizations that would otherwise be hard. Primitive types include void, boolean, variable-sized integers, and floating-point; derived types include pointers, arrays, structures, and functions. The `cast` instruction performs the only permitted type conversions, and `getelementptr` performs address computation.
- LLVM IR exists in three equivalent forms (textual, binary, in-memory), interconvertible without loss of information.

## 5. Design of a Retargetable Decompiler

The decompiler's objective is to analyze binary code and transform it into an HLL while preserving functional equivalence (necessary for accurate later analysis), a hard task given missing information from compiler optimizations and malware obfuscation. Usage is straightforward: the user describes the target architecture in the ISAC ADL, a tool-chain generator automatically produces the decompiler, and binaries for that architecture can then be reverse-translated.

The structure mirrors a classical compiler (front-end, middle-end, back-end; Figure 4), and only the front-end is platform-specific. The binary coding and semantics of each instruction are extracted from the ISAC model, so the decompiler need not be manually reconfigured for a new architecture. The authors assert that "at present, there is no other competitive method of automatically-generated retargetable decompilation."

### 5.1 Front-End

The front-end translates architecture-specific machine code into a sequence of low-level LLVM IR instructions. Because malware inputs are usually packed and protected, the first step is code unpacking (treated as out of scope, referencing existing literature). Next, the platform-specific file format is converted into a unified internal **COFF-based file format**, with conversions currently supported from Windows PE, Unix ELF, Symbian E32, and Android DEX.

To build the instruction decoder, the binary coding and semantics of instructions are extracted from the ISAC model by a tool called the **semantics extractor**, which transforms the ANSI C behavior section of each instruction into an equivalent sequence of LLVM IR instructions, mapping instruction semantics to machine code. From this, an instruction decoder (similar to a disassembler, but emitting LLVM IR basic blocks rather than assembly) is generated automatically, based on a formal model. When statically-linked code is detected, its representation is emitted instead of raw instruction semantics.

Statically-linked code detection is inspired by FLIRT. Static libraries contain object files of differing formats; these are extracted, transformed into the internal object file format, and packed into a single archive so that later processing deals with one format (an advantage over FLIRT, which needs separate tooling per object-file format). Signature creation has two parts: extracting a pattern for each object file, then building a signature from a group of patterns (Figure 5).

The final front-end stage is static analysis of the emitted LLVM IR, focused on control-flow analyses and transformations to produce code more suitable for later stages (for example function detection, elimination of "jump register" instructions, and annotation). The authors note this part "is not implemented yet" and needs more research.

### 5.2 Middle-End

At this stage the LLVM IR is very low-level: each basic block represents a single assembly instruction (decompiled in isolation), there are many redundant instructions, and no high-level constructs are visible. The middle-end improves the IR and prepares it for HLL emission through three kinds of passes:

- **Search for idioms**: recognizing code sequences whose combined meaning is not apparent from individual instructions (for example replacing xor of a register with itself by an assignment of zero). Idioms may span several instructions and be replaced by equivalent ones; this pass also includes analyses such as constant and expression propagation.
- **Retrieval of high-level constructs**: identifying if/else statements, switches, and loops (headers and bodies of loops, common post-branch destination blocks, etc.) so that unstructured `goto`s are used as little as possible.
- **Optimization of the code**: connecting successive basic blocks and eliminating redundant instructions.

The authors prefer LLVM's existing, sophisticated optimization and analysis passes over their own whenever possible. To aid this stage, the front-end annotates the IR using LLVM metadata attached to instructions, including markings of function-body entry points and application-binary-interface information (calling conventions, system calls, etc.).

### 5.3 Back-End

The back-end transforms optimized LLVM IR into an HLL, currently a **Python-like language**, with support for other back-ends planned. The HLL is non-typed, block structured, and uses whitespace indentation rather than braces or keywords, emphasizing readability for human analysts. Where Python lacks a needed construct, C-like constructs are used: C-like switch statements for fall-through, the address and dereference operators, lists instead of arrays, and dictionaries instead of structures. An explicit `goto` remains a necessary addition for cases that cannot be fully structured (for example an irreducible control-flow subgraph).

Generation walks the control-flow graph, using middle-end analysis information to emit proper high-level constructs. A final textual post-processing phase improves readability by eliminating redundant brackets and expressions introduced by the back-end.

## 6. Experimental Results

Because the decompiler is early-stage, the authors compare only their back-end against the C back-end currently included in LLVM (real-world decompilation examples exist but are not yet in publishable form). The C function in Figure 6 was compiled with llvm-gcc 4.2.1 at -O3 directly into LLVM IR (LLVM 2.8, --emit-llvm), then emitted by both back-ends (Figures 7 and 8).

The Python-like back-end output (Figure 8) reduces a multi-line, goto-laden, heavily cast C back-end output (Figure 7) to four readable lines. The authors list the key differences their back-end achieves:

- No useless variables are introduced (unlike `llvm_cbe_tmp__1` in the C back-end output).
- Basic-block bodies are inlined instead of using `goto`s wherever possible, and likewise for loops and switches.
- String literals are inlined rather than accessed through a structure.
- Redundant code (for example unnecessary pairs of brackets) is removed to increase readability.
- Because the HLL is non-typed, no sequences of casts are needed, which would otherwise reduce readability even when type-correct.
- As little boilerplate code as possible is generated (though this is not visible in the figures).

## 7. Conclusion

The paper proposed a retargetable decompiler for static platform-independent malware analysis whose front-end is generated from an ISAC ADL processor description and whose middle-end and back-end are built on LLVM. The authors present this reuse of ISAC and LLVM as innovative, enabling automatic retargetability, which they consider their major advantage over similar projects. They report they can already convert platform-specific machine code into platform-independent LLVM IR and then into human-readable HLL, claiming their back-end achieves better reverse-translation results than existing solutions.

They also identify substantial remaining work. The front-end static analyzer must be finished to yield more accurate LLVM IR. The middle-end can gain new analyses (for example pushing a negation into a condition so that `if not (a == b)` becomes `if a != b`, or replacing a chain of if/else-if with a single switch). The back-end can improve construct emission: loops are currently always emitted as `while True`, so proper detection of induction variables in the middle-end is needed for more natural loops, and other HLLs (possibly with type information and conversions) could be considered.

The work was supported by MPO ČR (FR-TI1/038), TAČR (TA01010667), BUT FIT grant FIT-S-11-2, Research Plan MSM0021630528, and the SMECY European project. The paper closes with 42 references spanning malware analysis, prior decompilers (D-Neliac, PILER, dcc, Boomerang, REC, Hex-Rays), FLIRT, the ISAC/Lissom and LLVM literature, SSA form, and static malware unpacking.

----

## Full text

Design of a Retargetable Decompiler for a Static
Platform-Independent Malware Analysis
Lukáš Ďurﬁna, Jakub Křoustek, Petr Zemek, Dušan Kolář, Tomáš Hruška,
Karel Masařík, and Alexander Meduna
Brno University of Technology, Faculty of Information Technology
Božetěchova 2, 612 66 Brno, Czech Republic
{idurfina,ikroustek,izemek,kolar,hruska,masarik,meduna}@fit.vutbr.cz

Abstract. Together with the massive expansion of smartphones, tablets,
and other smart devices, we can notice a growing number of malware
threats targeting these platforms. Software security companies are not
prepared for such diversity of target platforms and there are only few
techniques for platform-independent malware analysis. This is a major security issue these days. In this paper, we propose a concept of
a retargetable reverse compiler (i.e. a decompiler), which is in an early
stage of development. The retargetable decompiler transforms platformspeciﬁc binary applications into a high-level language (HLL) representation, which can be further analyzed in a uniform way. This tool will help
with a static platform-independent malware analysis. Our unique solution is based on an exploitation of two systems that were originally not
intended for such an application—the architecture description language
(ADL) ISAC for a platform description and the LLVM Compiler System
as the core of the decompiler. In this study, we show that our tool can
produce highly readable HLL code.
Keywords: decompilation, reverse engineering, malware, LLVM, Lissom, ISAC.

1

Introduction

There are two basic types of malicious software (a.k.a. malware) analysis—
dynamic analysis and static analysis. Even though both types have the same
objective—investigation of malware behavior—they diﬀer in its accomplishment.
Both methods are usually performed together to gain a better understanding of
malware samples. In dynamic analysis, we inspect a run-time malware behavior
by its monitoring (e.g. monitoring of WinAPI calls [1]) and we track changes of
the system and network (e.g. registry modiﬁcation, installation of new services,
network communication, etc. [2,3]).
To gain further insight of malware (e.g. inspection of malware functions, shellcode detection, etc.), static analysis is used. In this case, the code viewing and
walking is done by several reverse-engineering tools like disassemblers or decompilers [4,5]. The reverse translation of malware gives the analyst an opportunity
to see its source code, either on the assembly language level (disassembly), or on
T.-h. Kim et al. (Eds.): ISA 2011, CCIS 200, pp. 72–86, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011


Design of a Retargetable Decompiler

73

a higher level, such as the C language (decompilation). With such knowledge,
it is possible to create an appropriate protection (e.g. signature of a malware
sample for an anti-virus or a new heuristic method).
Static malware analysis is crucial because some kinds of malware cannot be
properly analysed using only dynamic analysis (e.g. polymorphic and metamorphic code [6,7]), and we will focus on it in the further text.
Malware was primarily targeted at personal computers (i.e. architectures x86
and x86-64 [8]) for the past 20 years. The techniques for malware analysis were
well optimized for this platform during this time and security companies were
able to keep pace with malware authors [9,6].
The expansion of smart devices (e.g. smartphones, tablets, etc.) is very rapid
last years [10]. Such devices are powered by various processors and running
several types of operation systems. Users often use these new platforms for manipulating sensitive user data (e.g. passwords, credit card information, etc.),
which comes to the attention of malware authors. Furthermore, the variety of
these platforms is problematic for security companies because their solutions
are mostly oriented on the classical ones, and they are not capable to protect
new platforms at the moment. Those are the main reasons why the amount of
malware for these platforms increases steadily for the last years.
In this paper, we present an overview of a retargetable decompiler, which is
currently in an early stage of development. Our approach is not tied to any
particular target platform. The primarily utilization of this tool is a static
platform-independent malware analysis. With its help, it will be possible to
inspect malware code on a much more abstract and uniﬁed form of representation, while preserving the functional equivalence of the code. Therefore, malware
analysts do not need to have a deep knowledge of the target platform (i.e. instruction set and processor architecture) and they can fully focus on malware
analysis.
The retargetable decompiler is based on exploitation of the ADL ISAC [11],
which is intended to be used for designing new application-speciﬁc instruction set
processors (ASIPs). However, we use this formalism for the description of existing
platforms. The front-end of the decompiler is generated from this description.
The decompiler core is based on the LLVM Compiler System [12], which we use
for a reverse translation from a binary form into a Python-like language.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the state of the art of
machine code decompilers. Then, Sections 3 and 4 describe the two key concepts
our decompiler is based on—the ISAC language and the LLVM Compiler System.
The design of our decompiler is then presented in Section 5. Experimental results
are given in Section 6. Section 7 closes the paper by discussing future research.

2

State of the Art

The era of machine code decompilers was established before more than 50 years.
The D-Neliac decompiler [13], built in 1960, was the ﬁrst decompiler which
showed that it is feasible to develop programs working in a reverse way to
compilers.

74

L. Ďurﬁna et al.

From this period, there have been a lot of attempts to create various kinds
of decompilers. A project with the closest idea to our project is the PILER
System [14]. This system, consisting of three parts, uses two intermediate representations. The ﬁrst part is an interpreter, which has to be run on the source
machine. Its output is Micro Form. Micro Form is a three-address low-level intermediate representation. This representation is processed by the second part—
an analyzer. The analyzer exploits more analyses, such as data ﬂow or timing
analyses, to produce Intermediate Form. This form is a high-level intermediate
representation designed to be suitable for FORTRAN, COBOL, and other languages of that time. The last part is a converter. It emits the source of code of
the HLL. In its time, the PILER System was designed to be ﬂexible and general.
However, according to the available information, it was never completed.
Currently, there exist several decompilers which deserve to be mentioned.
There are the dcc decompiler [15] from C. Cifuentes, the open source Boomerang decompiler [16], the REC Decompiler [17], and the Hex-Rays Decompiler [5].
The ﬁrst two decompilers are not developed any more, but the second two are
constantly improving. They are shortly described in the following paragraphs.
The summary is shown in Table 1.
The dcc decompiler aims only to a single architecture and to a single operating system (i80286 MS-DOS executables), but it is well structured and it
complexly shows and implements the most important algorithms for the reverse
engineering process. It has the same structure as a compiler: there are a frontend, a middle-end, and a back-end. Every part has its own separate tasks. This
decompiler uses also two types of an intermediate representation. The low one is
for the communication between the front-end and the middle-end, and the high
one is sent from the middle-end to the back-end, which ﬁnally transforms this
representation into a C source code. Except these intermediate representations,
the decompiler creates a control ﬂow graph in the front-end, and this graph is
used in the both other parts. The dcc decompiler also contains other tools which
help to create a more readable result in the target HLL. The most important features of these tools are recognitions of compilers and library routines. According
to the recognized compiler, the start-up code does not need to be decompiled.
The same eﬀect applies for library routines.
After the dcc decompiler was published, there was an idea to create a retargetable decompiler. This idea resulted in an open source project called Boomerang. Its main developer was M. van Emmerik. Boomerang is a retargetable
decompiler with a modular architecture. This architecture is a base for its retargetability. The design is similar to dcc, but there is an emphasis on the modular
principle for an easy substitution of every part. Boomerang currently supports
input executables for x86 (except SIMD instructions), Sparc, and PowerPC processors, where binary ﬁle format can be either ELF or PE. The target language
is C.
The REC decompiler is not open source, but it is available for free, and also
the authors published the description of its design. From nowadays decompilers,

Design of a Retargetable Decompiler

75

it supports the most number of architectures and binary ﬁle formats. The supported processors are x86, x86-64, MIPS, m68k, Sparc, and PowerPC. The ﬁle
format of an input executable can be PE, ELF, or MachO. The REC decompiler
implements complex algorithms for control ﬂow graphs. Therefore, it is able to
reconstruct some advanced constructs, such as switch statements.
The Hex-Rays Decompiler represents a proprietary solution which can be
bought as an add-on to the IDA Pro Disassembler [4]. Therefore, we lack detailed information about this solution. This decompiler has a well-developed
recognition of compilers, start-up and statically-linked code. This scope is covered by Fast Library Identiﬁcation and Recognition Technology (FLIRT) [18].
It provides tools for an easy addition of new library and compiler signatures,
which can be subsequently used by the decompiler.
Table 1. A comparison of the described decompilers

Supported
tectures

archi-

REC decompiler

Hex-Rays
compiler

dcc

Boomerang

i80286

x86, x86-64, MIPS,
x86, Sparc,
m68k, Sparc, Pow- x86, ARM
PowerPC
erPC

Supported ﬁle for- MS-DOS forPE, ELF
PE, ELF, MachO
mats
mat
Target language
C
C
C-like
two
types
Intermediate rep(high
and a single type ?
resentation
low)
Detects staticallyYes
No
Yes
linked code

De-

ELF, PE
C
?
Yes

On the other hand, there are projects which are not complete decompilers, but
they are specialized only for generating a source code from some intermediate
representation. As a nice example, we can mention emscripten [19]. It is a compiler able to transform LLVM bitcode to Javascript. It is used for transforming
C/C++ code for running on the web. A similar project is llvm-js-back-end [20],
which is a general LLVM back-end for producing Javascript code.

3

ISAC Language

The ISAC language [11] was developed within the Lissom project at Brno University of Technology [21]. The project has two basic scopes. The ﬁrst scope
is a development of an ADL for the description of Multiprocessor Systems-onChip (MPSoC). The second scope is a transformation of MPSoC description into

76

L. Ďurﬁna et al.

advanced software tools (e.g. a C compiler, a simulator, etc.) or into a hardware
realization of each processor. The ISAC language belongs into a so-called mixed
ADL. It means that a processor model consists of several parts. In the resource
part, processor resources, such as registers or memory hierarchy, are declared. In
the operation part, processor instruction set with behavior of instructions and
processor micro-architecture is described. Processor model can be written in
two levels of accuracy—instruction-accurate or cycle-accurate. The retargetable
decompiler currently uses the ﬁrst one.
The assembler and coding sections capture the format of instructions in
the assembly and machine language, so they deﬁne instructions in textual and
binary forms. For the behavioral model, the behavior section is used. In this
section, a subset of the ANSI C language can be used. The behavior section
deﬁnes the semantics of each operation. For example, a simple instruction with
its behavior is described using the assembler, coding, and behavior sections, see
Figure 1.

RESOURCES {
// HW resources
PC REGISTER bit [32] pc ;
// program counter
REGISTER bit [32] regs [16]; // register file
RAM bit [32] memory { SIZE (0 x10000 ); FLAGS (R , W , X ); };
}
OPERATION reg REPRESENTS regs
{ /* textual and binary description of registers */ }
OPERATION op_add {
// instruction description
INSTANCE reg ALIAS { rd , rs , rt };
ASSEMBLER { " ADD " rd "=" rs " ," rt };
CODING { 0 b0001 rd rs rt };
// instruction behavior
BEHAVIOR { regs [ rd ] = regs [ rs ] + regs [ rt ]; };
}
Fig. 1. Example of a ISAC language source code

4

LLVM Compiler System

The LLVM Compiler System [12] was originally designed as a compiler framework to support transparent, lifelong program analysis and transformation for
arbitrary programs, by providing high-level information to compiler transformations at compile-time, link-time, run-time and in idle-time between runs [22].
Nowadays, the use of LLVM spans over many diﬀerent areas, including compilation [23,24,25,26], video decoding [27], signal processing [28], static checking [29,30,31,32], and implementation of various programming languages

Design of a Retargetable Decompiler

77

[33,34,35]. The key features of LLVM include a universal, language-independent
instruction set, type system, intermediate representation (LLVM IR [36]), many
built-in sophisticated optimization algorithms and passes, link-time optimizations, just-in-time (JIT) code generation, and application programming interface
for several programming languages.
Consider the C source code in Figure 2. This straightforward implementation
of the factorial function can be directly compiled into the LLVM IR. The output
of this conversion is shown in Figure 3. This example shows us some of the
properties of the LLVM IR:
– The used RISC-like instruction set captures the key operations of ordinary
processors, but avoids most of machine-speciﬁc constraints. Most instructions are in the three-address form—they take either one or two operands
and produce a single result. The instruction set includes arithmetic instructions (e.g. add, mul), bitwise instructions (e.g. shl, and), memory access
instructions (e.g. load, store, alloca), conversion instructions (e.g. trunc,
zext), and other instructions (e.g. icmp, call). Furthermore, every basic
block ends with a terminator instruction (e.g. br, ret) which explicitly speciﬁes its successor basic blocks.
– As can be seen from the presence of the phi instruction in Figure 3, the
virtual registers are in the Static Single Assignment (SSA) form (see [37]),
where each variable is assigned exactly once. The use of this form results in
a simpliﬁcation of many compiler optimizations.
– A language-independent type system is used. Every instruction and SSA
register has an associated type and all operations obey strict type rules.
This enables several optimizations which otherwise would not be possible
(at least not in such a straightforward way). Primitive types include void,
boolean, variable-sized integers, and ﬂoating-point types. Derived types include pointers, arrays, structures, and functions. The cast instruction can be
used for type conversions (other ways of type conversions are not possible).
Address computation and address arithmetic is done by the getelementptr
instruction.
– The LLVM IR can exist in the following three forms: textual (as in Figure 3),
binary (compiled textual representation), and in-memory (compiler internal
representation). All of these representations are equivalent—that is, one can
be transformed to the others without any loss of information.
int factorial ( int n ) {
if ( n == 0)
return 1;
return n * factorial (n -1);
}
Fig. 2. A simple implementation of the factorial function in C

78

L. Ďurﬁna et al.
define i32 @factorial ( i32 % n ) {
entry :
%0 = icmp eq i32 %n , 0
br i1 %0 , label % bb2 , label % bb1
bb1 :
%1 = add i32 %n , -1
%2 = icmp eq i32 %1 , 0
br i1 %2 , label % factorial . exit , label % bb1 . i
bb1 . i :
%3
%4
%5
br

= add i32 %n , -2
= call i32 @factorial ( i32 %3)
= mul i32 %4 , %1
label % factorial . exit

factorial . exit :
%6 = phi i32 [ %5 , % bb1 . i ] , [ 1 , % bb1 ]
%7 = mul i32 %6 , % n
ret i32 %7
bb2 :
ret i32 1
}
Fig. 3. The generated LLVM IR code from the code in Figure 2

5

Design of a Retargetable Decompiler

The objective of the decompiler is an analysis of a binary code and its transformation into a HLL. It is important to preserve the functional equivalence of the
transformed program; otherwise, further code analyses will be inaccurate. This
is a very diﬃcult task because we have to deal with missing information in the
input code (e.g. because of compiler optimizations, malware obfuscation, etc.).
The usage of the retargetable decompiler is straightforward—its user describes
the target architecture in the ISAC ADL and the decompiler is automatically
generated by a tool-chain generator based on this description. After that, it is
possible to reversely translate binary executables for this architecture. The idea
of this process is discussed in the following text.
The structure of the retargetable decompiler is similar to a classical compiler. It consists of a front-end, a middle-end, and a back-end, see Figure 4. The
only platform-speciﬁc part is the front-end. For this purpose, the binary coding
and semantics of each processor instruction is extracted from the architecture
model in ISAC. This is a major diﬀerence against other retargetable decompilers, because it is not necessary to manually reconﬁgure the decompiler for a new

Design of a Retargetable Decompiler

79

ISAC

GENERATOR

DECOMPILER
PE

ELF

...

C
O
N
V
E
R
T
E
R

U
N
P
A
C
K
E
R

COFF

F
R
O
N
T
E
N
D

LLVM
IR

M
I
D
D
L
E
E
N
D

LLVM
IR

B
A
C
K
E
N
D

HLL

Fig. 4. The concept of the retargetable decompiler

architecture. It should be noted that in present, there is no other competitive
method of automatically-generated retargetable decompilation.
5.1

Front-End

The objective of the front-end is a translation from an architecture-speciﬁc machine code into a sequence of low-level LLVM IR instructions. The input binary
ﬁle is stored in a platform-speciﬁc ﬁle format (e.g. Windows PE, Unix ELF,
etc.). Furthermore, in the case of malware, the input ﬁle is usually packed and
protected against reverse-engineering. Therefore, the ﬁrst step of the reverse
translation is a code unpacking phase. As this topic is well documented in the
literature (see [38,39]), we will not deal with it in our paper.
After that, it is necessary to convert the platform-speciﬁc ﬁle format into
a uniﬁed form of representation. The internal COFF-based ﬁle format has been
designed for this purpose, together with several conversion algorithms. At the
moment, we support conversions from Windows PE, Unix ELF, Symbian E32,
and Android DEX ﬁle formats.
To generate the instruction decoder (i.e. a part of the front-end responsible
for the conversion from a machine code into LLVM IR), it is necessary to extract
the binary coding and semantics of instructions from the ISAC model. This task
is done via a tool called semantics extractor [40]. The semantics extractor transforms ANSI C code from the behavior section of the instruction into a sequence
of LLVM IR instructions, which properly describes its behavior. Therefore, we
are able to map instruction semantic in LLVM IR to its machine code.
After that, it is possible to automatically generate an instruction decoder.
Its functionality is similar to a disassembler, except its output is not an

80

L. Ďurﬁna et al.

assembly language representation of the instruction, but rather a sequence of
LLVM IR instructions (i.e. a basic block with several instructions). The instruction decoder is based on a formal model [41]. Whenever a statically-linked
code is detected, its representation is emitted instead of simple instruction
semantics.
The design of our solution for statically-linked code detection is inspired by
FLIRT [18]. In the whole process, there are separate steps which start from taking
the static library and ﬁnish at creating a signature for this library. Static libraries
contain object ﬁles with diﬀerent formats. This problem is solved by the same
way as it is solved for executable ﬁles. Object ﬁles are extracted from libraries,
they are transformed into our object ﬁle format and ﬁnally, they are packed into
a single archive. Due to this action, we can then proceed with a single ﬁle format.
In comparison with FLIRT, this clearly represents an advantage because we do
not have to build separate tools for each object ﬁle format. Indeed, we can easily
extend the tool for transformation.
The creation of signatures consists of two parts:
– extracting the pattern for each object ﬁle from a library,
– building the signature from a group of patterns.
The process is visualized in Figure 5.

Fig. 5. The process of creating the signature for static library

The ﬁnal part of the front-end is a static analysis of the emitted LLVM IR
code. It is focused on control ﬂow analyses and transformation of the LLVM IR
code to produce more suitable code for the following parts of the decompiler.
For example, this phase is responsible for the detection of functions, elimination
of “jump register” instructions, and annotation of the resulting LLVM IR code.
However, this part is not implemented yet, and more intensive research in this
ﬁeld is necessary.
5.2

Middle-End

In this stage, we have a very low-level LLVM IR of the input binary. Each basic
block represents a single assembly instruction, there may be many redundant
instructions (recall that each assembly instruction is decompiled in isolation),
and there is no evidence of high-level constructs, such as loops. The key role

Design of a Retargetable Decompiler

81

of the middle-end part of our decompiler is to improve the properties of the
generated LLVM IR code and prepare it for the ﬁnal emission of the output
HLL.
The following passes are performed over the LLVM IR code:
– Search for idioms. These are sequences of code whose combined semantics is
not immediately apparent from the instructions’ individual semantics. For
example, xor’ing a single register with itself can be replaced by assigning
a zero into it. This form is clearly more readable than the original form.
Idioms may, however, span over several instructions. In such cases, they may
be replaced with a few equivalent instructions. This pass also includes several
other types of program analysis, such as constant or expression propagation.
– Retrieval of high-level constructs, such as if/else statements, switches,
and loops. As we want to use unstructured goto’s as little as possible, it is
necessary to identify proper structured equivalents. We identify headers and
bodies of loops, common destination basic blocks after a branch instruction,
and other information needed to generate natural and readable output code.
– Optimization of the code. Here, we connect successive basic blocks and perform optimizations which eliminate redundant instructions.
As LLVM already includes many worked-out and sophisticated optimization and
analysis passes, we naturally prefer using them over our own passes whenever
possible.
To improve this middle phase in terms of eﬀectiveness, the LLVM IR code
generated by our front-end is annotated. We utilize the fact that LLVM IR
allows metadata to be attached to instructions in the program that can convey
extra information about the code. The used annotations include markings of the
entry point of function bodies and information about application binary interface
(calling conventions, system calls, etc.).
5.3

Back-End

In this ﬁnal decompilation stage, we transform the optimized LLVM IR into
a HLL. We currently use a Python-like (see [42]) language as the target language,
brieﬂy described next. However, a support for diﬀerent back-ends is planned.
Our HLL is non-typed, block structured, and uses whitespace indentation,
rather than curly braces or keywords, to delimit blocks. Since we focus on code
analysis by humans, the used language emphasises code readability. Whenever
there is no support in Python for a speciﬁc construction, we use C-like constructs.
For example, we use C-like switch statements to implement the fall-through
feature of C. Instead of arrays, we use lists, and instead of structures, we utilize
dictionaries. We also use the address and dereference operators from C. As there
are cases when the code cannot be structured by high-level constructs only (for
example, an irreducible subgraph of the control-ﬂow graph is detected [15]), an
explicit goto represents a necessary addition to our language.

82

L. Ďurﬁna et al.

The implemented back-end takes the optimized LLVM IR and converts it
into our HLL by walking over its control-ﬂow graph. Analysis information from
the middle-end is used throughout the generation to emit proper high-level
constructs.
After the generation is completed, an additional post-processing phase is done
to further improve the readability of the code. These modiﬁcations are done on
a textual level, and include the elimination of redundant brackets and expressions
introduced by the back-end.
In the next section, we present an example of a generated output code.

6

Experimental Results

In this section, we present some experimental results. Since our decompiler is
in an early stage of development, we just compare our back-end with the C
back-end, currently included in LLVM. Even though we have several examples
of a preliminary decompilation of a real-world code, the obtained results are not
in a publishable form yet.
First, we compile the source code given in Figure 6 directly into LLVM IR
using llvm-gcc1. Due to space requirements, we omit the listing of the obtained
LLVM IR code. Then, we emit a high-level representation of it by the C back-end
and by our back-end (see Figures 7 and 8, respectively).
Observe the following key diﬀerences between the two back-ends:
– We do not introduce any useless variables (see llvm_cbe_tmp__1 in the
output from the C back-end).
– Instead of using goto’s, we inline the bodies of the corresponding basic blocks
wherever possible. This also holds for other high-level constructs, such as
loops and switch statements.
– Instead of accessing string literals through a structure, we inline them wherever possible.
– We eliminate as much redundant code as possible, hence increasing the readability of the resulting code. For example, consider the redundant pairs of
brackets in the output from the C back-end. As they are not needed and
they also do not contribute to the understandability of the code (like when
brackets are used in complex expressions with many diﬀerent operators), we
remove them.
– As our HLL is non-typed, there is no need for any sequences of castings
which make the generated code—albeit type correct—less readable.
– Finally, we generate as little boilerplate code as possible (however, this cannot be seen from the ﬁgures).

1

We used llvm-gcc version 4.2.1. The source code from Figure 6 was compiled with
enabled optimizations (-O3) directly into LLVM IR (–emit-llvm). The used version
of LLVM is 2.8.

Design of a Retargetable Decompiler

int func ( int a , int b ) {
if ( a != b ) {
printf ("% d != % d " , a , b );
}
return a * ( b + 10);
}
Fig. 6. An input source code for our comparison of back-ends

// Removed boilerplate code
struct l_unnamed0 { unsigned char array [9]; };
static struct l_unnamed0 _OC_str = { "% d != % d " };
unsigned int func ( unsigned int llvm_cbe_a ,
unsigned int llvm_cbe_b ) {
unsigned int llvm_cbe_tm p_ _1 ;
if (( llvm_cbe_a == llvm_cbe_b )) {
goto llvm_cbe_bb1 ;
} else {
goto llvm_cbe_bb ;
}
llvm_cbe_bb :
llvm_cbe_tmp __ 1 = printf (((& _OC_str . array [(( signed
long long )0 ull )])) , llvm_cbe_a , llvm_cbe_b );
goto llvm_cbe_bb1 ;
llvm_cbe_bb1 :
return ((( unsigned int )((( unsigned int )((( unsigned
int )((( unsigned int ) llvm_cbe_b ) + (( unsigned
int )10 u ))))) * (( unsigned int ) llvm_cbe_a ))));
}
Fig. 7. Truncated output from the C back-end

def func (a , b ):
if not ( a == b ):
printf ("% d != % d " , a , b )
return ( b + 10) * a
Fig. 8. Output from our back-end

83

84

7

L. Ďurﬁna et al.

Conclusion

This paper proposed the concept of a retargetable decompiler for a static
platform-independent malware analysis. The front-end of this tool is generated
based on a processor description in the ISAC ADL. Its middle-end and back-end
are build on top of the LLVM Compiler System. The idea of exploitation of these
systems is innovative and it allows an automatic retargetability of our solution.
This is a major advantage of our solution over other similar projects.
The functionality of each part of the decompiler was discussed and we presented results of the current state of the implementation. As can be seen, we are
already able to convert a platform-speciﬁc machine code into its semantic representation as a platform independent LLVM IR code. Such code can be translated
into a human-readable HLL code by our back-end after that. This back-end can
achieve better results in a reverse translation than other existing solutions.
However, there is still a lot of space for improvements. In the ﬁrst place, it
is necessary to ﬁnish the implementation of the static analyser in the front-end.
After that, we will be able to produce a more accurate LLVM IR code, which
will improve the resulting HLL code.
The middle-end of our decompiler can be enhanced by several new analyses
and transformations. For example, consider the if condition in Figure 8. A more
natural way of representing the condition would be to transfer the negation
into the expression, resulting into if a != b. Another transformation to be
considered is a replacement of a chain of if/else if statements by a single
switch statement. Furthermore, current analyses and transformations have to
be improved to generate better HLL.
As for the back-end of our decompiler, emission of some HLL constructs can
be improved. For example, loops are currently always generated as while True
loops. A proper detection of induction variables in the middle-end is necessary
to emit more natural constructions. Furthermore, other HLLs can be considered,
possibly including type information and conversions between types.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the research fundings MPO
ČR, No. FR-TI1/038, TAČR, No. TA01010667, BUT FIT grant FIT-S-11-2, by
the Research Plan No. MSM0021630528, and by the SMECY European project.

References
1. Xu, J., Sung, A.H., Chavez, P., Mukkamala, S.: Polymorphic malicious executable
scanner by API sequence analysis. In: Fourth International Conference on Hybrid
Intelligent Systems, pp. 378–383 (2004)
2. Wagener, G., State, R., Dulaunoy, A.: Malware behaviour analysis. Journal in
Computer Virology 4, 279–287 (2008)
3. Willems, C., Holz, T., Freiling, F.: Toward automated dynamic malware analysis
using CWSandbox. IEEE Security and Privacy 5(2), 32–39 (2007)
4. IDA Pro Disassembler, http://www.hex-rays.com/idapro/

Design of a Retargetable Decompiler

85

5. Hex-Rays Decompiler, http://www.hex-rays.com/decompiler.shtml
6. Szor, P.: The Art of Computer Virus Research and Defense. Addison-Wesley, Upper
Saddle River (2005)
7. Szor, P., Ferrie, P.: Hunting for metamorphic. In: Virus Bulletin Conference, pp.
123–144 (2001)
8. Intel Corporation: Intel 64 and ia-32 architectures software developer’s manual.
Basic architecture, vol. 1 (2011)
9. Aquilina, J.: Malware Forensics Investigating and Analyzing Malicious Code. Syngress Publishing, Burlington (2008)
10. International Data Corporation (IDC): Worldwide quarterly mobile phone tracker
(2011)
11. Masařík, K.: System for Hardware-Software Co-Design, 1st edn., p. 156. Faculty
of Information Technology BUT, Brno (2008)
12. The LLVM Compiler System, http://llvm.org/
13. Halstead, M.H.: Machine-Independent Computer Programming, pp. 143–150. Spartan Books, Washington (1962)
14. Barbe, P.: The PILER system of computer program translation. Technical report,
Probe Consultants Inc. (1974)
15. Cifuentes, C.: Reverse Compilation Techniques. PhD thesis, School of Computing
Science, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, AU-QLD (1994)
16. Boomerang, http://boomerang.sourceforge.net/
17. Reverse Engineering Compiler, http://www.backerstreet.com/rec/rec.htm
18. Fast Library Identiﬁcation and Recognition Technology, http://www.hex-rays.
com/idapro/flirt.htm
19. emscripten, http://code.google.com/p/emscripten/
20. llvm-js-backend, http://github.com/dmlap/llvm-js-backend
21. Lissom Project, http://www.fit.vutbr.cz/research/groups/lissom/
22. Adve, V., Lattner, C., Brukman, M., Shukla, A., Gaeke, B.: LLVA: A low-level
virtual instruction set architecture. In: Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM/IEEE
International Symposium on Microarchitecture, San Diego, US-CA (2003)
23. Clang, http://clang.llvm.org/
24. LDC: LLVM D Compiler, http://www.dsource.org/projects/ldc
25. Trident Compiler, http://trident.sourceforge.net/
26. Tripp, J.L., Gokhale, M.B., Peterson, K.D.: Trident: From high-level language to
hardware circuitry. Computer 40(3), 28–37 (2007)
27. Just-In-Time Adaptive Decoder Engine (Jade), http://sourceforge.net/apps/
trac/orcc/
28. Faust: Signal Processing Language, http://sourceforge.net/projects/
faudiostream/
29. Babić, D., Hu, A.J.: Structural abstraction of software veriﬁcation conditions.
In: Damm, W., Hermanns, H. (eds.) CAV 2007. LNCS, vol. 4590, pp. 366–378.
Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
30. Babić, D., Hu, A.J.: Calysto: Scalable and precise extended static checking. In:
ICSE 2008: Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Software Engineering, Leipzig, DE, pp. 211–220 (2008)
31. Calysto Extended Static Checker, http://www.domagoj-babic.com/index.php/
ResearchProjects/Calysto
32. Lewycky, N.: Checker: A static program checker. Master’s thesis, Computer Science
Department, Ryerson University, Toronto, CA-ON (2006)
33. unladen-swallow: A Faster Implementation of Python, http://code.google.com/
p/unladen-swallow/

86

L. Ďurﬁna et al.

34. Rubinius, http://rubini.us/
35. The Pure Programming Language, http://code.google.com/p/pure-lang/
36. Adve, V., Lattner, C.: LLVM: A compilation framework for lifelong program analysis & transformation. In: Proceedings of the International Symposium on Code
Generation and Optimization, Palo Alto, US-CA, pp. 75–86 (2004)
37. Cytron, R., Ferrante, J., Rosen, B.K., Wegman, M.N., Zadeck, F.K.: Eﬃciently
computing static single assignment form and the control dependence graph. ACM
Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 13(4), 451–490 (1991)
38. Coogan, K., Debray, S.K., Kaochar, T., Townsend, G.M.: Automatic static unpacking of malware binaries. In: Working Conference on Reverse Engineering, Lille, FR,
pp. 167–176 (2009)
39. Yan, W., Zhang, Z., Ansari, N.: Revealing packed malware. IEEE Security and
Privacy 6(5), 65–69 (2008)
40. Husár, A., Trmač, M., Hranáč, J., Hruška, T., Masařík, K., Kolář, D., Přikryl, Z.:
Automatic C compiler generation from architecture description language ISAC. In:
6th Doctoral Workshop on Mathematical and Engineering Methods in Computer
Science, pp. 84–91. Masaryk University, Brno (2010)
41. Hruška, T., Kolář, D., Lukáš, R., Zámečníková, E.: Two-way coupled ﬁnite automaton and its usage in translators. In: New Aspects of Circuits, Heraklion, GR,
vol. 2008, pp. 445–449 (2008)
42. Python Programming Language, http://www.python.org/
