# Threads and Execution

Chapter 6

Threads and Execution
6.1

Threads

seL4 provides threads to represent an execution context. On MCS conﬁgurations of the kernel,
scheduling contexts are used to manage processor time. Without MCS, processor time is also
represented by the thread abstraction. A thread is represented in seL4 by its thread control block
object (TCB).
With MCS, a scheduling context is represented by a scheduling context object (SCO), and threads
cannot run unless they are bound to, or receive a scheduling context.

6.1.1

Thread control blocks

Each TCB has an associated CSpace (see Chapter 3) and VSpace (see Chapter 7) which may be
shared with other threads. A TCB may also have an IPC buffer (see Chapter 4), which is used to
pass extra arguments during IPC or kernel object invocation that do not ﬁt in the architecturedeﬁned message registers. While it is not compulsory that a thread has an IPC buffer, it will not
be able to perform most kernel invocations, as they require cap transfer. Each thread belongs
to exactly one security domain (see Section 6.3).

6.1.2

Thread Creation

Like other objects, TCBs are created with the seL4_Untyped_Retype() method (see Section 2.4).
A newly created thread is initially inactive. It is conﬁgured by setting its CSpace and VSpace
with the seL4_TCB_SetSpace() or seL4_TCB_Configure() methods and then calling seL4_TCB_WriteRegisters() with an initial stack pointer and instruction pointer. The thread can then be
activated either by setting the resume_target parameter in the seL4_TCB_WriteRegisters() invocation to true or by separately calling the seL4_TCB_Resume() method. Both of these methods
place the thread in a runnable state.
In non-MCS conﬁgurations of the kernel, this will result in the thread immediately being added
to the scheduler. On the MCS kernel, the thread will only begin running if it has a scheduling
context object.
In a SMP conﬁguration of the kernel, the thread will resume on the node corresponding to the
afﬁnity of the thread. For non-MCS conﬁgurations, the default thread afﬁnity is the node the
thread’s TCB object was created on, and seL4_TCB_SetAffinity() can be used to explicitly set
the afﬁnity. On MCS conﬁgurations, the afﬁnity is derived from the scheduling context object
(see Section 6.1.10).
24

6.1. THREADS

6.1.3

25

Thread Deactivation

The seL4_TCB_Suspend() method deactivates a thread. Suspended threads can later be resumed. Their suspended state can be retrieved with the seL4_TCB_ReadRegisters() and seL4_TCB_CopyRegisters() methods. They can also be reconﬁgured and reused or left suspended
indeﬁnitely if not needed. Threads will be automatically suspended when the last capability to
their TCB is deleted.

6.1.4

Thread Feature Flags

Speciﬁc features can be enabled or disabled on a per TCB basis with seL4_TCB_SetFlags().
If access to the Floating Point Unit is not needed, it can be disabled for individual threads to
maximise context switching speed.

6.1.5

Afﬁnity

It is architecture and platform speciﬁc, how an afﬁnity value maps to a speciﬁc node (core, hart)
on a speciﬁc platform. There is no guarantee that afﬁnity values are compatible across different
platforms.

6.1.6

Scheduling

seL4 uses a preemptive, tickless scheduler with 256 priority levels (0 — 255). All threads have a
maximum controlled priority (MCP) and a priority, the latter being the effective priority of the
thread. When a thread modiﬁes another thread’s priority (including itself) it must provide a
thread capability from which to use the MCP from. Threads can only set priorities and MCPs
to be less than or equal to the provided thread’s MCP. The initial task starts with an MCP and
priority as the highest priority in the system (seL4_MaxPrio). Thread priority and MCP can be set
with seL4_TCB_SetSchedParams() and seL4_TCB_SetPriority(), seL4_TCB_SetMCPriority()
methods.
Of threads eligible for scheduling, the highest priority thread in a runnable state is chosen.
Thread priority (structure seL4_PrioProps_t) consists of two values as follows:
Priority the priority a thread will be scheduled with.
Maximum controlled priority (MCP) the highest priority a thread can set itself or another thread
to.

6.1.7

MCS Scheduling

This section only applies to conﬁgurations with MCS enabled, where threads must have a scheduling context object available in order to be admitted to the scheduler.

6.1.8

Scheduling Contexts

Access to CPU execution time is controlled through scheduling context objects. Scheduling
contexts are conﬁgured with a tuple of budget(b) and period (p), both in microseconds, set by
seL4_SchedControl_Configure_Flags() (see Section 6.1.10). The tuple (b, p) forms an upper
bound on the thread’s execution – the kernel will not permit a thread to run for more than b
out of every p microseconds. However, pb does not represent a lower bound on execution, as a
thread must have the highest or equal highest priority of all runnable threads to be guaranteed

26

CHAPTER 6. THREADS AND EXECUTION

to be scheduled at all, and the kernel does not conduct an admission test. As a result the set
of all parameters is not necessarily schedulable. If multiple threads have budgets available
concurrently they are scheduled ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out, and round-robin scheduling is applied once the
budget is expired.
A scheduling context that is eligible to be picked by the scheduler, i.e has budget available, is
referred to as active. Budget charging and replenishment rules are different for round-robin and
sporadic threads. For round-robin threads, the budget is charged each time the current node’s
scheduling context is changed, until it is depleted and then reﬁlled immediately.
Threads where b == p are treated as round robin threads, where b acts as a timeslice. Otherwise the kernel uses sporadic servers to enforce temporal isolation, which enforce the property that pb cannot be exceeded for all possible p. In theory, sporadic servers provide temporal
isolation – preventing threads from exceeding their allocated budget – by using the following
algorithm:
• When a thread starts executing at current time T , record Ts
• When a thread stops executing (blocks or is preempted), schedule a replenishment at
Ts + p for the amount of time consumed (T − Ts ) and subtract that from the current
replenishment being used.
seL4 implements this algorithm by maintaining an ordered list of sporadic replenishments –
refills for brevity – in each scheduling context. Each replenishment contains a tuple of the
time it is eligible for use (rTime) and the amount that replenishment is for (rAmount). While a
thread is executing, it constantly drains the budget from the rAmount at the head of the replenishment list. If the rTime is in the future, the thread bound to that scheduling context is placed
in a queue of threads waiting for more budget.
Round-robin threads are treated that same as sporadic threads except regarding one aspect:
how the budget is charged. Round-robin threads have two reﬁlls only, both of which are always
ready to be used. When a round-robin thread stops executing, budget is moved from the head
to the tail replenishment. Once the head budget is consumed, the thread is removed from the
scheduling queue for its priority and appended at the tail.
Sporadic threads behave differently depending on the amount of replenishments available, which
must be bounded. Developers have two options to conﬁgure the size of the replenishment list:
• The maximum number of reﬁlls in a single scheduling context is determined by the size
of the scheduling context when created by seL4_Untyped_Retype().
• A per scheduling context parameter, extra_refills that limits the number of reﬁlls for
that speciﬁc scheduling context. This value is added to the base value of 2 and is limited
by the size of the scheduling context.
Threads that have short execution times (e.g interrupt handlers) and are not frequently preempted should have less reﬁlls, while longer running threads with long values of b should have
a higher value. Threads bound to a scheduling context with 0 extra reﬁlls will run periodically –
tasks that use their head replenishment, or call yield, will not be scheduled again until the start
of their next period.
Given the number of replenishments is limited, if a node’s SC changes and the outgoing SC
does not have enough space to store the new replenishment, space is created by removing
the current replenishment which can result in preemption if the next replenishment is not yet
available. Scheduling contexts with a higher number of conﬁgured reﬁlls will consume closer to
their whole budget, as they can be preempted and switch threads more often without ﬁlling their
replenishment queue. However, the scheduling overhead will be higher as the replenishment list
is subject to fragmentation.

6.1. THREADS

27

Whenever a thread is executing it consumes the budget from its current scheduling context.
The system call seL4_Yield() can be used to sacriﬁce any remaining budget and block until
the next replenishment is ready to be used.
Threads can be bound to scheduling contexts using seL4_TCB_Configure() or seL4_SchedContext_Bind(), both invocations have the same effect although seL4_TCB_Configure() allows
more thread ﬁelds to be set with only one kernel entry. When a thread is bound to a scheduling
context, if it is in a runnable state and the scheduling context is active, it will be added to the
scheduler.

6.1.9

Passive Threads

Threads can be unbound from a scheduling context with seL4_SchedContext_UnbindObject().
This is distinct from suspending a thread, in that threads that are blocked waiting in an endpoint
or notiﬁcation queue will remain in the queue and can still receive messages and signals. However, the unbound thread will not be schedulable again until it receives a scheduling context.
Threads without scheduling contexts are referred to as passive threads, as they cannot execute
without the action of another thread.

6.1.10

Scheduling Context Creation

Like other objects, scheduling contexts are created from untyped memory using seL4_UntypedRetype(). On creation, scheduling contexts are empty, representing 0% of CPU execution time.
To populate a scheduling context with parameters, one must invoke the appropriate SchedControl capability, which provides access to CPU time management on a single node. A scheduling
control cap for each node is provided to the initial task at run time. Threads run on the node that
their scheduling context is conﬁgured for. Scheduling context parameters can then be set and
updated using seL4_SchedControl_ConfigureFlags(), which allows the budget and period to
be speciﬁed along with a bitwise OR’d set of the following ﬂags.
seL4_SchedContext_Sporadic : constrain the execution time only according to the sporadic
server algorithm rather than to a continuous constant bandwidth.
The kernel does not conduct any schedulability tests, as task admission is left to user-level
policy and can be conducted online or ofﬂine, statically or dynamically or not at all.

6.1.11

Scheduling Context Donation

In addition to explicitly binding and removing scheduling contexts through seL4_SchedContext_Bind() and seL4_SchedContext_UnbindObject(), scheduling contexts can move between
threads over IPC. Scheduling contexts are donated implicitly when the system calls seL4_Call() and seL4_NBSendRecv() are used to communicate with a passive thread. When an active
thread invokes an endpoint with seL4_Call() and rendezvous with a passive thread, the active
thread’s scheduling context is donated to the passive thread. The generated reply cap ensures
that the callee is merely borrowing the scheduling context: when the reply cap is consumed
by a reply message being sent the scheduling context will be returned to the caller. If the reply cap is revoked, and the callee holds the scheduling context, the scheduling context will be
returned to the caller. However, if in a deep call chain and a reply cap in the middle of the call
chain is revoked, such that the callee does not possess the scheduling context, the thread will
be removed from the call chain and the scheduling context will remain where it is. If the receiver does not provide a reply object to track the donation in (i.e uses seL4_Wait() instead of
seL4_Recv() scheduling context donation will not occur but the message will be delivered. The
passive receiver will be set to inactive as it does not have a scheduling context.

28

CHAPTER 6. THREADS AND EXECUTION

Consider an example where thread A calls thread B which calls thread C. If whilst C holds the
scheduling context, B’s reply cap to A is revoked, then the scheduling context will remain with
C. However, a call chain will remain between A and C, such that if C’s reply cap is revoked, or
invoked, the scheduling context will return to A.
seL4_NBSendRecv() can also result in scheduling context donation. If the non-blocking send
phase of the operation results in message delivery to a passive thread, the scheduling context
will be donated to that passive thread and the thread making the system call becomes passive on the receiving endpoint in the receive phase. No reply capability is generated, so there
is no guarantee that the scheduling context will return, which increases book keeping complexity but allows for data-ﬂow like architectures rather than remote-procedure calls. Note that
seL4_Call() does not guarantee the return of a scheduling context: this is an inherently trusted
operation as the server could never reply and return the scheduling context.
Scheduling contexts can also be bound to notiﬁcation objects using seL4_SchedContext_Bind()
and unbound using seL4_SchedContext_UnbindObject(). If a signal is delivered to a notiﬁcation object with a passive thread blocked waiting on it, the passive thread will receive the
scheduling context that is bound to the notiﬁcation object. The scheduling context is returned
when the thread blocks on the notiﬁcation object. This feature allows for passive servers to use
notiﬁcation binding (See Section 5.3). If a scheduling context is bound to both a notiﬁcation object and a thread, the behaviour will be the same as for a passive server: The scheduling context
will be unbound from the thread when it blocks on the bound notiﬁcation object. This is useful
when launching passive servers or handling timeout exceptions.
Scheduling contexts can be unbound from all objects (notiﬁcation objects and TCBs that are
bound or have received a scheduling context through donation) using seL4_SchedContext_Unbind().
Passive threads will run on the CPU node that the scheduling context was conﬁgured with, and
will be migrated on IPC.

6.1.12

Scheduling algorithm

Threads are only eligible for scheduling if they have an active scheduling context. Of threads
eligible for scheduling, the highest priority thread in a runnable state is chosen.
Threads of sufﬁcient maximum controlled priority and with possession of the appropriate scheduling context capability can manipulate the scheduler and implement user-level schedulers using
IPC.
Scheduling contexts provide access to an upper bound on execution CPU time, however when a
thread executes is determined by thread priority. Consequently, access to CPU is a function of
thread MCPs, scheduling contexts and the SchedControl capability. The kernel will enforce that
threads do not exceed the budget in their scheduling context for any given period, and that the
highest priority thread will always run, however it is up to the system designer to make sure the
entire system is schedulable.

6.1.13

Exceptions

Each thread has two associated exception-handler endpoints, a standard exception handler and
a timeout exception handler, where the latter is MCS only. If the thread causes an exception, the
kernel creates an IPC message with the relevant details and sends this to the endpoint. This
thread can then take the appropriate action. Fault IPC messages are described in Section 6.2.
Standard exception-handler endpoints can be set with the seL4_TCB_SetSpace() or seL4_TCB_SetSchedParams() methods while Timeout exception handlers can be set with seL4_TCB_Set-

6.1. THREADS

29

TimeoutEndpoint() (MCS only). With these methods, a capability address for the exception
handler can be associated with a thread. This address is then used to lookup the handler endpoint, and the capability to the endpoint is installed into the threads’ kernel CNode. For threads
without an exception handler, a null capability can be used, however the consequences are different per exception handler type. Before raising an exception the handler capability is validated.
The kernel does not perform another lookup, but checks that the capability is an endpoint with
the correct rights.
The exception endpoint must have Write and either Grant or GrantReply rights. Replying to the
exception message restarts the thread. For certain exception types, the contents of the reply
message may be used to set the values in the registers of the thread being restarted. See Section 6.2 for details.
6.1.13.1

Standard Exceptions

The standard exception handler is used when a fault is triggered by a thread which cannot be
recovered without action by another thread. For example, if a thread raises a fault due to an
unmapped virtual memory page, the thread cannot make any more progress until the page is
mapped. If a thread experiences a fault that would trigger the standard exception handler while it
is set to a null capability, the kernel will pause the thread and it will not run again. This is because
without action by another thread, standard exceptions cannot be recovered from. Consequently
threads without standard exception handlers should be trusted not to fault at all.
Standard exception handlers can be passive, in which case they will run on the scheduling context of the faulting thread.
6.1.13.2

Timeout Exceptions (MCS Only)

Timeout faults are raised when a thread attempts to run but has no available budget, and if that
thread has a valid timeout exception handler capability. The handling of timeout faults is not
compulsory: if a thread does not have a timeout fault handler, a fault will not be raised and the
thread will continue running when it’s budget is replenished. This allows temporally sensitive
threads to handle budget overruns while other threads may ignore them.
Timeout faults are registered per thread, which means that while clients may not have a timeout fault handler, servers may, allowing single-threaded, time-sensitive, passive servers to use a
timeout exception handler to recover from malicious or untrusted clients whose budget expires
while the server is completing the request. Timeout fault handlers can access server reply objects and reply with an error to the client, then reset the server to handle the next client request.
If a reply message is sent to a nested server and a scheduling context without available budget
returned, another timeout fault will be generated if the nested server also has a timeout fault
handler.

6.1.14

Message Layout of the Read-/Write-Registers Methods

The registers of a thread can be read and written with the seL4_TCB_ReadRegisters() and
seL4_TCB_WriteRegisters() methods. For some registers, the kernel will silently mask certain
bits or ranges of bits off, and force them to contain certain values to ensure that they cannot be
maliciously set to values that would compromise the running system, or to respect values that
the architecture speciﬁcations have mandated to be certain values. The register contents are
transferred via the IPC buffer.

30

CHAPTER 6. THREADS AND EXECUTION

6.2

Faults

A thread’s actions may result in a fault. Faults are delivered to the thread’s exception handler
so that it can take the appropriate action. The fault type is speciﬁed in the message label and
is one of:
• seL4_Fault_CapFault
• seL4_Fault_VMFault
• seL4_Fault_UnknownSyscall
• seL4_Fault_UserException
• seL4_Fault_TimeoutFault
• seL4_Fault_NullFault (indicating no fault occurred and this is a normal IPC message)
• seL4_Fault_VGICMaintenence
• seL4_Fault_VPPIEvent
• seL4_Fault_VCPUFault
• seL4_Fault_DebugException
Faults are delivered in such a way as to imitate a Call from the faulting thread. This means
that to send a fault message the fault endpoint must have Write and either Grant or GrantReply permissions. If this is not the case, a double fault happens (generally the thread is simply
suspended).

6.2.1

Capability Faults

Capability faults may occur in two places. Firstly, a capability fault can occur when lookup of a
capability referenced by a seL4_Call() or seL4_Send() system call failed (seL4_NBSend() calls
on invalid capabilities silently fail). In this case, the capability on which the fault occurred may
be the capability being invoked or an extra capability passed in the caps ﬁeld in the IPC buffer.
Secondly, a capability fault can occur when seL4_Recv() or seL4_NBRecv() is called on a capability that does not exist, is not an endpoint or notiﬁcation capability or does not have receive
permissions.
Replying to the fault IPC will restart the faulting thread. The contents of the IPC message are
given in Table 6.1.
Meaning

IPC buffer location

Address at which to restart execution
Capability address
In receive phase (1 if the fault happened during a receive system call, 0 otherwise)
Lookup failure description. As described in
Section 3.4

seL4_CapFault_IP
seL4_CapFault_Addr
seL4_CapFault_InRecvPhase
seL4_CapFault_LookupFailureType

Table 6.1: Contents of an IPC message.

6.2. FAULTS

6.2.2

31

Unknown Syscall

This fault occurs when a thread executes a system call with a syscall number that is unknown
to seL4. The register set of the faulting thread is passed to the thread’s exception handler so
that it may, for example, emulate the system call if a thread is being virtualised.
Replying to the fault IPC allows the thread to be restarted and/or the thread’s register set to be
modiﬁed. If the reply has a label of zero, the thread will be restarted. Additionally, if the message
length is non-zero, the faulting thread’s register set will be updated. In this case, the number of
registers updated is controlled with the length ﬁeld of the message tag.

6.2.3

User Exception

User exceptions are used to deliver architecture-deﬁned exceptions. For example, such an exception could occur if a user thread attempted to divide a number by zero.
Replying to the fault IPC allows the thread to be restarted and/or the thread’s register set to be
modiﬁed. If the reply has a label of zero, the thread will be restarted. Additionally, if the message
length is non-zero, the faulting thread’s register set will be updated. In this case, the number of
registers updated is controlled with the length ﬁeld of the message tag.

6.2.4

Debug Exception: Breakpoints and Watchpoints

Debug exceptions are used to deliver trace and debug related events to threads. Breakpoints,
watchpoints, trace-events and instruction-performance sampling events are examples. These
events are supported for userspace threads when the kernel is conﬁgured to include them (when
CONFIG_HARDWARE_DEBUG_API is set). The hardware debugging extensions API is supported
on the following subset of the platforms that the kernel has been ported to:
• PC99: IA-32 and x86_64
• Sabrelite (i.MX6)
• Jetson TegraK1
• HiSilicon Hikey
• Raspberry Pi 3
• Odroid-X (Exynos4)
• Xilinx zynq7000
Information on the available hardware debugging resources is presented in the form of the following constants:
seL4_NumHWBreakpoints : Deﬁnes the total number of hardware break registers available, of
all types available on the hardware platform. On the Arm Cortex A7 for example, there are
6 exclusive instruction breakpoint registers, and 4 exclusive data watchpoint registers,
for a total of 10 monitor registers. On this platform therefore, seL4_NumHWBreakpoints
is deﬁned as 10. The instruction breakpoint registers will always be assigned the lower
API-IDs, and the data watchpoints will always be assigned following them.
Additionally, seL4_NumExclusiveBreakpoints, seL4_NumExclusiveWatchpoints and seL4_NumDualFunctionMonitors are deﬁned for each target platform to reﬂect the number of
available hardware breakpoints/watchpoints of a certain type.
seL4_NumExclusiveBreakpoints : Deﬁnes the number of hardware registers capable of generating a fault only on instruction execution. Currently this will be set only on Arm platforms.

32

CHAPTER 6. THREADS AND EXECUTION

The API-ID of the ﬁrst exclusive breakpoint is given in seL4_FirstBreakpoint. If there are
no instruction-break exclusive registers, seL4_NumExclusiveBreakpoints will be set to 0
and seL4_FirstBreakpoint will be set to -1.
seL4_NumExclusiveWatchpoints : Deﬁnes the number of hardware registers capable of generating a fault only on data access. Currently this will be set only on Arm platforms. The
API-ID of the ﬁrst exclusive watchpoint is given in seL4_FirstWatchpoint. If there are
no data-break exclusive registers, seL4_NumExclusiveWatchpoints will be set to 0 and
seL4_FirstWatchpoint will be set to -1.
seL4_NumDualFunctionMonitors : Deﬁnes the number of hardware registers capable of generating a fault on either type of access – i.e, the register supports both instruction and data
breaks. Currently this will be set only on x86 platforms. The API-ID of the ﬁrst dual-function
monitor is given in seL4_FirstDualFunctionMonitor. If there are no dual-function break
registers, seL4_NumDualFunctionMonitors will be set to 0 and seL4_FirstDualFunctionMonitor will be set to -1.
Value sent

IPC buffer location

Breakpoint instruction address
Exception reason
Watchpoint data access address
Register API-ID

IPCBuffer[0]
IPCBuffer[1]
IPCBuffer[2]
IPCBuffer[3]

Table 6.2: Debug fault message layout. The register API-ID is not returned in
the fault message from the kernel on single-step faults.

6.2.5

Debug Exception: Single-stepping

The kernel provides support for the use of hardware single-stepping of userspace threads when
conﬁgured to do so (when CONFIG_HARDWARE_DEBUG_API is set). To this end it exposes the
invocation, seL4_TCB_ConfigureSingleStepping.
The caller is expected to select an API-ID that corresponds to an instruction breakpoint, to use
when setting up the single-stepping functionality (i.e, API-ID from 0 to seL4_NumExclusiveBreakpoints - 1). However, not all hardware platforms require an actual hardware breakpoint
register to provide single-stepping functionality. If the caller’s hardware platform requires the
use of a hardware breakpoint register, it will use the breakpoint register given to it in bp_num, and
return true in bp_was_consumed. If the underlying platform does not need a hardware breakpoint to provide single-stepping, seL4 will return false in bp_was_consumed and leave bp_num
unchanged.
If bp_was_consumed is true, the caller should not attempt to re-conﬁgure bp_num for Breakpoint
or Watchpoint usage until the caller has disabled single-stepping and released that register, via
a subsequent call to seL4_TCB_ConfigureSingleStepping, or a fault-reply with n_instr being
0. Setting num_instructions to 0 disables single stepping.
On architectures that require an actual hardware registers to be conﬁgured for single-stepping
functionality, seL4 will restrict the number of registers that can be conﬁgured as single-steppers,
to one at any given time. The register that is currently conﬁgured (if any) for single-stepping will
be the implicit bp_num argument in a single-step debug fault reply.
The kernel’s single-stepping, also supports executing a certain number of instructions before
delivering the single-step fault message. Num_instructions should be set to 1 when single-

6.2. FAULTS

33

stepping, or any non-zero integer value to execute that many instructions before resuming singlestepping. This execution-count can also be set in the fault-reply to a single-step debug fault.
Value sent

Register set by reply

IPC buffer location

Breakpoint instruction
address
Exception reason

num_instructions to execute
—

IPCBuffer[0]
IPCBuffer[1]

Table 6.3: Single-step fault message layout.

6.2.6

Timeout Fault (MCS only)

Timeout faults are raised when a thread consumes all of its budget and has a timeout fault
handler that is not a null capability. They allow a timeout exception handler to take some action
to restore the thread, and deliver a message containing the scheduling context data word, as
well as the amount of time consumed since the last timeout fault occurred on this scheduling
context, or since seL4_SchedContext_YieldTo() or seL4_SchedContext_Consumed() was last
called. Timeout exception handlers can reply to a temporal fault with the registers set in the
same format as outlined in Section 6.1.14.
Meaning

IPC buffer location

Data word from the scheduling context object
that the thread was running on when the fault
occurred.
Upper 32-bits of microseconds consumed
since last reset
Lower 32-bits of microseconds consumed
since last reset

seL4_TimeoutFault_Data

seL4_TimeoutFault_Consumed
seL4_TimeoutFault_Consumed_LowBits

Table 6.4: Timeout fault outcome on 32-bit architectures.

6.2.7

VM Fault

The thread caused a page fault. Replying to the fault IPC will restart the thread. The contents
of the IPC message are given below.
Meaning

IPC buffer location

Program counter to restart execution at.
Address that caused the fault.
Instruction fault (1 if the fault was caused by
an instruction fetch).
Fault status register (FSR). Contains information about the cause of the fault. Architecture
dependent.

seL4_VMFault_IP
seL4_VMFault_Addr
seL4_VMFault_PrefetchFault
seL4_VMFault_FSR

Table 6.5: VM Fault outcome on all architectures.

34

6.2.8

CHAPTER 6. THREADS AND EXECUTION

Arm Virtualisation Faults

Arm with hypervisor support enabled can generate additional exceptions, see Section 6.4.1.
Replying to the fault IPC will restart the VCPU thread. The contents of the IPC messages are
given below.
Meaning

IPC buffer location

List Register index, -1 when unknown.

seL4_VGICMaintenance_IDX

Table 6.6: seL4_Fault_VGICMaintenance.

Meaning

IPC buffer location

Virtual PPI IRQ number.

seL4_VPPIEvent_IRQ
Table 6.7: seL4_Fault_VPPIEvent.

Meaning

IPC buffer location

Register value of HSR for aarch32 and ESR
for aarch64.

seL4_VCPUFault_HSR

Table 6.8: seL4_Fault_VCPUFault.

6.3

Domains

Domains are used to isolate independent subsystems, so as to limit information ﬂow between
them. The kernel switches between domains according to a dynamically conﬁgurable, timetriggered schedule.
Domain support is enabled by setting KernelNumDomains to a value greater than the default of
one at compile time. The maximum number of domain schedule entries is ﬁxed and equal to
KernelNumDomainSchedules.
A thread belongs to exactly one domain, and will only run when that domain is active. The seL4_DomainSet_Set() method changes the domain of a thread. The caller must possess a Domain
cap and the thread’s TCB cap. The initial thread starts with a Domain cap (see Section 9.2).
The domain schedule is conﬁgured with seL4_DomainSet_ScheduleConfigure() and seL4_DomainSet_ScheduleSetStart().

6.4

Virtualisation

Hardware execution virtualisation is supported on speciﬁc arm and x86 platforms. The interface
is exposed through a series of kernel objects, invocations and syscalls that allow the user to take
advantage of hardware virtualisation features.
Hardware virtualisation allows for a thread to perform instructions and operations as if it were
running at a higher privilege level. As higher privilege levels typically have access to additional
machine registers and other pieces of state a VCPU object is introduced to act as storage for this
state. For simplicity we refer to this virtualised higher privileged level as ’guest mode’. VCPUs
are bound in a one-to-one relationship with a TCB in order to provide a thread with this ability to
run in higher privilege mode. See the section on Arm or x86 for more precise details.

6.4. VIRTUALISATION

35

VCPU objects also have additional, architecture speciﬁc, invocations for manipulating the additional state or other virtualisation controls provided by the hardware. Binding of a VCPU to a TCB
is done by an invocation on the VCPU only, and not the TCB.

The provided objects and invocations are, generally speaking, the thinnest possible shim over
the underlying hardware primitives and operations. As a result an in depth familiarity with the
underlying architecture speciﬁc hardware mechanisms is required to use these objects, and
such familiarity is therefore assumed in description.

6.4.1

Arm

When a TCB has a bound VCPU it will have access to (virtualised) system registers, cache and
TLB maintenance instructions and be able to handle some exceptions itself. The virtual GIC will
be enabled, allowing virtual interrupt delivery.
The virtualised system registers can be modiﬁed with seL4_ARM_VCPU_WriteRegs(). By conﬁguring the mode portion of the SPSR_EL1 or cpsr register, for ARMv8 and ARMv7 respectively, the
thread can run in guest kernel mode.
Interrupts are virtualised through the virtual GIC and need to be forwarded with seL4_ARM_VCPU_InjectIRQ(), which provides a way to manage Virtual GIC List Registers, a queue of pending IRQs to be delivered to the guest. To help with managing the list, the Virtual GIC will send GIC
maintenance interrupts, which are delivered as VGIC Maintenance Faults. List Register state is
saved and restored on VCPU context switch, but there is currently no way to do that manually.
Shared Peripheral Interrupts (SPIs) can be handled like any normal IRQs and forwarded as required.
Virtual Private Peripheral Interrupts (PPI) are trapped and delivered as VPPI Event faults and
need to be acknowledged with seL4_ARM_VCPU_AckVPPI().
In addition to the above and standard exceptions, others are delivered as VCPU Faults.
Stage 2 translation is enabled when the kernel supports virtualisation. VCPUs will have control
over stage 1 translations and stage 2 translations will be used for the rest of the system. As
stage 2 translations use VMIDs instead of ASIDs to distinguish address spaces, VMIDs will be
used to implement seL4 ASIDs. Practically this means that there is an ASID limit of 256 for all
threads, until 16-bit VMIDs are supported. If more ASIDs are needed, ASIDs will be dynamically
re-used, with the associated cache ﬂushing and slowdowns.

6.4.2

x86

A TCB with a bound VCPU has two execution modes; one is the original thread just as if there
was no bound VCPU, and the other is the guest mode execution using the VCPU. Switching from
regular execution mode into the guest execution mode is done by using the seL4_VMEnter()
syscall. Executing this syscall causes the thread, whenever it is scheduled thereafter, to execute using the higher privileged mode controlled by the VCPU. Should the guest execution mode
generate any kind of fault, or if a message arrives on the TCBs bound notiﬁcation, the TCB will
be switched back to regular mode and the seL4_VMEnter() syscall will return with a message
indicating the reason for return.
VCPU state and execution is controlled through the seL4_VCPU_ReadVMCS() and seL4_VCPU_-

WriteVMCS() invocations. These are very thin wrappers around the hardware vmread and vmwrite
instructions and the kernel merely does enough validation on the parameters to ensure the VCPU
is not conﬁgured to run in such a way as to violate any kernel properties. For example, it is not

36

CHAPTER 6. THREADS AND EXECUTION

possible to disable the use of External Interrupt Exiting, as this would prevent the kernel from
receiving timer interrupts and allow the thread to monopolise CPU time.
Memory access of the guest execution mode is controlled by requiring the use of Extended
Page Tables (EPT). A series of EPT related paging structure objects (EPTPML4, EPTPDPT, EPTPD,
EPTPT) exist and are manipulated in exactly the same manner as the objects for the regular
virtual address space. Once constructed a TCB can be given an EPTPML4 as an EPT root with
seL4_TCB_SetEPTRoot(), which serves as the VSpace root when executing in guest mode, with
the VSpace root set with seL4_TCB_SetSpace() or seL4_TCB_Configure() continuing to provide
translation when the TCB is executing in its normal mode.
Direct access to I/O ports can be given to the privileged execution mode through the seL4_X86_VCPU_EnableIOPort() invocation and allows the provided I/O port capability to be linked to the
VCPU, and a subset of its I/O port range to be made accessible to the VCPU. Linking means that
an I/O port capability can only be used in a single seL4_X86_VCPU_EnableIOPort() invocation
and a second invocation will undo the previous one. The link also means that if the I/O port
capability is deleted for any reason the access will be correspondingly removed from the VCPU.

