# Paper: Mudge 2001

COVER FEATURE

Power: A First-Class
Architectural Design
Constraint
Power is a design constraint not only for portable computers and mobile
communication devices but also for high-end systems, and the design
process should not subordinate it to performance.

Trevor
Mudge
University of
Michigan

52

imiting power consumption presents a critical
issue in computing, particularly in portable
and mobile platforms such as laptop computers and cell phones. Limiting power in
other computer settings—such as server
farms—warehouse-sized buildings filled with Internet
service providers’ servers—is also important. A recent
analysis by Deo Singh and Vivek Tawair of Intel
showed that a 25,000-square-foot server farm with
approximately 8,000 servers consumes 2 megawatts
and that power consumption either directly or indirectly accounts for 25 percent of the cost for managing such a facility (see the proceedings of the Cool
Chips Tutorial at http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~tnm/
cool.pdf).
Internet use is growing exponentially, requiring
server farms to match the accompanying demand for
power. A Financial Times article in Fall 2000 noted
that information technology (IT) consumes about 8
percent of power in the US. If this component continues to grow exponentially without check, IT will soon
require more power than all other uses combined.
Table 1 presents information to better understand
current processor power consumption trends (see the
Berkeley CPU information center at http://bwrc.eecs.
berkeley.edu/CIC/summary/local/summary.pdf). The
rapid growth in power consumption is obvious.
Equally alarming is the growth in the chip die’s power
density, which increases linearly. Alpha model 21364’s
power density has reached approximately 30 watts
per square centimeter, which is three times that of a
typical hot plate. This growth occurred despite process
and circuit improvements. Trading high power for

L

high performance cannot continue, and containing the
growth in power requires adding architectural improvements to process and circuit improvements. The
only exceptions will be one-of-a-kind supercomputers
built for special tasks like weather modeling.

POWER EQUATIONS FOR CMOS LOGIC
Three equations provide a model of the power-performance trade-offs for complementary metal-oxide
semiconductor logic circuits. The CMOS literature on
low power frequently uses these equations. They are
simplifications that capture the essentials for logic
designers, architects, and systems builders. Here I
focus on CMOS because it will likely remain the dominant technology for the next five to seven years.
Besides applying directly to processor logic and caches,
the equations have relevance for some aspects of
DRAM chips. The first equation defines power consumption:
P = ACV2 f + τAVIshort f + VIleak

(1)

This equation has three components. The first component measures the dynamic power consumption
caused by the charging and discharging of the capacitive load on each gate’s output. It is proportional to
the frequency of the system’s operation, f, the activity
of the gates in the system, A (some gates do not switch
every clock), the total capacitance seen by the gate’s
outputs, C, and the square of the supply voltage, V.
The second component captures the power expended
as a result of the short-circuit current, Ishort, which
momentarily, τ, flows between the supply voltage and

Computer

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on January 15, 2009 at 18:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

0018-9162/01/$10.00 © 2001 IEEE

Table 1. Compaq Alpha power trends.
Alpha model

Peak power (W)

Frequency (MHz)

Die size (mm2)

Supply voltage

21064
21164
21264
21364

30
50
72
100

200
300
667
1,000

234
299
302
350

3.3
3.3
2.0
1.5

ground when a CMOS logic gate’s output switches.
The third component measures the power lost from
the leakage current regardless of the gate’s state.
In today’s circuits, the first term dominates, which
immediately suggests that reducing the supply voltage, V, is the most effective way to reduce power consumption. The quadratic dependence on V means that
the savings can be significant: Halving the voltage
reduces the power consumption to one-fourth its original value. Unfortunately, this savings comes at the
expense of performance, or, more accurately, maximum-operating frequency, as the next equation
shows:
fmax ∝ (V − Vthreshold)2 / V

(2)

The maximum frequency of operation is roughly linear in V. Reducing it limits the circuit to a lower frequency. Reducing the power to one-fourth its original
value only halves the maximum frequency. Equations
1 and 2 have an important corollary: Parallel processing, which involves splitting a computation in two
and running it as two parallel independent tasks, has
the potential to cut the power in half without slowing
the computation.
Reducing the voltage, V, in Equation 2 requires a
reduction in Vthreshold. This reduction must occur so
that low-voltage logic circuits can properly operate.
Unfortunately, reducing Vthreshold increases the leakage current, as Equation 3 shows:
Ileak ∝ exp ( − qVthreshold / (kT))

(3)

Thus, this is a limited option for countering the effect
of reducing V, because it makes the leakage term in
the first equation appreciable.
We can summarize the three essential points from
this model as follows:
• Reducing voltage has a significant effect on
power consumption: P ∝ V2.
• Reducing activity—most simply by turning off
the computer’s unused parts—also affects power
consumption.
• Parallel processing can reduce power consumption if done efficiently—ideally by applying it to
independent tasks.

Although reducing the supply voltage can decrease
power consumption and result in considerable savings with only a modest impact on performance, the
accompanying increase in leakage current limits how
far this technique can be taken.

Other figures of merit related to power
Equation 1 represents an average value that gives a
somewhat one-dimensional view. In many cases, at
least two other power quantities are important:
• Peak power. Typically, systems have an upper
limit that, if exceeded, leads to some damage.
• Dynamic power. Sharp changes in power consumption can result in ground bounce or di/dt
noise that upsets logic voltage levels, causing
erroneous circuit behavior.
Often, we use the term power to refer to quantities
that are not really power. For example, in portable
devices, the amount of energy needed to perform a
computation may be a more useful measure because
a battery stores a fixed amount of energy, not power.
To say that one processor is lower power than another
may be misleading. If it takes longer to perform a
given computation, the total energy expended may be
the same—the battery will run down by the same
amount in both cases. This comparison leads to the
idea of an energy/operation ratio. A processor with a
low energy/operation ratio is sometimes incorrectly
referred to as a low-power processor. Engineers frequently use the inverse of this measure, MIPS/W or
million instructions per second per watt, as a figure
of merit for processors intended for mobile applications.
Reducing the power consumption by half decreases
the frequency of operation by much less because of the
quadratic term in Equation 1. Ricardo Gonzalez and
Mark Horowitz1 proposed a third figure of merit:
energy × delay. This measure takes into account that,
in systems in which power is modeled by Equation 1,
we can trade a decrease in speed for higher MIPS/W.
Most of the literature uses MIPS/W or simply watts, so
we will continue this convention, recognizing that
occasionally it can suggest misleading trade-offs where
“quadratic” devices like CMOS are concerned. Finally,
if the computation under consideration must finish by
April 2001

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on January 15, 2009 at 18:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

53

Computer
architecture
research has
pursued two
themes: exploiting
parallelism and
using speculation.

a deadline, slowing the operation may not be an
option. In these cases, a measure that combines
total energy with a deadline is more appropriate.

REDUCING POWER CONSUMPTION
Systems designers have developed several
techniques to save power at the logic, architecture, and operating systems levels.

Logic

A number of techniques can save power at
the logic level. The clock tree can consume 30
percent of a processor’s power; the early Alpha
model 21064 exceeded even this figure. Therefore, it
is not surprising that engineers have developed several power-saving techniques at this level.
Clock gating. This technique is widely used to turn off
clock tree branches to latches or flip-flops whenever
they are not used. Until recently, developers considered gated clocks to be a poor design practice because
the clock tree gates can exacerbate clock skew.
However, more accurate timing analyzers and more
flexible design tools have made it possible for developers to produce reliable designs with gated clocks.
Half-frequency and half-swing clocks. A half-frequency
clock uses both edges of the clock to synchronize
events. The clock then runs at half the frequency of a
conventional clock. The drawbacks are that the
latches are more complex and occupy more area, and
that the clock’s requirements are more stringent.
The half-swing clock swings only half of V. It
increases the latch design’s requirements and is difficult to use in systems with low V. However, lowering clock swing usually produces greater gains than
clocking on both edges.
Asynchronous logic. Asynchronous logic proponents
have pointed out that because their systems do not
have a clock, they save the considerable power that a
clock tree requires. However, asynchronous logic
design suffers from the drawback of needing to generate completion signals. This requirement means that
additional logic must be used at each register transfer—in some cases, a double-rail implementation,
which can increase the amount of logic and wiring.
Other drawbacks include testing difficulty and an
absence of design tools.
Several projects have attempted to demonstrate the
power savings possible with asynchronous systems. The
Amulet, an asynchronous implementation of the ARM
instruction-set architecture, is one of the most successful projects (see the Power-Driven Microarchitecture
Workshop at http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~grunwald/
LowPowerWorkshop/agenda.html). Drawing definitive conclusions from such projects is difficult because
it requires comparing designs that use the same technologies. Further, the asynchronous designer works at
54

a disadvantage because today’s design tools are geared
for synchronous design. Ultimately, asynchronous
design does not offer sufficient advantages to merit a
wholesale switch from synchronous designs.
However, asynchronous techniques can play an
important role in globally asynchronous, locally synchronous systems.2 Such systems reduce clock power
and help with the growing problem of clock skew
across a large chip, while allowing the use of conventional design techniques for most of the chip.

Architecture
Computer architecture research, typified by the
work presented at the International Symposia on
Computer Architecture and the International Symposia on Microarchitecture, focuses on high performance. This research pursues two important themes:
exploiting parallelism and using speculation. Parallelism can reduce power, whereas speculation can permit computations to proceed beyond dependent
instructions that may not have completed. If the speculation is wrong, executing useless instructions can
waste energy. But this is not necessarily so. Branch prediction is perhaps the best-known example of speculation. If the predictors are accurate, it can increase
the MIPS/W figure.3
New architectural ideas can contribute most profitably to reducing the dynamic power consumption
term, specifically the activity factor, A, in Equation 1.
Memory systems. The memory system consumes a
significant amount of power. In systems with unsophisticated processors, cache memory can dominate
the chip area. Memory systems have two sources of
power loss. First, the frequency of memory access
causes dynamic power loss, as the first term in
Equation 1 models. Second, leakage current contributes to power loss, as the third term in Equation
1 models.
Organizing memory so that an access activates only
parts of it can help to limit dynamic memory power
loss. Placing a small cache in front of the L1 cache creates a filter cache that intercepts signals intended for
the main cache.4 Even if the filter cache is hit only 50
percent of the time, the power saved is half the difference between activating the main cache and the filter
cache, which can be significant.
Memory banking, currently used in some low-power
designs, splits the memory into banks and activates only
the bank presently in use. Because it relies on the reference pattern having a lot of spatial locality, memory banking is more suitable for instruction-cache organization.
The architect or systems designer can do little to limit
leakage except shut down the memory. This is only
practical if the memory will remain unused for a long
time because memory will lose state and, therefore,
requires disk backup. The operating system usually

Computer

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on January 15, 2009 at 18:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Microarchitecture Uses a Low-Power Core
Mike Morrow, Intel
The Intel XScale Core (http://developer.
intel.com/design/intelxscale/) uses advanced circuit, process, and microarchitectural techniques to facilitate low-power
operation.
A processor’s active power dissipation
is proportional to the frequency and
square of the voltage. In the V2 term of the
active power equation, voltage to the core
is scalable from 0.75 V to 1.65 V. The core
also incorporates back-bias circuitry to
minimize leakage current during inactivity, and the core’s static design—the clock
can be reduced to dc—contributes linearly
to active power savings.
Intel’s 80200 (http://developer.intel.
com/design/iio/manuals/273411.htm)—
the first processor to incorporate Intel
XScale microarchitecture—offers additional power-saving opportunities by
enabling rapid frequency and no-stall voltage changes and by providing a memory
bus that runs asynchronously.
Reaching a lower-power state may not
be worthwhile if it requires a long time.

Because the 80200 uses a PLL with a fast
resynch time, it can switch frequencies or
power modes in less than 20 µs. This
enables system techniques in which the
processor, while providing good interactive
response, is usually asleep or operating at
low frequency. For example, the processor
can be in “drowsy” mode (core dissipation
less than 1 mW) until an event awakens it;
then it processes the event at several hundred megahertz and drops back into
drowsy mode. Even the fastest touch-typist would not detect any performance
degradation.
For voltage scaling to be effective, the
processor must not spend excessive time
waiting for the voltage to change. A shorter
processor idle period translates into accomplishing more work. The 80200’s core can
run through a voltage change without the
processor idling during the transition. Also,
the voltage can follow a natural discharge
curve rather than being stepped or precipitously dropped for the core, which avoids
wastefully forcing the voltage to a lower
level and perhaps enables the use of a simpler power supply.

handles this type of shutdown, which we often refer to
as “sleep mode.”
Buses. Buses are a significant source of power loss,
especially interchip buses, which are often very wide.
The standard PC memory bus includes 64 data lines
and 32 address lines, and each line requires substantial drivers. A chip can expend 15 percent to 20 percent of its power on these interchip drivers.
One approach to limiting this swing is to encode
the address lines into a Gray code because address
changes, particularly from cache refills, are often
sequential, and counting in Gray code switches the
least number of signals.5
Adapting other ideas to this problem is straightforward. Transmitting the difference between successive
address values achieves a result similar to the Gray
code. Compressing the information in address lines
further reduces them.6 These techniques are best suited
to interchip signaling because designers can integrate
the encoding into the bus controllers.
Code compression results in significant instruction-memory savings if the system stores the program in compressed form and decompresses it on
the fly, typically on a cache miss.7 Reducing memory

The 80200’s bus interface runs asynchronously—the core can run at a frequency unrelated to the bus clock. In fact,
two clock signals are input to the device,
allowing system software to change core
frequency as needed without concern for
bus operation. If the bus frequency is a
fixed fraction of the core frequency, as is
often the case, a change in core frequency
might necessitate waiting for the bus to
clear.
The asynchronous relationship of the
bus and core clocks also enables static or
dynamic optimization of the bus frequency. A RAM region with a 25-ns access
time requires three 100-MHz clock cycles
per access, or one 33-MHz clock cycle. A
system with predictable accesses to this
memory might choose to drop the bus frequency and realize a linear improvement
in power without incurring any loss in
throughput.

Mike Morrow is a processor architect at
Intel. Contact him at michael.morrow@
intel.com.

size translates to power savings. It also reduces code
overlays—a technique still used in many digitalsignal processing (DSP) systems—which are another
source of power loss.
Parallel processing and pipelining. A corollary of our
power model is that parallel processing can be an
important technique for reducing power consumption in CMOS systems. Pipelining does not share
this advantage because it achieves concurrency by
increasing the clock frequency, which limits the
ability to scale the voltage, as Equation 2 demonstrates. This is an interesting reversal because
pipelining is simpler than parallel processing; therefore, pipelining is traditionally the first choice to
speed up execution. In practice, the trade-off
between pipelining and parallelism is not so distinct: Replicating function units rather than pipelining them has the negative effect of increasing area
and wiring, which in turn can increase power consumption.
The degree to which designers can parallelize computations varies widely. Although some computations
are “embarrassingly parallel,” they are usually characterized by identical operations on array data structures.
April 2001

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on January 15, 2009 at 18:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

55

However, for general-purpose computations typified by the System Performance Evaluation Cooperative benchmark suite, designers have made
little progress in discovering parallelism. Successful general-purpose microprocessors rarely issue
more than three or four instructions at once.
Increasing instruction-level parallelism is unlikely
to offset the loss caused by inefficient parallel execution. Future desktop architectures, however,
will likely have shorter pipes.
In contrast, common signal-processing algorithms often possess a significant degree of parallelism. DSP chip architecture, which is notably
different from desktop or workstation architectures, reflects this difference. DSPs typically run
at lower frequencies and exploit a higher degree of parallelism. Despite their lower clock rates, DSPs can
achieve high MIPS ratings because of their parallelism
and direct support for a multiply-accumulate operation, which occurs with considerable frequency in signal-processing algorithms. An example is the Analog
Device 21160 SHARC DSP, which uses only 2 watts to
achieve 600 Mflops on some DSP kernels.

Despite their lower
clock rates, DSPs
can achieve high
MIPS ratings
because of their
parallelism and
direct support for a
multiply-accumulate
operation.

Operating system
The quadratic voltage term in Equation 1 shows
that reducing voltage offers a significant power-savings benefit. It is not necessary for a processor to run
constantly at maximum frequency to accomplish its
work. If we know a computation’s deadline, we can
adjust the processor’s frequency and reduce the supply voltage. For example, a simple MPEG decode runs
at a fixed rate determined by the screen refresh, usually once every 1/30th of a second. Therefore, we can
adjust the processor to run so that it does not finish its
work ahead of schedule and waste power.
There are two approaches to scaling voltage using
the operating system. The first approach provides an
interface that allows the operating system to directly
set the voltage—often simply by writing a register. The
application uses these operating system functions to
schedule its voltage needs.8 The second approach uses
a similar interface, but the operating system automatically detects when to scale back the voltage during the application. An advantage of automatic
detection is that applications do not require modifications to perform voltage scheduling. A disadvantage is that detecting the best timing for scaling back
voltage is difficult, but important steps toward solving
this problem are under way (see Kris Flautner’s thesis
at http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~tnm/theses/krisf.pdf).
Both approaches offer effective power-saving methods that work directly on the quadratic term in
Equation 1. Voltage scaling has already received support in Intel’s next-generation StrongARM microprocessor, the XScale.
56

WHAT CAN WE DO WITH A HIGH MIPS/W DEVICE?
The obvious applications for processors with a high
MIPS/W lie in mobile computing. Futuristic third-generation mobile phones will require remarkable processing capabilities. These 3G phones will communicate over a packet-switched wireless link at up to 2
Mbits/sec. The link will support both voice and data
and will be connected all the time. Vendors plan to
support MPEG4 video transmission and other dataintensive applications.
In contrast, manufacturers build today’s cell
phones around two processors: a general-purpose
computer and a DSP engine. Both processors require
low power, the lower the better. A common solution
uses an ARM processor for the general-purpose
machine and a Texas Instruments DSP chip. For 3G
systems, both processors will need to be more powerful without sacrificing battery life. Given the power
constraints, the processing requirements exceed current technology.
One of the next major challenges for computer
architects is designing systems in which power is a firstclass design constraint. Considering the hundreds of
millions of cell phones in use today and the projected
sales of billions more, mobile phones will surpass the
desktop as the defining application environment for
computing, further underlining the need to consider
power early in the design process.

An inelegant solution
The cell phone’s two-processor configuration arose
from the need for a low-power system that performs
significant amounts of signal processing and possesses
general-purpose functionality for low-resolution display support, simple database functions, and protocols for cell-to-phone communications. From an
architectural perspective, this solution lacks elegance.
A “convergent” architecture that handles both signalprocessing and general-purpose computing requirements offers a better alternative. However, it may be
easier to manage the power to separate components so
that users can easily turn off the power to either one.
More research on such trade-offs is necessary.

Applications where power is key
While the cell phone and its derivatives will become
the leading users of power-efficient systems, this is by
no means the only application where power is key. For
example, a server farm has a workload of independent programs. Thus, it uses parallelism without the
inefficiencies that intraprogram communication and
synchronization often introduces—making multiprocessors an attractive solution.
A typical front-end server that handles mail, Web
pages, and news has an Intel-compatible processor, 32
Mbytes of memory, and an 8-Gbyte disk, and requires

Computer

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on January 15, 2009 at 18:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

about 30 watts of power. Assume that the processor
is an AMD Mobile K6, with a total of 64 Kbytes of
cache running at 400 MHz, and is rated at 12 watts.
Compare this processor with the XScale, which has
the same total cache size but consumes only 450 milliwatts at 600 MHz. The processor can actually run
from about 1 GHz to less than 100 MHz; at 150
MHz, it consumes 40 milliwatts. Replacing the K6
with 24 XScales does not increase power consumption. To process as many jobs as the 24-headed multiprocessor, the K6 will require an architectural
efficiency about 24 times that of an XScale.
Some may disagree with this analysis. For example, it does not account for the more complex processor-memory interconnect that the multiprocessor
requires, and it doesn’t consider the fact that the individual jobs can have an unacceptable response time.
However, the analysis shows that if power is the chief
design constraint, a low-power, nontrivial processor
like the XScale can introduce a new perspective into
computer architecture. If we replaced the K6 with a
100-watt Compaq 21364, it would need to be 200
times as efficient as the XScale.

FUTURE CHALLENGES
It is remarkable how quickly some microprocessor
manufacturers have already deployed some ideas for
lowering power consumption: The XScale provides
but one example.
However, if power consumption is to continue to
be reduced, an important problem requires attention
in the near term, that is, the leakage current. As
devices shrink to submicron dimensions, the supply
voltage must be reduced to avoid damaging electric
fields. This development, in turn, requires a reduced
threshold voltage. In Equation 3, leakage current
increased exponentially with a decrease in Vthreshold. In
fact, a 10 percent to 15 percent reduction can cause
a two-fold increase in Ileak. In increasingly smaller
devices, leakage will become the dominant source of
power consumption. Further, leakage occurs as long
as power flows through the circuit. This constant current can produce an increase in the chip temperature,
which in turn causes an increase in the thermal voltage, leading to a further increase in leakage current.
In some cases, this vicious circle results in unconstrained thermal runaway.
Because they are keenly aware of this pitfall, circuit
designers have proposed several techniques to handle it.
The present popular solution employs two types of
field-effect transistors: low Vthreshold devices for the highspeed paths and high Vthreshold devices for paths that are
not critical, as addressed in Equation 2. Such voltage
clustering 9 makes additional demands on computeraided design tools. Future circuits must operate properly with several supply-voltage levels and thresholds.

At the architectural level, some techniques for controlling dynamic power will also help to reduce leakage effects. In many cases, components that were
shielded from unnecessary activity, such as static random-access memory, are also candidates for implementation with lower-power-threshold devices and
can tolerate the performance hit.

lthough the contributions of process engineers
and circuit designers to power-aware designs
are crucial, architects and systems-level designers also need to contribute a twofold improvement
in power consumption per design generation.
Elevating power to a first-class constraint must be
a priority early in the design stage when designers
make architectural trade-offs as they perform cycleaccurate simulation. This presents a problem because
designers can make accurate power determination
only after they perform chip layout. However, designers can usually accept approximate values early in the
design flow, provided they accurately reflect trends.
For example, if the architecture changes, the approximate power figure should reflect a change in power
in the correct direction.
Several research efforts are under way to insert
power estimators into cycle-level simulators. Event
counters obtain frequency measures for architectural
components such as adders, caches, decoders, and
buses to estimate power. Researchers at Intel,10
Princeton,11 and Penn State University12 have developed power estimators based on the SimpleScalar simulator widely used in academe (see http://www.
simplescalar.org). A fourth effort, PowerAnalyzer,
which I am developing with Todd Austin and Dirk
Grunwald, is expanding on previous work to provide
estimates for multiple thresholds, di/dt noise, and peak
power (see http://www.eecs. umich.edu/~tnm/power/
power.html). ✸

A

Acknowledgment
This work was supported, in part, by contract
F33615-00-C-1678 from the Power Aware Computing
and Communications program at DARPA.

References
1. R. Gonzalez and M. Horowitz, “Energy Dissipation in
General-Purpose Microprocessors,” IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, IEEE Press, Piscataway, N.J., 1996, pp. 12771284.
April 2001

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on January 15, 2009 at 18:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

57

2. S. Moore et al., “Self-Calibrating Clocks for Globally
Asynchronous Locally Synchronous Systems,” Proc.
Int’l Conf. Computer Design, IEEE CS Press, Los Alamitos, Calif., 2000, pp. 73-78.
3. S. Manne, A. Klauser, and D. Grunwald, “Pipeline Gating: Speculation Control for Energy Reduction,” Proc.
25th Int’l Symp. Computer Architecture, IEEE Press, Piscataway, N.J., 1998, pp. 132-141.
4. M. Johnson, M. Gupta, and W. Mangione-Smith, “Filtering Memory References to Increase Energy Efficiency,” IEEE Trans. Computers, IEEE CS Press, Los
Alamitos, Calif., 2000, pp. 1-15.
5. L. Benini et al., “Address Bus Encoding Techniques for
System-Level Power Optimization,” Proc. 1998 Design
Automation and Test in Europe (DATE 98), IEEE CS
Press, Los Alamitos, Calif., 1998, pp. 861-866.
6. A. Park, M. Farrens, and G. Tyson, “Modifying VM
Hardware to Reduce Address Pin Requirements,” Proc.
25th Int’l Symp. Computer Architecture, IEEE Press, Piscataway, N.J., 1992, pp. 1-4.
7. C. Lefurgy, E. Piccininni, and T. Mudge, “Reducing
Code Size with Run-Time Decompression,” Proc. 6th
Int’l Symp. High-Performance Computer Architecture,
IEEE CS Press, Los Alamitos, Calif., 2000, pp. 218-227.
8. T. Pering, T. Burd, and R. Brodersen, “Voltage Scheduling in the lpARM Microprocessor System,” Proc. 2000
Int’l Symp. Low Power Electronics and Design, IEEE
CS Press, Los Alamitos, Calif., 2000, pp. 96-101.

SET
INDUSTRY
STANDARDS

9. K. Usami and M. Horowitz, “Clustered Voltage Scaling
Technique for Low-Power Design,” Int’l Symp. LowPower Design, ACM Press, New York, 1995, pp. 3-8.
10. G. Cai and C. Lim, “Architectural Level Power/Performance Optimization and Dynamic Power Estimation,”
Cool Chips Tutorial: An Industrial Perspective on LowPower Processor Design, T. Mudge, S. Manne, and D.
Grunwald, eds., IEEE CS Press, Los Alamitos, Calif., 1999,
pp. 90-113; http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~tnm/cool.html.
11. D. Brooks, V. Tiwari, and M. Martonosi, “Wattch: A
Framework for Architectural-Level Power Analysis and
Optimizations,” Proc. 27th Int’l Symp. Computer Architecture, IEEE Press, Piscataway, N.J., 2000, pp. 83-94.
12. N. Vijaykrishnan et al., “Energy-Driven Integrated
Hardware-Software Optimizations Using SimplePower,”
Proc. 27th Int’l Symp. Computer Architecture, IEEE
Press, Piscataway, N.J., 2000, pp. 95-106.

Trevor Mudge is a professor in the Department of
Computer Science and Electrical Engineering at the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. His research interests include computer architecture, very large scale
integration design, and compilers. Mudge received a
PhD in computer science from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Contact him at tnm@eecs.
umich.edu.

Posix

gigabit Ethernet

enhanced parallel ports

wireless token rings
networks FireWire

Computer Society members work together to define standards like
IEEE 1003, 1394, 802, 1284, and many more.

HELP SHAPE FUTURE TECHNOLOGIES • JOIN A COMPUTER SOCIETY STANDARDS WORKING GROUP AT

computer.org/standards/
58

Computer

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wisconsin. Downloaded on January 15, 2009 at 18:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

