6845  
Graphics controller chip used in many many graphic adaptors

8042  
Controller chip in the AT keyboard

8048  
Controller chip in the XT keyboard

82072A  
Controller chip in the AT floppy disk drive

82077  
Controller chip in PS/2 floppy disk drive. Successor to the 82072A

82284  
The 80286 clock generator

82288  
The 80286 bus controller chip

8237A  
An 8=bit DMA controller in the XT. Two chips in the AT and beyond, with four DMA channels per chip. Chips can be cascaded.

16450  
UART chip in the AT, successor to the 8250.

82489DX  
The original Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller (APIC) used in 486 and early Pentium multiprocessor systems. Later Pentiums integrate the local APIC onto the processor itself. The successor to the 8259A PIC.

8253  
Programmable Interval Timer ([PIT](https://wiki.osdev.org/PIT "PIT")) chip in the XT. Has three independent timers.

8254  
Programmable Interval Timer ([PIT](https://wiki.osdev.org/PIT "PIT")). Used in AT's and EISA/MCA machines. Just an improved version of the 8253.

8259A  
Programmable Interrupt Controller ([PIC](https://wiki.osdev.org/PIC "PIC")) used in all non-SMP PC's that predate the Pentium III/Athlon (current systems still include it for backward compatibility). Each chip has 8 interrupt lines. AT and beyond have two chips.

8284  
Clock generator in the 8088/8086/80186

8288  
Bus controller in the 8088/8086/80186

8741  
Common controller chip in AT keyboards

8742  
Controller chip in PS/2 keyboards

ABIOS  
Advanced BIOS. PS/2 BIOS that can be called in both Protected Mode and Real Mode.

ARLL  
Advanced RLL. Method used in Hard Disks. MFM, RLL, etc.

ASPI  
Advanced SCSI Programming Interface. An Adaptec thing, its a common interface for programming SCSI devices.

ATA  
AT Attachment. A bus standard for connecting hard disks and CD-ROMs.

BIST  
Built-in Self Test.

Booting  
The loading of the BIOS and kicking in the bootsector to bootstrap an OS loader.

Bootstrap  
The bootstrap is a small program that loads an operating system. (Usually synonymous with the bootsector/MBR). Also used to describe the process of setting up a compiler on a new system not having one already.

Bus Master  
Where a device can control the BUS autonomously. Examples of this are the CPU and DMA chips. Other controller chips can also do this (ala some PCI devices, etc).

Call Gate  
Much like an software driven interrupt, a call gate allows access to other code from a different privilege level.

Combicontroller  
Combine a Floppy disk controller chip and a Hard disk controller chip and you have a combicontroller. It is not limited to just floppy+hard drive chips. Usually meant to refer to the actual plug-in card where you have two floppy and two hd IDE ports.

CPL  
Current privilege level. The current [ring](https://wiki.osdev.org/Protected_Mode "Protected Mode") in which code is being executed.

Descriptor  
An 8 byte structure that describes a segment/gate/task in protected mode.

DMA  
[Direct Memory Access](https://wiki.osdev.org/DMA "DMA"). Allows peripheral devices to access main memory directly, bypassing the CPU.

DPL  
Descriptor privilege level. The privilege needed to use a descriptor in the [GDT](https://wiki.osdev.org/GDT "GDT") or [IDT](https://wiki.osdev.org/IDT "IDT")

EISA  
Extended ISA. Basically extends the ISA bus from being 16-bit to being 32-bit. Designed for 386 + 486 systems.

ESDI  
Enhanced Small Device Interface. A hard disk controlling mechanism. Successor to the ST506/412 interface. Can handle pumping data out at 24mbits (3mb a second)

Exception  
CPU error. Usually hardware triggered, but can also be software triggered (some debug breakpoints, etc)

Expanded Memory  
Memory used by an EMS driver. Located beyond 1mb mark.

Extended Memory  
Memory used by an XMS driver. Located beyond the 1mb mark. The first 64kb of XMS is known as HMA (High Memory Area).

Fault  
An exception that is recognized by the processor before the CPU executes the code. eg: trying to access memory swapped out to disk triggers a fault BEFORE the memory is accessed so it can be swapped into memory.

FDC  
Floppy Disk Controller

FIFO  
First In First Out. FIFO buffers are common in newer UART chips for communications (16550A)

GDT  
Global Descriptor Table. This table contains descriptors that are potentially available to all programs in protected mode.

HAL  
Hardware Abstraction Layer. Used by Windows NT and some other operating systems.

HDC  
Hard Disk Controller

IDE  
Intelligent Drive Electronics. Another name for ATA.

IDT  
Interrupt Descriptor Table. Table of 8-byte entries that describe interrupts, traps, exceptions and fault handlers to the CPU.

Interrupt  
Interrupts can be software or hardware generated. When an interrupt occurs, the CPU jumps to code assigned to be ran whenever that interrupt is triggered.

Interrupt Gate  
A descriptor for calling an interrupt.

IRQ  
Interrupt Request. Hardware signal to the CPU from an external peripheral.

ISA  
Industry Standard Architecture. The defined bus standard for AT's.

LDT  
Local Descriptor Table. A table of descriptors that can only be accessed by the task that owns the LDT and none other.

MC146818  
CMOS RAM and Real Time Clock chip in the AT.

MMU  
Memory Management Unit. The MMU is often contained within the CPU but can be external to the CPU. eg: old 68k CPU's did not have an MMU but one could be attached externally. The MMU is responsible for doing things like address segmentation translation and paging.

PD765  
The floppy controller chip in the XT

Multitasking  
Where the CPU 'appears' to be running several tasks all at the same time.

Nibble,Nybble  
Group of 4 bits. Half a byte.

NMI  
[Non Maskable Interrupt](https://wiki.osdev.org/Non_Maskable_Interrupt "Non Maskable Interrupt"). An interrupt request sent to the CPU that must be dealt with immediately.

Page  
Section of memory that is classed as a single entity. eg: x86 in pmode has pages of 1byte, 4kb and 4mb in size.

Page Directory  
Holds the entries for the paging table mechanism. Unlike Page Tables, the Page Directory can't be swapped out of memory.

PCI  
Peripheral Component Interconnect. A Local Bus standard running at 32bits at 33mhz (can go higher). PCI has replaced ISA as the most common bus interface for desktop computers.

PCMCIA  
Personal Computer Memory Card International Association. Small credit card sized units that plug into portable computer PCMCIA slot and provide things like extra memory, modems, etc.

PIC  
Programmable Interrupt Controller. The PIC manages hardware interrupts.

PIT  
Programmable Interval Timer. The PIT is like a stopwatch with periodic alarm...

POST  
Power On Self Test. Your computer does this when you turn it on in order to assess that its 100% A-OK and can boot up without error.

RPL  
Requested Privilege Level. Used in [Protected Mode](https://wiki.osdev.org/Protected_Mode "Protected Mode") to pretend running at a lower privilege level for accessing a descriptor.

RTC  
Real Time Clock

SCSI  
Small Computer Systems Interface. A different method from ATA/IDE for connecting devices to your computer.

Selector  
An index into a descriptor table.

ST506/412  
Physical interface between a hard disk and computer.

Task  
AKA a process or job. A task is just another program.

Task Switch  
Changing from one task to another in an multi-tasking operating system.

Trap  
An exception which occurs AFTER the error has occurred instead of before (see Fault).

TSS  
Task State Segment. A data structure that holds the state of the CPU when for that task. Used by multitasking OS.

VESA Local Bus (VLB)  
Bus system for 486 machines. CPU speed specific.
