# Notifications

Chapter 5

Notiﬁcations
Notiﬁcations are a simple, non-blocking signalling mechanism that logically represents a set of
binary semaphores.

5.1

Notiﬁcation Objects

A Notiﬁcation object contains a single data word, called the notiﬁcation word. Such an object
supports two operations: seL4_Signal() and seL4_Wait().
Notiﬁcation capabilities can be badged, using seL4_CNode_Mint(), just like Endpoint capabilities
(see Section 4.2.1). As with Endpoint capabilities, badged Notiﬁcation capabilities cannot be un-

badged, rebadged or used to create child capabilities with different badges.

5.2

Signalling, Polling and Waiting

The seL4_Signal() method updates the notiﬁcation word by bit-wise or-ing it with the badge
of the invoked notiﬁcation capability. It also unblocks the ﬁrst thread waiting on the notiﬁcation
(if any). As such, seL4_Signal() works like concurrently signalling multiple semaphores (those
indicated by the bits set in the badge). If the signal sender capability was unbadged or 0-badged,
the operation degrades to just waking up the ﬁrst thread waiting on the notiﬁcation (also see
below).
The seL4_Wait() method works similarly to a select-style wait on the set of semaphores: If
the notiﬁcation word is zero at the time seL4_Wait() is called, the invoker blocks. Else, the
call returns immediately, setting the notiﬁcation word to zero and returning to the invoker the
previous notiﬁcation-word value.
The seL4_Poll() is the same as seL4_Wait(), except if no signals are pending (the notiﬁcation
word is 0) the call will return immediately without blocking.
If threads are waiting on the Notiﬁcation object at the time seL4_Signal() is invoked, the ﬁrst
queued thread receives the notiﬁcation. All other threads keep waiting until the next time the
notiﬁcation is signalled.

5.3

Binding Notiﬁcations

Notiﬁcation objects and TCBs can be bound together in a 1-to-1 relationship through the seL4_TCB_BindNotification() invocation. When a Notiﬁcation is bound to a TCB, signals to that no-

22

5.3. BINDING NOTIFICATIONS

23

tiﬁcation object will be delivered even if the thread is receiving from an IPC endpoint. To distinguish whether the received message was a notiﬁcation or an IPC, developers should check the
badge value. By reserving a speciﬁc badge (or range of badges) for capabilities to the bound
notiﬁcation — distinct from endpoint badges — the message source can be determined.
Once a notiﬁcation has been bound, the only thread that may perform seL4_Wait() on the notiﬁcation is the bound thread.

