# Message Passing (IPC)

Chapter 4

Message Passing (IPC)
The seL4 microkernel provides a message-passing IPC mechanism for communication between
threads. The same mechanism is also used for communication with kernel-provided services.
Messages are sent by invoking a capability to a kernel object. Messages sent to Endpoints are
destined for other threads, while messages sent to other objects are processed by the kernel.
This chapter describes the common message format, endpoints, and how they can be used for
communication between applications.

4.1

Message Registers

Each message contains a number of message words and optionally a number of capabilities.
The message words are sent to or received from a thread by placing them in its message registers. The message registers are numbered and the ﬁrst few message registers are implemented
using physical CPU registers, while the rest are backed by a ﬁxed region of memory called the
IPC buffer. The reason for this design is efﬁciency: very short messages need not use the memory. The IPC buffer is assigned to the calling thread (see Section 6.1 and Section 10.3.7.11).
Every IPC message also has a tag (structure seL4_MessageInfo_t). The tag consists of four
ﬁelds: the label, message length, number of capabilities (the extraCaps ﬁeld) and the capsUnwrapped ﬁeld. The message length and number of capabilities determine either the number of
message registers and capabilities that the sending thread wishes to transfer, or the number of
message registers and capabilities that were actually transferred. The label is not interpreted
by the kernel and is passed unmodiﬁed as the ﬁrst data payload of the message. The label may,
for example, be used to specify a requested operation. The capsUnwrapped ﬁeld is used only on
the receive side, to indicate the manner in which capabilities were received. It is described in
Section 4.2.2.
The kernel assumes that the IPC buffer contains a structure of type seL4_IPCBuffer as deﬁned
in Table 4.1. The kernel uses as many physical registers as possible to transfer IPC messages.
When more arguments are transferred than physical message registers are available, the kernel
begins using the IPC buffer’s msg ﬁeld to transfer arguments. However, it leaves room in this
array for the physical message registers. For example, if an IPC transfer or kernel object invocation required 4 message registers (and there are only 2 physical message registers available
on this architecture) then arguments 1 and 2 would be transferred via message registers and
arguments 3 and 4 would be in msg[2] and msg[3]. This allows the user-level object-invocation
stubs to copy the arguments passed in physical registers to the space left in the msg array if desired. The situation is similar for the tag ﬁeld. There is space for this ﬁeld in the seL4_IPCBuffer
structure, which the kernel ignores. User level stubs may wish to copy the message tag from its
18

4.2. ENDPOINTS

19

Type

Name

Description

seL4_MessageInfo_t
seL4_Word[]
seL4_Word

tag
msg
userData

seL4_CPtr[] (in)
seL4_CapData_t[] (out)
seL4_CPtr

caps
badges
receiveCNode

seL4_CPtr

receiveIndex

seL4_Word

receiveDepth

Message tag
Message contents
Base address of the structure, used by supporting user libraries
Capabilities to transfer
Badges for endpoint capabilities received
CPtr to a CNode from which to ﬁnd the receive slot
CPtr to the receive slot relative to receiveCNode
Number of bits of receiveIndex to use

Table 4.1: Fields of the seL4_IPCBuffer structure. Note that badges and caps
use the same area of memory in the structure.

CPU register to this ﬁeld, although the user level stubs provided with the kernel do not do this.

4.2

Endpoints

Endpoints allow a small amount of data and capabilities (namely the IPC buffer) to be transferred between two threads. Endpoint objects are invoked directly using the seL4 system calls

described in Section 2.2.
IPC Endpoints uses a rendezvous model and as such is synchronous and blocking. An Endpoint
object may queue threads either to send or to receive. If no receiver is ready, threads performing
the seL4_Send() or seL4_Call() system calls will wait in a queue for the ﬁrst available receiver.
Likewise, if no sender is ready, threads performing the seL4_Recv() system call or the second
half of seL4_ReplyRecv() will wait for the ﬁrst available sender.
Trying to Send or Call without the Write right will fail and return an error. In the case of Send the
error is ignored (the kernel isn’t allowed to reply). Thus there is no way of knowing that a send
has failed because of a missing right. On the other hand calling seL4_Recv() with a endpoint
capability that does not have the Read right will raise a fault, see Section 6.2. This is because
otherwise the error message would be indistinguishable from a normal message received from
another thread via the endpoint.

4.2.1

Endpoint Badges

Endpoint capabilities may be minted to create a new endpoint capability with a badge attached
to it, a data word chosen by the invoker of the mint operation. When a message is sent to
an endpoint using a badged capability, the badge is transferred to the receiving thread’s badge
register.
An endpoint capability with a zero badge is said to be unbadged. Such a capability can be badged
with the seL4_CNode_Mint() invocation on the CNode containing the capability. Endpoint capabilities with badges cannot be unbadged, rebadged or used to create child capabilities with
different badges.
On 32-bit platforms, only the low 28 bits of the badge are available for use. The kernel will silently
ignore any usage of the high 4 bits. On 64-bit platforms, 64 bits are available for badges.

20

CHAPTER 4. MESSAGE PASSING (IPC)

4.2.2

Capability Transfer

Messages may contain capabilities, which will be copied to the receiver, provided that the endpoint capability invoked by the sending thread has Grant rights. An attempt to send capabilities
using an endpoint capability without the Grant right will result in a transfer of the raw message,
without any capability transfer.
Capabilities to be sent in a message are speciﬁed in the sending thread’s IPC buffer in the caps
ﬁeld. Each entry in that array is interpreted as a CPtr in the sending thread’s capability space.
The number of capabilities to send is speciﬁed in the extraCaps ﬁeld of the message tag.
The receiver speciﬁes the slot in which it is willing to receive a capability, with three ﬁelds within
the IPC buffer: receiveCNode, receiveIndex and receiveDepth. These ﬁelds specify the root
CNode, capability address and number of bits to resolve, respectively, to ﬁnd the slot in which
to put the capability. Capability addressing is described in Section 3.3.2.
Note that receiving threads may specify only one receive slot, whereas a sending thread may
include multiple capabilities in the message. Messages containing more than one capability
may be interpreted by kernel objects. They may also be sent to receiving threads in the case
where some of the extra capabilities in the message can be unwrapped.
If the n-th capability in the message refers to the endpoint through which the message is sent,
the capability is unwrapped: its badge is placed into the n-th position of the receiver’s badges
array, and the kernel sets the n-th bit (counting from the least signiﬁcant) in the capsUnwrapped
ﬁeld of the message tag. The capability itself is not transferred, so the receive slot may be used
for another capability.
A capability that is not unwrapped is transferred by copying it from the sender’s CNode slot to
the receiver’s CNode slot. The sender retains access to the sent capability.
If a receiver gets a message whose tag has an extraCaps of 2 and a capsUnwrapped of 2, then
the ﬁrst capability in the message was transferred to the speciﬁed receive slot and the second capability was unwrapped, placing its badge in badges[1]. There may have been a third
capability in the sender’s message which could not be unwrapped.

4.2.3

Errors

Errors in capability transfers can occur at two places: in the send phase or in the receive phase.
In the send phase, all capabilities that the caller is attempting to send are looked up to ensure
that they exist before the send is initiated in the kernel. If the lookup fails for any reason, seL4_Send() and seL4_Call() system calls immediately abort and no IPC or capability transfer takes
place. The system call will return a lookup failure error as described in Section 10.1.
In the receive phase, seL4 transfers capabilities in the order they are found in the sending
thread’s IPC buffer caps array and terminates as soon as an error is encountered. Possible
error conditions are:
• A source capability cannot be looked up. Although the presence of the source capabilities
is checked when the sending thread performs the send system call, this error may still
occur. The sending thread may have been blocked on the endpoint for some time before
it was paired with a receiving thread. During this time, its CSpace may have changed and
the source capability pointers may no longer be valid.
• The destination slot cannot be looked up. Unlike the send system call, the seL4_Recv()
system call does not check that the destination slot exists and is empty before it initiates
the receive operation. Hence, the seL4_Recv() system call will not fail with an error if the

4.2. ENDPOINTS

21

destination slot is invalid and will instead transfer badged capabilities until an attempt to
save a capability to the destination slot is made.
• The capability being transferred cannot be derived. See Section 3.1.5 for details.
An error will not void the entire transfer, it will just end it prematurely. The capabilities processed
before the failure are still transferred and the extraCaps ﬁeld in the receiver’s IPC buffer is set
to the number of capabilities transferred up to failure. No error message will be returned to the
receiving thread in any of the above cases.

4.2.4

Calling and Replying

As explained in Section 2.2, when the user calls seL4_Call() on an endpoint capability, some
speciﬁc actions are taken. First a call will do exactly the same action as a normal seL4_Send().
Then after the rendezvous and all the normal IPC procedure happened, instead of returning
directly to the caller, seL4_Call() will check if either Grant or GrantReply are present on the
invoked endpoint capability:
• If this is not the case, the caller thread is suspended as if seL4_TCB_Suspend() was called
on it. The send part of the call would still have been performed as usual.
• If this is the case. A reply capability is set in a speciﬁc slot of the receiver TCB. The Grant
right of that reply capability is set by copying the Grant right of the endpoint capability
invoked by the receiver in seL4_Recv(). Then, the caller thread is blocked waiting for the
reply.
A reply capability points directly to the caller thread and once the call has been performed is
completely unrelated to the original Endpoint. Even if the latter was destroyed, the reply capability
would still exist and point to the caller who would still be waiting for a reply.
The generated reply capability can then be either invoked in place (in the speciﬁc TCB slot)
with the seL4_Reply() or saved to an addressable slot using seL4_CNode_SaveCaller() to be
invoked later with seL4_Send(). The speciﬁc slot cannot be directly addressed with any CPtr as
it is not part of any CSpace.
A reply capability is invoked in the same way as a normal send on a Endpoint. A reply capability
has implicitly the Write right, so the message will always go through. Transferring caps in the
reply can only happen if the reply capability has the Grant right and is done in exactly the same
way as in a normal IPC transfer as described in Section 4.2.2.
The main difference with a normal endpoint transfer is that the kernel guarantees that invoking
a reply capability cannot block: If you own a reply capability, then the thread it points to is waiting for a reply. However a reply capability is a non-owning reference, contrary to all the other
capabilities. That means that if the caller thread is destroyed or modiﬁed in any way that would
render a reply impossible (for example being suspended with seL4_TCB_Suspend()), the kernel
would immediately destroy the reply capability.
Once the reply capability has been invoked, the caller receives the message as if it has been
performing a seL4_Recv() and just received the message. In particular, it starts running again.
The seL4_Call() operation exists not only for efﬁciency reasons (combining two operations
into a single system call). It differs from seL4_Send() immediately followed by seL4_Recv() in
ways that allow certain system setup to work much more efﬁciently with much less setup than
with a traditional setup. In particular, it is guaranteed that the reply received by the caller comes
from the thread that received the call without having to check any kind of badge.

