# Capability Spaces

Chapter 3

Capability Spaces
Recall from Section 2.1 that seL4 implements a capability-based access control model. Each
userspace thread has an associated capability space (CSpace) that contains the capabilities
that the thread possesses, thereby governing which resources the thread can access.
Recall that capabilities reside within kernel-managed objects known as CNodes. A CNode is a
table of slots, each of which may contain a capability. This may include capabilities to further
CNodes, forming a directed graph. Conceptually a thread’s CSpace is the portion of the directed
graph that is reachable starting with the CNode capability that is its CSpace root.
A CSpace address refers to an individual slot (in some CNode in the CSpace), which may or
may not contain a capability. Threads refer to capabilities in their CSpaces (e.g. when making
system calls) using the address of the slot that holds the capability in question. An address in
a CSpace is the concatenation of the indices of the CNode capabilities forming the path to the
destination slot; we discuss this further in Section 3.3.
Recall that capabilities can be copied and moved within CSpaces, and also sent in messages
(message sending will be described in detail in Section 4.2.2). Furthermore, new capabilities can
be minted from old ones with a subset of their rights. Recall, from Section 2.4.1, that seL4 maintains a capability derivation tree (CDT) in which it tracks the relationship between these copied
capabilities and the originals. The revoke method removes all capabilities (in all CSpaces) that
were derived from a selected capability. This mechanism can be used by servers to restore sole
authority to an object they have made available to clients, or by managers of untyped memory
to destroy the objects in that memory so it can be retyped.
seL4 requires the programmer to manage all in-kernel data structures, including CSpaces, from
userspace. This means that the userspace programmer is responsible for constructing CSpaces
as well as addressing capabilities within them. This chapter ﬁrst discusses capability and
CSpace management, before discussing how capabilities are addressed within CSpaces, i.e.
how applications can refer to individual capabilities within their CSpaces when invoking methods.

3.1

Capability and CSpace Management

3.1.1

CSpace Creation

CSpaces are created by creating and manipulating CNode objects. When creating a CNode the
user must specify the number of slots that it will have, and this determines the amount of memory that it will use. Each slot requires 2seL4_SlotBits bytes of physical memory and has the capacity to hold exactly one capability. This is 16 bytes on 32-bit architectures and 32 bytes on
9

10

CHAPTER 3. CAPABILITY SPACES

64-bit architectures. Like any other object, a CNode must be created by calling seL4_Untyped_Retype() on an appropriate amount of untyped memory (see Section 2.4.2). The caller must
therefore have a capability to untyped memory with at least the size of a CSpace as well as
enough free capability slots available in existing CNodes for the seL4_Untyped_Retype() invocation to succeed.

3.1.2

CNode Methods

Capabilities are managed largely through invoking CNode methods.
CNodes support the following methods:

seL4_CNode_Mint() creates a new capability in a speciﬁed CNode slot from an existing capability. The newly created capability may have fewer rights than the original and a different
guard (see Section 3.3.1). seL4_CNode_Mint() can also create a badged capability (see
Section 4.2.1) from an unbadged one.
seL4_CNode_Copy() is similar to seL4_CNode_Mint(), but the newly created capability has the
same badge and guard as the original.
seL4_CNode_Move() moves a capability between two speciﬁed capability slots. You cannot
move a capability to the slot in which it is currently.
seL4_CNode_Mutate() can move a capability similarly to seL4_CNode_Move() and also reduce
its rights similarly to seL4_CNode_Mint(), but without making a copy. That is, if the capability is revokable, it remains revokable. Similar to seL4_CNode_Mint() it can be used to
adjust the guard of a CNode capability. It cannot be used to badge endpoint capabilities.
seL4_CNode_Rotate() moves two capabilities between three speciﬁed capability slots. It is
essentially two seL4_CNode_Move() invocations: one from the second speciﬁed slot to
the ﬁrst, and one from the third to the second. The ﬁrst and third speciﬁed slots may be
the same, in which case the capability in it is swapped with the capability in the second
slot. The method is atomic; either both or neither capabilities are moved.
seL4_CNode_Delete() removes a capability from the speciﬁed slot.
seL4_CNode_Revoke() is equivalent to calling seL4_CNode_Delete() on each derived child of
the speciﬁed capability. It has no effect on the capability itself, except in very speciﬁc
circumstances outlined in Section 3.2.
seL4_CNode_SaveCaller() moves a kernel-generated reply capability of the current thread from
the special TCB slot it was created in, into the designated CSpace slot (non-MCS only).
seL4_CNode_CancelBadgedSends() cancels any outstanding sends that use the same badge
and object as the speciﬁed capability.

3.1.3

Capabilities to Newly-Retyped Objects

When retyping untyped memory into objects with seL4_Untyped_Retype(), capabilities to the
newly-retyped objects are placed in consecutive slots in a CNode speciﬁed by its root, node_index, and node_depth arguments. The node_offset argument speciﬁes the index into the CNode
at which the ﬁrst capability will be placed. The num_objects argument speciﬁes the number of
capabilities (and, hence, objects) to create. All slots must be empty or an error will result. All
resulting capabilities will be placed in the same CNode.

3.1. CAPABILITY AND CSPACE MANAGEMENT

3.1.4

11

Capability Rights

As mentioned previously, some capability types have access rights associated with them. Currently, access rights are associated with capabilities for Endpoints (see Chapter 4), Notiﬁcations
(see Chapter 5), Pages (see Chapter 7) and Replying (see Chapter 4). The access rights associated with a capability determine the methods that can be invoked. seL4 supports four access
rights, which are Read, Write, Grant and GrantReply. Read, Write and Grant are orthogonal to
each other. GrantReply is a less powerful form of Grant e.g. if you already have Grant, having
GrantReply or not is irrelevant. The meaning of each right is interpreted relative to the various
object types, as detailed in Table 3.1.
When an object is ﬁrst created, the initial capability that refers to it carries the maximum set of
access rights. Other, less-powerful capabilities may be manufactured from this original capability, using methods such as seL4_CNode_Mint() and seL4_CNode_Mutate(). If a greater set
of rights than the source capability is speciﬁed for the destination capability in either of these
invocations, the destination rights are silently downgraded to those of the source.
Type

Read

Write

Grant

GrantReply

Endpoint

Receiving

Sending

Sending any capabilities

Sending reply capabilities

Notiﬁcation

Waiting

Signaling

N/A

N/A

Page

Mapping
the
page readable.

Mapping
the
page writable.

N/A

N/A

Reply

N/A

N/A

Sending any capabilities in reply
message

N/A

Table 3.1: seL4 access rights: What a speciﬁc right entitles a capability to do

3.1.5

Capability Derivation Tree

As mentioned in Section 2.4.1, seL4 keeps track of capability derivations in a capability derivation tree.
Various methods, such as seL4_CNode_Copy() or seL4_CNode_Mint(), may be used to create
derived capabilities. Not all capabilities support derivation. In general, only original capabilities
support derivation invocations, but there are exceptions. Table 3.2 summarises the conditions
that must be met for capability derivation to succeed for the various capability types, and how
capability-derivation failures are reported in each case. The capability types not listed can be
derived once.
Figure 3.1 shows an example capability derivation tree that illustrates a standard scenario: the
top level is a large untyped capability, the second level splits this capability into two regions
covered by their own untyped caps, both are children of the ﬁrst level. The third level on the
left is a copy of the level 2 untyped capability. Untyped capabilities when copied always create
children, never siblings. In this scenario, the untyped capability was typed into two separate
objects, creating two capabilities on level 4, both are the original capability to the respective
object, both are children of the untyped capability they were created from.
Ordinary original capabilities can have one level of derived capabilities. Further copies of these
derived capabilities will create siblings, in this case remaining on level 5. There is an exception

12

CHAPTER 3. CAPABILITY SPACES

Cap Type

Conditions for Derivation

Error Code on Derivation Failure

ReplyCap
IRQControl
Untyped

Cannot be derived
Cannot be derived
Must not have children (Section 3.2)
Must be mapped
Must be mapped
Must be mapped

Dependent on syscall
Dependent on syscall
seL4_RevokeFirst

Page Table
Page Directory
IO Page Table (IA-32 only)

seL4_IllegalOperation
seL4_IllegalOperation
seL4_IllegalOperation

Table 3.2: Capability derivation.
Untyped

Untyped

Untyped

Object 2
original

original

Object 1

derived

Endpoint

original
unbadged

Untyped

derived

derived

derived
unbadged

original
badged

derived
badged

derived
badged

Figure 3.1: Example capability derivation tree.

to this scheme for Endpoint and Notiﬁcation capabilities — they support an additional layer of
depth though badging. The original Endpoint or Notiﬁcation capability will be unbadged. Using
the mint method, a copy of the capability with a speciﬁc badge can be created (see Section 4.2.1,
Section 5.1). This new, badged capability to the same object is treated as an original capability
(the “original badged endpoint capability”) and supports one level of derived children like other
capabilities.

3.2

Deletion and Revocation

Capabilities in seL4 can be deleted and revoked. Both methods primarily affect capabilities, but
they can have side effects on objects in the system where the deletion or revocation results in
the destruction of the last capability to an object.
As described above, seL4_CNode_Delete() will remove a capability from the speciﬁed CNode
slot. Usually, this is all that happens. If, however, it was the last typed capability to an object,
this object will now be destroyed by the kernel, cleaning up all remaining in-kernel references
and preparing the memory for re-use.
If the object to be destroyed was a capability container, i.e. a TCB or CNode, the destruction process will delete each capability held in the container, prior to destroying the container. This may
result in the destruction of further objects if the contained capabilities are the last capabilities.1
1

The recursion is limited as if the last capability to a CNode is found within the container, the found CNode is not
destroyed. Instead, the found CNode is made unreachable by moving the capability pointing to the found CNode

3.3. CSPACE ADDRESSING

13

The seL4_CNode_Revoke() method will seL4_CNode_Delete() all CDT children of the speciﬁed
capability, but will leave the capability itself intact. If any of the revoked child capabilities were
the last capabilities to an object, the appropriate destroy operation is triggered.
Note: seL4_CNode_Revoke() may only partially complete in two speciﬁc circumstances. The
ﬁrst being where a CNode containing the last capability to the TCB of the thread performing
the revoke (or the last capability to the TCB itself) is deleted as a result of the revoke. In this
case the thread performing the revoke is destroyed during the revoke and the revoke does not
complete. The second circumstance is where the storage containing the capability that is the
target of the revoke is deleted as a result of the revoke. In this case, the authority to perform the
revoke is removed during the operation and the operation stops part way through. Both these
scenarios can be and should be avoided at user-level by construction.
Note that for page tables and page directories seL4_CNode_Revoke() will not revoke frame capabilities mapped into the address space. They will only be unmapped from the space.

3.3

CSpace Addressing

When performing a system call, a thread speciﬁes to the kernel the capability to be invoked by
giving an address in its CSpace. This address refers to the speciﬁc slot in the caller’s CSpace
that contains the capability to be invoked.
CSpaces are designed to permit sparsity, and the process of looking-up a capability address
must be efﬁcient. Therefore, CSpaces are implemented as guarded page tables.
As explained earlier, a CSpace is a directed graph of CNode objects, and each CNode is a table
of slots, where each slot can either be empty, or contain a capability, which may refer to another
CNode. Recall from Section 2.3 that the number of slots in a CNode must be a power of two. A
CNode is said to have a radix, which is the power to which two is raised in its size. That is, if a
CNode has 2k slots, its radix would be k. The kernel stores a capability to the root CNode of each
thread’s CSpace in the thread’s TCB. Conceptually, a CNode capability stores not only a reference
to the CNode to which it refers, but also carries a guard value, explained in Section 3.3.1.

3.3.1

Capability Address Lookup

Like a virtual memory address, a capability address is simply an integer. Rather than referring to
a location of physical memory (as does a virtual memory address), a capability address refers
to a capability slot. When looking up a capability address presented by a userspace thread,
the kernel ﬁrst consults the CNode capability in the thread’s TCB that deﬁnes the root of the
thread’s CSpace. It then compares that CNode’s guard value against the most signiﬁcant bits of
the capability address. If the two values are different, lookup fails. Otherwise, the kernel then
uses the next most-signiﬁcant radix bits of the capability address as an index into the CNode to
which the CNode capability refers. The slot s identiﬁed by these next radix bits might contain
another CNode capability or contain something else (including nothing). If s contains a CNode
capability c and there are remaining bits (following the radix bits) in the capability address that
into the found cnode itself, by swapping the capability with the ﬁrst capability in the found cnode, and then trying to
delete the swapped capability instead. This breaks the recursion.
The result of this approach is that deleting the last cap to the root CNode of a CSpace does not recursively delete
the entire CSpace. Instead, it deletes the root CNode, and the branches of the tree become unreachable, potentially
including the deleting of some of the unreachable CNode’s caps to make space for the self-referring capability.
The practical consequence of this approach is that CSpace deletion requires user-level to delete the tree leaf ﬁrst
if unreachable CNodes are to be avoided. Alternatively, any resulting unreachable CNodes can be cleaned up via
revoking a covering untyped capability, however this latter approach may be more complex to arrange by construction
at user-level.

14

CHAPTER 3. CAPABILITY SPACES

CNode

Guard

0x0 (4 bits)

0x00

Object
Object

Guard

0x000 (12 bits)

Object

0x00 CNode
CNode

Object
Object

0xFF
4 bit guard + 8 bit radix = 12 bits
translated
32 - 20 - 12 = 0 bits remaining

CNode

0xFF
Guard

0x0 (3 bits)

0x0
12 bit guard + 8 bit radix* = 20 bits
translated. 32 bit word - 20 bits = 12
bits remaining
*(2^8 = 256 slots)

Object

CNode

CNode

0xF

3 bit guard + 4 bit radix = 7 bits
translated
32 - 20 - 7 = 5 bits remaining

Figure 3.2: An example CSpace demonstrating object references at all levels,
various guard and radix sizes and internal CNode references.

have yet to be translated, the lookup process repeats, starting from the CNode capability c and
using these remaining bits of the capability address. Otherwise, the lookup process terminates
successfully; the capability address in question refers to the capability slot s.
Figure 3.2 demonstrates a valid CSpace with the following features:
• a top level CNode object with a 12-bit guard set to 0x000 and 256 slots;
• a top level CNode with direct object references;
• a top level CNode with two second-level CNode references;
• second level CNodes with different guards and slot counts;
• a second level CNode that contains a reference to a top level CNode;
• a second level CNode that contains a reference to another CNode where there are some
bits remaining to be translated;
• a second level CNode that contains a reference to another CNode where there are no bits
remaining to be translated; and
• object references in the second level CNodes.
It should be noted that Figure 3.2 demonstrates only what is possible, not what is usually practical. Although the example CSpace is legal, it would be reasonably difﬁcult to work with due to
the small number of slots and the circular references within it.

3.3.2

Addressing Capabilities

A capability address is stored in a CPointer (abbreviated CPtr), which is an unsigned integer
variable. Capabilities are addressed in accordance with the translation algorithm described

3.3. CSPACE ADDRESSING

15

L1 CNode Cap
Guard

0x0 (4 bits)

0x00
0x0F

0x60

L2 CNode Cap
Guard

0x0 (4 bits)

0x00

L3 CNode Cap

Cap A
Guard
0x00
0x60

0 bits

Cap B
0x60

Cap C, D, E, F, G
0xFF

0x64
0xFF
0xFF

Figure 3.3: An arbitrary CSpace layout.

above. Two special cases involve addressing CNode capabilities themselves and addressing a
range of capability slots.
Recall that the translation algorithm described above will traverse CNode capabilities while there
are address bits remaining to be translated. Therefore, in order to address a capability which
may be a CNode capability, the user must supply not only a capability address but also specify
the maximum number of bits of the capability address that are to be translated, called the depth
limit. When a CPointer is paired with depth limit depth, only its depth least signiﬁcant bits are
used in translation.
Certain methods, such as seL4_Untyped_Retype(), require the user to provide a range of capability slots. This is done by providing a base capability address, which refers to the ﬁrst slot in the
range, together with a window size parameter, specifying the number of slots (with consecutive
addresses, following the base slot) in the range.
Figure 3.3 depicts an example CSpace. In order to illustrate these ideas, we determine the address of each of the 10 capabilities in this CSpace.
Cap A. The ﬁrst CNode has a 4-bit guard set to 0x0, and an 8-bit radix. Cap A resides in slot
0x60 so, provided that it is not a CNode capability, it may be referred to by any address
of the form 0x060nnnnn (where nnnnn is any sequence of 5 hexadecimal digits, because
the translation process terminates after translating the ﬁrst 12 bits of the address). For
simplicity, we usually set unused address bits to 0, which in this case yields the address
0x06000000.
Cap B. Again, the ﬁrst CNode has a 4-bit guard set to 0x0, and an 8-bit radix. The second CNode
is reached via the L2 CNode Cap. It also has a 4-bit guard of 0x0 and Cap B resides at index
0x60. Hence, Cap B’s address is 0x00F06000. Translation of this address terminates after
the ﬁrst 24 bits.
Cap C. This capability is addressed via both CNodes. The third CNode is reached via the L3
CNode Cap, which resides at index 0x00 of the second CNode. The third CNode has no
guard and Cap C is at index 0x60. Hence, its address is 0x00F00060. Translation of this
address leaves 0 bits untranslated.
Caps C–G. This range of capability slots is addressed by providing a base address (which refers
to the slot containing Cap C) of 0x00F00060 and a window size of 5.
L2 CNode Cap. Recall that to address a CNode capability, the user must supply not only a capability address but also specify the depth limit, which is the maximum number of bits to

16

CHAPTER 3. CAPABILITY SPACES

be translated. L2 CNode Cap resides at offset 0x0F of the ﬁrst CNode, which has a 4-bit
guard of 0x0. Hence, it may be referred to by any address of the form 0xnnnnn00F with a
depth limit of 12 bits, where nnnnn is any sequence of 5 hexadecimal digits.
L3 CNode Cap. This capability resides at index 0x00 of the second CNode, which is reached by
the L2 CNode Cap. The second CNode has a 4-bit guard of 0x0. Hence, the capability may
be referred to by any address of the form 0xnn00F000 with a depth limit of 24 bits, where
nn is any sequence of 2 hexadecimal digits.
In summary, to refer to any capability (or slot) in a CSpace, the user must supply its address.
When the capability might be a CNode, the user must also supply a depth limit. To specify a
range of capability slots, the user supplies a starting address and a window size.

3.4

Lookup Failure Description

When a capability lookup fails, a description of the failure is given to either the calling thread
or the thread’s exception handler in its IPC buffer. The format of the description is always the
same but may occur at varying offsets in the IPC buffer depending on how the error occurred.
The description format is explained below. The ﬁrst word indicates the type of lookup failure
and the meaning of later words depend on this.

3.4.1

Invalid Root

A CSpace CPtr root (within which a capability was to be looked up) is invalid. For example, the
capability is not a CNode cap.

Data

Meaning

Offset + 0

seL4_InvalidRoot

3.4.2

Missing Capability

A capability required for an invocation is not present or does not have sufﬁcient rights.

Data

Meaning

Offset + 0
Offset + seL4_CapFault_BitsLeft

seL4_MissingCapability
Bits left

3.4.3

Depth Mismatch

When resolving a capability, a CNode was traversed that resolved more bits than was left to decode in the CPtr or a non-CNode capability was encountered while there were still bits remaining
to be looked up.

3.4. LOOKUP FAILURE DESCRIPTION

17

Data

Meaning

Offset + 0
Offset + seL4_CapFault_BitsLeft
Offset + seL4_CapFault_DepthMismatch_BitsFound

seL4_DepthMismatch
Bits of CPtr remaining to decode
Bits that the current CNode being traversed
resolved

3.4.4

Guard Mismatch

When resolving a capability, a CNode was traversed with a guard size larger than the number of
bits remaining or the CNode’s guard did not match the next bits of the CPtr being resolved.

Data

Meaning

Offset + 0
Offset + seL4_CapFault_BitsLeft
Offset + seL4_CapFault_GuardMismatch_GuardFound
Offset + seL4_CapFault_GuardMismatch_BitsFound

seL4_GuardMismatch
Bits of CPtr remaining to decode
The CNode’s guard
The CNode’s guard size

