# Glossary

Glossary
ASID Address Space Identiﬁer. Depending on architecture, the kernel provides software ASIDs,
which are associated with VSpace root objects, and deﬁne the virtual address space of a
thread. They are mapped to hardware ASIDs on demand when the architecture supports
these. Multiple threads may be in the same address space.
Badge A badge is a piece of extra information stored in a capability, mostly used for endpoint
and notiﬁcation capabilities. It can be used by applications to identify caps previously
handed out to clients.
Capability The main access control concept in seL4. A capability conceptually is a reference to
a kernel object together with a set of access rights. Most seL4 capabilities store additional
bits of information. Some of this additional information may be exposed to the user, but
the bulk of it is kernel-internal book-keeping information. Capabilities are stored in CNodes
and TCBs.
CDT Capability Derivation Tree. A kernel-internal data structure that tracks the child/parent
relationship between capabilities. Capabilities to new objects are children of the Untyped
capability the object was created from. Capabilities can also be copied and result in either
child or sibling capabilities, depending on the operation that was used and the depth of
the existing derivation tree. The revoke operation will delete all children of the invoked
capability.
CNode Capability Node. Kernel-controlled storage that holds capabilities. Capability nodes can
be created in different sizes and be shared between CSpaces.
CPtr Capability Pointer. A user-level reference to a capability, relative to a speciﬁed root CNode
or the thread’s CSpace root.
CSpace A directed graph of CNodes. The CSpace of a thread deﬁnes the set of capabilities
it has access to. The root of the graph is the CNode capability in the CSpace slot of the
thread. The edges of the graph are the CNode capabilities residing in the CNodes spanned
by this root.
Endpoint IPC is facilitated by small kernel objects known as endpoints, which act as general
communication ports. Invocations on endpoint objects are used to send and receive IPC
messages.
Guard Guard of a CNode capability. From the user’s perspetive the CSpace of a thread is organised as a guarded page table. The kernel will resolve user capability pointers into internal
capability slot pointers. The guard of one link/edge in the CSpace graph deﬁnes a sequence of bits that will be stripped from the user-level capability pointer before resolving
resumes at the next CNode.
172

Glossary

173

IOMMU Input–Output Memory Management Unit. Applies virtual address translation and memory protection to DMA capable I/O devices.
IOPageTable This object represents a node in the multilevel page-table structure used by IOMMU
hardware to translate hardware memory accesses.
IOSpace This object represents the address space associated with a hardware device. It represents the right to modify a device’s address space. See Chapter 8.
IPC Inter Process Communication is facilitated by endpoints, which act as general communication ports. Invocations on endpoint objects are used to send and receive messages.
IRQControl A single capability from which IRQHandler capabilities to all IRQ numbers in the
system can be derived. This capability can be moved between CSpaces and CSpace slots
but cannot be duplicated. Revoking this capability removes all IRQHandlers.
IRQHandler Capabilities that represent the ability of a thread to handle a certain interrupt. See
Chapter 8.
Notiﬁcation Object A word-size array of ﬂags that provides a non-blocking signalling mechanism similar to a binary semaphore. Operations are signalling a subset of ﬂags in a single
operation, polling to check any ﬂags, and blocking until any are signalled. Notiﬁcation
capabilities can be signal-only or wait-only.
Reply Object (MCS only) A reply object is a vessel for tracking reply messages, used to send a
reply message and wake up the caller.
Scheduling Context (MCS only) An abstraction of CPU execution time.
TCB Thread Control Block. The kernel object that stores management data for threads, such
as the thread’s CSpace, VSpace, thread state, or user registers.
Untyped Memory Memory that can be used to create kernel objects via the seL4_Untyped_Retype() invocation. It is the foundation of memory allocation in the seL4 kernel. See
Section 2.4.
VM Virtual Memory. The concept of translating virtual memory addresses to physical frames.
See Chapter 7.
VSpace Virtual Address Space. In analogy to CSpace, the virtual memory space of a thread.
See Chapter 7.

174

Glossary

