A Simple, Fast Dominance Algorithm
Keith D. Cooper, Timothy J. Harvey, and Ken Kennedy
Rice University
Houston, Texas, USA

Abstract
The problem of ﬁnding the dominators in a control-ﬂow graph has a long history in the literature. The
original algorithms suﬀered from a large asymptotic complexity but were easy to understand. Subsequent
work improved the time bound, but generally sacriﬁced both simplicity and ease of implementation. This
paper returns to a simple formulation of dominance as a global data-ﬂow problem. Some insights into
the nature of dominance lead to an implementation of an O(N 2 ) algorithm that runs faster, in practice,
than the classic Lengauer-Tarjan algorithm, which has a timebound of O(E ∗ log(N )). We compare the
algorithm to Lengauer-Tarjan because it is the best known and most widely used of the fast algorithms
for dominance. Working from the same implementation insights, we also rederive (from earlier work on
control dependence by Ferrante, et al.) a method for calculating dominance frontiers that we show is faster
than the original algorithm by Cytron, et al. The aim of this paper is not to present a new algorithm, but,
rather, to make an argument based on empirical evidence that algorithms with discouraging asymptotic
complexities can be faster in practice than those more commonly employed. We show that, in some cases,
careful engineering of simple algorithms can overcome theoretical advantages, even when problems grow
beyond realistic sizes. Further, we argue that the algorithms presented herein are intuitive and easily
implemented, making them excellent teaching tools.
Keywords: Dominators, Dominance Frontiers

Introduction
The advent of static single assignment form (ssa) has rekindled interest in dominance and related concepts [13]. New algorithms for several problems in optimization and code generation have built on dominance [8, 12, 25, 27]. In this paper, we re-examine the formulation of dominance as a forward data-ﬂow
problem [4, 5, 19]. We present several insights that lead to a simple, general, and eﬃcient implementation in
an iterative data-ﬂow framework. The resulting algorithm, an iterative solver that uses our representation
for dominance information, is signiﬁcantly faster than the Lengauer-Tarjan algorithm on graphs of a size
normally encountered by a compiler—less than one thousand nodes. As an integral part of the process, our
iterative solver computes immediate dominators for each node in the graph, eliminating one problem with
previous iterative formulations. We also show that a natural extension of these ideas leads to an eﬃcient
algorithm for computing the dominance frontiers used in the ssa-construction algorithm.
Allen, in her work on control-ﬂow analysis, formulated the dominance computation as a global data-ﬂow
problem [4]. In a 1972 paper with Cocke, she showed an iterative algorithm to solve these equations [5].
Hecht and Ullman the showed that a reverse postorder iterative scheme solves these equations in a single
pass over the cfg for reducible graphs [19]. The simple, intuitive nature of the iterative formulation makes
it attractive for teaching and for implementing. Its simplicity leads to a high degree of conﬁdence in the
implementation’s correctness. The prime result of this paper is that, with the right data structure, the
iterative data-ﬂow framework for dominance is faster than the well-known Lengauer-Tarjan algorithm on
graphs that arise in real programs.
∗ This research was supported, in part, by Darpa through Usafrl contract F30602-97-2-298, by the State of Texas through
its Advanced Technology Program, grant number 3604-0122-1999, and by the NSF through the GrADS Project, grant number
9975020.

2

In practice, both of these algorithms are fast. In our experiments, they process from 50, 000 to 200, 000
control-ﬂow graph (cfg) nodes per second. While Lengauer-Tarjan has faster asymptotic complexity, it
requires unreasonably large cfgs—on the order of 30, 000 nodes—before this asymptotic advantage catches
up with a well-engineered iterative scheme. Since the iterative algorithm is simpler, easier to understand,
easier to implement, and faster in practice, it should be the technique of choice for computing dominators
on cfgs.
The dominance problem is an excellent example of the need to balance theory with practice. Ever since
Lowry and Medlock’s O(N 4 ) algorithm appeared in 1969 [23], researchers have steadily improved the time
bound for this problem [7, 10, 17, 19, 22, 26, 29]. However, our results suggest that these improvements in
asymptotic complexity may not help on realistically-sized examples, and that careful engineering makes the
iterative scheme the clear method of choice.

History
Prosser introduced the notion of dominance in a 1959 paper on the analysis of ﬂow diagrams, deﬁning it as
follows:
We say box i dominates box j if every path (leading from input to output through the diagram)
which passes through box j must also pass through box i. Thus box i dominates box j if box j is
subordinate to box i in the program [26].
He used dominance to prove the safety of code reordering operations, but he did not explain the algorithm
to compute dominance from his connectivity matrix.
Ten years later, Lowry and Medlock sketched an algorithm to compute dominators [23]. In essence, their
algorithm considers all of the paths from the entry node to each node, b, and successively removes nodes
from a path. If the removal of some node causes b to be unreachable, that node is in b’s dominator set.
Clearly, this algorithm is at least quadratic in the number of nodes, although the actual complexity would
depend heavily on the implementation1 .
The data-ﬂow approach to computing dominance begins with Allen’s 1970 paper, where she proposed a
set of data-ﬂow equations for the problem [4]. Two years later, Allen and Cocke showed an iterative algorithm
for solving these equations and gave its complexity as O(N 2 ) [5]. In 1975, Hecht and Ullman published an
analysis of iterative algorithms using reverse postorder traversals. They showed that the dominance equations
can be solved in linear time on reducible graphs [19]. They restrict their algorithm to reducible graphs so
that they can achieve the desired time bound, even though iterating to a ﬁxed point would generalize the
algorithm (but not the time bound) to handle irreducible graphs. Both Hecht’s book and Aho and Ullman’s
“dragon” book present the iterative algorithm for dominance without restricting it to reducible graphs [18,
3]. Unfortunately, Aho and Ullman mistakenly credit the algorithm to Purdom and Moore [24], rather than
to Allen and Cocke.
Aho and Ullman approached the problem from another direction [2]. Their algorithm takes the graph
and successively removes nodes. Any nodes in the entire graph (rather than a single path) that cannot
subsequently be reached are dominated by the removed node. This algorithm works in quadratic time, in
the number of nodes. With Hopcroft, they improved this time bound to O(E log E) for reducible graphs,
where E is the number of edges in the graph, by using an eﬃcient method of ﬁnding ancestors in trees [1].
Purdom and Moore, in the same year, proposed a similar algorithm, which ﬁrst builds a tree from the
graph. Dominators are then found by successively removing each node from the graph and noting which
children of that tree node can no longer be reached in the graph. This algorithm again requires quadratic
time to complete [24].
In 1974, Tarjan proposed an algorithm that uses depth-ﬁrst search and union-ﬁnd to achieve an asymptotic complexity of O(N log N + E) [29]. Five years later, Lengauer and Tarjan built on this work to produce
an algorithm with almost linear complexity [22]. Both algorithms rely on the observation that a node’s
dominator must be above it in the depth-ﬁrst spanning tree. This gives an initial guess at the dominator,
which is corrected in a second pass over the nodes. The algorithm relies on the eﬃciency of union-ﬁnd to
determine its time bound.
1 Lowry and Medlock do not give enough details to assess accurately the complexity of their algorithm, but Alstrup et al. claim

that it has an asymptotic complexity of N 4 , where N is the number of nodes in the graph [7].

3

In 1985, Harel published an algorithm built on Lengauer-Tarjan that computes immediate dominators
in linear time. He improved the time bound by speeding up the union-ﬁnd operations with a technique
from Gabow and Tarjan in that same year [16]. Harel’s explanation, however, was subsequently found to be
incomplete. In 1999, Alstrup et al. published a simpler method based on Harel’s initial work that achieves a
theoretical linear-time complexity [7]. The authors posit that the actual complexity of the algorithm, using
practical data structures, is O(E + N log log log N ), where N is the number of nodes in the graph, and E
is the number of edges. The paper does not provide any experimental data that shows the algorithm’s
measured behavior versus Lengauer-Tarjan.
In 1998, Buchsbaum et al. presented a linear-time algorithm based on Lengauer-Tarjan [10, 11]. Their
algorithm is essentially a divide-and-conquer algorithm that groups the bottom nodes of the depth-ﬁrst
search tree into microtrees. By solving the local problem for the microtrees, they can perform the subsequent
union-ﬁnd operations needed for Lengauer-Tarjan in linear time. Thus, their algorithm has better asymptotic
complexity than Lengauer-Tarjan. However, they state that their algorithm runs ten to twenty percent slower
than Lengauer-Tarjan on “real ﬂowgraphs” [11]. As an interesting aside, their analysis suggests that, for
many classes of graphs, Lengauer-Tarjan also runs in linear time.
This paper compares an iterative scheme for ﬁnding dominators against Lengauer-Tarjan. This comparison is appropriate for several reasons. First, Lengauer-Tarjan is the best known and most widely implemented
of the fast dominator algorithms. Comparing our work with Lengauer-Tarjan provides meaningful information to the many people who have implemented that algorithm. Second, the primary result of this paper is
that a simple iterative scheme for this problem can be engineered to outrun the more complicated techniques
built on union-ﬁnd—despite the higher asymptotic complexity of the iterative data-ﬂow approach. From this
perspective, Lengauer-Tarjan is an appropriate comparison; the other algorithms expend additional eﬀort to
speed up the union-ﬁnd operations when, in fact, the asymptotic advantage from union-ﬁnd does not show
up until the problem size becomes unrealistically large. Third, while Alstrup et al. and Buchsbaum et al.
both have lower asymptotic complexity than Lengauer-Tarjan, the papers provide no evidence that this theoretical advantage translates into faster running times. Indeed, Buchsbaum et al. show that their algorithm
tends to run slower than Lengauer-Tarjan [11]. Finally, the analysis presented by Buchsbaum et al. suggests
that, for many graphs, Lengauer-Tarjan also has linear-time behavior.

The Data-flow Approach
To compute dominance information with data-ﬂow techniques, we can pose the problem as a set of dataﬂow equations and solve them with a reverse-postorder iterative algorithm. This approach builds on the
well-understood principles of iterative data-ﬂow analysis to guarantee termination and correctness and to
provide insight into the algorithm’s asymptotic complexity.
This section presents the iterative data-ﬂow solver for dominance. It discusses the properties of the
algorithm that we can derive from the theory of iterative data-ﬂow analysis. Finally, it shows how simple
insights into the nature of dominance information and a carefully engineered data structure lead to a more
eﬃcient implementation—one that competes favorably with Lengauer-Tarjan.
To compute dominance information, the compiler can annotate each node in the cfg with a Dom set.
Dom(b): A node n in the cfg dominates b if n lies on every path from the entry node of the cfg to b.
Dom(b) contains every node n that dominates b. For x, y ∈ Dom(b), either x ∈ Dom(y) or y ∈ Dom(x).
By deﬁnition, for any node b, b ∈ Dom(b).
While Dom(b) contains every node that dominates b, it is often useful to know b’s immediate dominator.
Intuitively, b’s immediate dominator is the node n ∈ Dom(b) which is closest to b. Typically, the compiler
captures this information in a set IDom(b).2
IDom(b): For a node b, the set IDom(b) contains exactly one node, the immediate dominator of b. If n is
b’s immediate dominator, then every node in {Dom(b) − b} is also in Dom(n).
2 Since IDom(b) always has exactly one member, we could describe it as a function on Dom(b). For consistency in the paper,
we write it as a set; the implementation realizes it as a trivial function of Dom(b).

4

for all nodes, n
DOM[n] ← {1 . . . N }
Changed ← true
while (Changed)
Changed ← false
for all nodes, n, in reverse postorder 


new set ←
{n}
p∈preds(n) DOM[p]
if (new set = DOM[n])
DOM[n] ← new set
Changed ← true
Figure 1: The Iterative Dominator Algorithm
This formulation lets the compiler compute Dom sets as a forward data-ﬂow problem [5, 19]. Given a cfg,
G = (N, E, n0 ), where N is a set of nodes, E is a set of directed edges, and n0 is the designated entry node
for the cfg, the following data-ﬂow equations deﬁne the Dom sets:
Dom(n0 ) = {n0 }

Dom(n) = 




Dom(p) ∪ {n}

p∈preds(n)

We assume that the nodes are numbered in postorder, and that preds is a relation deﬁned over E that maps
a node to its predecessors in G.
To solve these equations, the compiler can use an iterative algorithm, as shown in Figure 1. Correct
initialization is important; the algorithm must either initialize each Dom set to include all the nodes, or it
must exclude uninitialized sets from the intersection. Both Allen and Cocke [5] and Hecht [18, pp. 179–180]
show similar formulations.
Properties of the Iterative Framework
This algorithm produces correct results because the equations for Dom, as shown above, form a distributive
data-ﬂow framework as deﬁned by Kam and Ullman [20]. Thus, we know that the iterative algorithm will
discover the maximal ﬁxed-point solution and halt. Since the framework is distributive, we know that the
maximal ﬁxed-point solution is identical to the meet-over-all paths solution—which matches the deﬁnition
of Dom.
The equations for Dom are simple enough that they form a rapid framework [20]. Thus, an iterative
algorithm that traverses the graph in reverse postorder will halt in no more than d(G) + 3 passes, where
d(G) is the loop connectedness of the graph. For a reducible graph, d(G) is independent of the depth-ﬁrst
spanning tree used to generate the postorder numbering.3 With an irreducible graph, d(G) depends on the
speciﬁc depth-ﬁrst spanning tree used to compute reverse postorder. Thus, on an irreducible graph, the
running time of the algorithm depends on the traversal order.
An Example
Figure 2 shows a small irreducible graph, along with the results of the iterative dominators computation.
Each node is labelled with its postorder number, and we will refer to each node by that number. The
right side shows the sets computed on each iteration over the graph. After the ﬁrst iteration, node 2 has
the wrong dominator set because the algorithm has not processed node 1. Since node 1 is one of node 2’s
3 Two studies suggest that, even before the advent of “structured programming,” most procedures had reducible cfgs [5] and

that d(G) is typically ≤ 3 for cfgs [21].

5



5





4

1



 3
 2


First Pass
{5}
{5, 4}
{5, 3}
{5, 3, 2}
{5, 1}

Node
5
4
3
2
1

Dom[b]
Second Pass
{5}
{5, 4}
{5, 3}
{5, 2}
{5, 1}

Third Pass
{5}
{5, 4}
{5, 3}
{5, 2}
{5, 1}

Figure 2: Computing Dominators on an Irreducible Graph
predecessors, the intersection that computes Dom[2] uses the initial value for Dom[1], and overestimates
Dom[2] as Dom[3] ∪ {2}. On the second iteration, both of node 2’s predecessors have been processed, and
their intersection produces the correct dominator set for node 2. The third iteration changes no sets, and
the algorithm halts.
Engineering the Data Structures
This iterative algorithm is both easy to understand and easy to implement. However, it is impractically
slow. A version that uses distinct bit-vector Dom sets at each node is up to 900 times slower than our
implementation of the Lengauer-Tarjan algorithm. With large graphs, considerable time is wasted performing
intersections on sparsely populated sets and copying these sets from one node to another. When we tried
to reduce the time necessary to do the intersections by substituting SparseSets for the bit vectors [9], the
increased memory requirements again made the algorithm impractical.
To improve the iterative algorithm’s performance, we need a memory-eﬃcient data structure that supports
a fast intersection. Keeping the Dom sets in a consistent order is one way to speed up intersection. If we
think of the set as a list, and require that the union always add to the end of the list, then the Dom sets will
reﬂect the order in which nodes are added. With this order, if Dom(a) ∩ Dom(b) = ∅, then the resulting set
is a preﬁx of both Dom(a) and Dom(b).
This observation lets us implement intersection as a forward walk through the ordered sets, performing
a pairwise comparison of elements. If the elements agree, that node is copied into the result set, and the
comparison moves to the next element. When the elements disagree or the end of the sets is reached, the
intersection terminates, and the current node is added as the last element of its own dominator set.
To improve memory eﬃciency, we rely on a subtle property of these ordered Dom sets. Notice that, for
all nodes except n0
Dom(b) = {b} ∪ IDom(b) ∪ IDom(IDom(b)) · · · {n0 }
This suggests a relationship between the ordered Dom set and an auxiliary data structure called the dominator tree. It contains the nodes of the cfg, with edges that reﬂect dominance. In the dominator tree, each
node is a child of its immediate dominator in the cfg.
Dom(b) contains exactly those nodes on a path through the dominator tree from the entry node n0 to
b. Our ordered intersection operator creates Dom(b) in precisely the order of that path. The ﬁrst element
of Dom(b) is n0 . The last element of Dom(b) is b. The penultimate element of Dom(b) is b’s immediate
dominator—the node in Dom(b) that is closest to b. Thus, with these ordered Dom sets, we can read IDom
directly from the sets.
This relationship between the Dom sets and the dominator tree suggests an alternative data structure.
Rather than keeping distinct Dom sets, the algorithm can represent the dominator tree and read the Dom
sets from the tree. The algorithm keeps a single array, doms, for the whole cfg, indexed by node. For
a node b, we represent b’s inclusion in Dom(b) implicitly. The entry doms(b) holds IDom(b). The entry
doms(doms(b)) holds the next entry, which is IDom(IDom(b)). By walking the doms array, starting at b, we
can reconstruct both the path through the dominator tree from b to n0 and b’s Dom set.
To use this representation, the algorithm must perform intersection by starting at the back of the Dom
set and moving toward the front—the opposite direction from our earlier description. This reverses the sense
6

for all nodes, b /* initialize the dominators array */
doms[b] ← Undefined
doms[start node] ← start node
Changed ← true
while (Changed)
Changed ← false
for all nodes, b, in reverse postorder (except start node)
new idom ← first (processed) predecessor of b /* (pick one) */
for all other predecessors, p, of b
if doms[p] = Undefined /* i.e., if doms[p] already calculated */
new idom ← intersect(p, new idom)
if doms[b] = new idom
doms[b] ← new idom
Changed ← true
function intersect(b1, b2) returns node
finger1 ← b1
finger2 ← b2
while (finger1 = finger2)
while (finger1 < finger2)
finger1 = doms[finger1]
while (finger2 < finger1)
finger2 = doms[finger2]
return finger1
Figure 3: The Engineered Algorithm
and termination condition of the intersections: under this scheme, we move backwards through the lists,
comparing elements until they are the same.
Figure 3 shows the code for the iterative algorithm with these improvements. The intersection routine
appears at the bottom of the ﬁgure. It implements a “two-ﬁnger” algorithm – one can imagine a ﬁnger
pointing to each dominator set, each ﬁnger moving independently as the comparisons dictate. In this case,
the comparisons are on postorder numbers; for each intersection, we start the two ﬁngers at the ends of
the two sets, and, until the ﬁngers point to the same postorder number, we move the ﬁnger pointing to the
smaller number back one element. Remember that nodes higher in the dominator tree have higher postorder
numbers, which is why intersect moves the ﬁnger whose value is less than the other ﬁnger’s. When the two
ﬁngers point at the same element, intersect returns that element. The set resulting from the intersection
begins with the returned element and chains its way up the doms array to the entry node.
This scheme has several advantages. It saves space by sharing representations—IDom(b) occurs once,
rather than once in each Dom set that contains it. It saves time by avoiding the cost of allocating and
initializing separate Dom sets for each node. It avoids data movement: with separate sets, each element in
the result set of an intersection was copied into that set; with the doms array, none of those elements are
copied. Finally, it explicitly represents IDom.
An Example
Figure 4 shows a somewhat more complex example. This graph requires four iterations instead of three,
since its loop connectedness, d(G), is one greater than the example of Figure 2. The right side of the ﬁgure
shows the contents of the doms array at each stage of the algorithm. For brevity, we have omitted the fourth
iteration, where doms does not change.

The doms array is indexed by node name, and all entries are initialized with a recognizable value to
indicate that they are not yet computed. At each node, b, we intersect the dominator sets of b’s predecessors.
7



6




 4


  
  3
1
2 

5

Before 1st
Iteration:

After 1st
Iteration:

After 2nd
Iteration:

After 3rd
Iteration:

doms
6
u
u
u
u
u

doms
6
6
6
4
4
6

doms
6
6
6
4
6
6

doms
6
6
6
6
6
6

Node 6
Node 5
Node 4
Node 3
Node 2
Node 1

Figure 4: An Example with the Engineered Algorithm
At node 2, in the ﬁrst iteration, we call the intersect routine with 3 and 4. An intuitive way to view
the intersect routine is to imagine that it walks up the dominator tree from two diﬀerent nodes until a
common parent is reached. Thus, intersect sets f inger1 to 3 and f inger2 to 4. Since f inger1 is less
than f inger2 (remember that we are using postorder numbers as node names), we set f inger1 equal to
doms[f inger1], which is 4. (This moved f inger1 up the dominator tree to its parent.) The two ﬁngers now
point to the same node, so intersect returns that node, which is 4. Next, we look at 2’s last predecessor,
node 1, but, since its dominator has not yet been calculated, we skip it and record new idom (in this case, 4)
in doms[2].
Of course, node 2’s dominator is not node 4, but this is only the result of the ﬁrst iteration. The second
iteration is more interesting. The ﬁrst intersection at node 2 compares 3 and 4, and produces 4. The second
intersection compares 1 and 4, and produces 6, which becomes the ﬁnal value for 2. It takes one more
iteration for 6 to ﬁlter over to node 3. The algorithm then makes one ﬁnal pass (not shown) to discover that
none of the information changes.

Complexity Analysis
Traversing the graph to compute the reverse postorder sequence takes O(N ) time. The resulting sequence
has N elements. The traversal that computes Dom and IDom visits each node. At each node, it performs
a set of pairwise intersections over the incoming edges. (The unions have been made implicit in the data
structure.) Taken over the entire traversal, this is O(E) intersections that require time proportional to the
size of the Dom sets they consume. Thus, the total cost per iteration is O(N + E · D) where D is the size of
the largest Dom set. The number of iterations depends on the shape of the graph. Kam and Ullman showed
that the iterative algorithm will halt in no more than d(G) + 3 iterations. Of course, this is an upper bound,
and the loop connectedness of an irreducible graph is a function of the order in which the depth-ﬁrst search
computes the reverse postorder numbering.

Dominance Frontiers
The other part of dominance that plays an important part in the ssa construction is the calculation of
dominance frontiers for each node in the cfg. Cytron et al. deﬁne the dominance frontier of a node, b, as:
. . . the set of all cfg nodes, y, such that b dominates a predecessor of y but does not strictly
dominate y [13].
Dominance frontiers have applications to algorithms other than ssa, as well. For example, ﬁnding postdominance frontiers is an eﬃcient method of computing control dependence, a critical analysis for automatic
parallelization [6].

8

for all nodes, b
if the number of predecessors of b ≥ 2
for all predecessors, p, of b
runner ← p
while runner = doms[b]
add b to runner’s dominance frontier set
runner = doms[runner]
Figure 5: The Dominance-Frontier Algorithm
Cytron et al. propose ﬁnding the dominance frontier set for each node in a two step manner. They begin
by walking over the dominator tree in a bottom-up traversal. At each node, b, they add to b’s dominancefrontier set any cfg successors not dominated by b. They then traverse the dominance-frontier sets of b’s
dominator-tree children – each member of these frontiers that is not dominated by b is copied into b’s
dominance frontier.
We approach the problem from the opposite direction, based on three observations. First, nodes in a
dominance frontier represent join points in the graph, nodes into which control ﬂows from multiple predecessors. Second, the predecessors of any join point, j, must have j in their respective dominance-frontier sets,
unless the predecessor dominates j. This is a direct result of the deﬁnition of dominance frontiers, above.
Finally, the dominators of j’s predecessors must themselves have j in their dominance-frontier sets unless
they also dominate j.
These observations lead to a simple algorithm.4 First, we identify each join point, j – any node with
more than one incoming edge is a join point. We then examine each predecessor, p, of j and walk up
the dominator tree starting at p. We stop the walk when we reach j’s immediate dominator – j is in the
dominance frontier of each of the nodes in the walk, except for j’s immediate dominator. Intuitively, all of
the rest of j’s dominators are shared by j’s predecessors as well. Since they dominate j, they will not have j
in their dominance frontiers. The pseudo code is given in Figure 5.
There is a small amount of bookkeeping not shown; speciﬁcally, any j should be added to a node’s dominance
frontier only once, but the data structure used for the dominance frontier sets will dictate the amount of
additional work necessary. In our implementation, we use linked lists for dominance-frontier sets, so we keep
a SparseSet [9] to restrict multiple entries – when a join point is entered into a node’s dominance-frontier
set, we put that node into the SparseSet, and, before a join point is entered into a node’s dominance-frontier
set, we check to see if that node is already in the SparseSet.
Complexity Analysis
Traversing the cfg requires O(N ) time. If each node in the graph were a join point, we would have to
do at least N × 2 walks up the dominator tree giving us a quadratic timebound. But remember that the
walks always stop as early as possible. That is, we only touch a node, n, if the join point belongs in the
dominance frontier of n. Thus, the number of nodes touched is equal to the sum of the sizes of all of the
dominance-frontier sets. This sum can be quadratic in the number of nodes, but we contend that the sets
cannot be built any more eﬃciently. In other words, we do no more work than is required.
As we shall see, this approach tends to run faster than Cytron et al.’s algorithm in practice, almost
certainly for two reasons. First, the iterative algorithm has already built the dominator tree. Second, the
algorithm uses no more comparisons than are strictly necessary.
4 This algorithm first appeared in a paper by Ferrante et al. in the context of control dependence [14]. We believe that its value

as a method of computing dominance frontiers has not been studied prior to this work.

9

Experiments
The iterative formulation of dominators, with the improvements that we have described, is both simple and
practical. To show this, we implemented both our algorithm and the Lengauer-Tarjan algorithm (with path
compression but not balancing) in C in our research compiler and ran a series of experiments to compare
their behavior. With our algorithm, we built the dominance-frontier calculation as described in the previous
section. Alongside our Lengauer-Tarjan implementation, we built the dominance-frontier calculation as
described by Cytron et al. [13]. The timing results for our algorithm include the cost of computing the
reverse postorder numbers, although in neither case do we include the cost of building the dominator tree –
it is a natural byproduct of our algorithm, and so we felt it an unfair test to include the time to build the
tree in the Lengauer-Tarjan/Cytron et al. implementation.
One of the ﬁrst problems that we encountered was the size of our test codes. They were too small to
provide reasonable timing measurements. All the experiments were run on a 300 MHz Sun Ultra10 under the
Solaris operating system. On this machine, the clock() function has a granularity of only one hundredth
of a second.5 Our standard test suite contains 169 Fortran routines taken from the SPEC benchmarks and
from Forsythe, Malcolm, and Moler’s book on numerical methods [15]. The largest cfg in the suite is from
field, with 744 basic blocks.6 On this ﬁle, the timer only measures one hundredth of a second of cpu
time to compute dominators using the iterative algorithm. The vast majority of the codes in our test suite
registered zero time to compute dominators.
This result is signiﬁcant in its own right. On real programs, both of the algorithms ran so fast that their
speed is not a critical component of compilation time. Again, this suggests that the compiler writer should
choose the algorithm that is easiest to understand and to implement.
We performed two sets of experiments to better understand the tradeoﬀ of complexity with runtime. In
the ﬁrst experiment, we modiﬁed the dominator calculation to run multiple times for each cfg, carefully
making sure that each iteration did the same amount of work as a single, isolated run. In the second
experiment, we created artiﬁcial graphs of a size which would register reliably on our timer.
Our Test Suite
For our ﬁrst experiment, we modiﬁed each of the two dominator algorithms to iterate over the same graph
multiple times and recorded the total time. To ensure that the smaller graphs – those of fewer than twentyﬁve nodes – register on our timer, we build the dominator information 10, 000 times on each example. To
allow for comparison, all graphs were run that many times.
We ran the two algorithms on an unloaded 300 MHz Sun Ultra 10 with 256 megabytes of RAM. To adjust
for interference, we ran each graph through both algorithms ten times and recorded the lowest run time.2
For each graph, we measured the time to compute dominators and the time to compute dominance frontiers.
We also measured the time to compute postdominators and postdominance frontiers.3 The postdominance
computation has a diﬀerent behavior, because the reversed cfg has a diﬀerent shape. This gives us additional
insight into the behavior of the algorithms.
In cfgs generated from real-world codes, it is more common to encounter irreducible graphs when
calculating postdominance information. Broadly speaking, irreducible loops are caused by multiple-entry
loops. While few modern languages allow a jump into the middle of a loop, almost all languages allow a
jump out of the middle of the loop, and real-world codes tend to do this with some frequency. When we
walk backwards through the cfg, jumps out of a loop become jumps into a loop, and irreducibility results.

5 The manual page for clock() says that the time returned is in microseconds; however, we found that in practice, the amount
of cpu time is reported only down to the hundredth of a second.
6 This number includes empty basic blocks put in to split critical edges, a transformation often done to enable or simplify
optimizations.
2 Choosing the lowest time, instead of, as is often done, the average time, makes sense when comparing deterministic algorithms.
Measurements on real machines, necessary to show that the theory is working in practice, will have variance due to external
factors, such as context switching. These factors can only increase the running time. Thus, the most accurate measure of a
deterministic algorithm’s running time is the one that includes the lowest amount of irrelevant work.
3 Postdominators are dominators on the reversed cfg.

10

Iterative Algorithm
Dominance
Postdominance
Dom DF
Dom
DF
3148 1446
2753
1416
1551
716
1486
674
711
309
600
295
289
160
297
151
156
86
165
94
49
26
52
25

Number
of Nodes
> 400
201–400
101–200
51–100
26–50
<= 25

Lengauer-Tarjan/Cytron et al.
Dominance
Postdominance
Dom DF
Dom
DF
7332 2241
6845
1921
3315 1043
3108
883
1486
446
1392
388
744
219
700
191
418
119
412
99
140
32
134
26

1
Average times by graph size, measured in 100
’s of a second

Table 1: Runtimes for 10, 000 Runs of Our Fortran Test Suite, aggregated by Graph Size
The timing results are shown in Table 1. For the dominance calculation, the iterative algorithm runs
about 2.5 times faster than Lengauer-Tarjan, on average. The improvement slowly decreases as the number
of blocks increases. This is what we would expect: the Lengauer and Tarjan algorithm has a greater startup
cost, which gets amortized in larger graphs. Of course, the Lengauer-Tarjan results should catch up quickly
based on the relative asymptotic complexity. That this is not the case argues strongly that real-world codes
have low connectivity of irreducible loops and their shapes allow for comparatively fast intersections.
For computing dominance frontiers, the times begin to diverge as the number of blocks increases. It
appears that the advantage of our algorithm over Cytron et al.’s algorithm increases as the cfg gets larger,
ultimately resulting in an approximately 30% speedup for the largest graphs. We believe this is because, in
general, larger graphs have more complicated control ﬂow. The amount of work done by the Cytron et al.
algorithm grows as a function of the size of the dominance-frontier sets, whereas our formulation grows with
the size of the cfg.
Larger Graphs

We believe that the sizeable improvement in running time only tells part of the story. While the advantage in
asymptotic complexity of Lengauer-Tarjan should give it better running times over the iterative algorithm,
we need to ask the question of when the asymptotic advantage takes over. To answer this, we built huge
graphs which, as we will show, provide an insight into the value of the iterative algorithm.
Building Random Graphs
To obtain appropriate cfgs, we had to design a mechanism that generates large random cfgs.4 Since
we were primarily interested in understanding the behavior of the algorithms on programs, as opposed to
arbitrary graphs, we measured the characteristics of the cfgs of the programs in our test suite and used
these statistics to generate random graphs with similar properties.
Our test suite contains, in total, 11,644 blocks and 16,494 edges. Eleven percent of the edges are back
edges. Sixty-one percent of the blocks have only one outgoing edge, and ﬁfty-ﬁve percent of the blocks have
only one incoming edge. Blocks with two incoming or outgoing edges were thirty-four percent and forty-three
percent of the total, respectively. The remaining incoming and outgoing edges were grouped in sets of three
or more per block.
Using these measurements, we built a program that performs a preorder walk over an imaginary graph.
As the “walk” progresses, it instantiates nodes as it reaches them. It starts by creating a single, initial block,
n0 . It randomly determines the number of edges coming out of that block, based on the statistics from our
test suite, and instantiates those edges. Next, it walks those edges in a recursive depth-ﬁrst search. Each
4 Note that this analysis concerns only the structure of the cfg, so the basic blocks in our random graphs contain nothing except

branching operations.

11

Average (.01-secs)
Standard Deviation

Iterative Algorithm
Dominance
Postdominance
Dom
DF
Dom
DF
39.72 18.91 38.68
12.63
2.30
1.86
2.12
0.58

Lengauer-Tarjan/Cytron et al.
Dominance
Postdominance
Dom
DF
Dom
DF
41.80 25.21 39.75
18.85
0.92
2.88
0.78
0.51

Table 2: Runtime Statistics for the 100-graph Test Suite
time it traverses an edge, it creates a new block to serve as its sink, determines the number and kind of
successor edges that the new block should have, and instantiates them. It continues in this fashion until it
has generated the desired number of nodes. At that point, there will be a number of edges that do not yet
have a sink. It connects those edges to blocks that already exist.
Creating back edges is problematic. The classic method used to identify a back edge has an implicit
assumption that the entire graph has been deﬁned [28]. Since the random graph builder does not have access
to the entire graph, it cannot tell, for certain, whether an edge will be a back edge in the completed graph.
Thus, it cannot add the back edges as it builds the rest of the graph. Instead, the graph builder builds a
queue of all the edges that it intends to be back edges. It does not traverse these edges in the depth-ﬁrst
search. Instead, it waits until all of the nodes have been instantiated and then processes the prospective
back edges on the queue, connecting them to appropriate nodes.
The resulting graphs matched the characteristics of the test suite codes almost exactly, with two variations, back edges and loop connectedness. Because the graph builder must add edges before the graph is
fully deﬁned, it cannot know the total number of successors that a node will have. This uncertainty shows
up in two ways. First, the generated graphs have fewer back edges than the cfgs in the test suite—eight
percent versus eleven percent. Second, the loop connectedness of the generated graphs is higher than that
of the cfgs in the test suite—slightly over three versus 1.11 for the test suite.
These diﬀerences have an important implication for measuring the running time of our algorithm versus
Lengauer-Tarjan. The complexity of our algorithm depends on the loop connectedness of the graph, since
it uses Kam and Ullman’s formulation of the iterative algorithm. The Lengauer-Tarjan algorithm always
requires two passes, independent of the graph’s structure. Thus, the higher value for d(G) should favor
Lengauer-Tarjan, at our algorithm’s expense.
Measurements on Large Random Graphs
Because graphs with 500 nodes barely registered on our system’s timer, we needed graphs that were at least
an order of magnitude larger. To ﬁll this need, we used the graph builder to create a test suite of 100 graphs
of 30, 000 nodes each.
Table 2 shows the results of our timing experiments for the test suite of 100 large, random graphs. It
reports the numbers for dominance and postdominance, under the iterative scheme and under the LengauerTarjan algorithm. The ﬁrst row shows the average solution time, across all 100 graphs. The second row
shows the standard deviation in that time, across all 100 graphs. Within each category, two numbers appear.
The column labelled Dom reports the time for the dominator calculation, while the column labelled DF
reports the time for the dominance-frontier calculation.
If we add the times to compute dominators and dominance frontiers, our algorithms run about 12%
faster than Lengauer-Tarjan. The main advantage is from the faster dominance-frontier calculation, which is
about 25% faster on the forward problem, and about 33% faster on the backward problem. We conjectured
that the asymptotic diﬀerences between the dominance algorithms would shift the advantage from the
iterative algorithm to the Lengauer-Tarjan, and this graph suggests that this point is near 30, 000 nodes;
however, computing the crossover is complicated by the variability of the shape of the graph. For example, on
a cfg with 30, 000 nodes in a straight line—each node has only one parent and only one child—the iterative
scheme takes only four hundredths of a second, while the Lengauer-Tarjan algorithm takes its standard 0.4
seconds. The conclusion to be drawn from this experiment is nonetheless clear: the iterative algorithm is
competitive with Lengauer-Tarjan even on unrealistically large graphs.

12

Summary and Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented a technique for computing dominators on a control-ﬂow graph. The
algorithm builds on the well-developed and well-understood theory of iterative data-ﬂow analysis. By relying
on some fundamental insights into the nature of the dominance information, we were able to engineer
a representation for the dominator sets that saves on both space and time. The resulting algorithm is
2.5 times faster than the classic Lengauer-Tarjan algorithm on real programs. On control-ﬂow graphs of
30, 000 nodes—a factor of almost 40 times larger than the largest cfg in the SPEC benchmarks—our
method and Lengauer-Tarjan take, essentially, the same time.
Our simple iterative technique is faster than the Lengauer-Tarjan algorithm. Its simplicity makes it
easy to implement, easy to understand, and easy to teach. It eliminates many of the costs that occur
in an implementation with separate sets—in particular, much of the allocation, initialization, and data
movement. This simple, fast technique should be the method of choice for implementing dominators – not
only is development time very short, but the compiler writer can have a high degree of conﬁdence in the
implementation’s correctness. The algorithm for the dominance frontier calculation is not only simpler but
also faster than the original algorithm by Cytron et al.

Acknowledgements
Several people provided insight, support, and suggestions that improved this work. Fran Allen helped us
track down the origins of the iterative approach to dominance. Preston Briggs made insightful suggestions
on both the exposition in general and the experimental results in particular. Steve Reeves and Linda Torczon
participated in many of the discussions. The members of the Massively Scalar Compiler Project provided
us with support and a system in which to conduct these experiments. To all these people go our heartfelt
thanks.

References
[1] A. V. Aho, J. E. Hopcroft, and J. D. Ullman. On ﬁnding lowest common ancestors in trees. In STOC:
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC) , 1973.
[2] A. V. Aho and J. D. Ullman. The Theory of Parsing, Translation, and Compiling. Prentice-Hall, 1972.
[3] A. V. Aho and J. D. Ullman. Principles of Compiler Design. Addison-Wesley, 1977.
[4] F. E. Allen. Control ﬂow analysis. SIGPLAN Notices, 5(7):1–19, July 1970. Proceedings of a Symposium
on Compiler Optimization.
[5] F. E. Allen and J. Cocke. Graph-theoretic constructs for program ﬂow analysis. Technical Report RC
3923 (17789), IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, July 1972.
[6] R. Allen and K. Kennedy. Advanced Compilation for Vector and Parallel Computers. Morgan-Kaufmann,
2001.
[7] S. Alstrup, D. Harel, P. W. Lauridsen, and M. Thorup. Dominators in linear time. SIAM J. Comput.,
28(6):2117–2132, June 1999.
[8] P. Briggs, K. D. Cooper, and L. T. Simpson. Value numbering. Software–Practice and Experience,
00(00), June 1997. Also available as a Technical Report From Center for Research on Parallel Computation, Rice University, number 95517-S.
[9] P. Briggs and L. Torczon. An eﬃcient representation for sparse sets. ACM Letters on Programming
Languages and Systems, 2(1–4):59–69, March–December 1993.
[10] A. L. Buchsbaum, H. Kaplan, A. Rogers, and J. R. Westbrook. Linear-time pointer-machine algorithms
for least common ancestors, mst veriﬁcation, and dominators. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 279–288, 1998.
13

check this

[11] A. L. Buchsbaum, H. Kaplan, A. Rogers, and J. R. Westbrook. Linear-time pointer-machine algorithms
for least common ancestors, mst veriﬁcation, and dominators. ACM Transactions on Programming
Languages and Systems, 20(6):1265–1296, Nov. 1998.
[12] M. Carroll and B. G. Ryder. An incremental algorithm for software analysis. In Proceedings of the SIGPLAN/SIGSOFT Software Engineering Symposium on Practical Software Development Environments,
SIGPLAN Notices 22(1), pages 171–179, Jan. 1987.
[13] R. Cytron, J. Ferrante, B. K. Rosen, M. N. Wegman, and F. K. Zadeck. Eﬃciently computing static single assignment form and the control dependence graph. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages
and Systems, 13(4):451–490, Oct. 1991.
[14] J. Ferrante, K. J. Ottenstein, and J. D. Warren. The program dependence graph and its use in optimization. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 9(3):319–349, July 1987.
[15] G. E. Forsythe, M. A. Malcolm, and C. B. Moler. Computer Methods for Mathematical Computations.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, New Jersey, 1977.
[16] H. N. Gabow and R. E. Tarjan. A linear-time algorithm for a special case of disjoint set union. Journal
of Computer and System Sciences, 30:209–221, 1985.
[17] D. Harel. A linear time algorithm for ﬁnding dominators in ﬂow graphs and related problems. In
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 185–194, May
1985.
[18] M. S. Hecht. Flow Analysis of Computer Programs. Programming Languages Series. Elsevier NorthHolland, Inc., 52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York, NY 10017, 1977.
[19] M. S. Hecht and J. D. Ullman. A simple algorithm for global data ﬂow analysis problems. SIAM J.
Comput., 4(4):519–532, Dec. 1975.
[20] J. B. Kam and J. D. Ullman. Global data ﬂow analysis and iterative algorithms. Journal of the ACM,
23(1):158–171, Jan. 1976.
[21] D. E. Knuth. An empirical study of Fortran programs. Software – Practice and Experience, 1:105–133,
1971.
[22] T. Lengauer and R. E. Tarjan. A fast algorithm for ﬁnding dominators in a ﬂowgraph. ACM Transactions
on Programming Languages and Systems, 1(1):115–120, July 1979.
[23] E. Lowry and C. Medlock. Object code optimization. Communications of the ACM, pages 13–22, Jan.
1969.
[24] J. Paul W. Purdom and E. F. Moore. Immediate predominators in a directed graph. Communications
of the ACM, 15(8):777–778, Aug. 1972.
[25] K. Pingali and G. Bilardi. Optimal control dependence computation and the Roman chariots problem.
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 19(3):462–491, May 1997.
[26] R. Prosser. Applications of boolean matrices to the analysis of ﬂow diagrams. In Proceedings of the
Eastern Joint Computer Conference, pages 133–138. Spartan Books, NY, USA, Dec. 1959.
[27] P. H. Sweany and S. J. Beaty. Dominator-path scheduling—a global scheduling method. SIGMICRO
Newsletter, 23(12):260–263, Dec. 1992. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual International Symposium on
Microarchitecture.
[28] R. E. Tarjan. Finding dominators in directed graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 3(1):62–89, Mar. 1974.
[29] R. E. Tarjan. Testing ﬂow graph reducibility. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 9:355–365, 1974.

14

