# Hardware I/O

Chapter 8

Hardware I/O
8.1

Interrupt Delivery

Interrupts are delivered as notiﬁcations. A thread may conﬁgure the kernel to signal a particular
Notiﬁcation object each time a certain interrupt triggers. Threads may then wait for interrupts to
occur by calling seL4_Wait() or seL4_Poll() on that Notiﬁcation.
IRQHandler capabilities represent the ability of a thread to conﬁgure a certain interrupt. They

have three methods:
seL4_IRQHandler_SetNotification() speciﬁes the Notiﬁcation the kernel should signal() when
an interrupt occurs. A driver may then call seL4_Wait() or seL4_Poll() on this notiﬁcation
to wait for interrupts to arrive.
seL4_IRQHandler_Ack() informs the kernel that the userspace driver has ﬁnished processing
the interrupt and the kernel can send further pending or new interrupts to the application.
seL4_IRQHandler_Clear() de-registers the Notiﬁcation from the IRQHandler object.
When the system ﬁrst starts, no IRQHandler capabilities are present. Instead, the initial thread’s
CSpace contains a single IRQControl capability. This capability may be used to produce a single
IRQHandler capability for each interrupt available in the system. Typically, the initial thread of
a system will determine which IRQs are required by other components in the system, produce
an IRQHandler capability for each interrupt, and then delegate the resulting capabilities as appropriate. Methods on IRQControl can be used for creating IRQHandler capabilities for interrupt
sources.

8.2

x86-Speciﬁc I/O

8.2.1

Interrupts

In addition to managing IRQHandler capabilities, x86 platforms require the delivery location in
the CPU vectors to be conﬁgured. Regardless of where an interrupt comes from (IOAPIC, MSI,
etc) it must be assigned a unique vector for delivery, ranging from VECTOR_MIN to VECTOR_MAX. The rights to allocate a vector are effectively given through the IRQControl capability and
can be considered as the kernel outsourcing the allocation of this namespace to user level.
seL4_IRQControl_GetIOAPIC() creates an IRQHandler capability for an IOAPIC interrupt
seL4_IRQControl_GetMSI() creates an IRQHandler capability for an MSI interrupt
44

8.2. X86-SPECIFIC I/O

8.2.2

45

I/O Ports

On x86 platforms, seL4 provides access to I/O ports to user-level threads. Access to I/O ports
is controlled by IO Port capabilities. Each IO Port capability identiﬁes a range of ports that can
be accessed with it. Reading from I/O ports is accomplished with the seL4_X86_IOPort_In8(),
seL4_X86_IOPort_In16(), and seL4_X86_IOPort_In32() methods, which allow for reading of
8-, 16- and 32-bit quantities. Similarly, writing to I/O ports is accomplished with the seL4_X86_IOPort_Out8(), seL4_X86_IOPort_Out16(), and seL4_X86_IOPort_Out32() methods. Each of
these methods takes as arguments an IO Port capability and an unsigned integer port, which
indicates the I/O port to read from or write to, respectively. In each case, port must be within the
range of I/O ports identiﬁed by the given IO Port capability in order for the method to succeed.
The I/O port methods return error codes upon failure. A seL4_IllegalOperation code is returned if port access is attempted outside the range allowed by the IO Port capability. Since
invocations that read from I/O ports are required to return two values – the value read and the
error code – a structure containing two members, result and error, is returned from these API
calls.
At system initialisation, the initial thread’s CSpace contains the IOPortControl capability, which
can be used to seL4_X86_IOPort_Issue() IO Port capabilities to sub ranges of I/O ports. Any
range that is issued may not have overlap with any existing issued IO Port capability.

8.2.3

I/O Space

I/O devices capable of DMA present a security risk because the CPU’s MMU is bypassed when
the device accesses memory. In seL4, device drivers run in user space to keep them out of the
trusted computing base. A malicious or buggy device driver may, however, program the device
to access or corrupt memory that is not part of its address space, thus subverting security. To
mitigate this threat, seL4 provides support for the IOMMU on Intel x86-based platforms. An
IOMMU allows memory to be remapped from the device’s point of view. It acts as an MMU for
the device, restricting the regions of system memory that it can access. More information can
be obtained from Intel’s IOMMU documentation [Intel Corporation, 2011].
Two new objects are provided by the kernel to abstract the IOMMU:
IOSpace This object represents the address space associated with a hardware device on the

PCI bus. It represents the right to modify a device’s memory mappings.
IOPageTable This object represents a node in the multilevel page-table structure used by IOMMU

hardware to translate hardware memory accesses.
Page capabilities are used to represent the actual frames that are mapped into the I/O address
space. A Page can be mapped into either a VSpace or an IOSpace but never into both at the same

time.
IOSpace and VSpace fault handling differ signiﬁcantly. VSpace page faults are redirected to the

thread’s exception handler (see Section 6.2), which can take the appropriate action and restart
the thread at the faulting instruction. There is no concept of an exception handler for an IOSpace.
Instead, faulting transactions are simply aborted; the device driver must correct the cause of the
fault and retry the DMA transaction.
An initial master IOSpace capability is provided in the initial thread’s CSpace. An IOSpace capability for a speciﬁc device is created by using the seL4_CNode_Mint() method, passing the PCI
identiﬁer of the device as the low 16 bits of the badge argument, and a Domain ID as the high 16
bits of the badge argument. PCI identiﬁers are explained fully in the PCI speciﬁcation [Shanley
and Anderson, 1999], but are brieﬂy described here. A PCI identiﬁer is a 16-bit quantity. The ﬁrst

46

CHAPTER 8. HARDWARE I/O

8 bits identify the bus that the device is on. The next 5 bits are the device identiﬁer: the number
of the device on the bus. The last 3 bits are the function number. A single device may consist
of several independent functions, each of which may be addressed by the PCI identiﬁer. Domain IDs are explained fully in the Intel IOMMU documentation [Intel Corporation, 2011]. There
is presently no way to query seL4 for how many Domain IDs are supported by the IOMMU and
the seL4_CNode_Mint() method will fail if an unsupported value is chosen.
The IOMMU page-table structure has three levels. Page tables are mapped into an IOSpace using the seL4_X86_IOPageTable_Map() method. This method takes the IOPageTable to map, the
IOSpace to map into and the address to map at. Three levels of page tables must be mapped
before a frame can be mapped successfully. A frame is mapped with the seL4_X86_Page_MapIO() method whose parameters are analogous to the corresponding method that maps Pages
into VSpaces (see Chapter 7), namely seL4_X86_Page_Map().
Unmapping is accomplished with the usual unmap (see Chapter 7) API call, seL4_X86_Page_Unmap().
More information about seL4’s IOMMU abstractions can be found in [Palande, 2009].

8.3

Arm-Speciﬁc I/O

8.3.1

Arm SMMU version 2.0

seL4 provides an API for programming the Arm System MMU (SMMU) version 2.0, which allows
system software to manage access rights and address translation for devices that can initiate
direct memory accesses (DMA).
An Arm SMMU v2.0 implementation allows device memory transactions to be associated with
an identiﬁer (StreamID) that is used to direct the transaction through a SMMU translation context
bank (CB). A translation context bank can perform address translation, memory protection and
memory attribute transformation. The standard speciﬁes different types of address translations
that correspond to stages in the ArmV8 virtual memory system architecture such as either nonsecure EL0, EL1 ﬁrst and second stage translations, Hyp mode translations or secure mode
translations. It is possible to associate different StreamIDs with the same context bank and
it is possible to share address translation tables between a context bank and software MMU
address space if the stage and type of translation is the same.
Faults that occur when a memory transaction conﬂicts with a StreamID or CB conﬁguration
happen asynchronously with respect to a processor element’s execution. When this occurs an
interrupt is used to allow a PE to handle the SMMU fault. Faults are reported through registers
in the SMMU that can be queried in an interrupt handler.
TLB maintenance operations are required to keep SMMU translation caches consistent when
there are changes to any valid page table mapping entries.
An SMMU implementation usually has a maximum number of StreamIDs that it supports. The
speciﬁcation allows StreamIDs to be up to 16bits wide. There are also a ﬁxed number of context
banks, up to a maximum of 128. Context banks can be generic or support only a single address
translation stage. This information is reported by ID registers in each implementation.
The seL4 API allows system software to manage an SMMU by assigning StreamIDs to context
banks, bind context banks to page translation structures, implement SMMU fault handling and
also perform explicit TLB maintenance. This allows system software to ensure that a device is
only able to access and modify memory contents that it has been explicitly given access to and
allow devices to be presented with a virtualised address space for performing DMA.

8.3. ARM-SPECIFIC I/O

47

All the StreamIDs and context banks are accessible via capabilities. Control capabilities are
used to create capabilities referring to each StreamID and context bank in a system. The kernel
tracks the allocation of StreamIDs and context banks with two static CNodes, one for each
resource type. These CNodes track which VSpace a context bank has bound to it, and which
context bank a StreamID is bound to.
The capabilities allow access control policies to be implemented by a user thread. When StreamID
or context bank capabilities are revoked, the kernel will disable the context banks or StreamID
mappings.
TLB maintenance is handled by the kernel via tracking which context banks are associated with
a particular VSpace. Any TLB maintenance operations that the kernel performs on VSpace invocations are also applied to associated context banks.
SMMU fault handling is delegated to user level via invocations that allow fault statuses to be
queried and cleared for each context bank and for the SMMU globally. SMMU fault interrupts
can be handled the same as other platform level interrupts.
The kernel implementation only uses translation stages matching what translation the kernel
is performing for VSpace objects. When seL4 is operating in EL1, the SMMU only uses stage
1 translation (ASID), that is "stage 1 with stage 2 bypass" in the context bank attribute conﬁguration. When hypervisor mode is enabled, and seL4 is operating in EL2, the SMMU only does
stage 2 translations.
Four capabilities types provide access to SMMU resources:
seL4_ARM_SID A capability granting access to a single transaction stream, which can be used

to bind and unbind a stream to a single context bank.
seL4_ARM_CB A capability representing a single speciﬁc context bank. It can be used to bind

and unbind a VSpace to assign what page tables the context bank should use for translation, assign StreamIDs and process context bank faults.
seL4_ARM_SIDControl A control capability which can be used to create seL4_ARM_SID capabilities to speciﬁc transaction streams. The seL4_ARM_SIDControl cap is used for managing

rights on StreamID conﬁgurations. This capability is provided in the initial thread’s CSpace.
seL4_ARM_CBControl A control capability that can be used to derive seL4_ARM_CB capabilities.
The seL4_ARM_CBControl cap is used for managing rights on context bank conﬁgurations.

This capability is provided in the initial thread’s CSpace.
8.3.1.1

Creating seL4_ARM_SID capabilities

The Arm SMMU 2.0 speciﬁcation doesn’t specify how StreamIDs need to correspond to different
devices. Each platform can deﬁne its own policy for how StreamIDs are allocated. A seL4_ARM_SIDControl capability can be used to create a capability to any valid StreamID for the SMMU and
delegate access to other tasks in the system.
seL4_ARM_SIDControl_GetSID() uses the seL4_ARM_SIDControl capability to create a new seL4_ARM_SID capability that represents a single StreamID. This new capbility is placed in the
provided slot. It is expected that whatever thread controls an seL4_ARM_SIDControl capability knows about how StreamIDs are allocated in a system.
The Arm SMMU 2.0 speciﬁcation describes many ways of associating StreamIDs with context
banks. Currently only direct mapping of a StreamID to a context bank is supported.

48

CHAPTER 8. HARDWARE I/O

8.3.1.2

Creating seL4_ARM_CB capabilities

Each context bank allows the SMMU to maintain an active translation context with it’s own
registers for holding context speciﬁc information. An SMMU has a ﬁxed number of context
banks available for use and these are allocated using the seL4_ARM_CBControl capability.
seL4_ARM_CBControl_GetCB() uses the seL4_ARM_CBControl capability to create a new seL4_ARM_CB capability that represents a single context bank. This new capability is placed
in the provided slot. It is expected that whatever thread controls a seL4_ARM_CBControl
capability has knowledge of the properties of each context bank that each index refers to.
8.3.1.3

Conﬁguring context banks

By providing a seL4_ARM_CB cap, a user-level thread can conﬁgure the VSpace used by the bank
with the following API:
seL4_ARM_CB_AssignVspace() conﬁgures the context bank to use the provided VSpace root for
translations.
seL4_ARM_CB_UnassignVspace() removes the conﬁgured VSpace and invalidates the TLB.
The SMMU-v2 uses the same paging structure as the MMU (AArch_64 and AArch_32 formats).
Therefore, there is no need to provide a new set of page structure caps nor a separate set of
map and unmap functions. To manage the assignment, the kernel has an internal CNode, called
smmuStateCBNode, that stores copies of the VSpace_cap created by executing the above API.
The copy of the VSpace_cap contains its assigned ContextBank number. Therefore the kernel
can conduct context bank invalidation if the VSpace_cap is revoked.
8.3.1.4

Conﬁguring streams (transactions)

A user-level thread can bind a context bank with an seL4_ARM_SID capability with:
seL4_ARM_SID_BindCB() conﬁgures the stream to use given context bank for translation. To
simplify the process, the binding also enables the stream ID. seL4_ARM_SID_BindCB generates a copy of the seL4_ARM_CB cap in kernel’s internal CNode. This allows the stream ID
to be disabled if the seL4_ARM_CB cap is revoked.
seL4_ARM_SID_UnbindCB() removes the seL4_ARM_CB cap from the kernel’s internal CNode and
disables the stream ID. The kernel provides this API for the conveniences of sharing a
stream ID among multiple VSpaces.
If there are any exceptions after the stream ID is enabled, the user-level software should use the
fault handling mechanisms to resolve them.
8.3.1.5

Copying and Deleting caps

The kernel allows copying both ARM_SID cap and seL4_ARM_CB cap. This allows capabilities
to be delegated to different threads. The kernel does not allow copying neither the seL4_ARM_SIDControl nor the seL4_ARM_CBControl capabilities.
Deleting a seL4_ARM_CB cap that contains a valid capBindSID ﬁeld will:
• invalidate the streamID to ContextBank assignment in hardware.
Deleting the last seL4_ARM_CB cap will:
• perform an seL4_ARM_CB_UnassignVspace(), removing any conﬁgured VSpace,

8.3. ARM-SPECIFIC I/O

49

• invalidate the TLB.
Similarly, deleting a VSpace_cap that contains an assigned context bank number will:
• invalidate the context bank
• invalidate the TLB.
Deleting the last ARM_SID cap will:
• Perform an seL4_ARM_SID_UnbindCB(), (deleting the copy of the assigned seL4_ARM_CB
cap)
• Disable the stream ID.
8.3.1.6

TLB invalidation

The kernel is expected to perform all required SMMU TLB maintenance operations as part of the
API implementation. In addition, the kernel provides two system calls for explicitly performing
invalidations:
seL4_ARM_CBControl_TLBInvalidateAll() invalidates all TLB entries in all context banks.
seL4_ARM_CB_TLBInvalidate() invalidates all TLB entries in a context bank.
The kernel does not impose any restrictions on how a VSpace is used by user-level applications, hence a VSpace can be shared by normal threads and drivers. Sharing a VSpace between
threads and drivers also means sharing all mappings in that VSpace between MMUs in CPU
cores and SMMU used by device transactions. Moreover, multiple context banks in SMMU can
share a VSpace. Therefore, maintaining the coherency between the TLB in MMU and the TLB in
SMMU’s context banks is important.
The kernel keeps a record of Vspace’s usage in context banks in SMMU by maintaining: the
number of context banks using a given ASID, and the ASID that a given context bank is using.
There are a few reasons behind this design.
• First, the ASID is efﬁcient for representing a VSpace. In seL4, each VSpace has an ASID
which is assigned before the VSpace is ready to be used and will never change until the
VSpace is deleted. Recording how many context banks are using a VSpace’s ASID is equivalent to recording the VSpace’s usage in context banks.
• Second, all TLB invalidation operations require knowledge of the ASID. There are two types
of TLB invalidation operations: invalidating a page table entry using its ASID (triggered by
updating a page table entry, e.g. unmapping a page), and invalidating all mappings of an
ASID (triggered by deleting a VSpace).
• Third, the kernel can easily ﬁnd a context banks’ ASID on all occasions, which is useful to
either conduct TLB invalidation requests or unassign VSpace from a context bank.
By knowing how many context banks are using an ASID, the kernel can easily check in every TLB
invalidation operation and invoke TLB invalidation in SMMU if the value is not zero. In SMMU’s
TLB invalidation operation, the kernel searches the context banks using the ASID, and conducts
TLB invalidation in those context banks.
Ideally, the SMMU shares the same ASID or VMID name space with the rest of the system.
This allows the SMMU to maintain TLB coherency by listening for TLB broadcasting messages.
This means the context banks should be conﬁgured with the correct ASID or VMID when the
StreamID is enabled. This is not a problem for stage 1 translation, as there are a large number
of ASID bits and an ASID can be assigned to a VSpace root with existing APIs. However, the
VMID used in stage 2 only has 8 bits, and the kernel allocates them on demand and can reclaim

50

CHAPTER 8. HARDWARE I/O

a VSpace’s hardware ASID to reuse if there are more VSpaces than available ASIDs. While it
is possible to do this when the VSpace is only used in an MMU, it is not possible with multiple
active context banks. Due to this, the context bank in SMMU cannot be conﬁgured with the
correct VMID. Currently, the SMMU driver uses a private VMID space, and uses the context bank
number as the corresponding VMID number.
8.3.1.7

Fault handling

The number of IRQs used for reporting transaction faults is hardware dependent. There are
two kinds of faults: global faults (general conﬁguration and transaction faults), or context bank
faults. For transaction faults, the SMMU reports faulty stream IDs. The global faults reports:
• Invalid context fault.
• Unidentiﬁed stream fault.
• Stream match conﬂict fault.
• Unimplemented context bank fault.
• Unimplemented context interrupt fault.
• Conﬁguration access fault.
• External fault.
Each context bank contains registers to report faults on address translation, for example, faulty
addresses, or permission errors. The SMMU driver identiﬁes the cause of a fault by ﬁrst reading
the global fault registers (one state register and three fault syndrome registers), then by reading corresponding context bank fault registers. Note, the SMMU reports the faulty transaction
(stream) ID, which can be used to identify its context bank ID.
• System assumption: Both the SMMU’s IRQ handler and the owner of the seL4_ARM_SIDControl cap (controlling stream ID distributions) are trusted.
• SMMU interrupts are handled as same as other IRQs, i.e. the kernel does not treat the
SMMU IRQs special, reporting the interrupt via IRQ notiﬁcations.
• The kernel provides an API for reading the global fault registers: seL4_ARM_SIDControl_GetFault(). Because the IRQ notiﬁcation can only deliver information via the badge, the
owner of the seL4_ARM_SIDControl cap can retrieve more information via this API.
• If the fault is related to a transaction, the owner of the seL4_ARM_SIDControl cap will notify the holder of the corresponding stream ID cap, which should also have a copy of the
context bank cap bound to this transaction.
• The kernel provides an API for reading the context bank fault registers: seL4_ARM_CB_CBGetFault(), used by a context bank cap holder (the seL4_ARM_CB cap holder).
• Once the fault handling is done, the server can call seL4_ARM_CB_CBClearFault() to clear
the fault status on a context bank, and seL4_ARM_SIDControl_ClearFault() to clear the
fault status on SMMU.

