SLUBStick: Arbitrary Memory Writes through Practical Software Cross-Cache
                     Attacks within the Linux Kernel

        Lukas Maar                       Stefan Gast               Martin Unterguggenberger
Graz University of Technology    Graz University of Technology    Graz University of Technology
                    Mathias Oberhuber                    Stefan Mangard
               Graz University of Technology       Graz University of Technology

                          Abstract
While the number of vulnerabilities in the Linux kernel has
increased significantly in recent years, most have limited capabilities, such as corrupting a few bytes in restricted allocator
caches. To elevate their capabilities, security researchers have
proposed software cross-cache attacks, exploiting the memory reuse of the kernel allocator. However, such cross-cache
attacks are impractical due to their low success rate of only
40 %, with failure scenarios often resulting in a system crash.
   In this paper, we present SLUBStick, a novel kernel exploitation technique elevating a limited heap vulnerability to
an arbitrary memory read-and-write primitive. SLUBStick
operates in multiple stages: Initially, it exploits a timing side
channel of the allocator to perform a cross-cache attack reliably. Concretely, exploiting the side-channel leakage pushes
the success rate to above 99 % for frequently used generic
caches. SLUBStick then exploits code patterns prevalent in
the Linux kernel to convert a limited heap vulnerability into
a page table manipulation, thereby granting the capability to
read and write memory arbitrarily. We demonstrate the applicability of SLUBStick by systematically analyzing two Linux
kernel versions, v5.19 and v6.2. Lastly, we evaluate SLUBStick with a synthetic vulnerability and 9 real-world CVEs,
showcasing privilege escalation and container escape in the
Linux kernel with state-of-the-art kernel defenses enabled.

1

Introduction

Operating system kernels, such as Linux, are susceptible to
memory safety vulnerabilities due to their size and complexity.
However, most of these vulnerabilities have limited capabilities, such as corrupting a few bytes in restricted allocator
caches. These limitations make exploitation difficult in practice. To make these vulnerabilities even more difficult to
exploit, researchers and kernel developers have included defenses such as SMAP, KASLR, and kCFI [37]. In addition, the
kernel’s allocator is designed to restrict exploits that propagate
from heap vulnerabilities. One particular hardening strategy

is to enforce coarse-grained heap separation. This separation
places objects in distinct allocator caches that maintain blocks
of adjacent pages, called slabs, and separate security-critical
objects from frequently used objects. Hence, vulnerabilities
in frequently used caches cannot be directly exploited to manipulate security-critical objects, such as credentials.
   To circumvent coarse-grained heap separation, security researchers [50] presented software cross-cache attacks, which
have been used by several kernel exploits [2, 13, 17, 19, 28–30,
47]. Software cross-cache attacks exploit the memory reuse of
the kernel allocator as follows: Initially, an adversary triggers
a heap vulnerability to obtain and hold on to a write capability
for a victim object. They then free all memory slots on the
slab page containing the victim object and allocate a different
(sensitive) object type. This triggers the allocation of new
slab pages, presumably reclaiming the previously freed and
recycled slab page. The adversary then continues to overwrite
the victim object, which now resides in the same memory
location as the newly allocated sensitive object, corrupting it.
   The Linux kernel has two types of allocator caches: dedicated and generic caches. While dedicated caches can be
reliably exploited for cross-cache attacks [2, 17, 19, 28, 47],
generic caches cannot [28, 50]. In particular, exploitation of
generic caches has a success rate of only 40 % [50], with
failure scenarios often leading to system crashes. To increase the reliability of generic cache exploitation, security
experts [13, 29, 30, 47] have used stabilization objects, e.g.,
msg_msg or pipe_buffer. However, these objects cannot be
used in newer kernel versions due to more refined heap separation, i.e., v5.14 introduced kmalloc-cg-*. Therefore, for
newer kernel versions, cross-cache attacks on generic caches
do not provide the reliability required in practice [28, 50].
   In this paper, we present SLUBStick, a novel kernel exploitation technique that converts a limited kernel heap vulnerability into an arbitrary read-and-write primitive. At its
core, SLUBStick exploits timing side-channel leakage of the
kernel’s allocator to reliably trigger the recycling and reclaiming process for a specific memory target. Exploiting this sidechannel leakage significantly enhances the success rate of soft-

ware cross-cache attacks, exceeding 99 % for generic caches
with a single slab page and 82 % for multiple slab pages.
With this substantial increase, our approach overcomes the
prior unreliability and makes cross-cache attacks practical
for exploitation. Using our reliable side-channel supported
approach, SLUBStick performs a cross-cache attack to recycle a slab page that contains a write capability. SLUBStick
then reclaims the slab page as a page table, i.e., Page Upper
Directory (PUD), used for userspace address translation. By
triggering the write capability, SLUBStick overwrites page
table entries, obtaining arbitrary read and write capabilities.
   To perform SLUBStick, we overcome the following technical challenges: First, we present reliably exploitable primitives for our timing side channel that are accessible to unprivileged users. Second, hardly any kernel heap vulnerabilities provide the capability to modify kernel data directly.
Therefore, we present techniques that exploit code patterns
prevalent in the Linux kernel. These techniques convert heap
vulnerabilities before the recycling phase to allow a write capability after reclamation as a page table. Third, manipulating
page table entries to obtain an arbitrary memory read-andwrite primitive is challenging because the physical memory
layout is randomized due to KASLR, and we do not assume
address information leakage. Hence, we introduce a reliable
solution that obtains such a primitive from an overwrite.
   We conduct a systematic analysis for two Linux kernel
versions, v5.19 and v6.2, providing a comprehensive list of
primitives to successfully execute SLUBStick for all generic
caches from kmalloc-8 to kmalloc-4096. We also evaluate
SLUBStick with a synthetic vulnerability as well as with 9
real-world CVEs for both kernel versions on x86_64 as well
as aarch64, demonstrating its architecture and kernel version
independence. Based on these findings, we conclude that
SLUBStick poses a significant threat to kernel security.
   Contributions. The main contributions of SLUBStick are:
 (1) Side-Channel Supported Recycling and Reclaiming:
      We present a novel approach to reliably trigger the recycling process of a specific memory target and reclaim it
      by using a software timing side channel. Our approach
      shows success rates exceeding 99 % for frequently used
      generic caches, making cross-cache attacks practical.
 (2) Novel Exploitation Method: Leveraging our reliable
      side-channel supported recycling and reclaiming approach, we present a novel exploitation technique to
      convert kernel heap vulnerabilities with limited capabilities into an arbitrary memory read-and-write primitive
      with state-of-the-art kernel defenses enabled.
 (3) Comprehensive Analysis and Attack Evaluation: We
      systematically analyze two Linux kernel versions, v5.19
      and v6.2, showing that SLUBStick can be executed for
      generic cache from kmalloc-8 to kmalloc-4096. We
      also evaluate SLUBStick using a synthetic vulnerability
      and 9 real-world CVEs to escalate privileges.
   Outline. Section 2 describes the background and threat

              kmem_cache_cpu {
                void **freelist;   slab->freelist
                ...
                slab *slab;
                ...                                                             slab A
                slab *partial;     partial->freelist
              }                                                                 slab B

kmem_cache {
  kmem_cache_cpu *c __per_cpu;                                  partial->next
  ...
  kmem_cache_node *n[];
}                                                                               slab C

                                   slab = container_of(&partial, slab)
            kmem_cache_node {      slab->freelist
             ...                                                                slab D

             list_head partial;
             ...
                                                               slab->slab_list
            }

     free list next pointer
     freed object                                                               slab E
     allocated object

Figure 1: kmem_cache layout for the SLUB implementation.

model. Section 3 presents SLUBStick. Section 4 introduces
our reliable recycling and reclaiming process. Section 5 describes pivoting heap vulnerabilities. Section 6 details how to
gain arbitrary read-and-write capabilities. Section 7 comprehensively evaluates our attack. Section 8 discusses valuable
insights and kernel defenses. Section 9 concludes this work.

2

Background and Threat Model

2.1 Buddy and SLUB Allocator
Linux’s page allocator is based on the Binary Buddy Allocator [23], mainly referred to as buddy allocator. It allocates
physical contiguous memory in chunks of page order size,
i.e., 2n · PAGE_SIZE, where n is the page order. Moreover, it
combines this page-order allocation with free chunk merging.
   SLUB allocator. As the buddy allocator only provides
page-order allocations, the slab allocator caches available objects with a predefined size in a multi-level free-list hierarchy,
using pages obtained from the buddy allocator. There are
three main implementations: SLUB is the default choice for
several Linux distributions [22], while SLOB has become
obsolete, and SLAB will be deprecated soon [8].
   In the Linux kernel, the SLUB allocator provides two primary types of allocator caches: dedicated and generic caches.
Dedicated caches are employed for frequently used fixed-size
objects, such as cred or task_struct. Generic caches are
utilized for generic object allocation and deallocation or for
objects whose sizes are not known during compile-time, e.g.,
elastic objects [5]. Both types of caches utilize kmem_cache,
with each dedicated cache having its own kmem_cache, while
generic caches have multiple kmem_caches matched to different sizes. When allocating memory from a generic cache,
the kernel matches the requested size to one of these caches
and allocates an object from the corresponding kmem_cache.

Increase in allocation time

                                       empty                    empty                     empty                     empty
                      c->freelist                 c->slab                c->partial                n->partial
                             partial                  partial                   partial                   partial

                     get object from            move c->slab            move c->partial           move n->partial             alloc memory
                       c->freelist             to c->freelist             to c->slab               to c->partial            chunk from buddy

                 ①                        ②                        ③                         ④                         ⑤

Figure 2: SLUB allocation of an object, where the terms c and n refer to the kmem_cache_cpu and kmem_cache_node,
respectively. The free lists (i.e., c->freelist and c->slab->freelist) and slab lists (i.e., c->partial and n->partial)
are checked to be either empty or partial.

Increase in deallocation time

                       is slab ==     no    put object to           is CPU partial     yes   move slabs to node
                        c->slab?                slab               slab list full?           partial slab list
                             yes

                      put object to                          yes   put slab into CPU
                                           was slab empty?
                       c->freelist                                 partial slab list
                                                   no

                                                             yes   is node partial     yes                            discard memory
                                            is slab full?
                                                                   slab list full?                                    chunks of slabs

                  ①                    ②                       ③                         ④                        ⑤

Figure 3: SLUB deallocation of an object, where the term slab refers to the slab that contains the object to be freed. The term c
represents the kmem_cache_cpu associated with this slab. The slab is either active (i.e., slab stored as c->slab), or stored in
the partial slab list (i.e., slab located within c->partial) or node partial slab list (i.e., slab located within n->partial).

   The Linux kernel incorporates cache aliasing to optimize
memory management. Cache aliasing merges freed objects
stored in distinct kmem_caches with similar characteristics,
e.g., object size and allocation properties. For security reasons, kmem_caches of dedicated or generic caches considered security-critical are marked as accounted to prevent
aliasing. Essentially, these accounted kmem_caches separate
accounted objects from the non-accounted ones. Securitycritical caches include those that store sensitive information,
such as cred, and objects commonly used for exploitation
(allocated using kmalloc-cg-*), such as elastic objects [5].
   Architecture. The architecture of a kmem_cache [22],
shown in Figure 1, includes a kmem_cache_cpu for each
logical CPU and an array of kmem_cache_nodes. The
kmem_cache_cpu comprises various free lists: a CPU free
list (c->freelist), a slab free list (slab->freelist), and
additional free lists of partial slabs (partial->freelist,
maintained as a single-linked list). Despite each slab having
its free list, the separate CPU free list allows lockless allocation, improving performance. The kmem_cache_node has a
double-linked list of slabs (partial) also containing freed
objects. In the context of this work, we refer to a list (i.e.,
free list, and single- and double-linked list) as full when it
reaches its capacity of containing objects. It is considered
empty when no object is present in it. A list is classified as
partial when it is neither full nor empty.
   Allocation and deallocation. kmem_cache stores objects
in a multi-level free-list hierarchy. As shown in Figure 2,
the allocation process starts by searching for an available

object in the lower free-list levels [22]. This process continues
throughout the hierarchy until an available object is found.
These levels include the CPU free list ①, slab free list ②, CPU
partial slab list ③, and node partial slab list ④, with each level
taking more allocation time. If no object is available in any
of these free lists, the SLUB allocator falls back to the buddy
allocator ⑤, which allocates a memory chunk.
   When deallocating, the SLUB allocator attempts to place
the object in the lower free-list levels, e.g., CPU free
list ① [22], as shown in Figure 3. Upon deallocation, the
kernel may check the number of free slabs, i.e., the number of
slabs with full free list stored in the node partial slab list ③. If
this number exceeds a particular capability (see Table 4), the
SLUB allocator deallocates the slab’s memory chunks ⑤, returning them to the buddy allocator. Memory chunks returned
in such a recycling phase are reused for future allocations.
   Timing attacks on allocation. Lee et al. [26] demonstrated with PSPRAY the feasibility of performing a timing
side channel on the SLUB allocator. PSPRAY deduces when
the allocator allocates a fresh memory chunk (see ⑤ in Figure 2). This insight increases the likelihood of successful kernel heap exploitation, which primarily relied on heap spraying,
i.e., for Use-After-Free (UAF) and Double-Free (DF), or heap
grooming, i.e., for Out-Of-Bounds (OOB) [4, 26, 53].
   However, their method relies on a precise measurement
primitive that is no longer available in recent kernel versions.
Their primary proposed primitive uses msg_msg. Since it is allocated via the segregated kmalloc-cg-* for kernel versions
v5.14 or higher, it is limited to scenarios where the vulnerable

            slab A

            freed

                     freed

                                       freed
                              obj1

                                                obj2
             obj

                      obj

                                        obj
write capability
                    ptr1             ptr2              ❶ recycling
           freed slab A
            freed

                     freed

                             freed

                                       freed

                                               freed
             obj

                      obj

                              obj

                                        obj

                                                obj
write capability
                                                       ❷ reclaiming
            sensitive slab B
            freed

                                       freed
                      obj3

                              obj4

                                                obj5
             obj

                                        obj

write capability

Figure 4: Software cross-cache attack with an initial state,
where a write capability refers to a freed object. An attacker
enforces a recycling ❶ of slab A’s memory chunk by freeing
obj1/2. By allocating sensitive objects, the attacker presumably reclaims ❷ the chunk for a sensitive slab B, resulting in
write capability referring obj3. Lastly, obj3 is overwritten.

object is also allocated from the segregated generic cache.
Other proposed primitives are limited because the computational overhead of non-allocation tasks primarily masks
allocation timing (e.g., read). Furthermore, their approach
fails to identify suitable measurement primitives, e.g., for
kmalloc-8/16. For other identified primitives, we could not
reproduce the allocation of a single data object (e.g., fchown),
or the primitives are privileged and therefore unusable (e.g.,
kexec_load). We contacted the authors about the applicability of using their identified syscalls (apart from msg_msg)
to determine the timing difference. They confirmed that the
overhead of the syscalls they identified limits their applicability. In summary, while their work demonstrates feasibility, its
applicability is limited to older kernel versions.

2.2    Software Cross-Cache Attacks
When the SLUB allocator frees memory chunks using the
buddy allocator, as shown with ⑤ in Figure 3, these chunks
are reused. Classic cross-cache attacks [2,17,19,28,29,47,50]
exploit this reusing behavior. Initially, an adversary compels
the SLUB allocator to recycle a memory chunk containing a
write capability due to vulnerabilities. Subsequently, they allocate numerous sensitive objects from another allocator cache,
hoping to reclaim the previously freed chunk. If successful,
the memory that was previously occupied with the write capability will now be occupied by sensitive objects. Lastly,
they trigger the write capability to this memory, corrupting
a sensitive data object. The recycling ❶ and reclaiming ❷
phases are shown in a simplified setting in Figure 4.
   Xu et al. [50] demonstrated the feasibility of cross-cache
attacks, and subsequent research [28, 29] has further explored
their impact. However, executing such attacks is notably chal-

lenging, particularly for frequently used generic caches. One
significant hurdle is the introduction of noise through uncontrolled allocations, complicating to achieve state ⑤ in Figure 3.
For example, unknown allocations from a kernel thread can
thwart the freeing of the slab’s memory chunk, thereby preventing the reclamation [28]. Adding to the complexity, the
unpredictable occurrence of both phases, recycling ❶ and
reclaiming ❷, introduces instability to the exploit.
   In summary, mounting cross-cache attacks is complex and
fraught with challenges. Although these attacks are compelling, in practice, they have a limited success rate, as low
as 40 % [50]. Importantly, this percentage only represents the
success rate of the cross-cache attack, excluding additional
stages of an end-to-end exploit, e.g., vulnerability triggering
and memory manipulation, which further reduces the overall
success rate. The process of repeatedly triggering vulnerabilities carries its risks. Traces left in the kernel often make it
difficult to trigger the same vulnerability again. For instance,
an OOB write may corrupt lists when triggered. Hence, repeated activation of the vulnerability can result in a crash,
severely limiting the attack’s practicality.

2.3 Threat Model
We assume that an unprivileged user has code execution. Additionally, we consider the presence of a heap vulnerability
in the Linux kernel. We assume that the Linux kernel incorporates all defense mechanisms available in version 6.4, the
most recent Linux kernel version when we started our work.
These mechanisms include features such as WˆX, KASLR,
SMAP, and kCFI [37]. We do not assume any microarchitectural vulnerabilities, e.g., transient execution [24, 31], fault
injection [43], or hardware side channels [3, 51].
   In this work, we primarily focus on heap vulnerabilities
(most common type of software vulnerability according to
Microsoft [36]) that result in a Double-Free (DF), or a Use-After-Free (UAF) or an Out-Of-Bounds (OOB) allowing for
a limited writing capability. For instance, CVE-2023-21400
enables the double free of an object within the kmalloc-32
generic cache, while CVE-2023-3609 permits a write operation at offset 0x18 on an object allocated from kmalloc-64.

3

Technical Overview and Challenges

This section outlines SLUBStick’s capability to overcome
several technical challenges when exploiting a limited heap
vulnerability to obtain an arbitrary read-and-write primitive.

3.1 Overview
Obtaining an arbitrary read-and-write primitive with SLUBStick involves three stages, as depicted in Figure 5. In the
first stage (see Figure 5a), SLUBStick exploits a heap vulnerability to acquire a Memory Write Primitive (MWP). This

                ptr1            ptr2
                                                                                 page                                        arbitrary page

        freed

                 freed

                                  freed
                         obj1

                                          obj2
         obj

                  obj

                                   obj

                                                                 pte

                                                                                                                  pte
                                       slab A                             page table                                       page table
       MWP                                              MWP                                               MWP

(a) Stage 1 deallocates objects obj1 and obj2    (b) Stage 2 reclaims the recycled memory          (c) Stage 3 triggers the MWP to manipulate
to trigger the recycling process of slab A’s     chunk for a page table used by the userspace      the page table entry pte. This manipulated
memory chunk, with a Memory Write Primi-         address translation, containing one entry, pte,   entry indexes then the arbitrary page, altive (MWP) referring to it.                      which refers to the user-accessible page.         lowing it to be overwritten from the userspace.

Figure 5: High-level overview of SLUBStick subdivided into three stages exploiting an MWP.

MWP provides an adversary with a write capability at an
adversary-determined time, with the primitive referring to the
memory of a freed object. Subsequently, SLUBStick triggers
the recycling process of its slab’s memory chunk by deallocating all objects of the slab. This chunk is then returned to the
buddy allocator for future allocations. Crucially, even after
the recycling, the MWP still refers to the recycled chunk.
   In the second stage (see Figure 5b), SLUBStick allocates
page tables to reclaim the recycled memory chunk for a pagetable page used to translate a userspace address. The entries in
this table refer to user-accessible pages, storing crucial information, e.g., their page frame number and access permissions.
   In the third stage (see Figure 5c), SLUBStick triggers the
MWP to overwrite the referenced memory of the page table.
This manipulation allows an adversary to change the page
frame number and permission bits, granting access to any
physical page and adjusting user access permissions. As a
result, the virtual address now refers to the selected page
with permission to modify it from userspace. For example, by
referring to kernel code, this capability allows the adversary to
alter the kernel’s behavior. As another example, the adversary
can reference data of privileged files such as /etc/passwd,
thus modifying it to bypass authentication checks.
   SLUBStick does not violate the kernel’s control flow or any
of the existing kernel defenses outlined in Section 2.3. Hence,
these existing kernel defenses cannot mitigate SLUBStick,
highlighting its severe threat to current systems. Furthermore,
efforts to separate generic caches [9] are ineffective in mitigating SLUBStick. We discuss the limitations of existing kernel
defenses in Section 8.

3.2   Technical Challenges
This section briefly describes how SLUBStick overcomes
several technical challenges to escalate privileges, while the
subsequent sections discuss our solutions in more detail.
   Triggering recycling/reclaiming. SLUBStick performs a
cross-cache attack on generic caches. As described in Section 2.2, cross-cache attacks have been challenging to execute
because they are unstable and unpredictable [28, 50]. Uncontrolled allocations and deallocations introduce noise, making

it difficult to determine when the recycling and reclaiming
phase will occur. However, we present a side-channel supported approach to reliably trigger the recycling process of a
targeted memory chunk, which is then reclaimed. This significantly increases the success rate, exceeding 99 % for slabs
with single page-size chunks and 82 % for multi-page-size
chunks, which were previously considered impractical. In
Section 4, we explain our novel approach, which exploits the
side-channel timing leakage of the SLUB allocator.
   Pivoting heap vulnerabilities. Pivoting a kernel heap vulnerability to establish an MWP presents two sub-challenges:
First, SLUBStick obtains a dangling pointer from the vulnerability. DF vulnerabilities provide us with this capability, while
OOB and UAF write vulnerabilities do not. Hence, SLUBStick requires an appropriate pivoting approach to utilize them
fully. Second, in most cases, a dangling pointer does not directly allow for controlled overwriting with controlled timing.
Hence, SLUBStick must pivot the dangling pointer, performing an adversary-controlled write, i.e., MWP. In Section 5, we
explain the process of adequately pivoting capabilities from
kernel heap vulnerabilities to obtain the MWP.
   Arbitrary read-and-write. By triggering the MWP,
SLUBStick can overwrite a page table used for address translations of a userspace address. As the kernel memory layout
is randomized (for physical addresses) by KASLR, and we
do not assume any address information leakage, pivoting an
MWP to an arbitrary memory read-and-write primitive is not
straightforward. In Section 6, we explain how we achieve this
pivot to an arbitrary read-and-write primitive.

4

Triggering Recycling and Reclaiming

In this section, we present a novel approach that reliably triggers the recycling process of a targeted memory chunk and
reclaims it, making cross-cache attacks practical for exploitation. Our approach leverages a software timing side-channel
attack on the SLUB allocator. Through this side channel, we
gain valuable information about when a memory chunk is
allocated and deallocated using the buddy allocator. These
insights allow us to reliably trigger the recycling process of a
targeted chunk (see Section 4.1). To ensure the return of this

chunk during the reclamation phase, we massage the buddy allocator’s internal state (see Section 4.2). By combining these
two strategies, our novel approach triggers the recycling and
reclaiming process reliably. To demonstrate the effectiveness,
we provide a proof-of-concept (including experiments), offering comprehensive details on deploying generic caches from
kmalloc-8 to kmalloc-4096 (see Section 4.3).

4.1    Side-Channel Supported Recycling
To trigger the recycling of a targeted memory chunk, our
approach first groups allocated objects according to their slab
by using a software timing side channel on the allocation. It
then deallocates these grouped objects, prompting the kernel
to recycle the slabs’ chunks, including our targeted chunk.
   The principal approach to grouping allocated objects involves timing measurements during standalone object allocation from userspace. A fast to medium timing indicates that
the object was allocated from one of the slab’s lists (①, ②, ③,
or ④ in Figure 2). Hence, we group it with the previously
allocated object in the same slab. Conversely, if the allocation
time is notably higher (⑤), this indicates that the object originates from a newly allocated memory chunk and thus a new
slab, which prompts us to group it separately. As a result, we
obtain a list of grouped objects organized by their slabs.
   One challenge with this approach is the lack of primitives
in the Linux kernel to accurately measure standalone allocation times with minimal non-allocation tasks from userspace.
This is because a single object allocation involves notable
non-allocation tasks, e.g., allocating an object by opening its
device. Using primitives with notable non-allocation tasks, as
proposed by PSPRAY [26] for non-separated generic caches,
leads to inaccurate and unusable results. To address this challenge, we separate the timing measurement from the persistent
object allocation. While an allocation primitive persistently
allocates an object, the timing measurement primitive is used
to group this allocated object based on its slab.
   Measurement primitive. We measure the timing of primitives that involve both allocation and deallocation within a
single syscall while only performing minimal non-allocation
tasks. During the deallocation process within this primitive,
the previously allocated object is consistently set to the active
CPU free list (state ① in Figure 3), which only minimally affects the measured timing. The minimal non-allocation tasks
executed during the syscall exhibit high consistency, which
also minimally affects the results. Thus, the measured timing
depends primarily on the allocation. This allows us to determine when a new memory chunk is allocated from userspace,
indicated by a notable slow allocation timing. To illustrate the
notable difference between fast and slow allocation timings,
we provide detailed experiments in Appendix B.
   An example of a measurement primitive is the add_key
syscall, shown in Listing 1. To ensure minimal interference
from non-allocation tasks, our approach invokes the add_key

 1   ssize_t __do_sys_add_key(const char __user *_desc) {
 2     ssize_t ret;
 3     size_t len = strnlen_user(_desc) + 1;
 4     char *desc = kmalloc(len, GFP_KERNEL);
 5     size_t n = copy_from_user(desc, _desc, len);
 6     if (n) goto ERR;
 7     desc[len - 1] = 0;
 8     if (IS_INVALID(desc)) goto ERR;
 9     ... /* add_key code execution */
10   ERR:
11     kfree(desc);
12     return ret;
13   }

Listing 1: The add_key syscall serves as a measurement
primitive to determine whether Line 4 allocates a new chunk.

 1   size_t timed_alloc(int *time) {
 2     /* allocate the 64 byte struct snd_ctl_file */
 3     int fd = open("/dev/snd/controlC0", O_RDONLY);
 4     /* timed allocation with invalid add_key */
 5     char _desc[64] = INVALID_DESC;
 6     size_t t0 = rdtsc_begin();
 7     add_key(_desc);
 8     size_t t1 = rdtsc_end();
 9     *time = t1 - t0;
10     /* return allocated object */
11     return fd;
12   }

Listing 2: An example of a 64 byte allocation from userspace,
where Line 3 allocates a snd_ctl_file object. Between
Lines 6 and 8, we use the add_key measurement primitive to
determine whether a new chunk was allocated.

syscall with a _desc, which fails the validation check at
Line 8. As a result, the syscall primarily involves two privilege switches, allocation and deallocation, with the execution
time mainly depending on the allocation. By measuring the
timing of this syscall, our approach determines whether Line 4
allocates a new memory chunk. Crucially, while the add_key
syscall is one example, measurement primitives are common
in the Linux kernel, as we later illustrate in Section 4.3.
   Persistent allocation primitive. A persistent allocation
refers to a situation where the allocated kernel object remains
allocated until the corresponding deallocation counterpart is
executed. Crucially, the deallocation of the object must occur
within the deallocation syscall, not at a later time. Therefore,
objects released inside a Read-Copy-Update (RCU) [35] callback function cannot be used for persistent allocation. Also,
the de-/allocation syscalls must be unprivileged.
   Triggering the recycling process. Using our method of
accurately measuring allocation timing and persistently allocating objects, our approach to reliably triggering the recycling process consists of two stages.
   In the first stage, we allocate and group kernel objects
based on their slabs. We start emptying all free lists within
the cache’s multi-level hierarchy by allocating many objects.
Next, we persistently allocate objects to fill the free memory
slots of the slab while using our measurement primitive to

exploit the timing side channel for grouping the allocated
objects. Listing 2 shows an example of combining a measurement primitive (e.g., add_key) with a persistent allocation
primitive (e.g., snd_ctl_file). The timed_alloc function
provides two outputs: the measured timing at Line 9 and the
allocated object as an identifier at Line 11. Using the measured *time, we determine whether the object belongs to the
same slab as the previously allocated object (i.e., indicated
by a low value) or whether it originates from a new memory
chunk and hence a new slab (i.e., indicated by a notably high
value). This allows us to group objects identified with fd by
their slabs.
   In the second stage, we proceed to free the grouped objects,
prompting the Linux kernel to deallocate their slabs via the
buddy allocator, as denoted by the state ⑤ in Figure 3. The
release of slabs occurs when the number of free slabs exceeds
the capacity of the node’s partial slab list ③, detailed in Table 4. Since we know the objects of the slabs and the capacity
of the partial slab list, we retain control over when the memory
chunks, including our target, are recycled. While uncontrolled
deallocations may introduce noise, we show remarkable noise
resilience in our experiments in Section 4.3.

4.2    Massaging the Buddy Allocator
This section determines the reclaiming phase of a targeted
memory chunk based on the recycling phase, where our approach is tailored to the generic cache size. A memory chunk
can consist of a single or multiple pages, as shown in Table 4.
Our goal is to ensure the reliable reclaiming of either the
recycled chunk or a page-size part of it. Notably, the reclamation chunk’s size is required to be one page, as SLUBStick
reclaims it as a page table, as we later show in Section 6.
   For generic caches from kmalloc-8 to kmalloc-256, the
memory chunk consists of a single page. When releasing
slabs’ memory chunks, the buddy allocator follows a Last In
First Out (LIFO) principle to return recycled memory chunks.
Therefore, to obtain a targeted chunk, one can request a pagesize chunk shortly after the recycling process in the opposite
order of the deallocation process.
   In contrast, for generic caches from kmalloc-512 to
kmalloc-4096, the memory chunk consists of multiple
pages. To ensure the reclaiming of the recycled memory
chunk as page size, we need to put the allocator in a state
where it splits the targeted memory chunk into smaller ones.
To accomplish this, we take the following strategy: First, we
empty smaller memory chunks, reducing the number of available smaller chunks. Next, we perform the recycling process,
preparing for subsequent chunk splitting and reclaiming. Finally, we allocate multiple page-size chunks. This compels
the kernel to split the targeted memory chunk into smaller
ones, making it available for allocation. Through these steps,
we ensure that the buddy allocator splits the targeted memory
into smaller chunks and returns them for page-size allocation.

4.3

Proof-of-Concept and Experiments

For our Proof-Of-Concept (POC), we first systematically analyze the Linux kernel to identify kernel objects suitable for
a measurement and allocation primitive. We then combine
our approaches discussed in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 to reliably
trigger the recycling and reclamation phase. Our POC demonstrates the feasibility and effectiveness of our approach with a
success rate of between 99.3 % to 99.9 % for single page-size
chunks and 82.1 % to 93.5 % for multi-page-size chunks.
   Systematic analysis. Our approach requires a measurement (e.g., add_key in Listing 1) and an allocation (e.g.,
snd_ctl_file in Listing 2) primitive. We scan the kernel
code for suitable code patterns using the query language CodeQL [15], as we explain in detail in Appendices C.2 and C.3.
   Many kernel execution paths in the kernel allow measurement primitives, as any snippet that copies user data to a
dynamically allocated buffer and subsequently performs validation checks can be leveraged. This includes functions that
delegate the allocation and copying process to commonly
used routines like strndup_user and memdup_user. Hence,
our analysis yields a measurement primitive for each generic
cache from kmalloc-8 to kmalloc-4096 (see Table 8).
   Similarly, the kernel has many execution paths that allow
persistent allocation primitives, as any unprivileged syscall
that persistently allocates an object and has a freeing counterpart that instantly releases the object can be leveraged. As
a result, our analysis also yields an allocation primitive for
each of these generic caches (see Tables 6 and 7).
   We conduct this analysis for Linux kernel versions v5.19
and v6.2. Our results, presented in Table 8 for measurement
primitives and Tables 6 and 7 for allocation primitives, underline the high applicability of our approach across versions.
   Experiments. We demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of our approach by showcasing how to reliably trigger the recycling process of a targeted memory chunk and
reclaim it during the reclaiming phase. To perform this experiment, we use a read device driver rdd, shown in Listing 6.
The driver provides object allocation (ALLOC), deallocation
(FREE), and reading of the object’s contents (READ). Allocation and deallocation are used to allocate and release an object
on a target memory chunk while reading determines if the
reclamation was successful. In this experiment, we use a page
table as the object that reclaimed the recycled memory chunk.
To allocate a page table, we map a page without all page table levels mapped. We consider the experiment successful
if we can read the page table entries from our rdd after the
reclaiming phase since this means that the page table successfully reclaimed our target memory chunk. The experiment is
considered unsuccessful if we can not trigger the recycling
process for the chunk containing the target object or if the
recycled page is not reclaimed as a page table.
   We ran this experiment 100 times to determine the success rate, which we repeated 10 times to compute the mean

Table 1: Success rate of triggering the recycling and reclamation process for generic caches.

Generic Cache   #Pages                 Success Rate
                            Idle      No CPU pinning   External noise
                             %             %                %
kmalloc-8         1      99.9 ± 0.1      99.9 ± 0.1      99.6 ± 0.7
kmalloc-16        1      99.4 ± 0.6      98.9 ± 1.2      99.9 ± 0.4
kmalloc-32        1      99.4 ± 0.9      99.7 ± 0.5      99.9 ± 0.3
kmalloc-64        1      99.2 ± 1.3      99.2 ± 0.9      81.0 ± 6.4
kmalloc-96        1      99.9 ± 0.4      99.9 ± 0.1      99.8 ± 0.6
kmalloc-128       1      99.9 ± 0.4      99.8 ± 0.5      99.9 ± 0.3
kmalloc-192       1      99.9 ± 0.4      99.8 ± 0.4      99.3 ± 1.2
kmalloc-256       1      99.9 ± 0.3      99.9 ± 0.3      99.7 ± 0.7
kmalloc-512       2      90.2 ± 5.4      87.2 ± 3.1      65.2 ± 2.8
kmalloc-1024      4      88.1 ± 7.2      79.5 ± 3.3      70.3 ± 8.1
kmalloc-2048      8      83.1 ± 9.2       70.5 ± 16      57.8 ± 5.7
kmalloc-4096      8      82.1 ± 3.4       73.3 ± 19       53.8 ± 10

5

Pivoting Kernel Heap Vulnerabilities

SLUBStick leverages a kernel heap vulnerability to gain a
Memory Write Primitive (MWP). This primitive provides an
adversary with a write capability to previously freed memory at a controlled time. To achieve this, SLUBStick initially
obtains a dangling pointer (see Section 5.1), i.e., a pointer
referencing an already freed object from a heap vulnerability. SLUBStick then establishes an MWP from this dangling
pointer (see Section 5.2). Crucially, we must extend the time
window between converting the dangling pointer to an MWP
(i.e., before the recycling) and when it is triggered (i.e., after
the reclaiming). These steps provide the adversary with an
MWP that can be triggered at the desired time.

and standard deviation. We tested under an idle system with
CPU pinning and two noise conditions: no CPU pinning and
external noise, demonstrating our noise resilience. Our experimental setup was Ubuntu 22.04 LTS with the generic Linux
kernel v6.2 for x86, where v5.19 gives similar results. We ran
this on a machine with Intel i7-1260P and 48 GB RAM.
   CPU pinning is the method used to fix a process to a CPU,
preventing CPU migration. Since both the slab and buddy allocator maintain per-CPU lists, CPU migration may introduce
noise. To examine this effect, we included both scenarios:
with and without CPU pinning. To introduce external noise,
we ran stress-ng concurrently with two workers for each
CPU, IO, and VM, saturating approximately 100 % usage on
all CPUs. This aligns with prior noise evaluation [26].
   Results. Under idle, our experiments (see Table 1) show
remarkable results, with a more than 99.2 % success rate for
generic caches with page-size chunks, i.e., kmalloc-8 to
kmalloc-256. The failure scenarios are primarily due to the
targeted chunk that can not be reclaimed as a page table. The
results of generic caches with multiple page-sized chunks
decrease with increasing size from 90.2 % to 82.1 %. This is
primarily due to the failure in reclaiming the targeted page
from the split chunk. The larger the original chunk, the more
error-prone the reclaiming is, as seen by the lowest success
rate of about 83 % for generic caches with 8 pages.
   Our results demonstrate remarkable noise resilience for almost all generic caches with page-size chunks with more than
98 % for no CPU pinning and external noise. One exception is
kmalloc-64 for the noise evaluation since stress-ng performs frequent allocation directly following deallocation for
kmalloc-64. Hence, it appends a memory chunk to the node
partial list, which makes it confusing to reclaim the memory
chunk before the actual target chunk as the target chunk. For
multiple page-sized chunks, no CPU pinning decreases the
success rate to 70.5 %, while external noise decreases it to
53.8 %. Crucially, despite the induced noise, our approach is
still notably better than the prior success rate of 40 % with no
noise [50].

5.1 Obtaining a Dangling Pointer
In this section, we pivot DF, and UAF and OOB write vulnerabilities to obtain a dangling pointer.
   Double-Free. By exploiting a DF vulnerability and freeing an object twice, we induce a situation where the pointer
to an object becomes dangling. However, freeing the same
object twice will cause it to reside twice in the CPU free list,
corrupting this free list and causing a system crash. Hence, to
leverage a DF vulnerability for obtaining a dangling pointer,
SLUBStick allocates an object after its initial freeing and then
utilizes the subsequent double free to create a dangling pointer
pointing to this newly allocated object. Reallocating the object prevents the duplicate free list entry, avoiding free-list
corruption and a subsequent system crash.
   Out-Of-Bounds and Use-After-Free write.                While
UAFs that allow write control over dangling pointers might
work, they often fall short in practice. For direct use in
SLUBStick, a UAF vulnerability would need specific criteria:
First, they must retain overwriting capability post-zeroing
during recycling. Second, they must be triggerable after
reclaiming as a page table. Third, they require the ability to
overwrite specific values, i.e., malicious page-table entries.
However, most UAFs [2, 19, 40, 52] provide limited write
primitives and small race windows, thus failing these criteria.
   Hence, SLUBStick leverages significantly weaker write
capabilities offered by UAF (and OOB) vulnerabilities commonly found in practice to enforce a double free of an object.
It does so by using this capability to manipulate either a reference counter or an object pointer within an object of the
same cache. By corrupting these members, SLUBStick forces
an object into a DF state (see Double-Free above).
   In Linux, reference counters manage the lifetime of an object. At its core, the counter increases with each new reference
and decreases with each release. When the counter reaches
zero, all the object’s resources are released. For exploitation,
SLUBStick identifies a victim object within the same cache
containing a reference counter located at the write capability. Using heap manipulation [6, 26, 50], it aligns this victim

 1   int ipmi_open(void) {
 2     ipmi_file_private *priv;
 3     /* allocate object */
 4     priv = kmalloc(sizeof(*priv));
 5   }
 6   long ipmi_ioctl(file *f, u64 data) {
 7     ipmi_file_private *priv;
 8     ipmi_timing_parms parms;
 9     /* copy data from user */
10     copy_from_user(&parms, data);
11     priv->parms = parms;
12   }

     Listing 3: Persistent code pattern 1.

1   u64 netlink_sendmsg(msghdr *msg, u64
          len) {
2     /* allocate object */
3     sk_buff *skb = kmalloc(len);
4     /* copy data from user */
5     copy_from_user(obj, msg, len);
6   }

Listing 4: Persistent code pattern 2.

 1   u64 keyctl_pkey_verify(void *uaddr, void *
           uaddr2, u64 size, u64 size2) {
 2     /* allocate and copy data from user */
 3     void *in = kmalloc(size);
 4     copy_from_user(in, uaddr, size);
 5     /* second copy for extending time window */
 6     void *in2 = kmalloc(size2);
 7     copy_from_user(in2, uaddr2, size2);
 8     /* free obj */
 9     kfree(in2);
10     kfree(in);
11   }

        Listing 5: Temporal code pattern.

Figure 6: Examples of code patterns allowing to be exploited as a Memory Write Primitive (MWP).

object in memory with the write capability. SLUBStick then
utilizes the write capability to corrupt the counter, forcing the
release of the object still in use and placing it in a DF state.
    To demonstrate the applicability of this approach, we analyze the kernel for the available objects with a reference
counter located at each potential 8 byte write capability. We
found 873 objects with a reference counter. They cover 100 %
of overwrite locations for generic caches up to kmalloc-32
and more than 80 % for generic caches between kmalloc-64
and kmalloc-256. For caches between kmalloc-512 and
kmalloc-4096 the availability ranges from 73.4 % to 2.7 %.
    Regarding pointer corruption, SLUBStick identifies a victim object within the same cache that contains a pointer to
an object from a separate cache. SLUBStick then places the
victim object to align the overwrite capability and triggers
it to corrupt the pointer by zeroing out the two least significant bytes. This creates an additional reference to another
object in the separate cache. When the kernel releases this
object, SLUBStick obtains a dangling pointer to the other
object stored in the separate cache without leaking KASLR.
    The uncorrupted pointer must refer to an object in a different slab. Otherwise, the slab that now contains a doublereferenced object cannot be recycled, as the object that was
originally pointed to has lost its reference and cannot be freed.
To ensure that the uncorrupted pointer refers to an object in a
different slab, SLUBStick employs our side channel (see Section 4.1). This technique allows for detecting and preventing
failure scenarios, enhancing the success rate of pivoting.
    Primitive conversion. The success rate of converting a
UAF (including DF) vulnerability to a dangling pointer relies on the time window between the free and use stages.
Techniques like ExpRace [27] can enhance exploitability by
widening the time window. Additionally, UAF and OOB write
vulnerabilities require an object with a reference counter or
pointer located at the write capability.

5.2   Establishing a Memory Write Primitive
In this section, we detail how SLUBStick establishes a Memory Write Primitive (MWP) from a dangling pointer, allowing

P1

timed
alloc

kmalloc

  recycle &
reclaim as PT

copy_from_
   user

     Thread A
                timed
P2              alloc

  recycle &
reclaim as PT

Thread B

kmalloc

page
fault

copy_from_user

copy

Figure 7: The execution timeline of persistent code patterns
1 (P1) and 2 (P2), where timed alloc performs persistent
allocations combined with our timing side channel. kmalloc
allocates the memory slot referenced by the dangling pointer.
Since this slot resides on the page table after recycling and
reclamation, copy_from_user overwrites page table entries.

an adversary to overwrite memory reclaimed for a page table
(see Section 6). The main challenge is to extend the time
window from converting the dangling pointer into an MWP
before recycling, while triggering must be done after the reclaim as a page table. To address this challenge, we exploit
three distinct code patterns prevalent in the Linux kernel, as
demonstrated in our systematic analysis.
   Persistent code pattern 1. The pattern shown in Listing 3
grants SLUBStick an MWP with control over the timing. The
process involves allocating the memory slot referred to by
the dangling pointer, e.g., as an ipmi_file_private object
at Line 4, before recycling. After reclamation, SLUBStick
triggers the MWP with ipmi_ioctl to overwrite page table
entries at Line 11. Figure 7 shows P1 with its timeline.
   While this pattern allows the MWP to be triggered
arbitrarily, it has limitations as the allocated object, e.g.,
ipmi_file_private, is zeroed during recycling. If other
code parts access the (unexpectedly) zeroed data, this could
lead to a crash. Notably, this limitation does not affect
ipmi_file_private, but others like timerfd_ioctl.
   Persistent code pattern 2. The second pattern (see List-

ing 4) allows SLUBStick to trigger an MWP at a controlled
time as follows: It allocates the memory slot referred to by
the dangling pointer, e.g., as sk_buff at Line 3, before the
recycling. Within the same syscall, the overwriting step at
Line 5 follows after memory reclamation. To extend the
time window between allocation and overwriting, SLUBStick
can use techniques such as userfaultfd, Filesystem for
USErspace (FUSE) [16], or slow page fault [20], controlling
the duration of a user page fault, e.g., from of msg at Line 5.
   While prior work [29, 40, 55] controlled the duration
of copying from userspace with userfaultfd, recent systems restrict userfaultfd to privileged users for handling
user page faults while in kernel mode [7]. Alternatively, researchers [16] showed that FUSE also allows control of the
duration of copying from userspace. FUSE is a framework for
userspace filesystems and can be utilized by an unprivileged
user [16, 21]. We hence use FUSE to extend the time window between allocation and overwriting, allowing us to perform the recycling and reclaiming in between. Besides FUSE,
SLUBStick can leverage the slow page fault approach [20].
   We show P2 with its execution timeline in Figure 7, where
thread B’s page fault starts before recycling and ends after
reclaiming. The hourglass illustrates this time window extension, e.g., with FUSE. Hence, SLUBStick successfully
overwrites entries in the reclaimed page table.
   Temporal code pattern. Beyond persistent patterns,
SLUBStick can also utilize temporal ones, as exemplified
in Listing 5. This approach demands the management of two
specific timing windows. The first ensures that object allocation at Line 3 and subsequent overwriting at Line 4 occur
during the intended phases. The second window is crucial
to avert premature object deallocation, leading to a potential
failure scenario since the object is concurrently accessed as a
page table. To extend these time windows, SLUBStick uses
FUSE files as described for persistent pattern 2.
   Systematic analysis. We use CodeQL [15] to identify suitable code patterns. We detail this approach in Appendix C.4.
Our results for Linux kernel versions v5.19 and v6.2 are
shown in Table 9. They indicate that persistent code pattern 1
is with 3 instances (and limited sizes) rare. For persistent code
pattern 2, we identify 5 instances with sizes that cover generic
caches from kmalloc-8 to kmalloc-4096. A similar stands
true for temporal code patterns with 7 identified. These findings underline the portability of the existing patterns.

6

Arbitrary Memory Read-and-Write

This section describes the three-stage process to obtain an
arbitrary memory read-and-write primitive by triggering an
MWP once, with an example shown in Figure 8. The single
triggering of the MWP is crucial since both the persistent
pattern 2 and the temporal pattern only allow a single trigger.
   Initially, SLUBStick starts with a mapped userspace
page using a Page Upper Directory (PUD) for address

translation, with an MWP associated with it. The goal
is to corrupt the content of a targeted page. Figure 8a
shows an example where the userspace page utilizes the
cr3->pgde->pude->pmde->pte->page translation, and
SLUBStick aims to corrupt the targeted page containing data
of /etc/passwd. While /etc/passwd is the target in this
example, any page can be targeted, including kernel code.
   In the first stage (Figure 8b), SLUBStick utilizes the
MWP to partially overwrite the PUD page with pude’ entries,
each comprising a page frame number of zero and set useraccessible and size bit. As a result, userspace addresses using
these entries for the page-table walk (cr3->pgde->pude’)
are granted read and write access over the first physical GB.
   In the second stage (Figure 8c), SLUBStick maps userspace
pages, prompting the kernel to map page tables. It continues
this process until a page table (PT’ in the case of Figure 8c)
is mapped in the first GB of physical memory. Given SLUBStick’s control over reading and writing the first GB, the content of this page table PT’ can be modified.
   In the third stage (Figure 8d), SLUBStick overwrites an
entry in the page table PT’ with pte’. This grants an arbitrary
physical memory read and write, using the userspace page
with the cr3->pgde->pude->pmde’->pte’ address translation. Since kpti is enabled by default on Ubuntu, SLUBStick
uses an invalid syscall to flush this translation from the TLBs
and force a page-table walk. Other methods, such as using
a TLB eviction set referring to zero pages, would also work.
With this primitive, SLUBStick can locate the targeted page
and tamper with its content to escalate privileges, e.g., adding
a privileged user with no authentication required.
   This example uses the MWP to overwrite a PUD page but
can also be used to overwrite a Page Middle Directory (PMD)
page. By tampering with a PMD page, SLUBStick has an
access space to find PT’ of 2 MB instead of 1 GB.
   In fact, we can use our MWP to overwrite not just a single
page table entry but the entire memory slot previously used
by the object. For instance, the function netlink_sendmsg
allows an adversary to overwrite len (see Line 5 of Listing 4)
bytes of the page table page. Thus, to increase the access space
after the first stage to find PT’, SLUBStick overwrites the
page table with entries of increasing page frame number. This
approach increases the access space to sizeof(cache)8      · 1 GB
and sizeof(cache)
            8      · 2 MB  for PUD   and PMD,    respectively.
   Reliability of obtaining an MWP to a PMD/PUD page.
In order to reliably obtain an MWP primitive to a PMD or
PUD page, SLUBStick employs the following strategies.
   For generic caches from kmalloc-8 to kmalloc-256,
SLUBStick maps a single PUD page, as explained in Section 4.2, with an MWP associating the PUD, as follows: Exploiting the LIFO approach inherent to the buddy allocator
for returning recycled memory chunks, SLUBStick initiates
the mapping of a user page with an unmapped PUD, PMD,
and PT. This procedure guarantees the reliable reclamation of
the recycled memory chunk for the PUD page.

page          target page

              Phyiscal Memory

       PGD

                   pgde

       PUD

                   pude

       PMD

                   pmde

       PT

                    pte

       Page

table entry

MWP

overwritable area            corrupted memory

                Phyiscal Memory

         PGD

                     pgde

         PUD         pude’

                     pude

         PMD

                     pmde

         PT

                      pte

         Page

corrupted table entry            lowest 1GB

               Phyiscal Memory

        PGD

                    pgde

        PUD         pude’

                    pude

        PMD
                    pmde’
                    pmde

        PT

                     pte

        Page

reference           corrupted reference

               Phyiscal Memory

        PGD

                    pgde

        PUD         pude’

                    pude

        PMD
                    pmde’
                    pmde

        PT

                     pte

        Page

/etc/passwd

/etc/passwd

/etc/passwd

/etc/passwd

1GB

1GB

      PT’

1GB

      PT’

pte’

(a) SLUBStick has an MWP to a         (b) SLUBStick leverages the         (c) SLUBStick maps alot of page         (d) SLUBStick uses first GB map-PUD page used for a user address      MWP to write pude’ (i.e., pfn=0,    tables, till a page table (i.e., PT’)   ping to tamper with the entry pte’
translation. It aims to tamper with   size=1, and user=1) to the PUD      is mapped within the first GB of        of page table PT’. As a result,
the targeted page containing data     page. As a result, user addresses   the physical memory.                    the user address using pte’ now
of /etc/passwd.                       using pude’ now reference the                                               references an arbitrary page, e.g.,
                                      first GB of the physical memory.                                            /etc/passwd.

Figure 8: Converting an MWP to an arbitrary read-and-write primitive to find and tamper with the targeted page /etc/passwd.

   Conversely, achieving an MWP to a PMD page involves
another strategy. For generic caches from kmalloc-512 to
kmalloc-4096, where the memory chunk size exceeds a
single page, SLUBStick initially prompts the kernel to split
the recycled memory chunk. To reliably reclaim the split
part of the memory chunk containing the MWP, SLUBStick
employs an extensive mapping strategy for PMD pages, accomplished by mapping 2 MB huge pages. This extensive
mapping tactic compels the buddy allocator to predominantly
allocate PMD pages, including the page associated with the
MWP. There are two options for using huge pages: Transparent Huge Pages (THP) or hugetlbfs. Albeit hugetlbfs offers
more stable exploitation results, these huge pages must be
pre-allocated. However, due to the widely spread application
of hugetlbfs [25], such as databases [38], virtualization, and
even Java [18], SLUBStick utilizes hugetlbfs.

7

Attack Evaluation

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of SLUBStick.
We initially exploit a synthetic DF vulnerability (see Section 7.1) to show its applicability across generic caches from
kmalloc-8 to kmalloc-4096. We then exploit 9 CVEs (see
Section 7.2), consisting of DF, UAF, and OOB vulnerabilities.
   Evaluation setup. For our experimental setup, we run the
exploits in a virtual machine via QEMU 6.2.0, equipped with

4 cores and 16 GB RAM. We ran Ubuntu 22.04 LTS, with
Linux kernels v5.19 and v6.2 for x86, and v6.2 for aarch64,
to demonstrate architecture and version independence. These
kernels were the unmodified generic ones, which presents a
considerable challenge for exploitation.

7.1 Synthetic Vulnerability
To evaluate SLUBStick for all generic caches, we create a
synthetic DF vulnerability in the Linux kernel, integrated into
a module, i.e., read device driver rdd. Its simplified code is
seen in Listing 6. For the exploitation processes, we need this
driver code’s allocation (ALLOC) and release (FREE) functionalities. We compile and then include this driver code during
the operating system’s startup for our three kernels.
   With the synthetic DF vulnerability in place, we execute SLUBStick on all generic caches from kmalloc-8
to kmalloc-4096. For the measurement primitive, we use
add_key with the invalid argument _descr (see Section 4.1).
As allocation primitive, we utilize objects retrieved via
our systematic analysis (see Section 5.2). For the MWP,
we accomplish the exploitation with all three types, persistent 1 and 2 as well as temporal, using do_signalfd4,
replace_user_tlv, and key_ctl_key_verify, respectively. Table 2 shows all primitives used for this evaluation. Equipped with these primitives, we successfully execute
SLUBStick, exploiting the DF for privilege escalation.

Table 2: Primitives used for our attack evaluation.

Generic Cache        MP               AP                          MWP
kmalloc-8          add_key       signalfd_ctx                 do_signalfd4
kmalloc-16         add_key        aa_revision             key_ctl_key_verfify
kmalloc-32         add_key       anon_vma_name            key_ctl_key_verfify
kmalloc-64         add_key       snd_ctl_file             key_ctl_key_verfify
kmalloc-96         add_key      vfio_container            key_ctl_key_verfify
kmalloc-128        add_key       dlm_user_proc            key_ctl_key_verfify
kmalloc-192        add_key         pp_struct              key_ctl_key_verfify
kmalloc-256        add_key      snd_compr_file              replace_user_tlv
kmalloc-512        add_key        tls_context              replace_user_tlv
kmalloc-1024       add_key        pipe_buffer              replace_user_tlv
kmalloc-2048       add_key      key.description             replace_user_tlv
kmalloc-4096       add_key        net_device                replace_user_tlv
MP: Measurement Primitive   AP: Allocation Primitive   MWP: Memory Write Primitive.

Table 3: Exploitability shown on real-world vulnerabilities.

    CVE          Capability      Cache
CVE-2023-21400      DF         kmalloc-32
CVE-2023-3609      UAF         kmalloc-96
CVE-2022-32250     UAF         kmalloc-64
CVE-2022-29582     UAF        files_cachep
CVE-2022-27666     OOB        kmalloc-4096
CVE-2022-2588       DF        kmalloc-192
CVE-2022-0995      OOB         kmalloc-96
CVE-2021-4157      OOB         kmalloc-64
CVE-2021-3492       DF        kmalloc-4096

7.2    Real-World Vulnerabilities
In line with prior research [6,29,46,49,53], we evaluate SLUBStick with a selection of real-world vulnerabilities. We port
these vulnerabilities to our kernels to demonstrate the version,
architecture, and kernel binary independence of SLUBStick.
Our evaluation includes 9 vulnerabilities that are systematically classified based on the capability they provide. If the
root cause of a vulnerability is a race condition that allows
an adversary to derive a kernel heap vulnerability, we classify it as a heap vulnerability. For instance, since both race
conditions, CVE-2023-21400 and CVE-2022-29582, can be
pivoted to a UAF and DF, respectively, we classify them as a
UAF and DF. In total, our selection consists of 3 DF vulnerabilities that enable SLUBStick directly, as well as 3 OOB and
3 UAF that we pivot to achieve a DF state.
   The feasibility of pivoting an OOB and UAF depends on
the write capability provided. We demonstrate with our results that the capability to overwrite as low as two bytes is
enough to pivot to a DF state. Examples include corrupting
a reference counter (as seen in CVE-2022-29582 and CVE2023-3609) or nullifying the two least significant bytes of a
pointer (like in CVE-2022-27666). For pivoting, SLUBStick
requires an exploitable object containing a data pointer or
reference counter at the overwrite point. The purely manual
identification of suitable objects is time-consuming due to the
extensive nature of the Linux kernel. For this reason, we utilize CodeQL to assist in identifying suitable objects for OOB
and UAF write vulnerabilities, described in Appendix C.1.
   Exploitability results. Table 3 shows the exploitability of

SLUBStick, showcasing its functionality across kernel heap
vulnerabilities and cache sizes. Specifically, we can free objects twice for the CVE2023-21400, CVE-2022-2588, and
CVE-2021-3492 vulnerabilities, allowing SLUBStick to exploit these vulnerabilities and directly escalate privileges.
   Additionally, the CVE-2022-0995 vulnerability allows overwriting out-of-bounds originating from the
watch_queue object. We exploit this write capability
to corrupt the reference counter of an anon_vma_name
object, both located within the same generic cache, i.e.,
kmalloc-96. With the corrupted reference, we create a
DF state of an anon_vma_name object, which enables the
execution of SLUBStick. For CVE-2022-27666, the OOB
allows overwriting memory adjacent to the page_frag
object (allocated from generic cache kmalloc-4096). We
perform a cross-cache overflow to zero the next pointer’s
two least significant bytes of a msg_msg object positioned on
the adjacent memory chunk. This allows us to free the next
twice so we can execute SLUBStick. As a third OOB write
vulnerability, CVE-2021-4157, we exploit the overwriting
capability within kmalloc-64 to tamper with the reference
counter kref of an eventfd_ctx object. As a result, we can
pivot this to a DF and perform SLUBStick.
   Furthermore, the CVE-2022-29582 vulnerability allows a
file UAF, specifically using the file object after it has been
invalidly freed. By strategically pivoting this vulnerability
using cross-cache, we can reclaim the memory chunk for the
generic cache kmalloc-256. Subsequently, we reclaim the
invalidly freed file object to corrupt its reference counter.
This allows us to free the file a second time, creating a DF
state to run SLUBStick. Similarly, CVE-2023-3609 allows to
use a tc_u_hnode object after it has been freed. Reclaiming
the memory within the same generic cache and overwriting
the reference counter, we pivot this vulnerability to a DF
state of tc_u_hnode to perform SLUBStick. Lastly, the CVE-2022-32250 vulnerability provides a write capability within
the generic cache kmalloc-64, which we use to corrupt a
data pointer within fdtable for a DF state.

8

Discussion

Impact on existing attacks. Our side-channel supported approach presented in Section 4 greatly enhances the reliability
of cross-cache attacks from generic caches and makes them
practical for exploitation. Thus, it amplifies the effectiveness
of exploitation methods employing cross-cache attacks.
   For instance, DirtyCred [29] relies on the cross-cache approach to exploit DF vulnerabilities. This exploitation entails
pivoting DF vulnerabilities to trigger an invalid free on a
credential object. With our enhancement of the cross-cache
attack, DirtyCred’s success rate in pivoting DF vulnerabilities from generic caches also significantly increases, making
DirtyCred an even more significant threat to kernel security.
   Moreover, SLUBStick is more versatile than DirtyCred

as it does not rely on an invalid free on a credential object.
Instead, an invalid free operation on any object is sufficient.
   Container escape. In addition to privilege escalation, our
research demonstrates that SLUBStick can directly enable
container escapes such as Docker. For containers permitting
FUSE, SLUBStick uses FUSE to extend the time window
in persistent code pattern 2 and the temporal pattern. For
(hardened) containers prohibiting FUSE, SLUBStick uses
persistent code pattern 1 or the slow page fault approach [20]
instead of FUSE. It then modifies kernel code accessible from
userspace via a syscall, i.e., sys_setresuid.
   Noise. With SLUBStick, we present a reliable approach
for privilege escalation, leveraging a software timing side
channel on the SLUB’s object allocation. To maximize the
reliability of SLUBStick, we minimize noise as follows:
   CPU migration, the process of moving a task to another
CPU, can introduce instabilities as both the slab and buddy
allocator maintain per-CPU lists. To mitigate migration and,
hence, increase reliability, SLUBStick may pin all running
processes used in exploitation to a single CPU. However, it is
not essential as illustrated in Table 1.
   Due to the preemptive nature of the Linux kernel, preemption may occur during the timing measurement of a measurement primitive, potentially corrupting the result. To limit
this noise source, SLUBStick performs timing measurements
and keeps track of the number of objects associated with the
current slab. If SLUBStick observes slow timing, indicating
the allocation of a new memory chunk, it validates this by
checking the object number of the current slab. This validation prevents misinterpretation of slow allocations, ensuring
that previous and current objects reside in the same slab.
   Manual vs automated components. We use the CodeQL [15] static analyzer to generate a list of possible objects
or primitives automatically. Through manual inspection, we
then refine this list by selecting suitable candidates. To provide a representation of the effectiveness of our automated
part, our evaluated kernel contains 66 787 structures, where
our automated tool outputs 8601 potential as allocation and
memory write primitives. After manual inspection, we get
36 suitable structures for allocation primitives. For memory
write primitives, the tool outputs 2046 copy locations, where
manual inspection yields 15 memory write primitives. For
measurement primitives, the tool outputs 195 primitives, with
14 after inspection. Tables 6 to 9 show our findings. Further
details on this process are provided in Appendix C.
   Cross version/architecture dependencies. Kernel exploitation often depends on the specific kernel version and
system architecture, as various exploitation techniques are
closely tied to these factors. For example, KASLR is bypassed
either with a read primitive [5] or a hardware side channel [3].
Read primitives are closely tied to specific kernel versions and
configurations, while hardware side channels depend on the
system architecture. Additionally, numerous exploits rely on
constructing ROP chains [48,54], which involves a detailed in-

spection of the kernel binary, a process connected with system
architecture, Linux kernel version, and configuration. SLUBStick distinguishes itself by not relying on bypassing KASLR
or constructing a ROP chain, nor does it use architecturespecific data. As a result, SLUBStick is resilient to variations
in kernel versions and architecture dependencies.
   Kernel defenses. The last decade has seen a surge of proposals to improve kernel security. We briefly discuss the defenses, particularly considering SLUBStick.
   KASLR is designed to enhance kernel security by randomizing the memory layout, making it more challenging to
exploit vulnerabilities to perform Code Reuse Attacks (CRA)
and data-only attacks. To further complicate CRA, researchers
have introduced Control-Flow Integrity (CFI) [1], which has
been adapted to kernel software [10, 14, 32, 45]. CFI helps
ensure the integrity of the kernel control flow by restricting it
to an approximated control-flow graph. Moreover, the Linux
kernel has incorporated various hardening strategies to make
the allocator more resistant to memory corruption vulnerabilities. These include slab list randomization, protection of slab
meta-data, and slab quarantine [39]. However, researchers
have identified bypassing attacks [26, 39, 53] for these hardening strategies. Additionally, heap separation is a defense
integrated into the Linux kernel to separate caches containing
security-critical data, e.g., cred, or objects often used for exploitation [29, 40, 55], e.g., msg_msg. To further enhance the
separation of kernel objects, researchers [9] have proposed to
increase the separation granularity. This involves randomly
assigning each allocation site to one of these separated caches,
making heap spraying attacks more challenging. However,
SLUBStick leverages common code patterns, allowing it to
circumvent the separation attempt of generic caches. Going a
step further, our timing side channel on the allocator can even
be utilized to determine whether two allocation sites share
the same cache. In summary, the described countermeasures,
while valuable, appear ineffective in mitigating SLUBStick.
   AUTOSLAB [28] is a defense provided by grsecurity via
paid subscription. Since AUTOSLAB separates allocator
caches based on their allocation types, it restricts that different allocation types share the same allocation cache. However, this granularity is still too coarse-grained, as, e.g., the
type char * is used by multiple allocation, measurement,
and memory write primitives. As a result, the allocation cache
with type char * is still exploitable with SLUBStick.
   SLAB_VIRTUAL [42], which is currently under development, is designed to mitigate cross-cache attacks by allocating
kernel objects via virtual addresses rather than direct physical memory. However, Torvalds and Molnar noted that it has
drawbacks like significant overhead and incompatibility with
DMA [42]. If merged, DMA-allocated memory will most
likely be excluded [42]. This leaves more than 350 allocation
sites unprotected, exploitable to obtain all necessary code
patterns (allocation, measurement, and memory write primitives, such as sun8i_ce_aes_setkey, monwrite_new_hdr,

and sti_hqvdp_vtg_cb). Hence, SLUBStick can exploit a
vulnerability, e.g., CVE-2023-2194, of a DMA-allocated object. Since DMA-allocated memory is mainly used in drivers,
known to be vulnerable [34], SLUBStick still poses a threat.
   Lastly, prior academic works [11, 33, 41, 44] proposed defenses to protect page tables to mitigate data-only attacks.
   While existing defenses such as AUTOSLAB and
SLAB_VIRTUAL demonstrate promise in mitigating SLUBStick, none provide comprehensive protection. This underscores the threat SLUBStick poses to kernel security.
   Public exploits. Recently, multiple non-academic exploits have been proposed [2, 12, 13, 17, 19, 30, 47, 52].
Some [2, 17, 19, 47] leverage cross-cache attacks using the
dedicated file cache. In contrast, we focused on generic
caches, which are considerably more challenging to exploit.
This is primarily because generic caches have numerous allocation sites, resulting in significant allocation noise. Specifically, while the dedicated file cache has one allocation site
(dup_f), generic caches have from 354 (kmalloc-4096) to
2250 (kmalloc-64) on systems like our evaluated Ubuntu.
Hence, we proposed our side-channel supported approach to
perform cross-cache attacks on generic caches reliably.
   Two exploits, bad io_uring [30] and the exploit demonstrated by Wu et al. [47], highlight the exploitation of crosscache attacks on older kernel versions (i.e., v5.10), targeting
Android devices. Bad io_uring leverages a cross-cache attack to misuse pipe_buffer as an arbitrary read and write.
Wu et al. (concurrently to our work) demonstrated pagetable manipulation by misusing signalfd_ctx. Both exploits rely on stabilization objects in conjunction with multiple retriggers of cross-cache reuse. Specifically, bad io_uring
utilized additional pipe_buffer objects for stabilization,
while Wu et al. relied on seq_operations. However, kernel advances beyond v5.14 introduced heap separation (i.e.,
kmalloc-cg-*), rendering the reuse of these stabilization
objects ineffective for exploitation. Consequently, these exploitation strategies are thwarted by newer kernel versions. In
contrast, SLUBStick exploits more recent systems, including
v5.19 and v6.2, for a wide variety of heap vulnerabilities.

9

Conclusion

This paper presented SLUBStick, a novel kernel exploit technique that enables arbitrary memory read-and-write primitives
through a practical software cross-cache attack. For our crosscache attack, we used a software timing side channel on the
SLUB allocator, significantly enhancing the success rate for
frequently used generic caches to over 99 %. Moreover, using page-table manipulation, SLUBStick effectively converts
a limited kernel heap vulnerability into arbitrary read-andwrite capabilities. We demonstrated privilege escalation in
the Linux kernel using a synthetic vulnerability and 9 realworld CVEs, showcasing its serious threat.

Acknowledgements

We thank Daniel Gruss, the anonymous reviewers, and our
shepherd for their valuable feedback. This project has received funding from the Austrian Research Promotion Agency
(FFG) via the SEIZE and AWARE project (FFG grant numbers 888087 and 891092), the European Research Council
(ERC project FSSec 101076409), and the Austrian Science
Fund (FWF SFB project SPyCoDe 10.55776/F85). Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the funding parties.

References

[1] Martín Abadi, Mihai Budiu, Ulfar Erlingsson, and Jay
    Ligatti. Control-Flow Integrity. In CCS, 2005.

[2] Awarau and pql. CVE-2022-29582 An io_uring vulnerability, 2022. URL: https://ruia-ruia.github.io/
    2022/08/05/CVE-2022-29582-io-uring/.

[3] Claudio Canella, Michael Schwarz, Martin Haubenwallner, Martin Schwarzl, and Daniel Gruss. KASLR: Break
    It, Fix It, Repeat. In AsiaCCS, 2020.

[4] Weiteng Chen, Xiaochen Zou, Guoren Li, and Zhiyun
    Qian. KOOBE: Towards Facilitating Exploit Generation of Kernel Out-Of-Bounds Write Vulnerabilities. In
    USENIX Security, 2020.

[5] Yueqi Chen, Zhenpeng Lin, and Xinyu Xing. A Systematic Study of Elastic Objects in Kernel Exploitation. In
    CCS, 2020.

[6] Yueqi Chen and Xinyu Xing. SLAKE: Facilitating Slab
    Manipulation for Exploiting Vulnerabilities in the Linux
    Kernel. In CCS, 2019.

[7] Jonathan Corbet.     Blocking userfaultfd() kernelfault handling, 5 2020. URL: https://lwn.net/
    Articles/819834/.

[8] Jonathan Corbet. A slab allocator (removal) update, 5
    2023. URL: https://lwn.net/Articles/932201/.

[9] Jonathan Corbet. Randomness for kmalloc(), 7 2023.
    URL: https://lwn.net/Articles/938637/.

[10] John Criswell, Nathan Dautenhahn, and Vikram Adve.
     KCoFI: Complete Control-Flow Integrity for Commodity Operating System Kernels. In S&P, 2014.

[11] Lucas Davi, David Gens, Christopher Liebchen, and
     Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. PT-Rand: Practical Mitigation of
     Data-only Attacks against Page Tables. In NDSS, 2017.

[12] Devil. CoRJail: From Null Byte Overflow To Docker
     Escape Exploiting poll_list Objects In The Linux
     Kernel, 2022. URL: https://syst3mfailure.io/
     corjail/.

[13] ETenal. CVE-2022-27666: Exploit esp6 modules
     in Linux kernel, 2022. URL: https://etenal.me/
     archives/1825.

[14] Alexander J. Gaidis, Joao Moreira, Ke Sun, Alyssa
     Milburn, Vaggelis Atlidakis, and Vasileios P. Kemerlis.
     FineIBT: Fine-grain Control-flow Enforcement with Indirect Branch Tracking. RAID, 2023.

[15] GitHub.    CodeQL, 2021.
     codeql.github.com/.

URL: https://

[16] Luke Gix. FUSE for Linux Exploitation 101, 2022.
     URL: https://exploiter.dev/blog/2022/FUSEexploit.html.

[17] h0mbre.    Escaping the Google kCTF Container
     with a Data-Only Exploit, 2023. URL: https://
     h0mbre.github.io/kCTF_Data_Only_Exploit/#.

[18] IBM. Working with hugetlbfs huge-page support, 2023.
     URL: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/linux-onz?topic=hps-working-huge-pages-3.

[19] javierprtd. No CVE for this bug which has never
     been in the official kernel, 2023. URL: https:
     //soez.github.io/posts/no-cve-for-this.-Ithas-never-been-in-the-official-kernel/.

[20] Choo Yi Kai.     A new method for container escape using file-based DirtyCred, 2023.   URL:
     https://starlabs.sg/blog/2023/07-a-newmethod-for-container-escape-using-filebased-dirtycred/.

[21] The Linux Kernel.      FUSE, 2023.    URL:
     https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/next/
     filesystems/fuse.html.

[22] Imran Khan.      Linux SLUB Allocator Internals and Debugging, 2022.      URL: https:
     //blogs.oracle.com/linux/post/linux-sluballocator-internals-and-debugging-1.

[23] Kenneth C Knowlton. A fast storage allocator. Communications of the ACM, 1965.

[24] Paul Kocher, Jann Horn, Anders Fogh, Daniel Genkin,
     Daniel Gruss, Werner Haas, Mike Hamburg, Moritz
     Lipp, Stefan Mangard, Thomas Prescher, Michael
     Schwarz, and Yuval Yarom. Spectre Attacks: Exploiting
     Speculative Execution. In S&P, 2019.

[25] Mike Kravetz.        hugetlbfs: Not just for
     databases anymore!, 2015.       URL: https:
     //blogs.oracle.com/linux/post/hugetlbfsnot-just-for-databases-anymore/.
[26] Yoochan Lee, Jinhan Kwak, Junesoo Kang, Yuseok Jeon,
     and Byoungyoung Lee. PSPRAY: Timing Side-Channel
     based Linux Kernel Heap Exploitation Technique. In
     USENIX Security, 2023.
[27] Yoochan Lee, Changwoo Min, and Byoungyoung Lee.
     ExpRace: Exploiting Kernel Races through Raising Interrupts. In USENIX Security, 2021.
[28] Zhenpeng Lin.     How AUTOSLAB Changes
     the Memory Unsafety Game, 2021.      URL:
     https://grsecurity.net/how_autoslab_
     changes_the_memory_unsafety_game.
[29] Zhenpeng Lin, Yuhang Wu, and Xinyu Xing. DirtyCred:
     Escalating Privilege in Linux Kernel. In CCS, 2022.
[30] Zhenpeng Lin, Xinyu Xing, Zhaofeng Chen, and Kang
     Li. Bad io_uring: A New Era of Rooting for Android,
     2023. URL: https://i.blackhat.com/BH-US-23/
     Presentations/US-23-Lin-bad_io_uring.pdf.
[31] Moritz Lipp, Michael Schwarz, Daniel Gruss, Thomas
     Prescher, Werner Haas, Anders Fogh, Jann Horn, Stefan
     Mangard, Paul Kocher, Daniel Genkin, Yuval Yarom,
     and Mike Hamburg. Meltdown: Reading Kernel Memory from User Space. In USENIX Security, 2018.
[32] Lukas Maar, Pascal Nasahl, and Stefan Mangard. Beyond the Edges of Kernel Control-Flow Hijacking Protection with HEK-CFI. In AsiaCCS, 2024.
[33] Lukas Maar, Martin Schwarzl, Fabian Rauscher, Daniel
     Gruss, and Stefan Mangard. DOPE: DOmain Protection
     Enforcement with PKS. In ACSAC, 2023.
[34] Derrick McKee, Yianni Giannaris, Carolina Ortega
     Perez, Howard Shrobe, Mathias Payer, Hamed Okhravi,
     and Nathan Burow. Preventing Kernel Hacks with
     HAKC. In NDSS, 2022.
[35] Paul McKenney. What is RCU, Fundamentally?, 12
     2007. URL: https://lwn.net/Articles/262464/.
[36] Matt Miller. Trends, challenges, and strategic shifts in
     the software vulnerability mitigation landscape. Bluehat
     IL, 2019.
[37] Joao Moreira. Kernel FineIBT Support, 4 2022. URL:
     https://lwn.net/Articles/891976/.
[38] MySQL. Enabling Large Page Support, 2023. URL:
     https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/
     large-page-support.html.

[39] Alexander Popov.        Linux kernel heap quarantine versus use-after-free exploits, 2020. URL:
     https://a13xp0p0v.github.io/2020/11/30/
     slab-quarantine.html.
[40] Alexander Popov.    Four Bytes of Power: Exploiting CVE-2021-26708 in the Linux kernel,
     2021. URL: https://a13xp0p0v.github.io/2021/
     02/09/CVE-2021-26708.html.
[41] Sergej Proskurin, Marius Momeu, Seyedhamed Ghavamnia, Vasileios P. Kemerlis, and Michalis Polychronakis.
     xMP: Selective Memory Protection for Kernel and User
     Space. In S&P, 2020.
[42] Matteo Rizzo and Jann Horn.     Prevent crosscache attacks in the SLUB allocator, 2023.
     URL:       https://lore.kernel.org/linux-mm/
     202309151425.2BE59091@keescook/T/.
[43] Mark Seaborn and Thomas Dullien. Exploiting the
     DRAM Rowhammer bug to gain kernel privileges. In
     Black Hat USA, 2015.
[44] Chengyu Song, Byoungyoung Lee, Kangjie Lu,
     William R. Harris, Taesoo Kim, and Wenke Lee. Enforcing Kernel Security Invariants with Data Flow Integrity.
     In NDSS, 2016.
[45] Yoo Sungbae, Park Jinbum, Kim Seolheui, Kim Yeji,
     and Kim Taesoo. In-Kernel Control-Flow Integrity on
     Commodity OSes using ARM Pointer Authentication.
     In USENIX Security, 2022.
[46] Ruipeng Wang, Kaixiang Chen, Chao Zhang, Zulie Pan,
     Qianyu Li, Siliang Qin, Shenglin Xu, Min Zhang, and
     Yang Li. AlphaEXP: An Expert System for Identifying
     Security-Sensitive Kernel Objects. In USENIX Security,
     2023.
[47] Nicolas Wu. Dirty Pagetable: A Novel Exploitation
     Technique To Rule Linux Kernel, 2023.      URL:
     https://yanglingxi1993.github.io/dirty_
     pagetable/dirty_pagetable.html.
[48] Wei Wu, Yueqi Chen, Xinyu Xing, and Wei Zou. KE-PLER: Facilitating Control-flow Hijacking Primitive
     Evaluation for Linux Kernel Vulnerabilities. In USENIX
     Security, 2019.
[49] Wei Wu, Yueqi Chen, Jun Xu, Xinyu Xing, Xiaorui
     Gong, and Wei Zou. FUZE: Towards Facilitating Exploit Generation for Kernel Use-After-Free Vulnerabilities. In USENIX Security, 2018.
[50] Wen Xu, Juanru Li, Junliang Shu, Wenbo Yang, Tianyi
     Xie, Yuanyuan Zhang, and Dawu Gu. From collision to
     exploitation: Unleashing use-after-free vulnerabilities
     in linux kernel. In CCS, 2015.

[51] Yuval Yarom and Katrina Falkner. Flush+Reload: a
     High Resolution, Low Noise, L3 Cache Side-Channel
     Attack. In USENIX Security, 2014.
[52] Wang Yong.       KSMA: Breaking Android kernel
     isolation and Rooting with ARM MMU features, 2018.
     URL: https://i.blackhat.com/briefings/asia/
     2018/asia-18-WANG-KSMA-Breaking-Androidkernel-isolation-and-Rooting-with-ARM-MMU-features.pdf.
[53] Kyle Zeng, Yueqi Chen, Haehyun Cho, Xinyu Xing,
     Adam Doupé, Yan Shoshitaishvili, and Tiffany Bao.
     Playing for K(H)eaps: Understanding and Improving
     Linux Kernel Exploit Reliability. In USENIX Security,
     2022.
[54] Kyle Zeng, Zhenpeng Lin, Kangjie Lu, Xinyu Xing,
     Ruoyu Wang, Adam Doupé, Yan Shoshitaishvili, and
     Tiffany Bao. RetSpill: Igniting User-Controlled Data to
     Burn Away Linux Kernel Protections. In CCS, 2023.
[55] Xiaochen Zou and Zhiyun Qian. Exploit esp6 modules
     in Linux kernel, 2022. URL: https://etenal.me/
     archives/1825.

Table 4: Detailed information of each generic cache, where ✶
denotes the number of slabs until the node partial slab list is
full, prompting to discard the slabs’ memory chunks.

Generic Cache   Memory Chunk   Number of   Number of   Node Partial Slab
                                 Pages      Objects     List Capacity✶
 kmalloc-8         4096            1         512               6
 kmalloc-16        4096            1         256               6
 kmalloc-32        4096            1         128               6
 kmalloc-64        4096            1          64               8
 kmalloc-96        4096            1          42              12
kmalloc-128        4096            1          32               8
kmalloc-192        4096            1          21              12
kmalloc-256        4096            1          16               7
kmalloc-512        8192            2          16               6
kmalloc-1024       16384           4          16               6
kmalloc-2048       32768           8          16               6
kmalloc-4096       32768           8           8               6

A

Generic Cache Information

To trigger the recycling process reliably, we provide insights
(see Table 4) into how a generic cache manages memory
chunks and stores available objects. Generic caches from
kmalloc-8 to kmalloc-256 use one page per slab, with the
slab storing 512 to 16 objects per memory chunk. Caches
larger than kmalloc-256 use multiple pages per slab, storing
between 16 and 8 objects per chunk. The Node Partial Slab
List Capacity column indicates when the SLUB allocator
releases the chunks of the slabs, e.g., for kmalloc-256, if
this cache reaches 6 free slabs, the SLUB allocator prompts
the buddy allocator to discard and recycle the slab’s chunks.

Table 5: Measured timing in timestamps for fast ① and slow ⑤
allocation (see Figure 2) using the measurement primitive
add_key with an invalid _descr argument.

Generic Cache   Fast Allocation ①   Slow Allocation ⑤
  kmalloc-8         1086 ± 53            > 4401
 kmalloc-16         1114 ± 69            > 3224
 kmalloc-32         1133 ± 58            > 2510
 kmalloc-64         1130 ± 69            > 2468
 kmalloc-96         1117 ± 44            > 2169
 kmalloc-128       1250 ± 126            > 2470
 kmalloc-192        1197 ± 86            > 2121
 kmalloc-256        1359 ± 34            > 2439
 kmalloc-512        1685 ± 84            > 3759
kmalloc-1024        1601 ± 30            > 3589
kmalloc-2048        1561 ± 23            > 3415
kmalloc-4096        1925 ± 33            > 3758

 1   typedef struct { size_t uaddr, size; } msg_t;
 2   void *obj;
 3   long rd_ioctl(struct file *_, unsigned num, size_t param) {
 4     msg_t msg;
 5     copy_from_user(&msg, param, sizeof(msg_t));
 6     switch (num) {
 7       case ALLOC:
 8         obj = kmalloc(msg->size);
 9         return 0;
10       case FREE:
11         kfree(obj);
12         return 0;
13       case READ:
14         copy_to_user(msg->uaddr, obj, msg->size);
15         return 0;
16       default:
17         return -1;
18     }
19   }

Listing 6: Read device driver rdd, supporting an allocation
(ALLOC), deallocation (FREE), and read (READ).

Table 6: Allocation primitives allocating a single fixed-size
object during the syscall, with ✶ new objects identified.

Generic Cache           Object             Constraints
                pci_filp_private✶
 kmalloc-8
                signalfd_ctx
                afs_file✶
 kmalloc-16
                aa_revision✶
                vmci_host_dev✶
                seq_operations           cg cache
 kmalloc-32
                coda_file_info✶
                shm_file_data
                snd_info_private_data✶
 kmalloc-64
                snd_ctl_file✶
                subprocess_info
 kmalloc-96     watch_queue
                vfio_container✶
kmalloc-128     dlm_user_proc✶
                loopback_pcm✶
kmalloc-192     snd_timer_user✶
                pp_struct✶
                vhci_data✶
kmalloc-256     snd_compr_file✶
                msg_queue                cg cache
                tls_context
kmalloc-512
                mousedev_client✶         input group
                pipe_buffer
                tty_struct
kmalloc-1024    sock
                xfrm_policy
                nouveau_cli✶
                super_block
kmalloc-2048
                perf_event✶              SELinux disabled
kmalloc-4096    net_device

Table 7: Allocation primitives allocating a single variable-size
object during the syscall, with ✶ new objects identified.

   Elastic Object        Generic Caches       Constraints
user_key_payload     kmalloc-[32,32767)    only 200 allocation
anon_vma_name✶          kmalloc-[8,96)
msg_msg               kmalloc-[64,4096)    cg cache
msg_msgseg             kmalloc-[8,4096)    cg cache
drm_property_blob   kmalloc-[96,INT_MAX)
key.description       kmalloc-[8,4096)

B

Timings of Measurement Primitives

C

Systematic Analysis Detailed

We perform experiments to verify that the slow allocation
time ⑤ is higher than the fast allocation time ① (see Figure 2).
We use add_key as the measurement primitive with an invalid
_descr argument to fulfill the constraints described in Section 4.1, while others (e.g., mount with an invalid dev_name
address) yield similar results. Our experimental environment
is Ubuntu 22.04 LTS with a Linux kernel v6.2, running on a
machine with Intel i7-1260P and 48 GB RAM. We allocate
16384 objects as a warm-up to ensure that the measured tim-
ing of the subsequent allocations is either from the CPU free
list ① or from a new memory chunk using the buddy allocator ⑤. We then perform 4096 allocations and distinguish them
between Fast and Slow Allocation. As shown in Table 5, the
results demonstrate a notable timing difference between these
allocation paths, with an average fast allocation from 1086 to
1925 timestamps and a minimum slow allocation from 4401
to 3758.

In this section, we present our systematic analysis in more detail. Our principal approach is first to identify a list of possible
objects or primitives using the CodeQL [15] static analyzer.
We then use these results to manually identify suitable results or discard those results that violate the constraints of
the respective primitive. For each primitive, our systematic
analysis results in a comprehensive list of suitable objects and
functions, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach.
   CodeQL aims to find code patterns that cause vulnerabilities in software. At its core, it creates a database where
essential meta-information about the examined software is
stored. With this database, CodeQL uses queries as input
to analyze the software and interpret the query results. We
retrofit CodeQL to find allocation and measurement primitives (see Section 4.1). We also use CodeQL to find suitable
victim objects for UAF and OOB write vulnerabilities (see
Section 5.1) and suitable code patterns to exploit for an MWP

Table 8: Measurement primitives, where ✶ denotes allocation via the separated kmalloc-cg-* caches and ✩ denotes depending
allocation size whether msg_msg/msg_msgseg is allocated.

                     Syscall                                  File                  Argument       Allocation Size              Condition
add_key                                          security/keys/keyctl.c          _descr               [1,4096)       *(char *)_descr = ’.’
request_key                                      security/keys/keyctl.c          _descr               [1,4096)       _callout_info bad address
keyctl$KEYCTL_JOIN_SESSION_KEYRING               security/keys/keyctl.c          arg2                 [1,4096)       *(char *)arg2 = ’.’
keyctl$KEYCTL_SEARCH                             security/keys/keyctl.c          arg4                [1,4096)        arg2 invalid keyid
keyctl$KEYCTL_PKEY_QUERY                         security/keys/keyctl.c          arg5                 [1,4096)       arg2 invalid keyid
mount                                            fs/namespace.c                  type                 [1,4096)       dev_name bad address
fsopen                                           fs/fsopen.c                     _fs_name             [1,4096)       _fs_name not existing
fsl_hv_ioctl$FSL_HV_IOCTL_SETPROP                drivers/virt/fsl_hypervisor.c   *(size_t *)arg       [1,4096)       *((size_t *)arg+1) bad address
perf_ioctl$PERF_EVENT_IOC_SET_FILTER             kernel/events/core.c            arg                  [1,4096)       !has_addr_filter(event)
joydev_ioctl_common$JSIOCSAXMAP                  drivers/input/joydev.c          argp             [64,UINT64_MAX)    *(char *)argp > 0x3f
fsconfig$FSCONFIG_SET_FD                         fs/fsopen.c                     _key                  [1,256)       fget(aux) not existing
prctl$PR_SET_VMA$PR_SET_VMA_ANON_NAME            kernel/sys.c                    arg5                  [1,80)        *(char *)arg5 = 1
io_uring_register$IORING_REGISTER_RESTRICTIONS   fs/io_uring.c                   arg              [16,UINT32_MAX)    *(short *)arg = 5
msgsnd$alloc_msg✶                                ipc/msgutil.c                   len               [64/8✩,4096)      mtext bad address

Table 9: Code patterns allowing for an MWP, where ✶ denotes
the same function for allocation and triggering the MWP of
the persistent object, and ✩ and ✢ denote distinct function
for allocation and triggering the MWP.

            Function                  Type        Size          Constraints
ipmi_open✩/ipmi_ioctl✢                 P1           8
do_signalfd4✶                          P1           8
joydev_ioctl✶                          P1        5680
replace_user_tlv                       P2     [1,131072)
atmel_ioctl                            P2       [1,32)       CAP_NET_ADMIN
netlink_sendmsg                        P2    [1,INT_MAX)
tun_sendmsg                            P2    [1,INT_MAX)
tap_sendmsg                            P2    [1,INT_MAX)
mount                                  T       [1,4096)
key_ctl_key_verfify                    T        [1,256)
mtdchar_writeoob                       T       [1,4096)
mmc_blk_ioctl_copy_from_user           T           96
ptp_ioctl                              T         1216
__cld_pipe_inprogress_downcall         T       [1,65536)
__bpf_copy_key                         T        [1,512)      bpf as unprivileged
       P1/2: Persistent code pattern 1/2     T: Temporal code pattern.

(see Section 5.2).

C.1 Finding Suitable Objects to Pivot UAF and
    OOB Writes

To find suitable objects for pivoting UAF and OOB vulnerabilities with an overwriting capability, we need a victim object
with a pointer to a dynamically allocated object or a reference counter at the location of the overwriting location. In
the example of CVE-2022-32250, the UAF write vulnerability provides overwriting at offset 0x18 for objects allocated
from the generic cache kmalloc-64. With these constraints,
we use a CodeQL query to help find dynamically allocated
objects with either a pointer or reference counter at an offset of 0x18. We find the fdtable object that satisfies these
constraints with the pointer open_fds at an offset 0x18.
   Our query takes the overwrite offset and object size as
input and returns all matching objects available in the Linux
kernel with default kernel configurations. From these possible
objects, we manually identify a suitable object accessible
from userspace as an unprivileged user, e.g., the fdtable for

the CVE-2022-32250 vulnerability.

C.2 Finding Allocation Primitives
For allocation primitives, our CodeQL query identifies every
persistent object allocation code location grouped by object
size. From this list, we manually filter out those inaccessible
from userspace as unprivileged users. The result is a list of
fixed and variable-size objects, shown in Tables 6 and 7.

C.3 Finding Measurement Primitives
For measurement primitives, any code snippet that copies
user data into a dynamically allocated buffer and then performs validation checks can be leveraged. This includes kernel functions that use strndup_user, memdup_user and
memdup_user_nul. Therefore, we use a CodeQl query to
obtain all the code locations where these functions are called.
Next, we manually validate, e.g., by running test programs
to execute the syscall that executes the function found, that
these code locations are accessible from userspace as an unprivileged user. In the example of the add_key syscall, we
execute this syscall with a _desc where the first byte is a ’.’.
All other conditions with additional information to execute
the measuring primitives can be found in Table 8.

C.4 Finding Memory Write Primitives
For memory write primitives, our queries obtained all code
locations that execute copy_from_user. With all these locations, we search for our three distinct code patterns, i.e.,
persistent code patterns 1 and 2, and temporal code patterns. We then filter out those that violate constraints, e.g.,
timed_alloc shown in Listing 2. As a result, we obtain
functions that can be used as MWP, shown in Table 9.

USENIX Security ’24 Artifact Appendix: SLUBStick: Arbitrary Memory
Writes through Practical Software Cross-Cache Attacks within the Linux
                                Kernel

        Lukas Maar                          Stefan Gast
Graz University of Technology       Graz University of Technology
 Martin Unterguggenberger                Mathias Oberhuber
Graz University of Technology       Graz University of Technology
                        Stefan Mangard
                  Graz University of Technology

A

Artifact Appendix

A.1

Abstract

We present SLUBStick, a novel kernel exploitation technique
that elevates a limited heap vulnerability to an arbitrary memory read/write primitive. SLUBStick works in several steps:
Initially, it exploits a timing side channel of the allocator to
reliably perform a cross-cache attack with a better than 99 %
success rate on commonly used generic caches. SLUBStick
then exploits code patterns prevalent in the Linux kernel to
perform a cross-cache attack and turn a limited heap vulnerability into a page table manipulation, thereby granting the
capability to read and write memory arbitrarily.
   The artifacts demonstrate the timing side channel and endto-end exploits, showing the versatility of SLUBStick. For
both, we provide an environment of a Virtual Machine (VM)
running the Linux kernel x86_64 v6.2. For the timing side
channel, the evaluation presents success rates for slab pages,
with and without noise. For the end-to-end exploits, our attacks exploit an artificial Double Free (DF) vulnerability to
obtain an arbitrary physical read and write primitive. This
primitive is then used to manipulate the /etc/passwd file to
gain root privileges within the VM.

A.2.2 How to access

We provide the source code (github) for performing the timing side channel and the end-to-end attacks of an artificial
DF vulnerability. For convenience, we provide a VM image
(zenodo) with all necessary programs and scripts included.

A.2.3 Hardware dependencies

A Linux system running on the x86_64 architecture with a
sound module which requires the snd kernel module.

A.2.4 Software dependencies

A Linux system that allows to run qemu with KVM enabled.

A.2.5 Benchmarks

None.

A.3 Set-up
A.3.1 Installation

1. Install qemu on your x86_64 Linux system, and make
   sure it is allowed to run with KVM enabled.

A.2

Description & Requirements

A.2.1   Security, privacy, and ethical concerns

The artifacts do not perform any destructive steps as we exploit an artificial DF vulnerability introduced via a kernel
module within a VM. This evaluation of the artifacts demonstrates the practicality of running SLUBStick to gain root
privileges.

2. Clone our github repository (github) to the /repo/path
   directory.

3. Download the VM image (zenodo) and store it in
   /repo/path/images. This image is the default Ubuntu
   22.04 image running the Linux kernel v6.2. The username to log in is lmaar, and the password is asdf. This
   user is in the sudo group and, thereby, can gain root
   privileges via sudo su.

A.3.2   Basic Test
 1. Execute make run boots the VM, providing a terminal
    login prompt and an already logged in user on a graphical
    interface, i.e. Gnome.

2. Either login in the terminal (with username lmaar and
   password asdf) or open a terminal in the graphical interface.

3. Execute uname -r should return 6.2.0-x-generic.

    inbetween (described in Section 5.2). This is proven by
    (E8/9/10).
(C7): We demonstrate the exploitation of a memory write
    primitive to obtain an arbitrary physical read/write
    primitive (described in Section 6). This is proven by
    (E8/9/10).
(C8): We evaluate the end-to-end SLUBStick attack using
    a synthetic DF vulnerability in generic caches between
    kmalloc-[8,256] (described in Section 7.1). This is
    proven by (E8/9/10).

4. The directory /home/lmaar/exploits should include
   helper.c, do_eval*.sh, and eval.py.

5. The directory /home/lmaar/exploits/userspace
   should include *.c.

6. Change directory to /home/lmaar/exploits and execute make init.

A.4 Evaluation workflow
A.4.1   Major Claims
We provide artifacts verifying the following claims:
(C1): We demonstrate our proposed measurement primitives
    allow a timing side channel on the SLUB allocator (described in Section 4.1), leaking when a new slab is allocated. This is proven by (E1/2/3) with 3 different primitives.
(C2): We demonstrate that using measurement and allocation primitives, we can reliably trigger the recycling
    process for a targeted memory chunk from generic
    caches between kmalloc-[8,4096] (described in Section 4.1). This is proven by (E4) for single page slabs
    (i.e., kmalloc-[8,256]) and proven by (E5) for multi
    page slabs (i.e., kmalloc-[512,4096]).
(C3): We demonstrate that by using buddy allocator massaging (described in Section 4.2), we can reliably reclaim
    the targeted memory chunk from generic caches from
    kmalloc-[8,4096]. This is proven by (E4/5).
(C4): We evaluate the reliable triggering of the recycling and
    reclaiming of a targeted memory chunk under idle as
    well as noisy conditions (described in Section 4.3 and
    shown in Table 1). This is proven by (E6) under idle and
    without CPU pinning and proven by (E7) with external
    noise.
(C5): We demonstrate that persistent code pattern 1/2 and
    temporal code pattern can be exploited to establish a
    memory write primitive (described in Section 5.2). This
    is proven by (E8/9) for persistent code pattern 1/2 and
    by (E10) for temporal code pattern.
(C6): We demonstrate that FUSE can be leveraged as an
    unprivileged user to gain control over the copying from
    userspace, allowing us to perform the cross-cache reuse

A.4.2 Experiments

Before running the experiments, please perform the set-up in
A.3 and read the note in A.5.
(E1): Basic leakage 1 [30 human-seconds + 1 computersecond]:
     How to: Execute           ./userspace/timed_ppdev_-
     alloc.elf.
     Cache size: Fixed with of 192 Bytes.
     Results: This experiment outputs a vertical plot with
     the following format: <index>:         <tsc>:###, where
     index is the allocated object’s index, tsc the required
     time of the allocation, and ### provides a visual representation of the tsc. Allocating a new slab will result
     in a significantly larger tsc (as shown in ⑤ from Figure 2 and described in Section 2.1) compared to that
     from the CPU free list (① from Figure 2). Since one
     slab (from the kmalloc-192) can include 21 objects (as
     shown in Table 4), a new slab will be allocated every
     21th allocation. This is seen with the significantly larger
     tsc (i.e., above 2000 compared to about 1100) of every
     21th index.
     It is important to note that sometimes other allocations
     beside each 21st will cause a higher tsc due to noise
     from the system.
(E2): Basic leakage 2 [30 human-seconds + 1 computersecond]:
     How to: Execute ./userspace/timed_anon_vma_-
     name_alloc.elf <cache_size>.
     Cache sizes: 16, 32, 64, or 96 Bytes.
     Results: Similar to (E1), this experiment indicates
     larger tsc values when the SLUB allocator allocates
     a new slab. Depending on the cache_size (i.e., between 16 Bytes to 96 Bytes), the new slab is allocated
     within the kmalloc-[16,96]. For larger cache_sizes,
     fewer objects must be allocated to prompt the allocator to allocate a new slab. This is because fewer objects are located on one slab (as shown in Table 4). For
     instance, the kmalloc-16 stores 256 objects per slab
     while kmalloc-96 stores 42, indicated with significantly
     larger tsc values.
(E3): Basic leakage 3 [30 human-seconds + 1 computersecond]:

     How to: Execute ./userspace/timed_msg_alloc-
     .elf <cache_size>.
     Cache sizes: 64, 96, 128, 192, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, or
    4096 Bytes.
     Results: Similar results to (E2), but for the
     kmalloc-cg-[64,4096]            depending       on      the
     cache_size (i.e., between 16 Bytes to 96 Bytes).
(E4): Single page slab reclaiming [30 human-seconds + 1
     computer-second]:
     How to: Execute           ./userspace/eval_pud.elf
    <cache_size>.
     Cache sizes: 8, 16, 32, 64, 96, 128, 192, or 256 Bytes.
     Results: This experiment outputs which slab page was
     reclaimed as a Page Upper Directory (PUD), successfully performing the cross-cache attack from the kernel
     heap to a PUD. If the correct slab page is reclaimed as a
     PUD, this experiment outputs [+] SUCCESS, while [!]
     FAIL indicates a failed experiment. [!] RETRY (start
     not found) indicates that the side channel did not find
     suitable slabs for cross-cache reuse. This output represents neither a failure nor a success, but the experiment
     should be repeated.
(E5): Mutli page slab reclaiming [30 human-seconds + 1
     computer-second]:
     How to: Execute           ./userspace/eval_pmd.elf
    <cache_size>.
     Cache sizes: 512, 1024, 2048, or 4096 Bytes.
     Results: Same results as (E4).
(E6): Reclaiming on idle and without cpu pinning [30 humanseconds + 2 computer-hours]:
     How to: Execute ./do_eval.sh and then eval.py.
     Execution: ./do_eval.sh internally executes all
     ./eval_*.elf with and without CPU pinning and outputs log files in the ./eval directory. ./eval.py reads
     all log files in ./eval.
     Results: ./eval.py ouputs a table similar to Table 1,
     but without the standard deviation.
(E7): [Optional] Reclaiming with external noise [10 humanminutes + 2 computer-hours]:
     How to: Execute         ./do_eval_p(u,m)d_noise.sh
    <cache_size> and then eval.py, with pud using
     objects between 8 Bytes to 256 Bytes and pmd using
     objects between 512 Bytes to 4096 Bytes
     Execution: This experiment is similar to (E6), but
     it requires rebooting the VM after each run for the
     ./do_eval_pmd_noise.sh script.
     Results: Same results as (E6).
(E8): End-to-end exploit with persistent code pattern 1 [30
     human-seconds + 1 computer-minutes]:
     How to: Execute                ./userspace/exploit_-
     signal.elf.
     Cache size: Fixed with of 8 Bytes.
     Results: Tampers the /etc/passwd such that unprivileged users can elevate their privilege level by calling su

    without authentication.
(E9): End-to-end exploit with persistent code pattern 2 [30
     human-seconds + 30 computer-seconds]:
     How to: Execute ./userspace/exploit_snd.elf
    <cache_size>.
     Cache sizes: 16, 32, 64, 96, 128, 192, or 256 Bytes.
     Results: Same results as (E8).
(E10): End-to-end exploit with temporal code pattern [30
     human-seconds + 30 computer-seconds]:
     How to: Execute ./userspace/exploit_key.elf
    <cache_size>
     Cache sizes: 16, 64, 96, or 128 Bytes.
     Results: Same results as (E8).

A.5 Notes on Reusability
For this artifact evaluation, we evaluate generic caches that
allocate memory in chunks of 8, 16, 32, 64, 96, 128, 192,
256, 512, 1024, 2048, and 4096 Bytes. Some experiments
only work on certain generic cache sizes, while others work
generically on more.
   We want to note that the success rate of the end-to-end
exploit (E8-10) varies depending on the cache size. Moreover, since these exploits corrupt the memory, (successfully)
triggering them multiple times may cause the VM to crash.

A.6 Version
Based on the LaTeX template for Artifact Evaluation
V20231005. Submission, reviewing and badging methodology followed for the evaluation of this artifact can be found at
https://secartifacts.github.io/usenixsec2024/.

