# Kernel Services and Objects

Chapter 2

Kernel Services and Objects
A limited number of service primitives are provided by the microkernel; more complex services
may be implemented as applications on top of these primitives. In this way, the functionality
of the system can be extended without increasing the code and complexity in privileged mode,
while still supporting a potentially wide number of services for varied application domains.
Note that some services are available only when the kernel is conﬁgured for MCS1 support.
The basic services seL4 provides are as follows:
Threads are an abstraction of CPU execution that supports running software;
Scheduling contexts (MCS only) are an abstraction of CPU execution time;
Address spaces are virtual memory spaces that each contain an application. Applications are
limited to accessing memory in their address space;
Inter-process communication (IPC) via endpoints allows threads to communicate using message passing;
Reply objects (MCS only) are used to store single-use reply capabilities, and are provided by
the receiver during message passing;
Notiﬁcations provide a non-blocking signalling mechanism similar to binary semaphores;
Device primitives allow device drivers to be implemented as unprivileged applications. The
kernel exports hardware device interrupts via IPC messages; and
Capability spaces store capabilities (i.e., access rights) to kernel services along with their bookkeeping information.
This chapter gives an overview of these services and describes how kernel objects are accessed
by userspace applications and how new objects can be created.

2.1

Capability-based Access Control

The seL4 microkernel provides a capability-based access-control model. Access control governs all kernel services; in order to perform an operation, an application must invoke a capability in its possession that has sufﬁcient access rights for the requested service. With this,
the system can be conﬁgured to isolate software components from each other, and also to enable authorised, controlled communication between components by selectively granting speciﬁc communication capabilities. This enables software-component isolation with a high de1

2

“mixed-criticality system”

2.2. SYSTEM CALLS

3

gree of assurance, as only those operations explicitly authorised by capability possession are
permitted.
A capability is an unforgeable token that references a speciﬁc kernel object (such as a thread
control block) and carries access rights that control what methods may be invoked. Conceptually, a capability resides in an application’s capability space; an address in this space refers
to a slot which may or may not contain a capability. An application may refer to a capability—
to request a kernel service, for example—using the address of the slot holding that capability.
This means, the seL4 capability model is an instance of a segregated (or partitioned) capability
system, where capabilities are managed by the kernel.
Capability spaces are implemented as a directed graph of kernel-managed capability nodes
(CNodes). A CNode is a table of slots, where each slot may contain further CNode capabilities. An
address of a capability in a capability space is the concatenation of the indices of slots within
CNodes forming the path to the destination slot; we discuss CNode objects in detail in Chapter 3.
Capabilities can be copied and moved within capability spaces, and also sent via IPC. This allows creation of applications with speciﬁc access rights, the delegation of authority to another
application, and passing to an application authority to a newly created (or selected) kernel service. Furthermore, capabilities can be minted to create a derived capability with a subset of the
rights of the original capability (never with more rights). A newly minted capability can be used
for partial delegation of authority.
Capabilities can also be revoked to withdraw authority. Revocation recursively removes any
capabilities that have been derived from the original capability being revoked. The propagation
of capabilities through the system is controlled by a take-grant-based model [Elkaduwe et al.,
2008, Boyton, 2009].

2.2

System Calls

The seL4 kernel provides a message-passing service for communication between threads. This
mechanism is also used for communication with kernel-provided services. There is a standard
message format, each message containing a number of data words and possibly some capabilities. The structure and encoding of these messages are described in detail in Chapter 4.
Threads send messages by invoking capabilities within their capability space. When an endpoint, notiﬁcation or reply capability is invoked in this way, the message will be transferred
through the kernel to another thread. When other capabilities to kernel objects are invoked, the
message will be interpreted as a method invocation in a manner speciﬁc to the type of kernel
object. For example, invoking a thread control block (TCB) capability with a correctly formatted
message will suspend the target thread.
Fundamentally, we can regard the kernel as providing three system calls: Send, Receive and
Yield. However, there are also combinations and variants of the basic Send and Receive calls. An
important variant is the Call operation, which consists of a standard Send operation atomically
followed by a variant of Receive which waits for a Reply. A reply message is always delivered
via a special resource instead of using the standard IPC mechanism; see seL4_Call() below
for details.
Invoking methods on kernel objects other than endpoints and notiﬁcations is done with Send
or Call, depending on whether the invoker wants a reply from the kernel (Call) or not (Send). By
using functions provided by the libsel4 API you are guaranteed to always use the more appropriate one. The Yield system call is not associated with any kernel object and is the only operation
that does not invoke a capability. In the MCS conﬁguration, Wait is a variant of Receive that does

4

CHAPTER 2. KERNEL SERVICES AND OBJECTS

not require a reply object to be provided—on non-MCS conﬁgurations, Wait is synonymous with
Receive, because neither call takes a reply object.
The fundamental system calls are:
seL4_Yield() is the only system call that does not require a capability to be used. It forfeits
the remainder of the calling thread’s timeslice and causes invocation of the kernel’s scheduler. If there are no other runnable threads with the same priority as the caller, the calling
thread will immediately be scheduled with a fresh timeslice. In the MCS conﬁguration, this
behaviour depends on the state of the scheduling context; see Section 6.1.8.
seL4_Send() delivers a message through the named capability. If the invoked capability is an
endpoint, and no receiver is ready to receive the message immediately, the sending thread
will block until the message can be delivered. No error code or response will be returned
by the receiving object.
seL4_Recv() (“receive”) is used by a thread to receive messages through endpoints or notiﬁcations. If no sender or notiﬁcation is pending, the caller will block until a message or
notiﬁcation can be delivered. This system call works only on Endpoint or Notiﬁcation capabilities, raising a fault (see section 6.2) when attempted with other capability types.
In the MCS conﬁguration, Receive takes a reply capability—a capability to a reply object—
as a parameter.
The remaining system calls are variants and combinations of seL4_Send() and seL4_Recv()
efﬁciently accommodate common use cases in systems programming.
seL4_NBSend() performs a polling send on an endpoint. If the message cannot be delivered
immediately, i.e., there is no receiver waiting on the destination Endpoint, the message is
silently dropped. The sending thread continues execution. As with seL4_Send(), no error
code or response will be returned.
seL4_NBRecv() is used by a thread to check for signals pending on a notiﬁcation object or messages pending on an endpoint without blocking. This system call works only on endpoints
and notiﬁcation object capabilities, raising a fault (see section 6.2) when attempted with
other capability types.
seL4_Call() combines seL4_Send() and seL4_Recv() with some important differences. The
call blocks the sending thread until its message is delivered and a reply message is received.
When invoking capabilities to kernel services other than endpoints, using seL4_Call()
allows the kernel to return an error code or other response through the reply message.
When the sent message is delivered to another thread via an Endpoint, the kernel does the
same operation as seL4_Send(). What happens next depends on the kernel conﬁguration.
For MCS conﬁgurations, the kernel then updates the reply object provided by the receiver.
A reply object is a vessel for tracking reply messages, used to send a reply message and
wake up the caller. In non-MCS conﬁgurations, the kernel then deposits a special reply
capability in a dedicated slot in the receiver’s TCB. This reply capability is a single-use right
to send a reply message and wake up the caller, meaning that the kernel invalidates it
as soon as it has been invoked. For both variants, the calling thread is blocked until a
capability to the reply object is invoked. For more information, see Section 4.2.4.
seL4_Reply() is used to respond to a seL4_Call(), by invoking the reply capability generated
by the seL4_Call() system call and stored in a dedicated slot in the replying thread’s TCB.
It has exactly the same behaviour as invoking the reply capability with seL4_Send() which
is described in Section 4.2.4.

2.3. KERNEL OBJECTS

5

seL4_ReplyRecv() combines seL4_Reply() and seL4_Recv(). It exists mostly for efﬁciency
reasons, namely the common case of replying to a request and waiting for the next can
be performed in a single kernel system call instead of two. The transition from the reply
to the receive phase is also atomic.
seL4_Wait() works like seL4_Recv(); on non-MCS conﬁgurations, they are in fact synonymous.
In the MCS conﬁguration, seL4_Wait() is used when no reply is expected. Unlike seL4_Recv(), seL4_Wait() takes no reply capability.
seL4_NBWait() (MCS only) is used by a thread to poll for messages through endpoints or notiﬁcations. If no sender or notiﬁcation is pending, the system call returns immediately.
seL4_NBSendWait() (MCS only) combines an seL4_NBSend() and seL4_Wait() into one atomic
system call.
seL4_NBSendRecv() (MCS only) combines an seL4_NBSend() and seL4_Recv() into one atomic
system call.

2.3

Kernel Objects

In this section we give a brief overview of the kernel-implemented object types whose instances
(also simply called objects) can be invoked by applications. The interface to these objects forms
the interface to the kernel itself. The creation and use of kernel services is achieved by the
creation, manipulation, and combination of these kernel objects:
CNodes (see Chapter 3) store capabilities, giving threads permission to invoke methods on particular objects. Each CNode has a ﬁxed number of slots, always a power of two, determined
when the CNode is created. Slots can be empty or contain a capability.

Thread Control Blocks (TCBs; see Chapter 6) represent a thread of execution in seL4. Threads
are the unit of execution that is scheduled, blocked, unblocked, etc., depending on the
application’s interaction with other threads.
Scheduling contexts (MCS only) (SchedulingContexts; see Chapter 6) represent CPU time in seL4.
Users can create scheduling contexts from untyped objects, however on creation scheduling contexts are empty and do not represent any time. Initially, there is a capability to
SchedControl for each node, which allows scheduling context to be populated with parameters, which when combined with a priority control thread’s access to CPU time.
Endpoints (see Chapter 4) facilitate message-passing communication between threads. IPC is

synchronous: A thread trying to send or receive on an endpoint blocks until the message
can be delivered. This means that message delivery only happens if a sender and a receiver rendezvous at the endpoint, and the kernel can deliver the message with a single
copy (or without copying for short messages using only registers).
A capability to an endpoint can be restricted to be send-only or receive-only. Additionally,
Endpoint capabilities can have the grant right, which allows sending capabilities as part of
the message.
Reply objects (MCS only) (see Chapter 4) track scheduling context donation and provide a con-

tainer for single-use reply capabilities. They are provided by seL4_Recv().
Notiﬁcation Objects (see Chapter 5) provide a simple signalling mechanism. A Notiﬁcation is a

word-size array of ﬂags, each of which behaves like a binary semaphore. Operations are
signalling a subset of ﬂags in a single operation, polling to check any ﬂags, and blocking
until any are signalled. Notiﬁcation capabilities can be signal-only or wait-only.

6

CHAPTER 2. KERNEL SERVICES AND OBJECTS

Virtual Address Space Objects (see Chapter 7) are used to construct a virtual address space
(or VSpace) for one or more threads. These objects largely directly correspond to those
of the hardware, and as such are architecture-dependent. The kernel also includes ASID
Pool and ASID Control objects for tracking the status of address spaces.
Interrupt Objects (see Chapter 8) give applications the ability to receive and acknowledge interrupts from hardware devices. Initially, there is a capability to IRQControl, which allows for
the creation of IRQHandler capabilities. An IRQHandler capability permits the management
of a speciﬁc interrupt source associated with a speciﬁc device. It is delegated to a device
driver to access an interrupt source. The IRQHandler object allows threads to wait for and
acknowledge individual interrupts.
Untyped Memory (see Section 2.4) is the foundation of memory allocation in the seL4 kernel.
Untyped memory capabilities have a single method which allows the creation of new kernel objects. If the method succeeds, the calling thread gains access to capabilities to the
newly-created objects. Additionally, untyped memory objects can be divided into a group
of smaller untyped memory objects allowing delegation of part (or all) of the system’s
memory. We discuss memory management in general in the following sections.

2.4

Kernel Memory Allocation

The seL4 microkernel does not dynamically allocate memory for kernel objects. Instead, objects
must be explicitly created from application-controlled memory regions via Untyped Memory capabilities. Applications must have explicit authority to memory (through these Untyped Memory
capabilities) in order to create new objects, and all objects consume a ﬁxed amount of memory once created. These mechanisms can be used to precisely control the speciﬁc amount of
physical memory available to applications, including being able to enforce isolation of physical
memory access between applications or a device. There are no arbitrary resource limits in the
kernel apart from those dictated by the hardware2 , and so many denial-of-service attacks via
resource exhaustion are avoided.
At boot time, seL4 pre-allocates the memory required for the kernel itself, including the code,
data, and stack sections (seL4 is a single kernel-stack operating system). It then creates an
initial user thread (with an appropriate address and capability space). The kernel then hands all
remaining memory to the initial thread in the form of capabilities to Untyped Memory, and some
additional capabilities to kernel objects that were required to bootstrap the initial thread. These
Untyped Memory regions can then be split into smaller regions or other kernel objects using the
seL4_Untyped_Retype() method; the created objects are termed children of the original untyped
memory object.
The user-level application that creates an object using seL4_Untyped_Retype() receives full
authority over the resulting object. It can then delegate all or part of the authority it possesses
over this object to one or more of its clients.
Untyped memory objects represent two different types of memory: general purpose memory, or
device memory. General purpose memory can be retyped into any other object type and used for
any operation on untyped memory provided by the kernel. Device memory covers memory regions reserved for devices as determined by the hardware platform, and usage of these objects
is restricted by the kernel in the following ways:
• Device untyped objects can only be retyped into frames or other untyped objects; developers cannot, for example, create an endpoint from device memory.
2

The treatment of virtual ASIDs imposes a ﬁxed number of address spaces. This limitation is to be removed in
future versions of seL4.

2.4. KERNEL MEMORY ALLOCATION

7

• Frame objects retyped from device untyped objects cannot be set as thread IPC buffers,
or used in the creation of an ASID pool.
The type attribute (whether it represents general purpose or device memory) of a child untyped
object is inherited from its parent untyped object. That is, any child of a device untyped object
will also be a device untyped object. Developers cannot change the type attribute of an untyped
object.

2.4.1

Reusing Memory

The model described thus far is sufﬁcient for applications to allocate kernel objects, distribute
authority among client applications, and obtain various kernel services provided by these objects. This alone is sufﬁcient for a simple static system conﬁguration.
The seL4 kernel also allows Untyped Memory regions to be reused. Reusing a region of memory
is allowed only when there are no dangling references (i.e., capabilities) left to the objects inside
that memory. The kernel tracks capability derivations, i.e., the children generated by the methods
seL4_Untyped_Retype(), seL4_CNode_Mint(), seL4_CNode_Copy(), and seL4_CNode_Mutate().
The tree structure so generated is termed the capability derivation tree (CDT).3 For example,
when a user creates new kernel objects by retyping untyped memory, the newly created capabilities would be inserted into the CDT as children of the untyped memory capability.
For each Untyped capability pointing to an Untyped Memory region, the kernel keeps a watermark
recording how much of the region has previously been allocated. Whenever a user requests the
kernel to create new objects in an untyped memory region, the kernel will carry out one of two
actions: if there are already existing objects allocated in the region, the kernel will allocate the
new objects at the current watermark level, and increase the watermark. If all capabilities to
objects previously allocated in the region have been deleted, the kernel will reset the watermark
and start allocating new objects from the beginning of the region again.
Finally, the seL4_CNode_Revoke() method provided by the CNode objects deletes all capabilities
derived from the argument capability. Revoking the last capability to a kernel object triggers the
destroy operation on the now unreferenced object. This cleans up any in-kernel dependencies
between it, other objects and the kernel. It does not necessarily zero all memory state associated with the object yet. Memory zeroing will happen for the entire region when an untyped
capability is reset as part of the ﬁrst retype operation after all child capabilities have been revoked.
To reuse a region of memory, user code can call seL4_CNode_Revoke() on the original untyped
capability for that region, thereby removing all children of that capability. After this invocation,
no references remain to any object within the untyped region, and the region may be safely
retyped again.

2.4.2

Summary of Object Sizes

When retyping untyped memory it is useful to know how much memory the object will require.
Object sizes are deﬁned in libsel4.
Note that CNodes, SchedContexts (MCS only), and Untyped Objects have variable sizes. When retyping untyped memory into CNodes or SchedContexts, or breaking an Untyped Object into smaller
Untyped Objects, the size_bits argument to seL4_Untyped_Retype() is used to specify the size
3

Although the CDT conceptually is a separate data structure, it is implemented as part of the CNode object and
so requires no additional kernel meta-data.

8

CHAPTER 2. KERNEL SERVICES AND OBJECTS

of the resulting objects. For all other object types, the size is ﬁxed, and the size_bits argument
to seL4_Untyped_Retype() is ignored.
Type

Meaning of size_bits

Size in Bytes

CNode

log2 number of slots

2size_bits · 2seL4_SlotBits seL4_SlotBits is:
on 32-bit architectures: 4
on 64-bit architectures: 5

SchedContext

log2 size in bytes

2size_bits

log2 size in bytes

2size_bits

(MCS only)
Untyped

Table 2.1: Meaning of size_bits for object types of variable size

A single call to seL4_Untyped_Retype() can retype a single Untyped Object into multiple objects.
The number of objects to create is speciﬁed by its num_objects argument. All created objects
must be of the same type, speciﬁed by the type argument. In the case of variable-sized objects,
each object must also be of the same size. If the size of the memory area needed (calculated
by the object size multiplied by num_objects) is greater than the remaining unallocated memory
of the Untyped Object, an error will result.
Useful constants for creating SchedContext objects are listed below.
seL4_MinSchedContextBits

minimum log2-size of a scheduling context

seL4_CoreSchedContextBytes

size in bytes of a scheduling context, excluding extra reﬁlls

seL4_RefillSizeBytes

size in bytes of a single extra reﬁll

