      L Y
    R    S S
E AC C E
A

               ®
           NO S TA RCH PRE SS
     E A R LY A C C E S S P R O G R A M :
        FEEDBACK WELCOME!

The Early Access program lets you read significant portions of an upcoming
book while it’s still in the editing and production phases, so you may come
across errors or other issues you want to comment on. But while we sincerely
appreciate your feedback during a book’s EA phase, please use your best dis-
cretion when deciding what to report.
     At the EA stage, we’re most interested in feedback related to content—
general comments to the writer, technical errors, versioning concerns, or
other high-level issues and observations. As these titles are still in draft
form, we already know there may be typos, grammatical mistakes, miss-
ing images or captions, layout issues, and instances of placeholder text. No
need to report these—they will all be corrected later, during the copyedit-
ing, proofreading, and typesetting processes.
     If you encounter any errors (“errata”) you’d like to report, please fill
out this Google form so we can review your comments.
          DATA ENGINEERING
         FOR CYBERSECURITY
                          James Bonifield
                               Early Access edition, 01/27/25

Copyright © 2025 by James Bonifield.
ISBN 13: 978-1-7185-0394-6 (print)
ISBN 13: 978-1-7185-0395-3 (ebook)

Publisher: William Pollock
Managing Editor: Jill Franklin
Production Manager: Sabrina Plomitallo-González
Developmental Editor: Frances Saux

No Starch Press and the No Starch Press logo are registered trademarks of No Starch Press,
Inc. Other product and company names mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their
respective owners. Rather than use a trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trade-
marked name, we are using the names only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark.

All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any informa-
tion storage or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the copyright owner
and the publisher.

The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While every
precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the author nor No Starch
Press, Inc. shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the information contained in it.
                               CONTENTS

Foreword by Jacob Soo
Foreword by Shubham Shah, aka shubs
Introduction

Chapter 0: Day Zero
Chapter 1: Taint Analysis
Chapter 2: Mapping Code to Attack Surface
Chapter 3: Automated Variant Analysis
Chapter 4: Binary Taxonomy
Chapter
    From5: Source
         Day Zero to and  Sink(Early
                     Zero Day   Discovery
                                     Access) © 2025 by Eugene Lim
Chapter 6: Hybrid Binary Analysis
Chapter 7: Quick and Dirty Fuzzing
Chapter 8: Coverage-Guided Fuzzing
Chapter 9: Fuzzing Everything
Chapter 10: Beyond Day Zero

The chapters in red are included in this Early Access PDF.

                  To my wife Darshini,
                  The real bug hunter;

                 To the Lim family,
             Who bore my nocturnal ways;

                         To BBAC,
               (Still waiting on that BBQ);

                To the Hacker101 OGs,
             You were there from Day Zero.
From Day Zero to Zero Day (Early Access) © 2025 by Eugene Lim

About the Author
        Eugene “Spaceraccoon” Lim is a security researcher and white-hat hacker.
        From Amazon to Zoom, he has helped secure applications from a range of
        vulnerabilities, and in 2021 he was selected from a pool of one million white-
        hat hackers for HackerOne’s annual H1-Elite Hall of Fame. Since 2020, he
        has been credited for hundreds of vulnerability disclosures in enterprise
        software, applications, and hardware. His work has been featured at top con-
        ferences such as Black Hat and DEF CON and in industry publications such
        as WIRED and The Register.

About the Technical Reviewer
        Kc Udonsi (CISSP), aka “glitchnsec,” is currently the security architect at
        Stan Technology Inc., where he oversees the organization’s security posture
        by designing and building defenses. He has experience leading research
        teams in the cybersecurity industry and mentoring security professionals.
        Kc offers training on the OpenSecurityTraining platform and is a sessional
        instructor for computer and network security at his alma mater, the Univer-
        sity of Toronto Scarborough. In his previous role as a senior vulnerability
        researcher at Trend Micro, he disclosed significant vulnerabilities to compa-
        nies such as Adobe and Microsoft.
From Day Zero to Zero Day (Early Access) © 2025 by Eugene Lim
