
  FOREWORD BY SHUBHAM SHAH,
         AKA SHUBS

When I was a toddler, my parents used to playfully scold me, saying that ev-
ery time they bought me a new toy I would “break it, crumble it, take it apart
in pieces.” Little did I know that my curiosity about understanding the in-
ner workings of something—or just causing chaos and seeing what it led to—
would prove helpful in vulnerability research.
     Although I had a way with computers, breaking computer systems was
never a career option I thought I had. My family was distraught at the idea
of me breaking into systems for a living, and computer security was not a
well-known career pathway. Fortunately, times have changed.
     Coming from this time when the relevant knowledge was hidden in the
dark nooks of the internet or transferred within tight-knit communities, Eu-
gene Lim’s From Day Zero to Zero Day has renewed my optimism about train-
ing the next generation of vulnerability researchers.
     As someone who has been heavily involved in the security research
community for the last 10 years, I have closely followed Eugene’s work in
admiration as he has tackled a broad range of topics, from complex client-
side attacks and server-side issues to deep reverse engineering of custom
protocols.
     In From Day Zero to Zero Day, Eugene synthesizes this diverse knowledge
to provide a framework and structure for systematically taking apart soft-
ware and discovering its underlying flaws. He explores the modern mindset
and procedures of vulnerability researchers in several domains, from source
code analysis and binary exploitation to deep fuzzing and automated variant
analysis. Eugene’s focus on first principles makes From Day Zero to Zero Day a
timeless book for vulnerability researchers.

                           What I loved the most about this book is its unique ability to really start
                      from day zero and teach the fundamentals needed to be successful at vulner-
                      ability research. Historically, the topics covered here have been dispersed
                      across a mountain of research articles, presentations, and blog posts, which
                      have often lacked pragmatic guidance and reproducibility. The idea of being
                      a vulnerability researcher has felt out of reach to many, as these topics were
                      never cohesively brought together in a single place.
                           With the increasing complexity and maturity of computer systems over
                      the last few decades, analyzing, finding, and exploiting zero-day vulnerabili-
                      ties has become an art form that requires undivided attention and constant
                      iteration. A good exploit is akin to a magnificent painting, and zero days
                      are waiting to be found, regardless of how deeply a product or program has
                      been analyzed for security issues.
                           As vulnerability researchers, it is our job to challenge assumptions. The
                      fact that a system is popular and widely deployed or may have been audited
                      thoroughly in the past should not deter our motivation and willingness to
                      dive deep and discover vulnerabilities. It is our unwavering attention and
                      dedication in this field that leads to the most significant discoveries. To suc-
                      ceed in vulnerability research, one must resist the urge to give up and push
                      through the psychological challenges that stand in the way of the discovery
                      of critical bugs.
                           Eugene’s detailed guidance in the different areas of vulnerability re-
                      search reinforces this mindset and provides practical steps to discover vul-
                      nerabilities in widely deployed software.
                           I hope you also have the opportunity to build exploits you look back at
                      in the future as art.

                                                                                    Shubham Shah (shubs)
                                                                                         CTO, Assetnote
                                                                                        Sydney, Australia
                                                                                           October 2024

xx   Foreword by Shubham Shah, aka shubs
