
                       INTRODUCTION

            Zero day. The term evokes a sense of ur-
           gency, fear, and yes, even excitement in
          infosec circles. They are called zero days be-
       cause no one other than the researchers who
discovered them knows about them, and the clock to
patch a known vulnerability hasn’t even started yet.
The discoverers of the zero days are thus free to ex-
ploit them at will. Rare, dangerous, and often over-
hyped, zero days capture the imagination of security
enthusiasts, who view zero-day research as one of the
pinnacles of offensive security.
    In my early days as a journeyman hacker who’d had some minor suc-
cesses in security testing, hunting for zero days seemed to me a mystic art
reserved for only the wisest and most experienced hackers. I read blog posts
and watched conference talks detailing incredible zero-day discoveries and
exploits, but like the audience at a magic show, I could only be impressed
by the final reveal without grasping the method, or trick, behind it all. How
did the researcher know to look at this particular part of the code? Why did
they attempt this exploit instead of another? Answering those questions was

                      often left as an exercise for the viewer or reader, but despite me venturing
                      into other disciplines, like red teaming and web penetration testing, my ex-
                      periences did not shed much light. I felt like there was a huge gap between
                      where I was and where I needed to be: not quite a beginner, but far from a
                      master.
                           However, with the right opportunities to practice cross-disciplinary skills
                      such as malware reverse engineering, and the time and space to focus on
                      deep security research, I began to discover that zero-day hunting wasn’t as
                      arcane as I’d thought. Like with a magic trick, the process behind it was ac-
                      tually systematic and, more importantly, learnable. In spite of the wide vari-
                      ety of targets and techniques, there are many common tools and approaches
                      researchers can use to effectively discover new vulnerabilities. This book
                      aims to take you through the journey from day zero as a novice researcher
                      to discovering your first zero day and beyond.

       Who Should Read This Book and Why
                      I wrote this book for others who are staring across the gap and for those
                      who experience a sense of impostor syndrome when considering zero-day
                      research, despite having a good grasp of offensive security fundamentals.
                      You may be just starting out, popping a few boxes for practice or capturing
                      flags at contests. You might have read a web hacking book like Real-World
                      Bug Hunting by Peter Yaworski (No Starch Press, 2019), or a more general
                      introduction like Ethical Hacking by Daniel G. Graham (No Starch Press,
                      2021). Maybe you have some experience working as a penetration tester
                      or red teamer, but you still feel lost when contemplating getting started on
                      security research.
                           While some blog posts and other online materials attempt to teach this
                      subject, they can’t go as deeply into the whole range of needed technical
                      skills as a book-length treatment can. Or they may go too deeply into one
                      particular niche topic, without explaining the overall strategy and thought
                      process needed to approach security research. This book is the book I wished
                      I’d had back when I first started out. It provides both a high-level overview
                      and nitty-gritty details, without assuming too much prior knowledge. By the
                      time you finish it, you should be able to initiate your own independent secu-
                      rity research project.

       What This Book Is About
                      This book covers three broad techniques in zero-day research: code review,
                      reverse engineering, and fuzzing. However, it doesn’t simply teach how to
                      use these techniques, but why. It describes the best way to deploy them, and
                      for which targets. I explain the process of analyzing a target to identify the
                      most likely weak spots and demonstrate with real-world examples. For exam-
                      ple, when explaining taint analysis in code review, I take a disclosed vulnera-
                      bility in actual software and rediscover it from scratch.

xxii   Introduction

     While it’s impossible to cover the three techniques fully—doing so for
each one would take a book (or several) by itself—I introduce subdomains
within each area in sufficient detail that you’ll be able to make your own in-
formed decisions about which tools or techniques to use for the problem
at hand. For example, fuzzing tools comprise not only traditional random
fuzzers but also coverage-guided fuzzers that use compile-time or runtime
instrumentation. By learning and applying these concepts, you’ll be well
equipped to explore further on your own.
     Although the grouping of chapters into parts allows you to jump around
based on the technique you wish to focus on, I recommend reading the
chapters in order as you progress in your understanding of the target. It
may be tempting to jump straight to “Fuzzing Everything” (Chapter 9), but
without a deeper understanding of data flows and taint analysis from Part I,
which focuses on source code review, you may waste a lot of time fuzzing the
wrong part of a target. Nevertheless, if you feel well versed in a particular
topic, feel free to skip ahead. A short summary of the chapters in this book
follows.
    Chapter 0: Day Zero Introduces the key concepts of zero-day vulner-
    ability research and differentiates it from other offensive security disci-
    plines. You’ll also learn how to identify potential research targets.
     Part I takes you through understanding and analyzing the source code
of your research targets. While not every target may have source code avail-
able, the techniques you learn here focus on the fundamentals of vulnera-
bility discovery that you’ll still apply in reverse engineering and fuzzing. In
addition, you’ll learn how to transition from manual to automated analysis
to scale your coverage.
    Chapter 1: Taint Analysis Walks through the process of manual source
    and sink analysis through real-world examples. It explains the sink-to-
    source strategy as an optimal approach.
    Chapter 2: Mapping Code to Attack Surface Teaches you how to map
    the code you are reading to the actual target, and vice versa. It iden-
    tifies various attack vectors and shows you how to identify them in
    source code.
    Chapter 3: Automated Variant Analysis Demonstrates how you can
    automate source code analysis using tools like CodeQL and Semgrep. It
    also explains how to scale your research across multiple targets at once.
   The reverse engineering chapters in Part II focus on extracting infor-
mation from targets that allows you to understand how input flows through
them and potentially reach exploitable code. As in Part I, you’ll start with
manual techniques before moving on to more efficient automation.
    Chapter 4: Binary Taxonomy Covers several categories of typical bi-
    naries and how to reverse engineer them. We’ll explore how to quickly
    triage binaries and apply the right reverse engineering tools.

                                                                   Introduction   xxiii

                           Chapter 5: Source and Sink Discovery Explains how to locate areas of
                           interest in binaries for further analysis using static and dynamic methods.
                           Chapter 6: Hybrid Binary Analysis Delves into more advanced reverse
                           engineering approaches, such as emulation, code coverage, and sym-
                           bolic analysis. The examples combine static and dynamic analysis to nar-
                           row down your search.
                           Finally, Part III covers the highly automated and scalable art of fuzzing.
                       Having learned about source and sink analysis in code review and reverse
                       engineering, you can now understand how fuzzing short-circuits processes
                       and how you can enhance your fuzzing with the principles and techniques
                       from previous chapters.
                           Chapter 7: Quick-and-Dirty Fuzzing Explores the basics of fuzzing
                           files and protocols and how to quickly bootstrap fuzzing with templates.
                           Chapter 8: Coverage-Guided Fuzzing Details the process of coverage-
                           guided fuzzing with AFL++, including writing a harness and analyzing
                           fuzzing performance.
                           Chapter 9: Fuzzing Everything Discusses even more fuzzing targets
                           and approaches to handle complex formats and binaries.
                           Chapter 10: Beyond Day Zero Describes the process of coordinated
                           vulnerability disclosure, writing a good vulnerability report, and how to
                           apply vulnerability research to improve the security of organizations.

       Source Code and Online Resources
                       This book features many working examples that you should test out for your-
                       self. The majority of examples are run on the latest version of Kali Linux
                       at the time of writing or use free and open source software, but a handful
                       include Windows targets, so it’s best to use virtual machines to run the rele-
                       vant operating systems and targets. The examples are all based on x86 and
                       x64, so the virtual machines can’t be ARM-based, which means you can’t
                       host them on Apple Silicon devices.
                            The source code and scripts used in the examples are available in the
                       book’s code repository at https://github.com/spaceraccoon/from-day-zero-to-zero
                       -day. You should use that as a reference to save time instead of copying and
                       pasting snippets from the book. The repository contains Git submodules,
                       which are copies of specific versions of open source repositories, so you’ll
                       have to run an additional Git command to fetch them after cloning the
                       repository:

                       $ git clone https://github.com/spaceraccoon/from-day-zero-to-zero-day
                       $ cd from-day-zero-to-zero-day
                       $ git submodule update --init

xxiv    Introduction

            Along the way, if you face any problems with the examples or have fur-
        ther questions, feel free to create an issue on the GitHub repository or reach
        out to me on X at https://x.com/spaceraccoonsec.

Further Reading
        In the book, I reference several examples from my security research blog at
        https://spaceraccoon.dev, which I’ll continue to update with new research and
        cybersecurity-related topics.
             After finishing this book, I recommend following up with specific books
        that focus on particular targets and techniques, such as the following:
            Practical Binary Analysis by Dennis Andriesse (No Starch Press, 2018)
            provides a more thorough treatment of reverse engineering, in partic-
            ular for x86-64 Linux binary analysis. This will fully equip you with the
            foundations of reverse engineering.
            Attacking Network Protocols by James Forshaw (No Starch Press, 2017)
            takes a deep dive into network protocols, which require specialized tools
            to capture and analyze. The book also provides great detail about pro-
            tocol internals and cryptography, and it is a good study of reverse engi-
            neering techniques.
            The Hardware Hacking Handbook by Colin O’Flynn and Jasper van Wouden-
            berg (No Starch Press, 2021) covers the vast range of hardware targets
            and the practical skills needed to tackle this type of security research,
            like working with electrical circuitry.
            Practical IoT Hacking by Fotios Chantzis, Ioannis Stais, Paulino Calderon,
            Evangelos Deirmentzoglou, and Beau Woods (No Starch Press, 2021) is
            a useful survey guide that covers hardware, firmware, and the wider in-
            ternet of things (IoT) ecosystem, such as mobile applications.
             After learning the basic principles of vulnerability research, you’ll be
        able to better appreciate the advanced and specialized techniques covered by
        these books.
             The world of zero-day research is vast and ever-expanding. New and
        experienced researchers share fresh discoveries all the time, so it’s worth
        checking out social media websites like X or https://infosec.exchange/explore
        for the latest findings. In addition, consider exploring the archives of cy-
        bersecurity conferences like hardwear.io (https://hardwear.io/archives/), DEF
        CON (https://media.defcon.org), Hack In The Box (https://conference.hitb.org),
        and OffensiveCon (https://www.offensivecon.org/archive.html), which are trea-
        sure troves of research presentations and papers. And don’t forget to follow
        the blogs of zero-day research organizations and companies, including the
        Zero Day Initiative (https://www.zerodayinitiative.com/blog), which pull back
        the curtain on high-impact zero days.
             Let’s get started hunting zero days!

                                                                           Introduction   xxv
From Day Zero to Zero Day (Early Access) © 2025 by Eugene Lim
