
                                    0
                               DAY ZERO
            He learned rapidly because his first training was in how to learn.
                                —Frank Herbert, Dune

             Once the protected turf of nation-state ac-
            tors and independent researchers, hunting
           zero days, or system vulnerabilities unknown
        to product developers or owners, has grown
into a massive market. With the number of discovered
and exploited zero days constantly growing, vulner-
ability research, or the process of analyzing systems
for new vulnerabilities, has assumed a critical role in
cybersecurity.
     For new entrants in the field of offensive security, vulnerability research
may appear to have an almost mythical quality, venturing far beyond typical
black-box penetration testing or web hacking into the depths of memory
corruption, assembly code, and dynamic instrumentation. This impression
is exacerbated by the fact that most write-ups on zero-day findings describe
what the vulnerability is, but not how it was discovered.
     Moreover, the sheer breadth of vulnerability research, which spans across
hardware and software, means that the methodologies for finding partic-
ular vulnerabilities can vary greatly. As you’ll learn, performing effective

                     vulnerability research necessitates an overarching strategy prior to selecting
                     individual tactics.
                         This chapter introduces you to the world of vulnerability research. You’ll
                     learn about the basics of reporting vulnerabilities, what vulnerability re-
                     search is (and isn’t), and its three main disciplines: code review, reverse en-
                     gineering, and fuzzing. I’ll also provide simple criteria you can apply to find
                     your own interesting vulnerability research targets. But in order to discover
                     a vulnerability, you first need to know what to look for.

     What Is a Vulnerability?
                     Let’s break down the following definition of a vulnerability, provided by the
                     National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) at https://csrc.nist
                     .gov/glossary/term/vulnerability:
                             Weakness in an information system, system security procedures,
                             internal controls, or implementation that could be exploited or
                             triggered by a threat source.

                          First, a vulnerability must be a flaw in the design or implementation of
                     a system. This means that if exploited, the vulnerability causes the system to
                     act in an insecure manner that wasn’t intended by the developers.
                          The Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) industry standard
                     uses the confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) triad to evaluate the
                     impact of vulnerabilities:
                         Confidentiality An attacker can access data they’re not authorized to
                         access.
                         Integrity An attacker can modify data they’re not authorized to modify.
                         Availability An attacker can disrupt access to the system itself.
                           These components describe how a successfully exploited vulnerability
                     can impact a system and provide a useful lens to characterize a vulnerability.
                     For example, a vulnerability that allows an attacker to write arbitrary files
                     in a system affects the integrity of the system but doesn’t necessarily impact
                     confidentiality. While this won’t be at the top of your mind when looking
                     for vulnerabilities, it’s helpful when communicating your findings to others,
                     such as when you’re writing a vulnerability disclosure report.
                           Second, the vulnerability must be exploitable by a threat source. If a
                     weakness exists in the system without there being some means of exploiting
                     it, it’s a bug rather than a vulnerability. A bug is a defect that leads to unin-
                     tended functionality. While all vulnerabilities are bugs, the opposite isn’t
                     always true. For example, if a router’s firmware reports the wrong day of the
                     week because of a mistake in the code that can’t be triggered externally, it’s
                     a bug but not a vulnerability, as it neither crosses a security boundary nor is
                     exploitable.

Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures Records
A Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) identifier, such as CVE-
2020-19909 or CVE-2020-21469, is a unique reference assigned to a publicly
disclosed vulnerability. The MITRE Corporation manages the system that
publishes these identifiers, which have gradually become a global standard
for referencing known vulnerabilities. However, although many consider a
CVE Record to be an “official” vulnerability, this isn’t the case; it’s nice to
get a CVE assigned for a vulnerability you discovered, but not all vulnerabili-
ties have CVEs, nor are all CVEs actual vulnerabilities.
     The CVE Program has grown organically into a de facto industry refer-
ence, rather than being established as a formal international standard. It’s
actually a federated system of CVE Numbering Authorities (CNAs) that can
assign CVE identifiers to vulnerabilities that fall within their scope. For ex-
ample, a vendor CNA has the authority to assign CVE IDs to vulnerabilities
affecting their own products, allowing them to control the CVE publication
process. While there are common CVE assignment rules and a central CVE
request form that goes to the root CNA (MITRE), the assignment of CVE
IDs is still fairly decentralized and left to the discretion of CNAs, which can
lead to erroneous CVEs being published.

Incorrect Reporting of Vulnerabilities
The frequent conflation of bugs and vulnerabilities is a common cause of
erroneous reporting. For example, the curl and Postgres projects have both
rejected vulnerability disclosures that could be considered bugs but weren’t
vulnerabilities. Let’s start with the disputed CVE-2020-19909 vulnerability
record for curl:
        Integer overflow vulnerability in tool_operate.c in curl 7.65.2 via a
        large value as the retry delay.

     As described by curl developer Daniel Stenberg in his blog post “CVE-
2020-19909 Is Everything That Is Wrong with CVEs” (https://daniel.haxx.se/
blog/2023/08/26/cve-2020-19909-is-everything-that-is-wrong-with-cves/), this in-
teger overflow occurs in the --retry-delay command line option that speci-
fies the number of seconds curl waits before retrying a failed request. If the
user specifies a value like 18446744073709552 on a 64-bit machine, the overflow
causes curl to evaluate the value as 384 instead.
     This scenario satisfies the condition of a weakness due to the integer
overflow. It may also be considered exploitable, since some systems might
pass user input to curl to make server-side web requests. However, it doesn’t
appear to cross a security boundary. Even if a supposed threat source could
exploit this overflow to force a system to retry failed web requests sooner
than expected, it’s difficult to articulate how this causes a security issue. The
amended vulnerability record now states:
        NOTE: many parties report that this has no direct security impact
        on the curl user; however, it may (in theory) cause a denial of ser-
        vice to associated systems or networks if, for example, --retry-delay

                           is misinterpreted as a value much smaller than what was intended.
                           This is not especially plausible because the overflow only happens
                           if the user was trying to specify that curl should wait weeks (or
                           longer) before trying to recover from a transient error.

                        This exploit scenario doesn’t cross a security boundary during normal
                   usage of curl by a local user either, since they’d already be able to control
                   --retry-delay directly.
                        A similar reasoning applies to CVE-2020-21469, the disputed vulnerabil-
                   ity record for Postgres, which states:
                           An issue was discovered in PostgreSQL 12.2 [that] allows attackers
                           to cause a denial of service via repeatedly sending SIGHUP signals.

                       The Postgres developers addressed this report in a blog post titled “CVE-
                   2020-21469 Is Not a Security Vulnerability” (https://www.postgresql.org/about/
                   news/cve-2020-21469-is-not-a-security-vulnerability-2701). As noted by the de-
                   velopers, in order to exploit this vulnerability, the attacker needs to already
                   have access to an account with elevated privileges, such as:
                      •    A PostgreSQL superuser (postgres)
                      •    A user that was granted permission to execute pg_reload_conf by a
                           PostgreSQL superuser
                      •    A privileged operating system user
                        With those privileges, an attacker can bring down the database using
                   standard functionality without needing to exploit this “vulnerability.” In
                   fact, with those privileges an attacker could do far worse, rendering the
                   point moot. Keep these distinctions in mind to avoid spending time on non-
                   issues.
                        We’ll explore the responsible disclosure process and working with CNAs
                   in more detail in Chapter 10. Now that you have a clearer idea of what con-
                   stitutes a vulnerability, let’s discuss vulnerability research.

      What Is Zero-Day Vulnerability Research?
                   Zero-day vulnerability research is the systematic process of analyzing soft-
                   ware and hardware targets to discover security vulnerabilities. This covers
                   most technology, from desktop applications to IoT devices to operating sys-
                   tem kernels.
                       Given this wide scope, vulnerability research focuses on individual com-
                   ponents, such as a particular driver in an operating system or a network ser-
                   vice in an IoT device. Covering the entire range of potential vulnerabilities
                   and targets is out of this book’s scope, but by isolating particular compo-
                   nents we can generalize techniques that are applicable across components,
                   such as reverse engineering shared libraries or fuzzing network protocols.
                   While the individual vulnerabilities and contexts differ between targets, the
                   process of finding them follows a common workflow.

    To further understand vulnerability research, let’s take a moment to dif-
ferentiate it from penetration testing.

Vulnerability Research vs. Penetration Testing
Vulnerability research and penetration testing share common techniques
and tools, but they differ in their goals.
     Penetration testing aims to find and exploit vulnerabilities in a particular
system, whether it’s a web application or a network. These vulnerabilities
aren’t necessarily new; for example, a penetration tester can scan a network
for outdated Active Directory servers vulnerable to publicly available exploit
scripts.
     Meanwhile, vulnerability research aims to discover vulnerabilities in soft-
ware or hardware targets. These targets may comprise a system, such as a
router, but they don’t apply solely to specific instances such as Enterprise
X’s corporate network or a web server at a particular domain. If you dis-
cover a new vulnerability in a router, all networks that use this router are
theoretically at risk.
     Vulnerability research targets differ from penetration testing targets in
terms of public availability, or whether others can obtain access to the soft-
ware or hardware. For example, while penetration testing, you may discover
that the organization uses a custom plug-in script that attackers can exploit
to gain access to a server. However, this script exists only on that organiza-
tion’s server and isn’t open source or commercially available, falling outside
the scope of typical vulnerability research.
     Additionally, while a vulnerability needs to be exploitable, vulnerability
research doesn’t necessarily entail exploiting it. For example, if you discover
a buffer overflow that overwrites return address pointers on the stack in a
program, a simple proof of concept (PoC) that triggers this is sufficient for
vulnerability research. Developing a full-blown exploit that executes arbi-
trary shellcode falls under exploit development—the process of creating tools
or code that exploits vulnerabilities—and is a necessary step in a penetra-
tion test. In some large vulnerability research organizations, vulnerability
discovery is handled by a separate team from exploit development, with the
former passing its output to the latter to refine into reliable exploits. This is
very common for complex vulnerabilities such as heap corruption in operat-
ing system kernels, which requires precise payloads to work across different
versions and memory states. However, it’s also common to conflate vulner-
ability research and exploit development. For this book, we’ll focus on the
narrower definition of vulnerability discovery.
     Another major feature of vulnerability research is the use of static and
dynamic analysis, including reverse engineering, to analyze a target. Pen-
etration tests often attempt to assess the real-world security posture of a
target and may be confined to black-box (with no knowledge of the inter-
nal implementation of the target) techniques on external attack surfaces,
such as testing the requests made to a web application. Vulnerability re-
search, on the other hand, focuses on white-box (with knowledge of the in-
ternals, such as source code) and gray-box (with only partial knowledge of

                    the internals) analysis, finding weaknesses through an “inside out” perspec-
                    tive by using code review and reverse engineering techniques. Thus, vulnera-
                    bility research is more effective at discovering deeper vulnerabilities.

                    Disciplines and Techniques
                    As mentione earlier, vulnerability research comprises three main disci-
                    plines: code review, reverse engineering, and fuzzing. As you will see in the
                    following chapters, they each include manual and automated techniques.
                    For example, code review begins with the fundamental skill of manual source-
                    to-sink tracing before diving into automated code analysis tools, while fuzzing
                    automates the generation and testing of unexpected inputs. Here’s a quick
                    overview of what each discipline entails.

                    Code Review
                    Code review is the process of analyzing the source code of a system to identify
                    vulnerabilities. In this book, we begin with code review rather than reverse
                    engineering or fuzzing in order to build the foundations for advanced skills
                    like root cause analysis and taint analysis. A key component of vulnerabil-
                    ity research is understanding how the target functions, so focusing on the
                    code first makes it easier to conceptualize the “backend” of your target when
                    reverse engineering or fuzzing it.
                         Code review often appears easier than reverse engineering or fuzzing,
                    but the difficulty of discovering a vulnerability doesn’t correlate with its crit-
                    icality. In some cases, critical vulnerabilities emerge surprisingly close to the
                    surface. Consider CVE-2021-44228, a devastating remote code execution
                    vulnerability in Apache Log4j that affected a staggering number of systems
                    and caused many sleepless nights for defenders. The root cause lay in a Java
                    Naming and Directory Interface (JNDI) injection, a class of vulnerabilities
                    discovered in 2016 by Alvaro Muñoz and Oleksandr Mirosh. That the vul-
                    nerability had existed unnoticed in the Log4j codebase since 2013 suggests
                    that not enough people (or automated code scans) had reviewed the code—
                    or if they did, they didn’t know what to look for.
                         This brings us to another point about the importance of code review:
                    most software uses open source code in some form, from shared libraries to
                    copied-and-pasted snippets. Decades-old vulnerable code thus lurks beneath
                    the latest software, waiting to be discovered. In the case of forked code, suc-
                    cessor projects may patch a vulnerability but fail to propagate patches up-
                    stream. For example, in 2021 I discovered a remote code execution vulner-
                    ability in Apache OpenOffice that had been patched in LibreOffice (https://
                    spaceraccoon.dev/all-your-d-base-are-belong-to-us-part-1-code-execution-in-apache
                    -openoffice/). Due to the ever-expanding web of dependencies in software, a
                    vulnerability in a single open source project could affect thousands of other
                    projects and, in turn, millions of users.
                         A prime example of this is the backdoor discovered in liblzma, a soft-
                    ware library providing data compression functions. Due to the wide usage
                    of liblzma in many Linux distributions, under the right circumstances an

attacker could exploit the backdoor to gain access to any server with an ex-
posed Secure Shell (SSH) service in the world.
     Thanks to the ubiquity of open source dependencies in software, instead
of trying to break hardened and obfuscated code in proprietary software,
creative researchers can target their open source dependencies instead. For
example, security researcher “Angelboy” achieved remote code execution in
multiple network-attached storage (NAS) devices by discovering and exploit-
ing vulnerabilities in Netatalk, an open source Apple Filing Protocol (AFP)
server used in these devices, rather than in software written by the vendors.

Reverse Engineering
Reverse engineering involves taking apart software, such as binary executable
files compiled from source code, to reveal and analyze its inner workings.
In this sense, reverse engineering picks up where code review leaves off.
Although this may appear more daunting than analyzing human-readable
code, it’s an exciting opportunity because many targets rely on “security
by obscurity” to hide blatant weaknesses. This means that they may have
avoided the scrutiny of security researchers who don’t go beyond code re-
view. Over time, a lack of visibility allows security vulnerabilities to accumu-
late without being discovered by others. The first researcher to properly re-
verse engineer the software will likely discover many vulnerabilities hiding
just beneath the surface.
     While code review is similar to reading a complicated map to find your
way from point A to point B, reverse engineering is like exploring a dark
tunnel that may reveal unexpected treasures at the next turn. However, this
doesn’t mean you’ll be fumbling in the dark. We’ll discuss systematic ways to
map out a target step by step through static and dynamic analysis, eventually
carving out a similar path as code review from A to B.
     Reverse engineering doesn’t focus only on lower-level assembly code, as
we can compile binaries into intermediate languages like Java bytecode or
even include embedded interpreters for scripting languages like JavaScript.
Working with incomplete source code extracted or decompiled from these
binaries builds on code review capabilities, which is why you’ll learn reverse
engineering after code review.

Fuzzing
Finally, fuzzing provides a highly automated means of finding vulnerabili-
ties by hammering a target with various invalid or unexpected inputs. In the
early days of vulnerability research, fuzzing was a largely hands-off affair that
involved pointing a fuzzer at a target and waiting for vulnerabilities to come
crashing out. Modern coverage-guided fuzzing uses more advanced and ef-
fective means of enumerating a target. The growing ease of working with
fuzzing tools has led to many researchers incorporating fuzzing into their
workflows and mature product teams using fuzzing to identify low-hanging
vulnerabilities early in the development lifecycle.

                        You’ll learn to optimize your fuzzing by writing fuzzing harnesses that
                    fuzz interesting or neglected parts of a target. Writing an optimal fuzzing
                    harness draws on many code review and reverse engineering concepts.

    Selecting a Vulnerability Research Target
                    Practicing target selection greatly increases your chances of finding a vulner-
                    ability. As you’ll see, picking a good target for research can be challenging
                    because a target isn’t guaranteed to be vulnerable. I recommend selecting
                    white-box targets at first as a way to practice all three disciplines of vulner-
                    ability research. There are countless projects with source code available on
                    the web, from open source projects to freeware.
                         We can use a rule of three similar to the CIA triad to choose a target:
                    familiarity, availability, and impact.

                    Familiarity
                    Familiarity is how much is known about the target. You should pick a target
                    that’s written in a programming language or framework you’re comfortable
                    with. While many vulnerabilities work similarly across different languages
                    and frameworks, some exploits require specific environments. Even gen-
                    eral classes of vulnerabilities like deserialization contain subtle differences
                    depending on the context. However, you don’t need to be an expert in ex-
                    ploiting language-specific vulnerabilities so long as you can follow the code.
                         In some cases, the target may have been researched before or is well doc-
                    umented. Conference talks, whitepapers, and vulnerability write-ups pro-
                    vide valuable information that can speed up your familiarization process.
                    While you may want to avoid a hardened target that has been thoroughly
                    researched before by others, I’ve found that popular targets are constantly
                    changing and adding new features. Don’t give up on them before even
                    trying!
                         Consider the platform the code targets as well, as this factor affects the
                    types of vulnerabilities you can exploit and your ability to discover them. Is
                    it a web application or a native shared library? Does it call Windows APIs?
                    Will it run on the client or server? Also consider whether the target uses
                    well-known protocols and standards; having documentation allows you to
                    recognize common functions and routines that are part of these standards
                    and save time in identifying them.

                    Availability
                    Unlike in the CIA triad, availability in the context of vulnerability research
                    means how easy it is to access and analyze the target. There are several im-
                    portant considerations when evaluating the availability of a project. The
                    most obvious is the ease of obtaining the source code: Is it on SourceForge
                    (you’d be surprised how many older projects live there) or GitHub? Can
                    you track version changes and development branches? Does the project live

in a monorepo, or is it scattered across various subprojects? The last thing
you want is to waste time chasing down private dependencies or an obscure
shared library.
     Also consider how difficult it’ll be to set up a testing environment for
your target. As you journey further into vulnerability research, you’ll need
to test against a working instance of the project to build your PoC (a mini-
mal exploit that triggers the vulnerability and demonstrates its impact on
the target). While the project might provide compiled binaries, they may
omit debugging flags or configurations that make it harder to develop your
exploit. What may appear to be a vulnerability in the source code could be
mitigated by proper validation or runtime checks. As Manul Laphroaig elo-
quently puts it, PoC || GTFO (No Starch Press, 2017). In other words, it’s
important to demonstrate that your vulnerability is exploitable.
     Ideally, the project comes with a containerized build option or well-
documented setup instructions. If building from source is too complex, look
for development builds that include debugging symbols and configurations.
Test potential vulnerabilities while reviewing the code to validate your as-
sumptions about how it works. This ensures that your research stays on track
and grounded in the real-life workings of the target.
     One final consideration is the accessibility of the project owners. If you
find a vulnerability, someone should be available to acknowledge and patch
the bug. Check for a security contact in the README file or on the owner’s
website. For example, the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) provides a
catch-all security@apache.org email and project-level security contacts. Keep
in mind that some project owners might not welcome or be able to respond
to vulnerability reports.

Impact
Impact is the importance of the target. While farming vulnerabilities in a
dead, decades-old project might be educational, it’s not impactful if no one
uses it. At the same time, dead projects could be far more important than
they appear; for example, a dead project could be the only known parsing
library for a legacy file format some major software uses to maintain back-
ward compatibility.
     Useful examples exist across the npm registry, which hosts JavaScript
packages used globally by developers. The js-yaml package (https://www
.npmjs.com/package/js-yaml) occupies a small footprint of 33 files and is rarely
updated, but it boasts more than 20,000 dependents and is downloaded as
many as 100 million times a week! Finding a vulnerability in such a target
would lead to multiple downstream impacts, as evidenced by the global rush
to patch Log4j in the wake of CVE-2021-44228.
     There are plenty of metrics to gauge a project’s impact, such as GitHub
stars or forks, download counts, and usage in other projects. Which metrics
you prioritize will depend on your goals in vulnerability research, though
working on a target many people use is usually more exciting.

                    Where to Explore Projects
                    With these considerations in mind, picking a suitable target from the mil-
                    lions of available codebases can be challenging. I recommend exploring
                    GitHub projects by topic at https://github.com/topics, then filtering by pro-
                    gramming language and sorting by stars, forks, or last update time. This
                    lets you quickly zoom in on potentially interesting projects if you have a
                    specific focus, like emulators or frameworks. Additionally, you can explore
                    up-and-coming projects that may not have experienced much scrutiny by
                    other vulnerability researchers on GitHub’s Trending page (https://github
                    .com/trending).
                         Another option is to browse project directories like the Apache Soft-
                    ware Foundation’s (https://projects.apache.org). The directory allows sorting
                    by name, committee, category, programming language, and number of com-
                    mitters. ASF projects have an established vulnerability disclosure process
                    with a security contact of last resort if you’re unable to reach the project
                    owner. However, avoid focusing on finding bugs in “in the attic” (end-of-life)
                    projects, as you’re unlikely to get a response to security reports about these.

    Conclusion
                    This chapter introduced you to the rapidly growing and evolving field of
                    vulnerability research by defining the term and differentiating it from pen-
                    etration testing, walking through its three disciplines (code review, reverse
                    engineering, and fuzzing), and discussing how to choose a familiar, available,
                    and impactful target. Now it’s time to dive into our first discipline: code
                    review.

