Preface
      “There are known knowns; there are things we know we know. We also know there are known
      unknowns; that is to say we know there are some things we do not know. But there are also
      unknown unknowns—there are things we do not know we don’t know.”
                                  —U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, February 12, 2002

While the previous statement was met with chuckles from those attending the press briefing,
it summarizes an important principle that is as relevant in complex technical systems as it is
in geopolitics: performance issues can originate from anywhere, including areas of the system
that you know nothing about and you are therefore not checking (the unknown unknowns).
This book may reveal many of these areas, while providing methodologies and tools for their
analysis.

About This Edition
I wrote the first edition eight years ago and designed it to have a long shelf life. Chapters are
structured to first cover durable skills (models, architecture, and methodologies) and then faster-
changing skills (tools and tuning) as example implementations. While the example tools and
tuning will go out of date, the durable skills show you how to stay updated.

There has been a large addition to Linux in the past eight years: Extended BPF, a kernel technol-
ogy that powers a new generation of performance analysis tools, which is used by companies
including Netflix and Facebook. I have included a BPF chapter and BPF tools in this new edition,
and I have also published a deeper reference on the topic [Gregg 19]. The Linux perf and Ftrace
tools have also seen many developments, and I have added separate chapters for them as well.
The Linux kernel has gained many performance features and technologies, also covered. The
hypervisors that drive cloud computing virtual machines, and container technologies, have also
changed considerably; that content has been updated.

The first edition covered both Linux and Solaris equally. Solaris market share has shrunk consid-
erably in the meantime [ITJobsWatch 20], so the Solaris content has been largely removed from
this edition, making room for more Linux content to be included. However, your understanding
of an operating system or kernel can be enhanced by considering an alternative, for perspective.
For that reason, some mentions of Solaris and other operating systems are included in this
edition.

For the past six years I have been a senior performance engineer at Netflix, applying the field of
systems performance to the Netflix microservices environment. I’ve worked on the performance
of hypervisors, containers, runtimes, kernels, databases, and applications. I’ve developed new
methodologies and tools as needed, and worked with experts in cloud performance and Linux
kernel engineering. These experiences have contributed to improving this edition.
xxx   Preface

      About This Book
      Welcome to Systems Performance: Enterprise and the Cloud, 2nd Edition! This book is about the
      performance of operating systems and of applications from the operating system context, and it is
      written for both enterprise server and cloud computing environments. Much of the material in
      this book can also aid your analysis of client devices and desktop operating systems. My aim
      is to help you get the most out of your systems, whatever they are.

      When working with application software that is under constant development, you may be
      tempted to think of operating system performance—where the kernel has been developed and
      tuned for decades—as a solved problem. It isn’t! The operating system is a complex body of soft-
      ware, managing a variety of ever-changing physical devices with new and different application
      workloads. The kernels are also in constant development, with features being added to improve
      the performance of particular workloads, and newly encountered bottlenecks being removed as
      systems continue to scale. Kernel changes such as the mitigations for the Meltdown vulnerabil-
      ity that were introduced in 2018 can also hurt performance. Analyzing and working to improve
      the performance of the operating system is an ongoing task that should lead to continual perfor-
      mance improvements. Application performance can also be analyzed from the operating system
      context to find more clues that might be missed using application-specific tools alone; I’ll cover
      that here as well.

      Operating System Coverage
      The main focus of this book is the study of systems performance, using Linux-based operating
      systems on Intel processors as the primary example. The content is structured to help you study
      other kernels and processors as well.

      Unless otherwise noted, the specific Linux distribution is not important in the examples used.
      The examples are mostly from the Ubuntu distribution and, when necessary, notes are included
      to explain differences for other distributions. The examples are also taken from a variety of
      system types: bare metal and virtualized, production and test, servers and client devices.

      Across my career I’ve worked with a variety of different operating systems and kernels, and this
      has deepened my understanding of their design. To deepen your understanding as well, this
      book includes some mentions of Unix, BSD, Solaris, and Windows.

      Other Content
      Example screenshots from performance tools are included, not just for the data shown, but also
      to illustrate the types of data available. The tools often present the data in intuitive and self-
      explanatory ways, many in the familiar style of earlier Unix tools. This means that screenshots
      can be a powerful way to convey the purpose of these tools, some requiring little additional
      description. (If a tool does require laborious explanation, that may be a failure of design!)

      Where it provides useful insight to deepen your understanding, I touch upon the history of
      certain technologies. It is also useful to learn a bit about the key people in this industry: you’re
      likely to come across them or their work in performance and other contexts. A “who’s who” list
      has been provided in Appendix E.
                                                                                          Preface    xxxi

A handful of topics in this book were also covered in my prior book, BPF Performance Tools
[Gregg 19]: in particular, BPF, BCC, bpftrace, tracepoints, kprobes, uprobes, and various BPF-
based tools. You can refer to that book for more information. The summaries of these topics in
this book are often based on that earlier book, and sometimes use the same text and examples.

What Isn’t Covered
This book focuses on performance. To undertake all the example tasks given will require, at times,
some system administration activities, including the installation or compilation of software
(which is not covered here).

The content also summarizes operating system internals, which are covered in more detail in
separate dedicated texts. Advanced performance analysis topics are summarized so that you
are aware of their existence and can study them as needed from additional sources. See the
Supplemental Material section at the end of this Preface.

How This Book Is Structured
Chapter 1, Introduction, is an introduction to systems performance analysis, summarizing key
concepts and providing examples of performance activities.

Chapter 2, Methodologies, provides the background for performance analysis and tuning,
including terminology, concepts, models, methodologies for observation and experimentation,
capacity planning, analysis, and statistics.

Chapter 3, Operating Systems, summarizes kernel internals for the performance analyst. This
is necessary background for interpreting and understanding what the operating system is doing.

Chapter 4, Observability Tools, introduces the types of system observability tools available,
and the interfaces and frameworks upon which they are built.

Chapter 5, Applications, discusses application performance topics and observing them from
the operating system.

Chapter 6, CPUs, covers processors, cores, hardware threads, CPU caches, CPU interconnects,
device interconnects, and kernel scheduling.

Chapter 7, Memory, is about virtual memory, paging, swapping, memory architectures, buses,
address spaces, and allocators.

Chapter 8, File Systems, is about file system I/O performance, including the different caches
involved.

Chapter 9, Disks, covers storage devices, disk I/O workloads, storage controllers, RAID, and the
kernel I/O subsystem.

Chapter 10, Network, is about network protocols, sockets, interfaces, and physical connections.

Chapter 11, Cloud Computing, introduces operating system– and hardware-based virtualiza-
tion methods in common use for cloud computing, along with their performance overhead,
isolation, and observability characteristics. This chapter covers hypervisors and containers.
xxxii   Preface

        Chapter 12, Benchmarking, shows how to benchmark accurately, and how to interpret others’
        benchmark results. This is a surprisingly tricky topic, and this chapter shows how you can avoid
        common mistakes and try to make sense of it.

        Chapter 13, perf, summarizes the standard Linux profiler, perf(1), and its many capabilities.
        This is a reference to support perf(1)’s use throughout the book.

        Chapter 14, Ftrace, summarizes the standard Linux tracer, Ftrace, which is especially suited for
        exploring kernel code execution.

        Chapter 15, BPF, summarizes the standard BPF front ends: BCC and bpftrace.

        Chapter 16, Case Study, contains a systems performance case study from Netflix, showing how
        a production performance puzzle was analyzed from beginning to end.

        Chapters 1 to 4 provide essential background. After reading them, you can reference the remain-
        der of the book as needed, in particular Chapters 5 to 12, which cover specific targets for analysis.
        Chapters 13 to 15 cover advanced profiling and tracing, and are optional reading for those who
        wish to learn one or more tracers in more detail.

        Chapter 16 uses a storytelling approach to paint a bigger picture of a performance engineer’s
        work. If you’re new to performance analysis, you might want to read this first as an example of
        performance analysis using a variety of different tools, and then return to it when you’ve read
        the other chapters.

        As a Future Reference
        This book has been written to provide value for many years, by focusing on background and
        methodologies for the systems performance analyst.

        To support this, many chapters have been separated into two parts. The first part consists of terms,
        concepts, and methodologies (often with those headings), which should stay relevant many years
        from now. The second provides examples of how the first part is implemented: architecture,
        analysis tools, and tunables, which, while they will become out-of-date, will still be useful as
        examples.

        Tracing Examples
        We frequently need to explore the operating system in depth, which can be done using tracing
        tools.

        Since the first edition of this book, extended BPF has been developed and merged into the Linux
        kernel, powering a new generation of tracing tools that use the BCC and bpftrace front ends.
        This book focuses on BCC and bpftrace, and also the Linux kernel’s built-in Ftrace tracer. BPF,
        BCC, and bpftrace, are covered in more depth in my prior book [Gregg 19].

        Linux perf is also included in this book and is another tool that can do tracing. However, perf is
        usually included in chapters for its sampling and PMC analysis capabilities, rather than for tracing.

        You may need or wish to use different tracing tools, which is fine. The tracing tools in this book
        are used to show the questions that you can ask of the system. It is often these questions, and the
        methodologies that pose them, that are the most difficult to know.
                                                                                           Preface     xxxiii

Intended Audience
The intended audience for this book is primarily systems administrators and operators of
enterprise and cloud computing environments. It is also a reference for developers, database
administrators, and web server administrators who need to understand operating system and
application performance.

As a performance engineer at a company with a large compute environment (Netflix), I frequently
work with SREs (site reliability engineers) and developers who are under enormous time pressure
to solve multiple simultaneous performance issues. I have also been on the Netflix CORE SRE
on-call rotation and have experienced this pressure firsthand. For many people, performance is
not their primary job, and they need to know just enough to solve the current issues. Knowing
that your time may be limited has encouraged me to keep this book as short as possible, and
structure it to facilitate jumping ahead to specific chapters.

Another intended audience is students: this book is also suitable as a supporting text for a systems
performance course. I have taught these classes before and learned which types of material work
best in leading students to solve performance problems; that has guided my choice of content for
this book.

Whether or not you are a student, the chapter exercises give you an opportunity to review and
apply the material. These include some optional advanced exercises, which you are not expected
to solve. (They may be impossible; they should at least be thought-provoking.)

In terms of company size, this book should contain enough detail to satisfy environments from
small to large, including those with dozens of dedicated performance staff. For many smaller
companies, the book may serve as a reference when needed, with only some portions of it used
day to day.

Typographic Conventions
The following typographical conventions are used throughout this book:

Example                 Description
netif_receive_skb()     Function name
iostat(1)               A command referenced by chapter 1 of its man page
read(2)                 A system call referenced by its man page
malloc(3)               A C library function call referenced by its man page
vmstat(8)               An administration command referenced by its man page
Documentation/...       Linux documentation in the Linux kernel source tree
kernel/...              Linux kernel source code
fs/...                  Linux kernel source code, file systems
CONFIG_...              Linux kernel configuration option (Kconfig)
r_await                 Command line input and output
xxxiv   Preface

        Example                   Description
        mpstat 1                  Highlighting of a typed command or key detail

        #                         Superuser (root) shell prompt

        $                         User (non-root) shell prompt

        ^C                        A command was interrupted (Ctrl-C)

        [...]                     Truncation

        Supplemental Material, References, and Bibliography
        References are listed are at the end of each chapter rather than in a single bibliography, allowing
        you to browse references related to each chapter’s topic. The following selected texts can also be
        referenced for further background on operating systems and performance analysis:

             [Jain 91] Jain, R., The Art of Computer Systems Performance Analysis: Techniques for Experimental
             Design, Measurement, Simulation, and Modeling, Wiley, 1991.

             [Vahalia 96] Vahalia, U., UNIX Internals: The New Frontiers, Prentice Hall, 1996.

             [Cockcroft 98] Cockcroft, A., and Pettit, R., Sun Performance and Tuning: Java and the Internet,
             Prentice Hall, 1998.

             [Musumeci 02] Musumeci, G. D., and Loukides, M., System Performance Tuning, 2nd Edition,
             O’Reilly, 2002.

             [Bovet 05] Bovet, D., and Cesati, M., Understanding the Linux Kernel, 3rd Edition, O’Reilly,
             2005.

             [McDougall 06a] McDougall, R., Mauro, J., and Gregg, B., Solaris Performance and Tools:
             DTrace and MDB Techniques for Solaris 10 and OpenSolaris, Prentice Hall, 2006.

             [Gove 07] Gove, D., Solaris Application Programming, Prentice Hall, 2007.

             [Love 10] Love, R., Linux Kernel Development, 3rd Edition, Addison-Wesley, 2010.

             [Gregg 11a] Gregg, B., and Mauro, J., DTrace: Dynamic Tracing in Oracle Solaris, Mac OS X and
             FreeBSD, Prentice Hall, 2011.

             [Gregg 13a] Gregg, B., Systems Performance: Enterprise and the Cloud, Prentice Hall, 2013
             (first edition).

             [Gregg 19] Gregg, B., BPF Performance Tools: Linux System and Application Observability,
             Addison-Wesley, 2019.

             [ITJobsWatch 20] ITJobsWatch, “Solaris Jobs,” https://www.itjobswatch.co.uk/jobs/uk/
             solaris.do#demand_trend, accessed 2020.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to all those who bought the first edition, especially those who made it recommended or
required reading at their companies. Your support for the first edition has led to the creation of
this second edition. Thank you.

This is the latest book on systems performance, but not the first. I’d like to thank prior authors
for their work, work that I have built upon and referenced in this text. In particular I’d like to
thank Adrian Cockcroft, Jim Mauro, Richard McDougall, Mike Loukides, and Raj Jain. As they
have helped me, I hope to help you.

I’m grateful for everyone who provided feedback on this edition:

Deirdré Straughan has again supported me in various ways throughout this book, including
using her years of experience in technical copy editing to improve every page. The words you
read are from both of us. We enjoy not just spending time together (we are married now), but
also working together. Thank you.

Philipp Marek is an IT forensics specialist, IT architect, and performance engineer at the
Austrian Federal Computing Center. He provided early technical feedback on every topic in
this book (an amazing feat) and even spotted problems in the first edition text. Philipp started
programming in 1983 on a 6502, and has been looking for additional CPU cycles ever since.
Thanks, Philipp, for your expertise and relentless work.

Dale Hamel (Shopify) also reviewed every chapter, providing important insights for various
cloud technologies, and another consistent point of view across the entire book. Thanks for
taking this on, Dale—right after helping with the BPF book!

Daniel Borkmann (Isovalent) provided deep technical feedback for a number of chapters,
especially the networking chapter, helping me to better understand the complexities and tech-
nologies involved. Daniel is a Linux kernel maintainer with years of experience working on the
kernel network stack and extended BPF. Thank you, Daniel, for the expertise and rigor.

I’m especially thankful that perf maintainer Arnaldo Carvalho de Melo (Red Hat) helped with
Chapter 13, perf; and Ftrace creator Steven Rostedt (VMware) helped with Chapter 14, Ftrace,
two topics that I had not covered well enough in the first edition. Apart from their help with this
book, I also appreciate their excellent work on these advanced performance tools, tools that I’ve
used to solve countless production issues at Netflix.

It has been a pleasure to have Dominic Kay pick through several chapters and find even more
ways to improve their readability and technical accuracy. Dominic also helped with the first
edition (and before that, was my colleague at Sun Microsystems working on performance).
Thank you, Dominic.

My current performance colleague at Netflix, Amer Ather, provided excellent feedback on sev-
eral chapters. Amer is a go-to engineer for understanding complex technologies. Zachary Jones
(Verizon) also provided feedback for complex topics, and shared his performance expertise to
improve the book. Thank you, Amer and Zachary.

A number of reviewers took on multiple chapters and engaged in discussion on specific topics:
Alejandro Proaño (Amazon), Bikash Sharma (Facebook), Cory Lueninghoener (Los Alamos
xxxvi   Acknowledgments

        National Laboratory), Greg Dunn (Amazon), John Arrasjid (Ottometric), Justin Garrison (Amazon),
        Michael Hausenblas (Amazon), and Patrick Cable (Threat Stack). Thanks, all, for your technical
        help and enthusiasm for the book.

        Also thanks to Aditya Sarwade (Facebook), Andrew Gallatin (Netflix), Bas Smit, George Neville-
        Neil (JUUL Labs), Jens Axboe (Facebook), Joel Fernandes (Google), Randall Stewart (Netflix),
        Stephane Eranian (Google), and Toke Høiland-Jørgensen (Red Hat), for answering questions and
        timely technical feedback.

        The contributors to my earlier book, BPF Performance Tools, have indirectly helped, as some
        material in this edition is based on that earlier book. That material was improved thanks to
        Alastair Robertson (Yellowbrick Data), Alexei Starovoitov (Facebook), Daniel Borkmann, Jason
        Koch (Netflix), Mary Marchini (Netflix), Masami Hiramatsu (Linaro), Mathieu Desnoyers
        (EfficiOS), Yonghong Song (Facebook), and more. See that book for the full acknowledgments.

        This second edition builds upon the work in the first edition. The acknowledgments from the
        first edition thanked the many people who supported and contributed to that work; in summary,
        across multiple chapters I had technical feedback from Adam Leventhal, Carlos Cardenas,
        Darryl Gove, Dominic Kay, Jerry Jelinek, Jim Mauro, Max Bruning, Richard Lowe, and Robert
        Mustacchi. I also had feedback and support from Adrian Cockcroft, Bryan Cantrill, Dan
        McDonald, David Pacheco, Keith Wesolowski, Marsell Kukuljevic-Pearce, and Paul Eggleton.
        Roch Bourbonnais and Richard McDougall helped indirectly as I learned so much from their
        prior performance engineering work, and Jason Hoffman helped behind the scenes to make
        the first edition possible.

        The Linux kernel is complicated and ever-changing, and I appreciate the stellar work by Jonathan
        Corbet and Jake Edge of lwn.net for summarizing so many deep topics. Many of their articles are
        referenced in this book.

        A special thanks to Greg Doench, executive editor at Pearson, for his help, encouragement, and
        flexibility in making this process more efficient than ever. Thanks to content producer Julie
        Nahil (Pearson) and project manager Rachel Paul, for their attention to detail and help in deliv-
        ering a quality book. Thanks to copy editor Kim Wimpsett for the working through another one
        of my lengthy and deeply technical books, finding many ways to improve the text.

        And thanks, Mitchell, for your patience and understanding.

        Since the first edition, I’ve continued to work as a performance engineer, debugging issues
        everywhere in the stack, from applications to metal. I now have many new experiences with
        performance tuning hypervisors, analyzing runtimes including the JVM, using tracers including
        Ftrace and BPF in production, and coping with the fast pace of changes in the Netflix micro-
        services environment and the Linux kernel. So much of this is not well documented, and it had
        been daunting to consider what I needed to do for this edition. But I like a challenge.
About the Author
Brendan Gregg is an industry expert in computing performance and cloud computing. He is a
senior performance architect at Netflix, where he does performance design, evaluation, analysis,
and tuning. The author of multiple technical books, including BPF Performance Tools, he received
the USENIX LISA Award for Outstanding Achievement in System Administration. He has also
been a kernel engineer, performance lead, and professional technical trainer, and was program
co-chair for the USENIX LISA 2018 conference. He has created performance tools included
in multiple operating systems, along with visualizations and methodologies for performance
analysis, including flame graphs.
This page intentionally left blank
