                                           Preface

This book follows the earlier authoritative and full-length descriptions of the design and
implementation of the 4.3BSD and 4.4BSD versions of the UNIX system developed at the
University of California at Berkeley. Since the final Berkeley release in 1994, several groups have
continued development of BSD. This book details FreeBSD, the system with the largest set of
developers and the most widely distributed releases. Although the FreeBSD distribution
includes nearly 1000 utility programs in its base system and nearly 25,000 optional utilities in
its ports collection, this book concentrates almost exclusively on the kernel.

UNIX-like Systems

UNIX-like systems include the traditional vendor systems such as Solaris and HP-UX; the
Linux-based distributions such as Red Hat, Debian, Suse, and Slackware; and the BSD-based
distributions such as FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, and Darwin. They run on computers ranging
from smart phones to the largest supercomputers. They are the operating system of choice for
most multiprocessor, graphics, and vector-processing systems, and are widely used for the
original purpose of timesharing. The most common platform for providing network services
(from FTP to WWW) on the Internet, they are collectively the most portable operating system
ever developed. This portability is due partly to their implementation language, C [Kernighan &
Ritchie, 1989] (which is itself a widely ported language), and partly to the elegant design of the
system.

Since its inception in 1969 [Ritchie & Thompson, 1978], the UNIX system has developed in
several divergent and rejoining streams. The original developers continued to advance the state
of the art with their Ninth and Tenth Edition UNIX inside AT&T Bell Laboratories, and then
their Plan 9 successor to UNIX. Meanwhile, AT&T licensed UNIX System V as a product before
merging it with Sun Microsystem’s BSD-based SunOS to produce Solaris. Ninth Edition UNIX,
System V, and Solaris were all strongly influenced by the Berkeley Software Distributions
produced by the Computer Systems Research Group (CSRG) of the University of California at
Berkeley. The Linux operating system, although developed independently of the other UNIX
variants, implements the UNIX interface. Thus, applications developed to run on other
UNIX-based platforms can be easily ported to run on Linux.

Berkeley Software Distributions

The distributions from Berkeley were the first UNIX-based systems to introduce many
important features including the following:

• Demand-paged virtual-memory support

• Automatic configuration of the hardware and I/O system

• A fast and recoverable filesystem

• The socket-based interprocess-communication (IPC) primitives

• The reference implementation of TCP/IP

The Berkeley releases found their way into the UNIX systems of many vendors and were used
internally by the development groups of many other vendors. The implementation of the
TCP/IP networking protocol suite in 4.2BSD and 4.3BSD, and the availability of those systems,
played a key role in making the TCP/IP networking protocol suite a world standard. Even the
non-UNIX vendors such as Microsoft have adopted the Berkeley socket design in their Winsock
IPC interface.

The BSD releases have also been a strong influence on the POSIX (IEEE Std 1003.1)
operating-system interface standard, and on related standards. Several features—such as
reliable signals, job control, multiple access groups per process, and the routines for directory
operations—have been adapted from BSD for POSIX.

Early BSD releases contained licensed UNIX code, thus requiring recipients to have an AT&T
source license to be able to obtain and use BSD. In 1988, Berkeley separated its distribution into
AT&T-licensed and freely redistributable code. The freely redistributable code was licensed
separately and could be obtained, used, and redistributed by anyone. The final freely
redistributable 4.4BSD-Lite2 release from Berkeley in 1994 contained nearly the entire kernel
and all the important libraries and utilities.

Two groups, NetBSD and FreeBSD, sprang up in 1993 to begin supporting and distributing
systems built from the freely redistributable releases being done by Berkeley. The NetBSD group
emphasized portability and the minimalist approach, porting the systems to nearly 60 platforms
and they were determined to keep the system lean to aid embedded applications. The FreeBSD
group emphasized maximal support for the PC architecture and pushed to ease installation for,
and market their system to, as wide an audience as possible.

In 1995, the OpenBSD group split from the NetBSD group to develop a distribution that
emphasized security. In 2003, the Dragonfly group split from the FreeBSD group to develop a
distribution that used a significantly lighter-weight mechanism to support multiprocessing.
Over the years, there has been a healthy competition among the BSD distributions, with many
ideas and much code flowing between them.

Material Covered in this Book

This book is about the internal structure of the FreeBSD 11 kernel and about the concepts, data
structures, and algorithms used in implementing FreeBSD’s system facilities. The book covers
FreeBSD from the system-call level down—from the interface to the kernel to the hardware itself.
The kernel includes system facilities, such as process management, security, virtual memory, the
I/O system, filesystems, the socket IPC mechanism, and network protocol implementations.
Material above the system-call level—such as libraries, shells, commands, programming
languages, and other user interfaces—is excluded, except for some material related to the
terminal interface and to system startup. Following the organization first established by
Organick’s book about Multics [Organick, 1975], this book is an in-depth study of a
contemporary operating system.

Where particular hardware is relevant, the book refers to the Intel 32-bit architecture and the
similar AMD 64-bit architecture. Because FreeBSD has emphasized development on these
architectures, they are the architectures with the most complete support and so provide a
convenient point of reference.

Use by Computer Professionals

FreeBSD is widely used to support the core infrastructure of many companies worldwide.
Because it can be built with a small footprint, it is also seeing increased use in embedded
applications. The licensing terms of FreeBSD do not require the distribution of changes and
enhancements to the system. The licensing terms of Linux require that all changes and
enhancements to the kernel be made available in source form at minimal cost. Thus, companies
that need to control the distribution of their intellectual property build their products using
FreeBSD.

This book is of direct use to the professionals who work with FreeBSD systems. Individuals
involved in technical and sales support can learn the capabilities and limitations of the system;
applications developers can learn how to interface with the system effectively and efficiently;
system administrators without direct experience with the FreeBSD kernel can learn how to

maintain, tune, and configure the system; and systems programmers can learn how to extend,
enhance, and interface with the system.

Readers who will benefit from this book include operating-system implementors, system
programmers, UNIX application developers, administrators, and curious users. The book can be
read as a companion to the source code of the system, falling as it does between the manual
pages and the code in its level of detail. But this book is neither exclusively a UNIX
programming manual nor a user tutorial. Familiarity with the use of some version of the UNIX
system (see, for example, Stevens [1992]) and with the C programming language (see, for
example, Kernighan & Ritchie [1989]) would be extremely useful. The FreeBSD Handbook gives
a comprehensive introduction to the setting up, operation, and programming of FreeBSD
[FreeBSD Mall, 2004; FreeBSD.org, 2014]. FreeBSD packaging, designed to be easy to install
and use for both desktop and laptop users, is available in the PC-BSD distribution [Lavigne,
2010; PC-BSD.org, 2014].

Use in Courses on Operating Systems

This book is suitable for use as a reference text to provide background for a primary textbook in
a first-level course on operating systems. It is not intended for use as an introductory
operating-system textbook; the reader should have already encountered terminology such as
‘‘memory management,’’ ‘‘process scheduling,’’ and ‘‘I/O systems’’ [Silberschatz et al., 2012].
Familiarity with the concepts of network protocols [Comer, 2000; Stallings, 2000; Tanenbaum,
2010] will be useful for understanding some of the later chapters.

This book can be used in combination with a copy of the FreeBSD system for more advanced
operating-systems courses. Students’ assignments can include changes to, or replacements of,
key system components such as the scheduler, the paging daemon, the filesystems, thread
signalling, various networking layers, and I/O management. The ability to load, replace, and
unload modules from a running kernel allows students to experiment without the need to
compile and reboot the system. By working with a real operating system, students can directly
measure and experience the effects of their changes. Because of the intense peer review and
insistence on well-defined coding standards throughout its 35-year lifetime, the FreeBSD kernel
is considerably cleaner, more modular, and thus easier to understand and modify than most
software projects of its size and age. Sample course material is available at www.teachbsd.com
(see description following the index).

Exercises are provided at the end of each chapter. The exercises are graded into three categories
indicated by zero, one, or two asterisks. The answers to exercises that carry no asterisks can be
found in the text. Exercises with a single asterisk require a step of reasoning, critical thinking, or

intuition beyond a concept presented in the text. Exercises with two asterisks present major
design projects or open research questions.

Organization

This text discusses both philosophical and design issues, as well as details of the system’s actual
implementation. Often, the discussion starts at the system-call level and descends into the
kernel. Tables and figures are used to clarify data structures and control flow. Pseudocode
similar to the C language displays algorithms. A bold font identifies program names and
filesystem pathnames. A bold and italic font introduces glossary terms. An italic font identifies
the names of system calls, variables, routines, and structure names. Routine names (other than
system calls) are further identified by the name followed by parentheses (e.g., malloc() is the
name of a routine, whereas argv is the name of a variable).

The book is divided into five parts, organized as follows:

• Part I, Overview Three introductory chapters provide the context for the complete
operating system and for the rest of the book. Chapter 1, History and Goals, sketches the
historical development of the system, emphasizing the system’s research orientation. Chapter 2,
Design Overview of FreeBSD, describes the services offered by the system and outlines the
internal organization of the kernel. It also discusses the design decisions that were made as the
system was developed. Sections 2.3 through 2.15 in Chapter 2 give an overview of their
corresponding chapters. Chapter 3, Kernel Services, explains how system calls are performed
and describes in detail several of the basic services of the kernel.

• Part II, Processes The first chapter in this part—Chapter 4, Process Management—lays the
foundation for later chapters by describing the structure of a process, the algorithms used for
scheduling the execution of the threads that make up a process, and the synchronization
mechanisms used by the system to ensure consistent access to kernel-resident data structures.
Chapter 5, Security, explains the security framework used throughout the kernel. It also details
the security facilities that are available to control process access to the resources on the system
and to each other. In Chapter 6, Memory Management, the virtual-memory-management
system is discussed in detail.

• Part III, I/O System First, Chapter 7, I/O System Overview, explains the system interface
to I/O and describes the structure of the facilities that support this interface. Following this
introduction are four chapters that give the details of the main parts of the I/O system. Chapter
8, Devices, gives a description of the I/O architecture of the Intel and AMD systems, and
describes how the I/O subsystem is managed and how the kernel initially maps out and later

manages the arrival and departure of connected devices. Chapter 9, The Fast Filesystem, details
the data structures and algorithms that implement the original local filesystem as seen by
application programs, as well as how local filesystems are interfaced with the device interface
described in Chapter 8. Chapter 10, The Zettabyte Filesystem, describes the filesystem most
recently added to FreeBSD from the OpenSolaris operating system. Chapter 11, The Network
Filesystem, explains the latest version 4.2 network filesystem from both the server and client
perspectives.

• Part IV, Interprocess Communication Chapter 12, Interprocess Communication,
describes the mechanism for providing communication between related or unrelated processes.
Chapters 13 and 14, Network-Layer Protocols and Transport-Layer Protocols, are closely related
because the facilities explained in the former are used by the protocols, such as the UDP, TCP,
and SCTP, explained in the latter.

• Part V, System Operation Chapter 15, System Startup and Shutdown, explains system
initialization at the process level from kernel initialization to user login.

The book is intended to be read in the order that the chapters are presented, but the parts other
than Part I are independent of one another and can be read separately. Chapter 15 should be
read after all the others, but knowledgeable readers may find it useful independently.

At the end of the book are a glossary with brief definitions of major terms and an index. Each
chapter contains a Reference section with citations of related material.

Getting BSD

All the BSD distributions are available either for downloading from the net or on removable
media such as CD-ROM or DVD. Information on obtaining source and binaries for FreeBSD can
be obtained from http://www.FreeBSD.org. The NetBSD distribution is compiled and ready to
run on most workstation architectures. For more information, contact the NetBSD Project at
http://www.NetBSD.org/. The OpenBSD distribution is compiled and ready to run on a wide
variety of workstation architectures and has been extensively vetted for security and reliability.
For more information, visit the OpenBSD project’s Web site at http://www.OpenBSD.org/.

You diehards that read to the end of the preface are rewarded by finding out that you can get a
32-hour introductory video course based on this book, a 40-hour advanced video course based
on the FreeBSD 5 source code, a 2.5-hour video lecture on the history of BSD, and a 4-CD set
containing all the releases and the source-control history of BSD from Berkeley. These items are
described in the advertisements that follow the index.

Acknowledgments

We extend special thanks to Matt Ahrens (Delphix) who provided invaluable insight on the
workings of the ZFS filesystem including countless e-mails answering our questions about how
it works and why specific design decisions were made.

We also thank the following people who provided extensive review of areas of the kernel in
which they have deep knowledge: John Baldwin (The FreeBSD Project) on locking, scheduling,
and virtual memory; Alan Cox (Rice University) on virtual memory; Jeffrey Roberson (EMC) on
the ULE scheduler; and Randall Stewart (Adara Networks) on the SCTP implementation.

We thank the following people, all of whom read and commented on early drafts of various
chapters of the book: Jonathan Anderson (Memorial University of Newfoundland); David
Chisnall (University of Cambridge); Paul Dagnelie (Delphix); Brooks Davis (SRI International);
Paweł Jakub Dawidek (Wheel Systems); Peter Grehan (The FreeBSD Project); Scott Long
(Netflix); Jake Luck; Rick Macklem (The FreeBSD Project); Ilias Marinos (University of
Cambridge); Roger Pau Monné (Citrex); Mark Robert Vaughan Murray; Edward Tomasz
Napierała (The FreeBSD Project); Peter G. Neumann (SRI International); Rui Paolo; Luigi Rizzo
(Universitá di Pisa, Italy); Margo Seltzer (Harvard University); Keith Sklower (University of
California, Berkeley); Lawrence Stewart (Swinburne University of Technology); Michael Tuexen
(Muenster University of Applied Sciences); Bryan Venteicher (NetApp); Erez Zadok (Stony
Brook University); and Bjoern A. Zeeb (The FreeBSD Project).

We are grateful to our now-retired editor of 25 years, Peter Gordon, who had faith in our ability
to get the book written despite several years of delays on our part. We are equally grateful to our
new editor, Debra Williams, who saw this project to completion and who accelerated the
production when we finally had a completed manuscript. We thank all the professional people at
Addison-Wesley and Pearson Education who helped us bring the book to completion: managing
editor John Fuller; production editor Mary Kesel Wilson; cover designer Chuti Prasertsith; copy
editor Deborah Thompson; and proofreader Melissa Panagos. Finally we acknowledge the
contributions of Jaap Akkerhuis, who designed the troff macros for the BSD books.

This book was produced using James Clark’s implementations of pic, tbl, eqn, and groff. The
index was generated by awk scripts derived from indexing programs written by Jon Bentley and
Brian Kernighan [Bentley & Kernighan, 1986]. Most of the art was created with xfig. Figure
placement and widow elimination were handled by the groff macros, but orphan elimination
and production of even page bottoms had to be done by hand.

We encourage readers to send us suggested improvements or comments about typographical or
other errors found in the book; please send electronic mail to
FreeBSDbook-bugs@McKusick.COM.

References

Bentley & Kernighan, 1986.

J. Bentley & B. Kernighan, ‘‘Tools for Printing Indexes,’’ Computing Science Technical Report
128, AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ, October 1986.

Comer, 2000.

D. Comer, Internetworking with TCP/IP Volume 1, 4th ed., Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River,
NJ, 2000.

FreeBSD Mall, 2004.

FreeBSD Mall, The FreeBSD Handbook, available from http://www.freebsdmall.com, March
2004.

FreeBSD.org, 2014.

FreeBSD.org, The Online FreeBSD Handbook, available from
http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook, March 2014.

Kernighan & Ritchie, 1989.

B. W. Kernighan & D. M. Ritchie, The C Programming Language, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.

Lavigne, 2010.

D. Lavigne, The Definitive Guide to PC-BSD, Apress / Springer-Verlag, March 2010.

Organick, 1975.

E. I. Organick, The Multics System: An Examination of Its Structure, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1975.

PC-BSD.org, 2014.

PC-BSD.org, The PC-BSD Users Handbook, available from http://wiki.pcbsd.org, June 2014.

Ritchie & Thompson, 1978.

D. M. Ritchie & K. Thompson, ‘‘The UNIX Time-Sharing System,’’ Bell System Technical
Journal, vol. 57, no. 6, Part 2, pp. 78–90, July–August 1978. The original version [Comm. ACM
vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 365–375 (July 1974)] described the 6th edition; this citation describes the 7th
edition.

Silberschatz et al., 2012.

A. Silberschatz, P. Galvin, & G. Gagne, Operating System Concepts, 9th ed., John Wiley and
Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2012.

Stallings, 2000.

R. Stallings, Data and Computer Communications, 6th ed., Prentice Hall, Hoboken, NJ, 2000.

Stevens, 1992.

W. Stevens, Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA,
1992.

Tanenbaum, 2010.

A. S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, 5th ed., Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2010.

                                About the Authors

left to right
Marshall Kirk McKusick, Robert N.M. Watson, and George V. Neville-Neil

Marshall Kirk McKusick writes books and articles, consults, and teaches classes on UNIX-
and BSD-related subjects. While at the University of California at Berkeley, he implemented the
4.2BSD fast filesystem and was the Research Computer Scientist at the Berkeley Computer
Systems Research Group (CSRG), overseeing the development and release of 4.3BSD and
4.4BSD. His particular areas of interest are the virtual-memory system and the filesystem. He
earned his undergraduate degree in electrical engineering from Cornell University and did his
graduate work at the University of California at Berkeley, where he received master’s degrees in
computer science and business administration, and a doctoral degree in computer science. He
has twice been president of the board of the Usenix Association, is currently a member of the
FreeBSD Foundation Board of Directors, a member of the editorial board of ACM’s Queue
magazine, a senior member of the IEEE, and a member of the Usenix Association, ACM, and
AAAS. In his spare time, he enjoys swimming, scuba diving, and wine collecting. The wine is
stored in a specially constructed wine cellar (accessible from the Web at
http://www.McKusick.com/cgi-bin/readhouse) in the basement of the house that he shares
with Eric Allman, his partner of 35-and-some-odd years and husband since 2013.

George V. Neville-Neil hacks, writes, teaches, and consults in the areas of Security,
Networking, and Operating Systems. Other areas of interest include embedded and real-time
systems, network time protocols, and code spelunking. In 2007, he helped start the AsiaBSDCon
series of conferences in Tokyo, Japan, and has served on the program committee every year
since then. He is a member of the FreeBSD Foundation Board of Directors, and was a member
of the FreeBSD Core Team for 4 years. Contributing broadly to open source, he is the lead
developer on the Precision Time Protocol project (http://ptpd.sf.net) and the developer of the
Packet Construction Set (http://pcs.sf.net). Since 2004, he has written a monthly column,
‘‘Kode Vicious,’’ that appears both in ACM’s Queue and Communications of the ACM. He serves
on the editorial board of ACM’s Queue magazine, is vice-chair of ACM’s Practitioner Board, and
is a member of the Usenix Association, ACM, IEEE, and AAAS. He earned his bachelor’s degree
in computer science at Northeastern University in Boston, Massachusetts. He is an avid bicyclist,
hiker, and traveler who has lived in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and Tokyo, Japan. He is
currently based in Brooklyn, New York, where he lives with his husband, Kaz Senju.

Robert N.M. Watson is a University Lecturer in Systems, Security, and Architecture in the
Security Research Group at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory. He supervises
doctoral students and postdoctoral researchers in cross-layer research projects spanning
computer architecture, compilers, program analysis, program transformation, operating
systems, networking, and security. Dr. Watson is a member of the FreeBSD Foundation Board
of Directors, was a member of the FreeBSD Core Team for 10 years, and has been a FreeBSD
committer for 15 years. His open-source contributions include work on FreeBSD networking,
security, and multiprocessing. Having grown up in Washington, D. C., he earned his
undergraduate degree in Logic and Computation, with a double major in Computer Science, at
Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and then worked at a series of
industrial research labs investigating computer security. He earned his doctoral degree at the
University of Cambridge, where his graduate research was in extensible operating-system access
control. Dr. Watson and his wife Dr. Leigh Denault have lived in Cambridge, England, for 10
years.

