                              Part I: Overview

                       Chapter 1. History and Goals

1.1 History of the UNIX System

The UNIX system has been in wide use for over 40 years and has helped to define many areas of
computing. Although numerous individuals and organizations have contributed (and still
contribute) to the development of the UNIX system, this book primarily concentrates on the
BSD thread of development:

• Bell Laboratories, which invented UNIX

• The Computer Systems Research Group (CSRG) at the University of California at Berkeley,
which gave UNIX virtual memory and the reference implementation of TCP/IP

• The FreeBSD project, the NetBSD project, the OpenBSD project, and the Dragonfly project,
which continue the work started by the CSRG

• The Darwin operating system at the core of Apple’s OS X (Darwin is based on FreeBSD)

Origins

The first version of the UNIX system was developed at Bell Laboratories in 1969 by Ken
Thompson as a private research project to use an otherwise idle PDP-7. Thompson was joined
shortly thereafter by Dennis Ritchie, who not only contributed to the design and
implementation of the system, but also invented the C programming language. The system was
completely rewritten into C, leaving almost no assembly language. The original elegant design of
the system [Ritchie, 1978] and developments of the first 15 years [Ritchie, 1984a; Compton,
1985] have made the UNIX system an important and powerful operating system [Ritchie, 1987].

Ritchie, Thompson, and other early UNIX developers at Bell Laboratories had worked
previously on the Multics project [Peirce, 1985; Organick, 1975], which had a strong influence
on the newer operating system. Even the name UNIX is merely a pun on Multics; in areas where
Multics attempted to do many tasks, UNIX tried to do only one task but do it well. The basic
organization of the UNIX filesystem, the idea of using a user process for the command

interpreter, the general organization of the filesystem interface, and many other system
characteristics come directly from Multics.

Ideas from various other operating systems, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s
(MIT’s) CTSS, also have been incorporated. The fork operation to create new processes comes
from Berkeley’s GENIE (SDS-940, later XDS-940) operating system. Allowing a user to create
processes inexpensively led to using one process per command rather than commands being run
as procedure calls, as is done in Multics.

Research UNIX

The first major editions of UNIX were the Research systems from Bell Laboratories. In addition
to the earliest versions of the system, these systems include the UNIX Time-Sharing System,
Sixth Edition, commonly known as V6, which in 1976 was the first version widely available
outside of Bell Laboratories. Systems are identified by the edition numbers of the UNIX
Programmer’s Manual that were current when the distributions were made.

The UNIX system was distinguished from other operating systems in three important ways:

1. It was written in a high-level language.

2. It was distributed in source form.

3. It provided powerful primitives normally found in only those operating systems that ran on
much more expensive hardware.

Most of the system source code was written in C rather than in assembly language. The
prevailing belief at the time was that an operating system had to be written in assembly
language to provide reasonable efficiency and to get access to the hardware. The C language
itself was at a sufficiently high level to allow it to be compiled easily for a wide range of
computer hardware, without it being so complex or restrictive that systems programmers had to
revert to assembly language to get reasonable efficiency or functionality. Access to the hardware
was provided through assembly-language stubs for the 3 percent of the operating-system
functions—such as context switching—that needed them. Although the success of UNIX does not
stem solely from its being written in a high-level language, the use of C was a critical first step
[Kernighan & Ritchie, 1978; Kernighan & Ritchie, 1989; Ritchie et al., 1978]. Ritchie’s C
language is descended [Rosler, 1984] from Thompson’s B language, which was itself descended
from BCPL [Richards & Whitby-Strevens, 1980]. C continues to evolve [Tuthill, 1985; ISO,
2011].

The second important distinction of UNIX was its early release from Bell Laboratories to other
research environments in source form. By providing source, the system’s founders ensured that
other organizations would be able not only to use the system, but also to tinker with its inner
workings. The ease with which new ideas could be adopted into the system always has been key
to the changes that have been made to it. Whenever a new system that tried to upstage UNIX
came along, somebody would dissect the newcomer and clone its central ideas into UNIX. The
unique ability to use a small, comprehensible system, written in a high-level language, in an
environment swimming in new ideas led to a UNIX system that evolved far beyond its humble
beginnings. Though recipients of the source code had to be licensed, campus-wide licenses were
cheaply available to universities. Thus, many people became versed in the way that UNIX
worked, setting the stage for the open-source world that would follow.

The third important distinction of UNIX was that it provided individual users with the ability to
run multiple processes concurrently and to connect these processes into pipelines of commands.
At the time, only operating systems running on large and expensive machines had the ability to
run multiple processes, and the number of concurrent processes usually was controlled tightly
by a system administrator.

Most early UNIX systems ran on the PDP-11, which was inexpensive and powerful for its time.
Nonetheless, there was at least one early port of Sixth Edition UNIX to a machine with a
different architecture: the Interdata 7/32 [Miller, 1978]. The PDP-11 also had an inconveniently
small address space. The introduction of machines with 32-bit address spaces, especially the
VAX-11/780, provided an opportunity for UNIX to expand its services to include virtual memory
and networking. Earlier experiments by the Research group in providing UNIX-like facilities on
different hardware had led to the conclusion that it was as easy to move the entire operating
system as it was to duplicate UNIX’s services under another operating system. The first UNIX
system with portability as a specific goal was UNIX Time-Sharing System, Seventh Edition (V7),
which ran on the PDP-11 and the Interdata 8/32 and had a VAX variety called UNIX/32V
TimeSharing, System Version 1.0 (32V). The Research group at Bell Laboratories has also
developed UNIX Time-Sharing System, Eighth Edition (V8); UNIX TimeSharing System, Ninth
Edition (V9); and UNIX Time-Sharing System, Tenth Edition (V10). Their 1996 system is Plan 9.
Regrettably, Bell Laboratories was disbanded after the release of Plan 9.

AT&T UNIX System III and System V

After the distribution of Seventh Edition in 1978, the Research group turned over external
distributions to the UNIX Support Group (USG). USG had previously distributed such systems
internally as the UNIX Programmer’s Work Bench (PWB), and had sometimes distributed them
externally as well [Mohr, 1985].

USG’s first external distribution after Seventh Edition was UNIX System III (System III) in 1982,
which incorporated features of Seventh Edition, of 32V, and also of several UNIX systems
developed by groups other than the Research group. Features of UNIX/RT (a real-time UNIX
system) were included, as were many features from PWB. USG released UNIX System V
(System V) in 1983; that system is largely derived from System III. The court-ordered
divestiture of the Bell Operating Companies from AT&T permitted AT&T to market System V
aggressively [Bach, 1986; Wilson, 1985].

USG metamorphosed into the UNIX System Development Laboratory (USDL), which released
UNIX System V, Release 2 in 1984. System V, Release 2, Version 4 introduced paging [Jung,
1985; Miller, 1984], including copy-on-write and shared memory, to System V. The System V
implementation was not based on the Berkeley paging system. USDL was succeeded by AT&T
Information Systems (ATTIS), which distributed UNIX System V, Release 3, in 1987. That
system included STREAMS, an IPC mechanism adopted from V8 [Presotto & Ritchie, 1985].
Shortly after the release of UNIX System V as a product, AT&T and Sun Microsystems worked
together to merge it with Sun Microsystem’s BSD-based SunOS to produce Solaris. Solaris and
its open-source variant Open Solaris are the primary System V variants of UNIX still in use
today.

Berkeley Software Distributions

The most influential of the non-Bell Laboratories and non-AT&T UNIX development groups was
the University of California at Berkeley [DiBona et al., 1999]. Software from Berkeley was
released in Berkeley Software Distributions (BSD)—for example, as 4.4BSD. Berkeley was the
source of the BSD name, and its distributions were the first distinct identity for the BSD
operating system. The first Berkeley VAX UNIX work was the addition to 32V of virtual memory,
demand paging, and page replacement in 1979 by William Joy and Ozalp Babao lu, to produce
3BSD [Babao lu & Joy, 1981]. The reason for the large virtual-memory space of 3BSD was the
development of what at the time were large programs, such as Berkeley’s Franz LISP. This
memory-management work convinced the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) to fund the Berkeley team for the later development of a standard system (4BSD) for
DARPA’s contractors to use.

A goal of the 4BSD project was to provide support for the DARPA Internet networking protocols,
TCP/IP [Comer, 2000]. The networking implementation was general enough to communicate
among diverse network facilities, ranging from local networks, such as Ethernets and token
rings, to long-haul networks, such as DARPA’s ARPANET.

We refer to all the Berkeley VAX UNIX systems following 3BSD as 4BSD, although there were
really several releases: 4.0BSD, 4.1BSD, 4.2BSD, 4.3BSD, 4.3BSD Tahoe, and 4.3BSD Reno.
4BSD was the UNIX operating system of choice for VAXes from the time that the VAX first
became available in 1977 until the release of System V in 1983. Most organizations would
purchase a 32V license but would order 4BSD from Berkeley. Many installations inside the Bell
System ran 4.1BSD (and replaced it with 4.3BSD when the latter became available). A new
virtual-memory system was released with 4.4BSD. The VAX was reaching the end of its useful
lifetime, so 4.4BSD was not ported to that machine. Instead, 4.4BSD ran on the newer 68000,
SPARC, MIPS, and Intel PC architectures.

The 4BSD work for DARPA was guided by a steering committee that included many notable
people from both commercial and academic institutions. The culmination of the original
Berkeley DARPA UNIX project was the release of 4.2BSD in 1983; further research at Berkeley
produced 4.3BSD in mid-1986. The next releases included the 4.3BSD Tahoe release of June
1988 and the 4.3BSD Reno release of June 1990. These releases were primarily ports to the
Computer Consoles Incorporated hardware platform. Interleaved with these releases were two
unencumbered networking releases: the 4.3BSD Net1 release of March 1989 and the 4.3BSD
Net2 release of June 1991. These releases extracted nonproprietary code from 4.3BSD; they
could be redistributed freely in source and binary form to companies and individuals not
covered by a UNIX source license. The final CSRG release requiring an AT&T source license was
4.4BSD in June 1993. Following a year of litigation (see Section 1.3), the free-redistributable
4.4BSDLite was released in April 1994. The final CSRG release was 4.4BSD-Lite Release 2 in
June 1995.

UNIX in the World

The UNIX system is also a fertile field for academic endeavor. Thompson and Ritchie were given
the Association for Computing Machinery Turing award for the design of the system [Ritchie,
1984b]. The UNIX system and related, specially designed teaching systems—such as Tunis
[Ewens et al., 1985; Holt, 1983], XINU [Comer, 1984], and MINIX [Tanenbaum, 1987]—are
widely used in courses on operating systems. Linus Torvalds reimplemented the UNIX interface
in his freely redistributable Linux operating system. The UNIX system is ubiquitous in
universities and research facilities throughout the world, and is ever more widely used in
industry and commerce.

1.2 BSD and Other Systems

The CSRG incorporated features from not only UNIX systems but from other operating systems.
Many of the features of the 4BSD terminal drivers are from TENEX/TOPS-20. Job control (in
concept—not in implementation) is derived from TOPS-20 and from the MIT Incompatible
Timesharing System (ITS). The virtual-memory interface first proposed for 4.2BSD, and finally
implemented in 4.4BSD, was based on the file-mapping and page-level interfaces that first
appeared in TENEX/TOPS-20. The current FreeBSD virtual-memory system (see Chapter 6)
was adapted from Mach, which was itself an offshoot of 4.3BSD. Multics has often been a
reference point in the design of new facilities.

The quest for efficiency was a major factor in much of the CSRG’s work. Some efficiency
improvements were made because of comparisons with the proprietary VMS operating system
for the VAX [Joy, 1980; Kashtan, 1980].

Other UNIX variants have adopted many 4BSD features. AT&T UNIX System V [AT&T, 1987],
the IEEE POSIX.1 standard [P1003.1, 1988], and the related National Bureau of Standards (NBS)
Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) have adopted the following:

• Job control (Chapter 2)

• Reliable signals (Chapter 4)

• Multiple file-access permission groups (Chapter 5)

• Filesystem interfaces (Chapter 9)

The X/OPEN Group (originally consisting of only European vendors but now including most US
UNIX vendors) produced the X/OPEN Portability Guide [X/OPEN, and, more recently, the
Spec 1170 Guide. These documents specify both the kernel interface and many of the utility
programs available to UNIX system users. When Novell purchased UNIX from AT&T in 1993, it
transferred exclusive ownership of the UNIX name to X/OPEN. Thus, all systems that want to
brand themselves as UNIX must meet the X/OPEN interface specifications. To date, no BSD
system has ever been put through the X/OPEN interface-specification tests, so none of them can
be called UNIX. The X/OPEN guides have adopted many of the POSIX facilities. The POSIX.1
standard is also an ISO International Standard, named SC22 WG15. Thus, the POSIX facilities
have been accepted in most UNIX-like systems worldwide.

The 4BSD socket interprocess-communication mechanism (see Chapter 12) was designed for
portability and was immediately ported to AT&T System III, although it was never distributed

with that system. The 4BSD implementation of the TCP/IP networking protocol suite (see
Chapter 14) is widely used as the basis for further implementations on systems ranging from
AT&T 3B machines running System V to VMS to embedded operating systems such as VxWorks.

The CSRG cooperated closely with vendors whose systems are based on 4.2BSD and 4.3BSD.
This simultaneous development contributed to the ease of further ports of 4.3BSD and to
ongoing development of the system.

The Influence of the User Community

Much of the Berkeley development work was done in response to the user community. Ideas and
expectations came not only from DARPA, the principal direct-funding organization, but also
from users of the system at companies and universities worldwide.

The Berkeley researchers accepted not only ideas from the user community but also actual
software. Contributions to 4BSD came from universities and other organizations in Australia,
Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States. These contributions included major features,
such as autoconfiguration and disk quotas. A few ideas, such as the fcntl system call, were taken
from System V, although licensing and pricing considerations prevented the use of any code
from System III or System V in 4BSD. In addition to contributions that were included in the
distributions proper, the CSRG also distributed a set of user-contributed software.

An example of a community-developed facility is the public-domain time-zone-handling
package that was adopted with the 4.3BSD Tahoe release. It was designed and implemented by
an international group, including Arthur Olson, Robert Elz, and Guy Harris, partly because of
discussions     in    the      USENET   newsgroup    comp.std.unix.      This    package   takes
time-zone-conversion rules completely out of the C library, putting them in files that require no
system-code changes to change time-zone rules; this change is especially useful with binary-only
distributions of UNIX. The method also allows individual processes to choose rules rather than
keeping one ruleset specification systemwide. The distribution includes a large database of rules
used in many areas throughout the world, from China to Australia to Europe. Distributions are
thus simplified because it is not necessary to have the software set up differently for different
destinations, as long as the whole database is included. The adoption of the time-zone package
into BSD brought the technology to the attention of commercial vendors, such as Sun
Microsystems, causing them to incorporate it into their systems. This time-zone framework is
still in use 30 years later.

1.3 The Transition of BSD to Open Source

Up through the release of 4.3BSD Tahoe, all recipients of BSD had to first get an AT&T source
license. That was because the BSD systems were never released by Berkeley in a binary-only
format; the distributions always contained the complete source to every part of the system. The
history of the UNIX system, and the BSD system in particular, had shown the power of making
the source available to the users. Instead of passively using the system, they actively worked to
fix bugs, improve performance and functionality, and even add completely new features.

With the increasing cost of the AT&T source licenses, vendors that wanted to build stand-alone
TCP/IP-based networking products for the PC market using the BSD code found the per-binary
costs prohibitive. So they requested that Berkeley break out the networking code and utilities,
and provide them under licensing terms that did not require an AT&T source license. The
TCP/IP networking code clearly did not exist in 32/V and thus had been developed entirely by
Berkeley and its contributors. The BSD-originated networking code and supporting utilities
were released in June 1989 as Networking Release 1, the first freely redistributable code from
Berkeley.

The licensing terms were liberal. A licensee could release the code modified or unmodified in
source or binary form with no accounting or royalties to Berkeley. The only requirements were
that the copyright notices in the source file be left intact and that products that incorporated the
code include in their documentation that the product contained code from the University of
California and its contributors. Although Berkeley charged a $1000 fee to get a tape, anyone was
free to get a copy from somebody who already had it. Indeed, several large sites put it up for
anonymous FTP shortly after it was released. Though the code was freely available, several
hundred organizations purchased tapes, which helped to fund the CSRG and encouraged further
development.

Networking Release 2

With the success of the first open-source release, the CSRG decided to see how much more of
BSD they could spring free. Keith Bostic led the charge by soliciting people to rewrite the UNIX
utilities from scratch based solely on their published descriptions. Their only compensation
would be to have their name listed among the Berkeley contributors next to the name of the
utility that they rewrote. The contributions started slowly and were mostly for the trivial utilities.
But as the list of completed utilities grew, and Bostic continued to hold forth for contributions at
public events such as Usenix, the rate of contributions continued to grow. Soon the list crossed

100 utilities, and within 18 months nearly all the important utilities and libraries had been
rewritten.

The kernel proved to be a bigger task because it could not easily be rewritten from scratch. The
entire kernel was reviewed, file by file, removing code that had originated in the 32/V release.
When the review was completed, there were only six remaining kernel files that were still
contaminated and that could not be trivially rewritten. While consideration was given to
rewriting those six files so that a complete kernel could be released, the CSRG decided to release
just the less-controversial set. The CSRG sought permission for the expanded release from folks
higher up in the university administration. After much internal debate and verification of the
methods used for detecting proprietary code, the CSRG was given permission to do the release.

The initial thought was to come up with a new name for the second freely redistributable release.
However, getting a new license written and approved by the university lawyers would have taken
many months. So, the new release was named Networking Release 2, since that could be done
with just a revision of the approved Networking Release 1 license agreement. This second,
greatly expanded, freely redistributable release began shipping in June 1991. The redistribution
terms and cost were the same as the terms and cost of the first networking release. As before,
several hundred individuals and organizations paid the $1000 fee to get the distribution from
Berkeley.

Closing the gap from the Networking Release 2 distribution to a fully functioning system did not
take long. Within 6 months of the release, Bill Jolitz had written replacements for the six
missing files. He promptly released a fully compiled and bootable system for the 386-based PC
architecture in January 1992, which he called 386/BSD. Jolitz’s 386/BSD distribution was done
almost entirely on the net. He simply put it up for anonymous FTP and let anyone who wanted it
download it for free. Within weeks he had a huge following.

Unfortunately, the demands of keeping a full-time job meant that Jolitz could not devote the
time needed to keep up with the flood of incoming bug fixes and enhancements to 386/BSD. So
within a few months of the release of 386/BSD, a group of avid 386/BSD users formed the
NetBSD group to pool their collective resources to help maintain and later enhance the system.
By early 1993, they were doing releases that became known as the NetBSD distribution. The
NetBSD group chose to emphasize the support of as many platforms as possible and continued
the research-style development done by the CSRG. Until 1998, their distribution was done solely
over the net with no distribution media available. Their group continues to target primarily the
hard-core technical users.

The FreeBSD group was formed a few months after the NetBSD group with a charter to support
just the PC architecture and to go after a larger and less technically advanced audience, much as

Linux had done. They built elaborate installation scripts and began shipping their system on a
low-cost CD-ROM in December 1993. The combination of ease-of-installation and heavy
promotion on the net and at major trade shows, such as Comdex, led to a large, rapid growth
curve. FreeBSD quickly rose to have the largest installed base of all the Networking Release
2-derived systems.

FreeBSD also rode the wave of Linux popularity by adding a Linux emulation mode that allows
Linux binaries to run on the FreeBSD platform. This feature allows FreeBSD users to use the
ever growing set of applications available for Linux while getting the robustness, reliability, and
performance of the FreeBSD system.

In 1995, OpenBSD spun off from the NetBSD group. Their technical focus was aimed at
improving the security of the system. Their marketing focus was to make the system easier to
use and more widely available. Thus, they began producing and selling CD-ROMs, with many of
the ease of installation ideas from the FreeBSD distribution.

The Lawsuit

In addition to the groups organized to freely redistribute systems originating from the
Networking Release 2 tape, a company, Berkeley Software Design Incorporated (BSDI), was
formed to develop and distribute a commercially supported version of the code. Like the other
groups, it started by adding the six missing files that Bill Jolitz had written for his 386/BSD
release. BSDI began selling its system, including both source and binaries, in January 1992 for
$995. It began running advertisements touting its 99 percent discount over the price charged for
System V source plus binary systems. Interested readers were told to call 1-800-ITS-UNIX.

Shortly after BSDI began its sales campaign, it received a letter from UNIX System Laboratory
(USL) (a mostly owned subsidiary of AT&T spun off to develop and sell UNIX) [Ritchie, 2004].
The letter demanded that BSDI stop promoting its product as UNIX and, in particular, that it
stop using the deceptive phone number. Although the phone number was promptly dropped and
the advertisements changed to explain that the product was not UNIX, USL was still unhappy
and filed suit to enjoin BSDI from selling its product. The suit alleged that the BSDI product
contained USL proprietary code and trade secrets. USL sought to get an injunction to halt
BSDI’s sales until the lawsuit was resolved claiming that it would suffer irreparable harm from
the loss of its trade secrets if the BSDI distributions continued.

At the preliminary hearing for the injunction, BSDI contended that it was simply using the
sources being freely distributed by the University of California plus six additional files. BSDI
was willing to discuss the content of any of the six added files but did not believe it should be

held responsible for the files being distributed by the University of California. The judge agreed
with BSDI’s argument and told USL that it would have to restate its complaint based solely on
the six files or the case would be dismissed. Recognizing that it would have a hard time making a
case from just the six files, USL decided to refile the suit against both BSDI and the University of
California. As before, USL requested an injunction on the shipping of Networking Release 2
from the university and of the BSDI products.

With the impending injunction hearing just a few short weeks away, preparation began in
earnest. All the members of the CSRG were deposed, as was nearly everyone employed by BSDI.
Briefs, counterbriefs, and counter-counterbriefs flew back and forth between the lawyers. The
staff of the CSRG turned from writing code to writing several hundred pages of material that
found its way into various briefs.

In December 1992, Dickinson R. Debevoise, a United States District Judge in New Jersey, heard
the arguments for the injunction. Although judges usually rule on injunction requests
immediately, he decided to take it under advisement. On a Friday about 6 weeks later, he issued
a 40-page opinion in which he denied the injunction and threw out all but two of the complaints
[Debevoise, 1993]. The remaining two complaints were narrowed to recent copyrights and the
possibility of the loss of trade secrets. He also suggested that the matter should be heard in a
state court system before being heard in federal court.

The University of California took the hint and rushed to California state court the following
Monday morning with a countersuit against USL. By filing first in California, the university had
established the locale of any further state court action. Constitutional law requires all state
filings to be done in a single state to prevent litigants with deep pockets from bleeding
opponents dry by filing 50 cases against them, one in each state. The result was that if USL
wanted to take any action against the university in state courts, it would be forced to do so in
California rather than in its home state of New Jersey.

The university’s suit claimed that USL had failed in its obligation to provide due credit to the
university for the use of BSD code in System V as required by the license that it had signed with
the university [Linzner & MacDonald, 1993]. If the claim were found to be valid, the university
asked that USL be forced to reprint all its documentation with the appropriate due credit added,
to notify all its licensees of its oversight, and to run full-page advertisements in major
publications such as the Wall Street Journal and Fortune magazine, notifying the business
world of its inadvertent oversight.

Soon after the filing in state court, USL was bought from AT&T by Novell. The CEO of Novell,
Ray Noorda, stated publicly that he would rather compete in the marketplace than in court. By
the summer of 1993, settlement talks had started. Unfortunately, the two sides had dug in so

deep that the talks proceeded very slowly. With some further prodding by Ray Noorda on the
USL side, many of the sticking points were removed, and a settlement was finally reached in
January 1994. The result was that three files were removed from the 18,000 that made up
Networking Release 2, and a few minor changes were made to other files. In addition, the
university agreed to add USL copyrights to about 70 files, although those files continued to be
freely redistributed.

4.4BSD

The newly blessed release was called 4.4BSD-Lite and was released in June 1994 under terms
identical to those used for the Networking releases. Specifically, the terms allow free
redistribution in source and binary form, subject only to the constraint that the university
copyrights remain intact and that the university receive credit when others use the code.
Simultaneously, the complete system was released as 4.4BSD-Encumbered, which still required
recipients to have a USL source license.

The lawsuit settlement also stipulated that USL would not sue any organization using
4.4BSD-Lite as the base for its system. So all the extant BSD groups—BSDI, NetBSD, and
FreeBSD—had to restart their code base with the 4.4BSD-Lite sources into which they then
merged their enhancements and improvements. While this reintegration caused a short-term
delay in the development of the various BSD systems, it was a blessing in disguise, since it
forced all the divergent groups to resynchronize with the 3 years of development that had
occurred at the CSRG since the release of Networking Release 2.

4.4BSD-Lite Release 2

The money received from the 4.4BSD-Encumbered and 4.4BSD-Lite releases was used to fund a
part-time effort to integrate bug fixes and enhancements. These changes continued for 2 years
until the rate of bug reports and feature enhancements had died down to a trickle. The final set
of changes was released as 4.4BSD-Lite Release 2 in June 1995. Most of the changes
incorporated into 4.4BSD-Lite Release 2 eventually made it into the other systems’ source bases.

Though the license term requiring that due credit be given to the university had been extremely
helpful in the lawsuit, the university agreed to drop it following the final release. As many people
began using the BSD-style copyrights for their own code, the proliferation of due-credit clauses
in open-source software became difficult to determine and unmanageably large. By agreeing to
drop the due-credit clause, the university hoped to set an example for others using its license.
Over time, and with much effort from the BSD community, the due-credit clause has been
dropped from many of the open-source programs that use the BSD-style license.

Following the release of 4.4BSD-Lite Release 2, the CSRG was disbanded. After 15 years of
piloting the BSD ship, it was time to let others with fresh ideas and boundless enthusiasm take
over. While it might seem best to have a single centralized authority overseeing the system
development, the idea of having several groups with different charters ensures that many
different approaches will be tried and that there is no single point of failure. Because the system
is released in source form, the best ideas can easily be picked up by other groups. Indeed,
cross-pollination of ideas between open-source projects is common.

1.4 The FreeBSD Development Model

Running an open-source project is different from running traditional software development. In
traditional development, the staff are paid, so it is possible to have managers and a system
architect that set schedules and direct the programmers’ activities. With open source, the
developers are volunteers. They tend to be transient, usually doing a project or two before
finding some other activity on which they prefer to spend their free time. They cannot be
directed because they only work on what interests them. Because their jobs, families, and social
lives often take precedence over their work on the project, it is impossible to put together
schedules. Finally, there is no paid staff to fill the management role of traditional development.
Thus, a successful open-source-development project must be self-organizing and set up to
gracefully handle a high turnover of its active developers.

The development model used by FreeBSD (as well as NetBSD and OpenBSD) was first set in
motion by the CSRG [McKusick et al., 1989]. The CSRG was always a small group of software
developers. This resource limitation required careful software-engineering management.
Careful coordination was needed not only of the CSRG personnel but also of members of the
general community who contributed to the development of the system. Certain outside
developers had permission to modify the master copy of the system source directly. People given
access to the master sources were carefully screened beforehand but were not closely supervised.
Everyone committing changes to the system source received notification of all changes, allowing
everyone to be aware of changes going into the system. Everyone was required to have any
nontrivial changes reviewed by at least one other person before committing them to the tree.
This model allowed many lines of development to proceed concurrently while still keeping the
project coherent.

The FreeBSD project is organized in much the same way as the CSRG. The entire FreeBSD
project, including all the source code, documentation, bug reports, mailing-list archives, and
even administrative data, is maintained in a publicly readable source-code-control system.
Anyone may view the source code and existing bug reports, track progress on fixing bugs, and
post bug reports. Anyone may join and participate in the numerous FreeBSD mailing lists. There

are three groups of people that directly work on FreeBSD: developers, committers, and the core
team.

There are 5000 to 6000 developers, each of whom works on some part of the system such as
maintaining the FreeBSD kernel, continuing development of the 1000 core FreeBSD utilities,
writing FreeBSD documentation, and updating other open-source software in the FreeBSD ports
collection. Developers are able to access the source-code repository, but they are not permitted
to change it. Instead, they must work with a committer or file a problem report to get their
changes added to the system.

There are currently 300 to 400 committers. Like the developers, most of them specialize in
some part of the system. Unlike the developers, they are permitted to make changes to those
parts of the source-code repository in which they have been authorized to work. All nontrivial
changes should be reviewed by one or more other committers before being checked into the
source tree. Most committers are doing work of their own as well as reviewing and committing
the work of several developers.

Nomination for advancement from developer to committer is done by the existing committers.
Most commonly a developer will be nominated by the committer with whom he has been
working. The nomination, along with a description and evaluation of past work and an initial
scope of new work, is sent to the core team for approval.

At the center of the project is the core team. The core team is composed of nine people who are
elected every 2 years. The candidates for the core team come from the committers and the
committers elect the core team. The core team acts as the final gatekeepers of the source code.
They monitor what is being committed and resolve conflicts if two or more committers cannot
agree on how to solve a particular problem. The core team also approves the advancement of
developers to committers and (in rare circumstances) temporarily or permanently evicts
someone from the committer group. The usual reason for departure from the committer group
is inactivity (making no changes to the system for more than a year).

The development structure of the FreeBSD project is directly derived from the one that we had
established at the CSRG. Both the CSRG and FreeBSD use a central source-code-controlled
repository. The FreeBSD core team is analogous to the CSRG staff. The FreeBSD committers are
much like the people to whom Berkeley gave accounts on the CSRG development machine that
allowed them to commit changes to the CSRG sources. And the FreeBSD developers are similar
to the people that contributed to Berkeley, but they did not have accounts on the CSRG
development machine.

The FreeBSD project has made some important improvements. First, its members recognize
that even the most dedicated programmer will eventually burn out, lose interest, or otherwise
decide to move on. There must be some way to let these people gracefully step aside rather than
letting their inattention create a void at a critical point in the project. So unlike the CSRG model
of having staff that were dictators for life, FreeBSD went to an elected core that is answerable to
the committers. A core member who is burned out can decide (or be persuaded) not to run for
reelection when his or her term ends. Core members who are not serving the interest of the
committers will not be reelected. Equally important, active and energetic people have plenty of
opportunity to move up through the ranks. Because the core team is elected, people rise into
that rank because their peers who are actively working on the project feel that they should have
the job. This approach works better than advancing because you are good buddies with
somebody at the top. It also ensures that the core team is made up of those who are good at
communicating with others, an important skill to have in that position.

Another significant improvement made by the FreeBSD project is to automate many tasks and
set up remote mirrors of the source-code repository, Web site, and bug reports. These changes
have allowed the project to support many more contributors than would have been possible
under the CSRG model. The FreeBSD project has also managed to become much less
US–centric by welcoming developers from around the world, including active people in Japan,
Australia, Russia, South Africa, Ukraine, Hungary, India, Denmark, France, Germany, and the
United Kingdom, to name just a few of the countries with active FreeBSD development.

The CSRG used to release new versions of the system about every 2 years. Changes to these
distributions were rare, typically only small and critical security-or stability-related changes.
Between versions, the CSRG would do test releases to gain experience with the new features that
were being developed.

The FreeBSD project has greatly expanded on the CSRG distribution scheme. At any point in
time there are at least two FreeBSD distributions. The first is the “stable” release that is
intended to be used in production environments. The second is the “current” release that
represents the current state of the FreeBSD system and is intended for use by developers and
users needing the latest features.

The stable release changes slowly, and the changes are limited to fixing bugs, improving
performance, and adding incremental hardware support. The stable system is released three to
four times per year, although users wishing to upgrade more often can download and install the
latest stable code as frequently as they need to do so (for example, after a major security patch
has been made). The stable version of FreeBSD is analogous to the CSRG major-version releases
except that they are more actively updated and are made available to the users. Like the stable

release, snapshots of the current release are created every few months. However, most users of
the current release update much more frequently (daily updates are common). By having
mirrored copies of the stable and current distributions available throughout the world, the
FreeBSD project allows its worldwide user base to stay up to date much more easily than was
possible with the CSRG distributions.

About every 2 years, the current branch is forked to create a new stable release. Once the new
stable branch has proven to be reliable enough for production use, work largely ceases on the
old stable branch and production users switch over to the new stable release. The mainline
development continues on the current branch. Nearly all changes are made first to the current
branch. Only after a change has been tested in the current branch and proven to work in that
environment is it merged-from-current (MFC-ed) to the stable release.

One advantage that the CSRG long had over the FreeBSD project was that the CSRG was part of
the University of California at Berkeley. Since the university is a nonprofit organization,
contributions made to the CSRG were tax-deductible to the contributor. Some people at the
FreeBSD project had long felt that they should find a way to let contributors to the project get a
tax deduction. In 2000, they set up the FreeBSD Foundation, which after 3 years of good
nonprofit work, was granted 501(c)3 status by the United States taxing authorities. This
certification means that contributions made to the FreeBSD Foundation can be deducted from
United States federal and state taxes in the same way as a contribution made to the university
can be deducted. The ability to get a tax deduction has markedly increased the volume of
monetary contributions to the FreeBSD project, which has enabled them to fund development of
parts of the system that are tedious to create but necessary and important.

Over the past 20 years, the FreeBSD project has grown at a steady but sustainable pace.
Although Linux has attracted a mass following, FreeBSD continues to hold its place in the
high-performance-server space. Indeed, Linux has helped to evangelize the viability of open
source to the corporate marketplace, and FreeBSD has ridden on its coattails. It is far easier to
convince your management to switch from Linux to FreeBSD than it is to convince them to
move from Microsoft’s Windows to FreeBSD. Linux has also supplied a steady stream of
developers for FreeBSD. Until recently, Linux had no central source-code repository, so to
contribute you had to work for a Linux distributor or you had to get the ear of a member of the
small set of people who could get changes put into the system. The much more egalitarian and
merit-based organization of the FreeBSD project has provided a steady influx of high-quality
developers. The typical new committer to the FreeBSD project is in his or her mid- to late 20s
and has been programming Linux or other open-source projects for a decade. These people have
enough experience and maturity that they are quickly able to become effective contributors to
the project. And the mentoring inherent in the progression of developer to committer ensures

that by the time someone has the right to directly commit code to the FreeBSD tree, they
understand the style and code-clarity guidelines that are critically important to preserving the
quality, robustness, and maintainability of FreeBSD.

The goal of the FreeBSD project is to provide software that may be used for any purpose and
without strings attached. Many of the developers have a significant investment in the code (and
project) and certainly do not mind a little financial compensation occasionally, but they
certainly do not insist on it. They believe that their first and foremost mission is to provide code
to any and all comers, for whatever purpose, so that the code gets the widest possible use and
provides the greatest possible benefit [Hubbard, 2014].

References

AT&T, 1987.

AT&T, The System V Interface Definition (SVID), Issue 2, American Telephone and Telegraph,
Murray Hill, NJ, January 1987.

Babao lu & Joy, 1981.

Ö. Babao lu & W. N. Joy, “Converting a Swap-Based System to Do Paging in an Architecture
Lacking Page-Referenced Bits,” Proceedings of the Eighth Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, pp. 78–86, December 1981.

Bach, 1986.

M. J. Bach, The Design of the UNIX Operating System, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
1986.

Comer, 1984.

D. Comer, Operating System Design: The Xinu Approach, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
1984.

Comer, 2000.

D. Comer, Internetworking with TCP/IP Volume 1, 4th ed., Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River,
NJ, 2000.

Compton, 1985.

M. Compton, editor, “The Evolution of UNIX,” UNIX Review, vol. 3, no. 1, January 1985.

Debevoise, 1993.

D. Debevoise, Civ. No. 92-1667, UNIX System Laboratories Inc. vs. Berkeley Software Design
Inc., available from http://sco.tuxrocks.com/Docs/USL/Doc-92.html, March 3, 1993.

DiBona et al., 1999.

C. DiBona, S. Ockman, & M. Stone, Open Sources: Voices from the Open Source Revolution, pp.
31–46, Chapter 2—Twenty Years of Berkeley UNIX: From AT&T-Owned to Freely
Redistributable,                                     available                           from
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/opensources/book/kirkmck.html,        ISBN     1-56592-582-3,
O’Reilly & Associates, Inc., Sebastopol, CA, 1999.

Ewens et al., 1985.

P. Ewens, D. R. Blythe, M. Funkenhauser, & R. C. Holt, “Tunis: A Distributed Multiprocessor
Operating System,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 247–254, June 1985.

Holt, 1983.

R. C. Holt, Concurrent Euclid, the UNIX System, and Tunis, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA,
1983.

Hubbard, 2014.

J. Hubbard, “A Brief History of FreeBSD,” FreeBSD Handbook, section 1.3.1, available from
http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/history.html, March 2014.

ISO, 2011.

ISO, “ISO/IEC 9899:2011 Programming Language C Standard,” ISO 9899:2011, available from
http://www.iso.org, December, 2011.

Joy, 1980.

W. N. Joy, “Comments on the Performance of UNIX on the VAX,” Technical Report, University
of California Computer System Research Group, Berkeley, CA, April 1980.

Jung, 1985.

R. S. Jung, “Porting the AT&T Demand Paged UNIX Implementation to Microcomputers,”
USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 361–370, June 1985.

Kashtan, 1980.

D. L. Kashtan, “UNIX and VMS: Some Performance Comparisons,” Technical Report, SRI
International, Menlo Park, CA, February 1980.

Kernighan & Ritchie, 1978.

B. W. Kernighan & D. M. Ritchie, The C Programming Language, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1978.

Kernighan & Ritchie, 1989.

B. W. Kernighan & D. M. Ritchie, The C Programming Language, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.

Linzner & MacDonald, 1993.

J. Linzner & M. MacDonald, University of California at Berkeley versus UNIX System
Laboratories                      Inc.,                     available                 from
http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/who/dmr/bsdi/930610.ucb_complaint.txt, June 1993.

McKusick et al., 1989.

M. K. McKusick, M. Karels, & K. Bostic, “The Release Engineering of 4.3BSD,” Proceedings of
the New Orleans USENIX Workshop on Software Management, pp. 95–100, April 1989.

Miller, 1978.

R. Miller, “UNIX—A Portable Operating System,” ACM Operating System Review, vol. 12, no. 3,
pp. 32–37, July 1978.

Miller, 1984.

R. Miller, “A Demand Paging Virtual Memory Manager for System V,” USENIX Association
Conference Proceedings, pp. 178–182, June 1984.

Mohr, 1985.

A. Mohr, “The Genesis Story,” UNIX Review, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 18, January 1985.

Organick, 1975.

E. I. Organick, The Multics System: An Examination of Its Structure, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1975.

P1003.1, 1988.

P1003.1, IEEE P1003.1 Portable Operating System Interface for Computer Environments
(POSIX), Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Piscataway, NJ, 1988.

Peirce, 1985.

N. Peirce, “Putting UNIX in Perspective: An Interview with Victor Vyssotsky,” UNIX Review, vol.
3, no. 1, p. 58, January 1985.

Presotto & Ritchie, 1985.

D. L. Presotto & D. M. Ritchie, “Interprocess Communication in the Eighth Edition UNIX
System,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 309–316, June 1985.

Richards & Whitby-Strevens, 1980.

M. Richards & C. Whitby-Strevens, BCPL: The Language and Its Compiler, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1980.

Ritchie, 1978.

D. M. Ritchie, “A Retrospective,” Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1947–1969,
July–August 1978.

Ritchie, 1984a.

D. M. Ritchie, “The Evolution of the UNIX Time-Sharing System,” AT&T Bell Laboratories
Technical Journal, vol. 63, no. 8, pp. 1577–1593, October 1984.

Ritchie, 1984b.

D. M. Ritchie, “Reflections on Software Research,” Comm ACM, vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 758–760,
August 1984.

Ritchie, 1987.

D. M. Ritchie, “UNIX: A Dialectic,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 29–34,
January 1987.

Ritchie, 2004.

D. M. Ritchie, Documents on UNIX System Laboratories Inc. versus Berkeley Software Design
Inc., available from http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/who/dmr/bsdi/bsdisuit.html, March 2004.

Ritchie et al., 1978.

D. M. Ritchie, S. C. Johnson, M. E. Lesk, & B. W. Kernighan, “The C Programming Language,”
Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1991–2019, July–August 1978.

Rosler, 1984.

L. Rosler, “The Evolution of C—Past and Future,” AT&T Bell Laboratories Technical Journal,
vol. 63, no. 8, pp. 1685–1699, October 1984.

Tanenbaum, 1987.

A. S. Tanenbaum, Operating Systems: Design and Implementation, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1987.

Tuthill, 1985.

B. Tuthill, “The Evolution of C: Heresy and Prophecy,” UNIX Review, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 80,
January 1985.

Wilson, 1985.

O. Wilson, “The Business Evolution of the UNIX System,” UNIX Review, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 46,
January 1985.

X/OPEN, 1987.

X/OPEN, The X/OPEN Portability Guide (XPG), Issue 2, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam,
Netherlands, 1987.

