              Chapter 2. Design Overview of FreeBSD

2.1 FreeBSD Facilities and the Kernel

The FreeBSD kernel provides four basic facilities: processes, filesystems, communications, and
system startup. This section outlines where each of these four basic services is described in this
book:

1. A process is composed of an address space with one or more threads of control running within
it. Mechanisms for creating, terminating, and otherwise controlling processes are discussed in
Chapter 4. The system multiplexes separate virtual-address spaces for each process. This
memory management is discussed in Chapter 6.

2. The user interfaces to the filesystem and devices are similar; common aspects are discussed
in Chapter 7. The organization and management of the devices in the I/O subsystem is described
in Chapter 8. The filesystem provides operations to manipulate a set of named files, organized in
a tree-structured hierarchy of directories. The filesystem must organize the storage of these files
and directories on physical media, such as disks. The role of the traditional fast filesystem in
doing these tasks is presented in Chapter 9; the role of the Zettabyte filesystem in doing these
tasks is presented in Chapter 10. Access to files on remote machines is the subject of Chapter 11.

3. Communication mechanisms provided by traditional UNIX systems include simplex reliable
byte streams between related processes (see pipes, Section 7.1), and notification of exceptional
events (see Signals, Section 4.7). FreeBSD also has a general interprocess-communication
facility. This facility, described in Chapter 12, uses access mechanisms distinct from those of the
filesystem, but once a connection is set up, a process can access it as though it were a pipe. There
is a general networking framework, discussed in Chapter 13, that is normally used as a layer
underlying the IPC facility. Chapter 14 describes particular networking implementations in
detail.

4. Any real operating system has operational issues, such as how to start it running. Startup and
operational issues are described in Chapter 15.

Sections 2.3 through 2.15 present introductory material related to Chapters 3 through 15. We
define terms, examine basic system calls, and explore historical developments. Finally, we give
the reasons for many major design decisions.

The Kernel

The kernel is the part of the system that runs in protected mode and mediates access by all user
programs to the underlying hardware (e.g., CPU, keyboard, monitor, disks, network links) and
software constructs (e.g., filesystem, network protocols). The kernel provides the basic system
facilities; it creates and manages processes and provides functions to access the filesystem and
communication facilities. These functions, called system calls, appear to user processes as
library subroutines. These system calls are the only interface that processes have to these
facilities. Details of the system-call mechanism are given in Chapter 3, as are descriptions of
several kernel mechanisms that do not execute as the direct result of a process doing a system
call.

A kernel, in traditional operating-system terminology, is a small nucleus of software that
provides only the minimal facilities necessary for implementing additional operating-system
services. Through much of the 1980s, research operating systems—such as Tunis [Ewens et al.,
1985], Chorus [Rozier et al., 1988], Mach [Accetta et al., 1986], and the V Kernel [Cheriton,
1988]—attempted to make this division of functionality into more than just a logical one.
Services such as filesystems and networking protocols were implemented as client application
processes of the nucleus or kernel. These micro-kernels largely failed because of the high
overhead of transitioning between kernel processes.

The FreeBSD kernel is not partitioned into multiple processes. This basic design decision was
made in the earliest versions of UNIX. The first two implementations by Ken Thompson had no
memory mapping and thus made no hardware-enforced distinction between user and kernel
space [Ritchie, 1988]. A message-passing system could have been implemented as readily as the
actually implemented model of kernel and user processes. The monolithic kernel was chosen for
simplicity and performance. And the early kernels were small; the inclusion of facilities such as
networking into the kernel has increased its size, although the kernel is still small compared to
many of the applications that run on it.

Users ordinarily interact with the system through a command-language interpreter, called a
shell, and through additional user application programs. Such programs and the shell are
implemented with processes rather than being part of the kernel. Details of such programs are
beyond the scope of this book, which instead concentrates almost exclusively on the kernel.

Sections 2.3 and 2.4 describe the services provided by the FreeBSD kernel and give an overview
of the latter’s design. Later chapters describe the detailed design and implementation of these
services as they appear in FreeBSD.

2.2 Kernel Organization

In this section, we view the organization of the FreeBSD kernel in two ways:

1. As a static body of software, categorized by the functionality offered by the modules that make
up the kernel

2. By its dynamic operation, categorized according to the services provided to users

The largest part of the kernel implements the system services that applications access through
system calls. In FreeBSD, this software has been organized according to the following:

• Basic kernel facilities: timer and system-clock handling, descriptor management, and process
management

• Security features: conventional UNIX model, but also sandboxing, virtualization, event
auditing, and cryptographic services

• Memory-management support: paging and swapping

• Generic system interfaces: the I/O, control, and multiplexing operations performed on
descriptors

• Filesystems: files, directories, pathname translation, file locking, and I/O buffer management

• Terminal-handling support: the pseudo-terminal interface and terminal line disciplines

• Interprocess-communication facilities: sockets

• Support for network communication: communication protocols and generic network facilities,
such as routing

Most of the software in these categories is machine independent and is portable across different
hardware architectures.

The machine-dependent aspects of the kernel are isolated from the mainstream code. In
particular, none of the machine-independent code contains conditional code for specific
architectures. When an architecture-dependent action is needed, the machine-independent code
calls an architecture-dependent function that is located in the machine-dependent code. The
software that is machine dependent includes the following:

• Low-level system-startup actions

• Trap and fault handling

• Low-level manipulation of the run-time context of a process

• Configuration and initialization of hardware devices

• Run-time support for I/O devices

Table 2.1 summarizes the machine-independent software that constitutes the FreeBSD kernel
for the 64-bit AMD architecture. The numbers in column 2 are for lines of C source code, header
files, and assembly language. Virtually all the software in the kernel is written in the C
programming language; a mere 0.6 percent is written in assembly language. As the statistics in
Table 2.2 show, the machine-dependent software, excluding device support, accounts for a
minuscule 3.8 percent of the kernel. Not shown are the 2,814,900 lines of code for the hundreds
of supported devices, only a few of which will be loaded into any particular kernel.

Table 2.1 Machine-independent software in the FreeBSD kernel.

Table 2.2 Machine-dependent software for the PC in the FreeBSD kernel.

In the 10 years since the previous edition of this book, the total size of the kernel has grown from
798,140 to 1,573,780 lines. The merger of ZFS into FreeBSD represents about a third of this
growth. The machine-independent code has grown from 689,794 lines (86.4%) to 1,515,700
lines (96.2%). The machine-dependent code has shrunk from 108,346 lines (13.6%) to 58,077
lines (3.8%). These statistics do not include the device driver code that has grown from 846,525
lines to 2,814,900 lines.

Only a small part of the kernel is devoted to initializing the system. This code is used when the
system is bootstrapped into operation and is responsible for setting up the kernel hardware
and software environment (see Chapter 15). Some operating systems (especially those with
limited physical memory) discard or overlay the software that performs these functions after
that software has been executed. The FreeBSD kernel does not reclaim the memory used by the
startup code because that memory space is barely 0.2 percent of the kernel resources used on a
typical machine. Also, the startup code does not appear in one place in the kernel—it is scattered
throughout, and it usually appears in places logically associated with what is being initialized.

2.3 Kernel Services

The boundary between the kernel- and user-level code is enforced by hardware-protection
facilities provided by the underlying hardware. The kernel operates in a separate address space
that is inaccessible to user processes. Privileged operations—such as starting I/O and halting the
central processing unit (CPU)—are available to only the kernel. Applications request services
from the kernel with system calls. System calls are used to cause the kernel to execute
complicated operations, such as writing data to secondary storage, and simple operations, such
as returning the current time of day. All system calls appear synchronous to applications: An
application does not run while the kernel performs the actions associated with a system call. The
kernel may finish some operations associated with a system call after it has returned. For
example, a write system call will copy the data to be written from the user process to a kernel
buffer while the process waits, but it will usually return from the system call before the kernel
buffer is written to the disk.

A system call usually is implemented as a hardware trap that changes the CPU’s execution mode
and the current address-space mapping. Parameters supplied by users in system calls are
validated by the kernel before being used. Such checking ensures the integrity of the system. All
parameters passed into the kernel are copied into the kernel’s address space to ensure that
validated parameters are not changed as a side effect of the system call. System-call results are
returned by the kernel, either in hardware registers or by their values being copied to
user-specified memory addresses. Like parameters passed into the kernel, addresses used for
the return of results must be validated to ensure that they are part of an application’s address
space. If the kernel encounters an error while processing a system call, it returns an error code
to the user. For the C programming language, this error code is stored in the global variable
errno, and the function that executed the system call returns the value -1.

User applications and the kernel operate independently of each other. FreeBSD does not store
I/O control blocks or other operating-system-related data structures in the application’s address
space. Each user-level application is provided an independent address space in which it executes.

The kernel makes most state changes—such as suspending a process while another is
running—invisible to the processes involved.

2.4 Process Management

FreeBSD supports a multitasking environment. Each task or thread of execution is termed a
process. In FreeBSD, the process context consists of user-level state, including the contents
of its address space and the run-time environment, and kernel-level state, which includes
scheduling parameters, resource controls, and identification information. The context includes
everything used by the kernel in providing services for the process. Users can create processes,
control the processes’ execution, and receive notification when the processes’ execution status
changes. Every process is assigned a unique value, termed a process identifier (PID). This
value is used by the kernel to identify a process when reporting status changes to a user, and by
a user when referencing a process in a system call.

The kernel creates a process by duplicating the context of another process. The new process is
termed a child process of the original parent process. The context duplicated in process
creation includes both the user-level execution state of the process and the process’s system
state managed by the kernel. Important components of the kernel state are described in Chapter
4.

The process lifecycle is depicted in Figure 2.1. A process may create a new process that is a copy
of the original by using the fork system call. The fork call returns twice: once in the parent
process, where the return value is the process identifier of the child, and once in the child
process, where the return value is 0. The parent–child relationship induces a hierarchical
structure on the set of processes in the system. The new process shares all its parent’s resources,
such as file descriptors, signal-handling status, and memory layout.

Figure 2.1 Process-management system calls.

Although there are occasions when the new process is intended to be a copy of the parent, the
loading and execution of a different program is a more useful and typical action. A process can
overlay itself with the memory image of another program, passing to the newly created image a
set of parameters, using the system call execve. One parameter is the name of a file whose
contents are in a format recognized by the system—either a binary-executable file or a file that
causes the execution of a specified interpreter program to interpret its contents.

A process may terminate by executing an exit system call, sending 8 bits of exit status to its
parent. If a process wants to communicate more than a single byte of information with its parent,
it must either set up an interprocess-communication channel using pipes or sockets, or use an
intermediate file. Interprocess communication is discussed extensively in Chapter 12.

A process can suspend execution until any of its child processes terminate using the wait system
call, which returns the PID and exit status of the terminated child process. A parent process can
arrange to be notified by a signal when a child process exits or terminates abnormally. Using the
wait4 system call, the parent can retrieve information about the event that caused termination
of the child process and about resources consumed by the process during its lifetime. If a
process is orphaned because its parent exits before it is finished, then the kernel arranges for the
child’s exit status to be passed back to a special system process, init (see Sections 3.1 and 15.5).
The details of how the kernel creates and destroys processes are given in Chapter 6.

Processes are scheduled for execution according to a process-priority parameter. Under the
default timesharing scheduler, this priority is managed by a kernel-based scheduling algorithm.
Users can influence the scheduling of a process by specifying a parameter (nice) that weights
the overall scheduling priority but are still obligated to share the underlying CPU resources
according to the kernel’s scheduling policy. FreeBSD also has a real-time scheduler. Processes
running under the real-time scheduler manage their own priority, which is not changed by the
kernel. The kernel will run the highest priority real-time process to the exclusion of all other
processes. Thus, real-time processes are not obliged to share the underlying CPU resources.

Signals

The system defines a set of signals that may be delivered to a process. Signals in FreeBSD are
modeled after hardware interrupts. A process may specify a user-level subroutine to be a
handler to which a signal should be delivered. When a signal is generated, it is blocked from
further occurrence while it is being caught by the handler. Catching a signal involves saving the
current process context and building a new one in which to run the handler. The signal is then
delivered to the handler, which can either abort the process or return to the executing process

(perhaps after setting a global variable). If the handler returns, the signal is unblocked and can
be generated (and caught) again.

Alternatively, a process may specify that a signal is to be ignored or that a default action, as
determined by the kernel, is to be taken. The default action of certain signals is to terminate the
process. This termination may be accompanied by creation of a core file that contains the
current memory image of the process for use in postmortem debugging.

Some signals cannot be caught or ignored. These signals include SIGKILL, which kills runaway
processes, and the job-control signal SIGSTOP.

A process may choose to have signals delivered on a special stack so that sophisticated software
stack manipulations are possible. For example, a language supporting co-routines needs to
provide a stack for each co-routine. The language run-time system can allocate these stacks by
dividing up the single stack provided by FreeBSD. If the kernel does not support a separate
signal stack, the space allocated for each co-routine must be expanded by the amount of space
required to catch a signal.

All signals have the same priority. If multiple signals are pending simultaneously, the order in
which signals are delivered to a process is implementation specific. Signal handlers execute with
the signal that caused their invocation to be blocked, but other signals may yet occur.
Mechanisms are provided so that processes can protect critical sections of code against the
occurrence of specified signals.

The design and implementation of signals are described in Section 4.7.

Process Groups and Sessions

Processes are organized into process groups. Process groups are used to control access to
terminals and to provide a means of distributing signals to collections of related processes. A
process inherits its process group from its parent process. Mechanisms are provided by the
kernel to allow a process to alter its process group or the process group of its descendants.
Creating a new process group is easy; the value of a new process group is ordinarily the process
identifier of the creating process.

The group of processes in a process group is sometimes referred to as a job and is manipulated
by high-level system software, such as the shell. A common kind of job created by a shell is a
pipeline of several processes connected by pipes, such that the output of the first process is the
input of the second, the output of the second is the input of the third, and so forth. The shell

creates such a job by forking a process for each stage of the pipeline, and then putting all those
processes into a separate process group.

A user process can send a signal to each process in a process group as well as to a single process.
A process in a specific process group may receive software interrupts affecting the group,
causing the group to suspend or resume execution, or to be interrupted or terminated.

A terminal (or more commonly a software emulation of a terminal called a pseudo-terminal) has
a process-group identifier assigned to it. This identifier is normally set to the identifier of a
process group associated with the terminal. A job-control shell may create several process
groups associated with the same terminal; the terminal is the controlling terminal for each
process in these groups. A process may read from a descriptor for its controlling terminal only if
the terminal’s process-group identifier matches that of the process. If the identifiers do not
match, the process will be blocked if it attempts to read from the terminal. By changing the
process-group identifier of the terminal, a shell can arbitrate a terminal among several different
jobs. This arbitration is called job control and is described, with process groups, in Section
4.8.

Just as a set of related processes can be collected into a process group, a set of process groups
can be collected into a session. The main uses for sessions are to create an isolated
environment for a daemon process and its children, and to collect a user’s login shell and the
jobs that that shell spawns.

2.5 Security

The FreeBSD security model has been developed over 40 years of evolving application needs.
The key insight is that security must be part of system design; it cannot be successfully added
later. The model addresses many different goals:

• Support authenticated local and remote access by multiple users, as well as integration with
distributed authentication and directory services

• Allow users to define permissions/access control lists to control use of their files by other users
and groups

• Support application authors in implementing compartmentalization for the purposes of
intra-application policy and vulnerability mitigation

• Implement efficient lightweight virtualization allowing administrators to delegate safe subsets
of root access to guest operating-system instances

• Allow the system administrator to control interactions between multiple users subject to
various mandatory policies including information flow

• Permit fine-grained logging of security events in the system such as filesystem operations or
network accesses

• Support and implement higher-level cryptographic services such as IPSec, ssh, transport-layer
security (TLS), and full-disk encryption (GELI)

Application developers and system administrators can build on these features in a broad variety
of ways. Software authors can implement features such as application-level sandboxing,
cryptographic protocols such as https and PGP, or intrusion detection and security monitoring
tools. System administrators and integrators can build systems or appliances providing Virtual
Private Networks (VPNs), multiuser file servers, or virtual hosting platforms. These concrete
goals in turn imply several design principles and elements for the kernel and core
operating-system components themselves:

• A self-protecting Trusted Computing Base (TCB) guarantees enough system integrity to
implement features such as multiple users and key storage

• Strong process isolation using virtual memory ensures that the kernel is protected from user
code, and that user processes are protected from one another

• Identification and instrumentation of security-relevant operations throughout the kernel to
implement access control, resource limits, and event auditing

• A coherent privilege model, internal to the kernel, that allows exceptional operations (such as
system administration, device-driver implementations) to occur in a structured way despite
being outside the regular access-control model

• Design abstractions that facilitate future security models, as well as security localization in
downstream products; for example, clean separation of policy and mechanism, object-oriented
structure (subject to the limitations of C), and a userspace capability-system model providing
protection, rather than policy, as the primitive for application compartmentalization

• Cryptographic primitives, such as secure random number generation and a library of
encryption   and   signature   functions,    that        can   support   many   different   higher-level
operating-system features and applications

Process Credentials

The kernel associates a set of process credentials with each process, which contain its
various UNIX user identifiers (UIDs), group identifiers (GIDs), resource limits, audit properties,
mandatory access control labels, capability-mode state, etc. Security-relevant operations
throughout the kernel check these credentials, known as the subject, along with object
properties (such as file permissions and ownership), before allowing the operation to proceed.
Credential contents are protected by virtue of being in the kernel address space: they can be
modified only using system calls that impose rules preventing circumvention of security policies.

FreeBSD implements the UNIX set-user-identity (setuid) and set-group-identity (setgid)
permissions that allow programs executed by one user to operate with the privileges of another
user or group. When the kernel detects an execution of such a binary, the process’s credentials
are modified to have a user or group ID reflecting the file’s own IDs.

When the file is owned by the root user, it allows elevated privileges to be acquired—but only for
the purposes of running the program in question. The program can then implement specific
functions, such as modifying the system password file to change the user’s password, but not the
password of any other user. However, the technique is not limited to the root user: several users
and groups serve to own common directories or devices, such as printers or terminals, which
can be accessed by normal users only through specific binaries.

Privilege Model

Privilege refers to the necessary “safety valves” that exist in operating-system design to
describe exceptions to normal access-control rules; for example:

• configuring network interfaces and network filtering;

• mounting, unmounting, and exporting filesystems;

• accessing or modifying kernel data and modules;

• overriding ACLs as a system administrator or for backups; or

• debugging system processes.

Historically, UNIX implemented a simple privilege model: processes with UID 0 (the root user)
were able to bypass almost all protections in the system. BSD, and later FreeBSD, have gradually

refined this approach through the introduction of securelevels, jails, and mandatory access
control.

The privilege model has required a change from a single in-kernel function, suser(), that simply
checks to see if the current thread has root credentials, to a more complex in-kernel interface
named priv_check(). Although the user-visible policy remains roughly similar to the UNIX root
model, internal subdivision into roughly 200 named privileges allows a variety of refinements,
such as subsetting of rights allowed in jails versus the remainder of the OS, as well as allowing
MAC policies to have controlled interactions with the privilege model. These changes have also
proven valuable in meeting the goal of supporting downstream consumers: product localizations
frequently seek to extend the privilege model, and the privilege space itself is extensible.

Discretionary Access Control

Another area of refinement of the original UNIX security model is through the more flexible and
fine-grained discretionary access control, the specification of protections properties for
other users by object owners. UNIX allowed read, write, and execute permission controls for the
file owner, the file group, and everyone else. FreeBSD added access-control lists, in which the
set of permissions is expanded to read, write, execute, lookup, and administration. These
expanded permissions can be applied to a list of users each with their own permissions, a list of
groups each with their own permissions, and access granted for everyone else. This model
permits full backward compatibility with historical implementations while also providing vastly
finer-grain control.

Capability Model

The Capsicum security framework is a new feature added in FreeBSD 9 to provide sandboxing of
libraries or modules, either because the code is of untrustworthy origin, or because it is
suspected that the code might experience vulnerabilities when acting on data of unknown or
dubious provenance. Capsicum allows the creation of processes that execute with only the
system rights that they have been explicitly delegated.

A process running in capability mode can only work with the set of file descriptors that it was
explicitly granted at creation time, or later delegated via IPC. The creator can further limit the
set of operations that may be performed on the granted descriptors. For example, it may allow
I/O on a descriptor, but not the right to change file modes or test for events using select, poll, or
kqueue. The process is denied access to the system’s global namespaces such as process
identifiers or the filesystem. Thus the open system call will fail but the openat system call will
work if given an appropriately privileged descriptor open on a directory from which to start.

Jail Lightweight Virtualization

While FreeBSD operates well under several full-machine virtualization technologies such as Xen
and its own bhyve hypervisor, FreeBSD jails provide lighter-weight virtual machines at a
much lower resource commitment. Each jail creates a group of processes with their own
root-administered environment giving the illusion that it is running on its own dedicated
hardware. Unlike a full virtual machine emulator that can run any operating system, a jail can
only provide a FreeBSD kernel environment. However, it can provide that environment much
more efficiently than a full virtual machine emulator: a single physical machine is typically
limited to dozens or hundreds of concurrent full virtual machines, while it can support
thousands of jails simultaneously.

Three techniques underly the jail implementation:

• access control, which prevents operations such as inter-jail process debugging;

• resource subsetting, which limits jails to a specific subset of the hierarchical filesystem
namespace (via chroot); and

• true virtualization, in which jails are each presented a unique instance of global system
namespaces.

Access control and resource subsetting come at little cost, whereas full virtualization can incur
substantial kernel-memory overhead. Virtualization is therefore configurable: jails may be
granted access to a subset of system IP addresses within the global network-stack instance, or
optional full network-stack virtualization can be configured.

In a typical configuration, each jail has an independent FreeBSD userspace installation in a
jail-specific filesystem tree—or for stronger resource isolation at greater resource commitment,
its own filesystem instance. Each jail will be delegated its own subset of system IP addresses.
Processes will operate as normal, but will be limited to those addresses; for example, an ISP
might grant each virtual-domain customer its own virtual FreeBSD installation, with its own
user account database, and each of which contains a webserver instance binding only the jail’s
IP addresses. Most operations are permitted within a jail including:

• running or signalling processes within the jail;

• changing files within the jail;

• binding low port numbers on the jail’s IP addresses; and

• optionally managing ZFS data sets within a larger volume delegated to the jail.

Processes running within a jail are not permitted to perform operations that would allow them
to see or affect anything running outside their jail. This restriction is implemented in large part
by masking the set of named system privileges available to root processes running within a jail.
Constrained privileges include:

• getting information on processes outside the jail;

• changing kernel variables;

• mounting or unmounting filesystems;

• modifying physical network interfaces or configurations; and

• rebooting the system.

Mandatory Access Control

Mandatory access control (MAC) describes a broad class of security policies that allow the
system administrator (or system integrator) to control systemic behaviors such as information
flow (for example, multilevel security (MLS)), or fine-grained system-scale rules (such as
type enforcement (TE)). As there remains significant disagreement about which mandatory
policies best solve particular practical security problems, FreeBSD implements a framework for
kernel access-control extensibility, the MAC framework.

The framework allows policies compiled into the kernel or kernel modules to instrument kernel
security decisions, but also provides common infrastructure required by many policies such as
object label storage, policy-agnostic APIs for security management, and tracing/debugging
features. Kernel subsystems invoke MAC framework entry points at strategic points in kernel
operation—creation and destruction of objects, before access to operations on objects, and
system security events such as privilege checks. The framework in turn invokes different policy
modules, composing their results.

Security policies are able to control access to a broad set of security-relevant system objects and
services including filesystem objects such as files/directories, IPC objects such as pipes, and
access to network sockets. They can also limit interprocess operations such as execution,
visibility, signalling, and tracing.

Many policies use security labels to tag processes and objects with additional security metadata
to be used during access control checks; for example, labels might contain per-object or

per-process confidentiality information for MLS to use in blocking illegitimate information flow,
or domain and type information that will be checked against Type Enforcement rules controlling
their interactions.

The MAC framework requires maintaining labels not just on userspace-visible objects acted on
directly by system calls, but also internal objects such as in-flight network data stored in mbuf
chains. A key design concern in the framework is performance proportionality: more intrusive
policies, such as labelled MAC policies, may incur greater expense for labelling, but policies
using only existing security information, such as process-credential UIDs and file ownership,
should not.

FreeBSD includes several sample policy modules such as confidentiality and integrity models,
but downstream consumers of FreeBSD have used the framework to implement many other
policies including Apple’s sandboxing models for Mac OS X and iOS, and application
sandboxing in Juniper’s Junos router operating system.

Event Auditing

The original UNIX accounting and the added FreeBSD tracing have been expanded to include
full auditing to provide accountability and intrusion detection. It is based on Open Basic
Security Module. When enabled, it generates records for kernel events involving access control,
authentication, security management, audit management, and user-level audit reports. For each
event, it records the user credentials that can be augmented with an audit identifier that holds
terminal and session information to be added to each audit record.

The volume of the audit trail is controllable using a global audit preselection policy with an
optional audit mask to subset the global policy. Audit records can be further thinned using the
auditreduce utility.

Cryptography and Random-Number Generators

Contemporary operating systems depend on a variety of cryptographic services:

• one-way hashes protect user passwords;

• digital signatures protect software updates and user data from tampering; and

• symmetric and asymmetric encryption protect user data on disk and the network.

All these functions require strong cryptographic foundations. The FreeBSD kernel includes a
strong cryptographic random number generator, and libraries of encryption, integrity checking,
and hashing algorithms. These libraries are used by kernel services such as GELI disk
encryption and IPSec virtual private networks, but also userspace applications such as ssh, GPG,
and Kerberos.

FreeBSD employs the Yarrow cryptographic pseudorandom number generator to implement
both sources of in-kernel randomness and /dev/random. Yarrow reuses existing
cryptographic primitives such as cryptographic hashes and counter-mode block encryption. The
key to making the output of Yarrow unguessable is having a good source of truly random seeds;
Yarrow is able to combine multiple sources of entropy, and tolerate compromise of a subset of
sources.

Many CPUs now implement built-in hardware random number generators using oscillator loops
to generate difficult-to-predict output. The first of these built-in hardware random number
generators was the VIA generator used since FreeBSD 5.3. More recently, Intel introduced a
random number generator that is accessed using the rdrand instruction, supported since
FreeBSD 9.2. Since 10.1, FreeBSD feeds the output of hardware entropy sources through Yarrow
as it is hard to determine whether these sources are operating correctly, or have perhaps been
compromised. With FreeBSD 11, Yarrow was replaced by Fortuna, which automates the
estimation of how and when to use alternate entropy sources.

FreeBSD makes use of cryptographic services within the kernel such as for providing full-disk
encryption. These cryptographic services may be implemented in software or by hardware
accelerators—historically they were found in add-on boards, but increasingly, they are
implemented via instruction-set extensions. Access to hardware encryption is also exported to
processes that need to provide large streams of encrypted data.

These security components combine to meet the requirements of the diverse systems that run
FreeBSD, ranging across hand-held computing devices, network devices, storage appliances,
and Internet service providers’ large-scale hosting environments.

2.6 Memory Management

Each process has its own private address space. The address space is initially divided into three
logical segments: text, data, and stack. The text segment is read-only and contains the
machine instructions of a program. The data and stack segments are both readable and writable.
The data segment contains the initialized and uninitialized data portions of a program, whereas
the stack segment holds the application’s run-time stack. The stack segment is extended

automatically by the kernel as the process executes. A process can expand or contract its data
segment by making a system call, whereas a process can change the size of its text segment only
when the segment’s contents are overlaid with data from the filesystem or when debugging takes
place. The initial contents of the segments of a child process are duplicates of the segments of a
parent process.

The entire contents of a process address space do not need to be resident for a process to
execute. If a process references a part of its address space that is not resident in main memory,
the system pages the necessary information into memory. When system resources are scarce,
the system uses a two-level approach to maintain available resources. If a modest amount of
memory is available, the system will take memory resources away from processes if these
resources have not been used recently. Should there be a severe resource shortage, the system
will resort to swapping the entire context of a process to secondary storage. The demand
paging and swapping done by the system are effectively transparent to processes. A process
may, however, advise the system about expected future memory utilization as a performance
aid.

BSD Memory-Management Design Decisions

The support of large, sparse address spaces, mapped files, and shared memory was a
requirement for 4.2BSD. An interface was specified, called mmap(), that allowed unrelated
processes to request a shared mapping of a file into their address spaces. If multiple processes
mapped the same file into their address spaces, changes to the file’s portion of an address space
by one process would be reflected in the area mapped by the other processes, as well as in the
file itself. Ultimately, 4.2BSD was shipped without the mmap() interface, because of pressure to
make other features, such as networking, available.

Further development of the mmap() interface continued during the work on 4.3BSD. Over 40
companies and research groups participated in the discussions leading to the revised
architecture that was described in the Berkeley Software Architecture Manual [McKusick et al.,
1994]. The first UNIX implementation of the interface was done by Sun Microsystems [Gingell
et al., 1987].

Once again, time pressure prevented 4.3BSD from providing an implementation of the interface.
Although the latter could have been built into the existing 4.3BSD virtual-memory system, the
developers decided not to put it in because that implementation was nearly 10 years old.
Furthermore, the original virtual-memory design was based on the assumption that computer
memories were small and expensive, whereas disks were locally connected, fast, large, and
inexpensive. Thus, the virtual-memory system was designed to be frugal with its use of memory

at the expense of generating extra disk traffic. In addition, the 4.3BSD implementation was
riddled with VAX memory-management hardware dependencies that impeded its portability to
other computer architectures. Finally, the virtual-memory system was not designed to support
the tightly coupled multiprocessors that were becoming increasingly common and important.

Attempts to improve the old implementation incrementally seemed doomed to failure. A
completely new design, on the other hand, could take advantage of large memories, conserve
disk transfers, and have the potential to run on multiprocessors. Consequently, the
virtual-memory system was completely replaced in 4.4BSD. The 4.4BSD virtual-memory system
was based on the Mach 2.0 virtual-memory system [Tevanian, 1987], with updates from Mach
2.5 and Mach 3.0.

The FreeBSD virtual-memory system is an extensively tuned version of the virtual-memory
implementation in 4.4BSD. It features efficient support for sharing, a clean separation of
machine-independent and machine-dependent features, as well as multiprocessor support.
Processes can map files anywhere in their address space. They can share parts of their address
space by doing a shared mapping of the same file. Changes made by one process are visible in
the address space of the other process and also are written back to the file itself. Processes can
also request private mappings of a file, which prevents any changes that they make from being
visible to other processes mapping the file or being written back to the file itself.

Another issue with the virtual-memory system is the way that information is passed into the
kernel when a read or write system call is made. For these system calls, FreeBSD always copies
data from the process address space into a buffer in the kernel. The copy is done for several
reasons:

• Often, the user data are not page aligned and are not a multiple of the hardware page length.

• If the page is taken away from the process, it will no longer be able to reference that page.
Some programs depend on the data remaining in the buffer even after those data have been
written.

• If the process is allowed to keep a copy of the page (as it is in current FreeBSD semantics), the
page must be made copy-on-write. A copy-on-write page is one that is protected against being
written by being made read-only. If the process attempts to modify the page, the kernel gets a
write fault. The kernel then makes a copy of the page that the process can modify. Unfortunately,
the typical process will immediately try to write new data to its output buffer, forcing the data to
be copied anyway.

• When pages are remapped to new virtual-memory addresses, most memory-management
hardware requires that the hardware address-translation cache be purged selectively. The cache
purges are often slow. The net effect is that remapping is slower than copying for blocks of data
less than 4 to 8 Kbyte.

For read or write operations that are transferring large quantities of data, doing the copy can be
time consuming. An alternative to doing the copying is to remap the process memory into the
kernel. The biggest incentives for memory mapping are the needs for accessing big files and for
passing large quantities of data between processes. The mmap() interface provides a way for
both of these tasks to be done without copying.

The mmap system call is not supported between processes running on different machines. Such
processes must communicate using sockets connected across the network. Thus, sending the
contents of a file across the network is another common operation where it is desirable to avoid
copying. Historically, the sending of a file was done by reading the file into an application buffer,
and then writing that buffer to a socket. This approach required two copies of the data: first
from the kernel to the application buffer, and then from the application buffer back into the
kernel to send on the socket. FreeBSD pioneered the sendfile system call that sends data from a
file down a socket without doing any copying.

Memory Management Inside the Kernel

The kernel often does allocations of memory that are needed for only the duration of a single
system call. In a user process, such short-term memory would be allocated on the run-time stack.
Because the kernel has a limited run-time stack, it is not feasible to allocate even moderate-size
blocks of memory on it. Consequently, such memory must be allocated through a more dynamic
mechanism. For example, when the system must translate a pathname, it must allocate a
1-Kbyte buffer to hold the name. Other blocks of memory must be more persistent than a single
system call, and thus could not be allocated on the stack even if there were space. An example is
protocol-control blocks that remain throughout the duration of a network connection.

Demands for dynamic memory allocation in the kernel have increased as more services have
been added. A generalized memory allocator reduces the complexity of writing code inside the
kernel. Thus, the FreeBSD kernel has a general memory allocator that can be used by any part of
the system. It has an interface similar to the C library routines malloc() and free() that provide
memory allocation to application programs [McKusick & Karels, 1988]. Like the C library
interface, the allocation routine takes a parameter specifying the size of memory that is needed.
The range of sizes for memory requests is not constrained; however, physical memory is

allocated and is not paged. The free routine takes a pointer to the storage being freed, but it does
not require the size of the piece of memory being freed.

Some large and persistent allocations, such as the structure that tracks information about a
process during its lifetime, are not well handled by the general memory allocator. The kernel
provides a zone allocator for these types of allocations. Each memory type is given its own zone
from which all its allocations are made. Memory allocated in one zone cannot be used by any
other zone or by the general memory allocator. The semantics of the interface are similar to the
general-memory allocator; memory is allocated from a zone with the zalloc() routine and freed
with the zfree() routine.

2.7 I/O System Overview

The basic model of the UNIX I/O system is a sequence of bytes that can be accessed either
randomly or sequentially. There are no access methods and no control blocks in a typical UNIX
user process.

Different programs expect various levels of structure, but the kernel does not impose structure
on I/O. For instance, the convention for text files is lines of ASCII characters separated by a
single newline character (the ASCII line-feed character), but the kernel knows nothing about
this convention. For the purposes of most programs, the model is further simplified to just a
stream of data bytes, or an I/O stream. It is this single common data form that makes the
characteristic UNIX tool-based approach work [Kernighan & Pike, 1984]. An I/O stream from
one program can be fed as input to almost any other program.

Descriptors and I/O

UNIX processes use descriptors to reference I/O streams. Descriptors are small unsigned
integers obtained from the open and socket system calls. The open system call takes as
arguments the name of a file and a permission mode to specify whether the file should be open
for reading or for writing, or for both. This system call also can be used to create a new, empty
file. A read or write system call can be applied to a descriptor to transfer data. The close system
call can be used to deallocate any descriptor.

Descriptors represent underlying objects supported by the kernel and are created by system
calls specific to the type of object. In FreeBSD, seven kinds of objects can be represented by
descriptors—files, pipes, fifos, sockets, POSIX IPC, event queues, and processes:

1. A file is a linear array of bytes with at least one name. A file exists until all of its names are
deleted explicitly and no process holds a descriptor for it. A process acquires a descriptor for a
file by opening that file’s name with the open system call. Most I/O devices are accessed as files.

2. A pipe is a linear array of bytes, as is a file, but it is used solely as an I/O stream, and it is
unidirectional. It also has no name and thus cannot be opened with open. Instead, it is created
by the pipe system call, which returns two descriptors, one of which accepts input that is sent to
the other descriptor reliably, without duplication, and in order.

3. A fifo is often referred to as a named pipe. A fifo has properties identical to a pipe, except
that it appears in the filesystem; thus, it can be opened using the open system call. Two
processes that wish to communicate each open the fifo: one opens it for reading, the other for
writing.

4. A socket is a transient object that is used for interprocess communication; it exists only as
long as some process holds a descriptor referring to it. A socket is created by the socket system
call, which returns a descriptor for it. There are different kinds of sockets that support various
communication semantics, such as reliable delivery of data, preservation of message ordering,
and preservation of message boundaries.

5. POSIX IPC includes message queues, shared memory, and semaphores. Each type of IPC has
its own set of system calls that are described in Section 7.2.

6. An event queue is a descriptor for which an application registers notification requests for a
wide set of events. The events include arrival of data for a descriptor, availability of space for
output on a descriptor, completion of asynchronous I/O, various timer-based events, and
change in status of a set of its processes. An event queue is created by the kqueue system call,
which returns a descriptor for it.

7. A process descriptor is used by the Capsicum capability model to control the set of processes
to which a sandboxed process can have access. A process descriptor is created by specifying the
RFPROCDESC flag to the rfork system call. Capsicum and its use of process descriptors is
described in Section 5.8.

In systems before 4.2BSD, pipes were implemented using the filesystem; when sockets were
introduced in 4.2BSD, pipes were reimplemented as sockets. For performance reasons, FreeBSD
no longer uses sockets to implement pipes and fifos. Rather, it uses a separate implementation
optimized for local communication.

The kernel keeps a descriptor table for each process, which is a table that the kernel uses to
translate the external representation of a descriptor into an internal representation. (The

descriptor is merely an index into this table.) The descriptor table of a process is inherited from
that process’s parent, and thus access to the objects to which the descriptors refer also is
inherited. The main ways that a process can obtain a descriptor are

1. by opening or creating an object, or

2. by inheriting from the parent process.

In addition, socket IPC allows passing descriptors in messages between unrelated processes on
the same machine.

Every valid descriptor has an associated file offset in bytes from the beginning of the object.
Read and write operations start at this offset, which is updated after each data transfer. For
objects that permit random access, the file offset also may be set with the lseek system call.
Ordinary files permit random access, and some devices do, too. The remaining descriptor types
including pipes, fifos, and sockets do not.

When a process terminates, the kernel reclaims all the descriptors that were in use by that
process. If the process was holding the final reference to an object, the object’s manager is
notified so that it can do any necessary cleanup actions, such as final deletion of a file or
deallocation of a socket.

Descriptor Management

Most processes expect three descriptors to be open already when they start running. These
descriptors are 0, 1, and 2, more commonly known as standard input, standard output,
and standard error, respectively. Usually, all three are associated with the user’s terminal by
the login process (see Section 15.4) and are inherited through fork and exec by processes run by
the user. Thus, a program can read what the user types by reading standard input, and the
program can send output to the user’s screen by writing to standard output. The standard error
descriptor also is open for writing and is used for error output, whereas standard output is used
for ordinary output.

These (and other) descriptors can be mapped to objects other than the terminal; such mapping
is called I/O redirection, and all the standard shells permit users to do it. The shell can direct
the output of a program to a file by closing descriptor 1 (standard output) and opening the
desired output file to produce a new descriptor 1. It can similarly redirect standard input to
come from a file by closing descriptor 0 and opening the file.

Pipes allow the output of one program to be input to another program without rewriting or even
relinking of either program. Instead of descriptor 1 (standard output) of the source program
being set up to write to the terminal, it is set up to be the input descriptor of a pipe. Similarly,
descriptor 0 (standard input) of the sink program is set up to reference the output of the pipe
instead of the terminal keyboard. The resulting set of two processes and the connecting pipe is
known as a pipeline. Pipelines can be arbitrarily long series of processes connected by pipes.

The open, pipe, and socket system calls produce new descriptors with the lowest unused number
usable for a descriptor. For pipelines to work, some mechanism must be provided to map such
descriptors into 0 and 1. The dup system call creates a copy of a descriptor that points to the
same file-table entry. The new descriptor is also the lowest unused one, but if the desired
descriptor is closed first, dup can be used to do the desired mapping. Care is required, however:
If descriptor 1 is desired, and descriptor 0 happens also to have been closed, descriptor 0 will be
the result. To avoid this problem, the system provides the dup2 system call; it is like dup, but it
takes an additional argument specifying the number of the desired descriptor (if the desired
descriptor was already open, dup2 closes it before reusing it).

Devices

Hardware devices have filenames and may be accessed by the user via the same system calls
used for regular files. The kernel can distinguish a device special file or special file, and it
can determine to what device it refers, but most processes do not need to make this
determination. Terminals, printers, and tape drives are all accessed as though they were streams
of bytes, like FreeBSD disk files. Thus, device dependencies and peculiarities are kept in the
kernel as much as possible, and even in the kernel most of them are segregated in the device
drivers.

Processes typically access devices through special files in the filesystem. I/O operations to these
files are handled by kernel-resident software modules termed device drivers. Most
network-communication        hardware      devices    are    accessible     through     only    the
interprocess-communication facilities and do not have special files in the filesystem namespace,
because the raw-socket interface provides a more natural interface than does a special file.

Device special files are created in the /dev filesystem by their device driver when the hardware
is first found. The ioctl system call manipulates the underlying device parameters of special files.
The operations that can be done differ for each device. This system call allows the special
characteristics of devices to be accessed, rather than overloading the semantics of other system
calls. For example, there is an ioctl on a sound card to set the audio-encoding format instead of
there being a special or modified version of write.

Socket IPC

The 4.2BSD kernel introduced an IPC mechanism more flexible than pipes, based on sockets. A
socket is an endpoint of communication referred to by a descriptor, just like a file or a pipe. Two
processes can each create a socket and then connect those two endpoints to produce a reliable
byte stream. Once connected, the descriptors for the sockets can be read or written by processes,
just as the latter would do with a pipe. The transparency of sockets allows the kernel to redirect
the output of one process to the input of another process residing on another machine. A major
difference between pipes and sockets is that pipes require a common parent process to set up
the communications channel. A connection between sockets can be set up by two unrelated
processes, possibly residing on different machines.

Fifos appear as an object in the filesystem that unrelated processes can open and send data
through in the same way as they would communicate through a pair of sockets. Thus, fifos do
not require a common parent to set them up; they can be connected after a pair of processes are
up and running. Unlike sockets, fifos can be used on only a local machine; they cannot be used
to communicate between processes on different machines.

The socket mechanism requires extensions to the traditional UNIX I/O system calls to provide
the associated naming and connection semantics. Rather than overloading the existing interface,
the developers used the existing interfaces to the extent that the latter worked without being
changed and designed new interfaces to handle the added semantics. The read and write system
calls were used for byte-stream-type connections, but six new system calls were added to allow
sending and receiving addressed messages such as network datagrams. The system calls for
writing messages include send, sendto, and sendmsg. The system calls for reading messages
include recv, recvfrom, and recvmsg. In retrospect, the first two in each class are special cases
of the others; recvfrom and sendto probably should have been added as library interfaces to
recvmsg and sendmsg, respectively.

Scatter-Gather I/O

In addition to the traditional read and write system calls, 4.2BSD introduced the ability to do
scatter-gather I/O. Scatter input uses the readv system call to allow a single read to be
placed in several different buffers. Conversely, the writev system call allows several different
buffers to be written in a single atomic write. Instead of passing a single buffer and length
parameter, as is done with read and write, the process passes in a pointer to an array of buffers
and lengths, along with a count describing the size of the array.

This facility allows buffers in different parts of a process address space to be written atomically,
without the need to copy them to a single contiguous buffer. Atomic writes are necessary in the
case where the underlying abstraction is record based, such as datagrams that output a single
message on each write request. It is also convenient to be able to read a single request into
several different buffers (such as a record header into one place and the data into another).
Although an application can simulate the ability to scatter data by reading the data into a large
buffer and    then copying the pieces to           their intended destinations, the cost of
memory-to-memory copying in such cases often would more than double the running time of
the affected application.

Just as send and recv could have been implemented as library interfaces to sendto and recvfrom,
it also would have been possible to simulate read using readv and write using writev. However,
read and write are used so much more frequently that the added cost of simulating them would
not have been worthwhile.

Multiple Filesystem Support

With the expansion of network computing, it became desirable to support both local and remote
filesystems. To simplify the support of multiple filesystems, the developers added a new virtual
node or vnode interface to the kernel. The set of operations exported from the vnode interface
appear much like the filesystem operations previously supported by the local filesystem.
However, they may be supported by a wide range of filesystem types:

• Local disk-based filesystems

• Files imported using a variety of remote filesystem protocols

• Read-only CD-ROM filesystems

• Filesystems providing special-purpose interfaces, for example, the /dev filesystem

By using loadable kernel modules (see Section 15.3), FreeBSD allows filesystems to be loaded
dynamically when the filesystems are first referenced by the mount system call. The vnode
interface is described in Section 7.3; its ancillary support routines are described in Section 7.4;
several of the special-purpose filesystems are described in Section 7.5.

2.8 Devices

Historically, the device interface was static and simple. Devices were discovered as the system
was booted and did not change thereafter. A typical disk driver could be written in a few

hundred lines of code. As the system has evolved, the complexity of the I/O system has
increased, with the addition of new functionality. Devices may appear and later disappear while
the system is running. With increasing complexity and types of I/O buses, the routing of I/O
requests has become complex. In a multiprocessor, for example, device interrupts must be
routed to the most appropriate processor, which may not be the same one that previously
handled the device. An overview of the PC architecture is given in Section 8.1.

Devices are described by character device drivers. Sections 8.2 through 8.6 introduce the
structure of device drivers and then detail device drivers for disks, network interfaces, and
terminals.

Logical disks may no longer refer to a partition on a single physical disk but instead may
combine several slices and/or partitions to create a virtual partition on which to build a
filesystem that spans several disks. The aggregation of physical disk partitions into a virtual
partition in these ways is referred to as volume management. Rather than building all this
functionality into all the filesystems or disk drivers, it has been abstracted out into the GEOM
(geometry) layer. The operation of the GEOM layer is described in Section 8.7. The management
of the disk subsystem in FreeBSD is described in Section 8.8.

Autoconfiguration is the procedure carried out by the system to recognize and enable the
hardware devices present in a system. Historically, autoconfiguration was done just once when
the system was booted. In current machines, particularly portable machines such as laptop
computers, devices routinely come and go while the machine is operating. Thus, the kernel must
be prepared to configure, initialize, and make available hardware when it arrives and to drop
operations with hardware that has departed. FreeBSD uses a device-driver infrastructure called
newbus to manage the devices on the system. The newbus architecture is described in Section
8.9.

2.9 The Fast Filesystem

A regular file is a linear array of bytes and can be read and written starting at any byte in the file.
The kernel distinguishes no record boundaries in regular files, although many programs
recognize line-feed characters as distinguishing the ends of lines, and other programs may
impose other structure. No system-related information about a file is kept in the file itself, but
the filesystem stores a small amount of ownership, protection, and usage information with each
file.

A filename component is a string of up to 255 characters. These filenames are stored in a type
of file called a directory. The information in a directory about a file is called a directory

entry and includes, in addition to the filename, a pointer to the file itself. Directory entries may
refer to other directories, as well as to plain files. A hierarchy of directories and files is thus
formed, called a filesystem; a small one is shown in Figure 2.2. Directories may contain
subdirectories, and there is no inherent limitation to the depth with which directory nesting may
occur. To protect the consistency of the filesystem, the kernel does not permit processes to write
directly into directories. A filesystem may include not only plain files and directories but also
references to other objects, such as sockets and fifos.

Figure 2.2 A small filesystem tree.

The filesystem forms a tree, the beginning of which is the root directory, sometimes referred
to by the name slash, spelled with a single solidus character (/). The root directory contains
files; in our example in Figure 2.2, it contains kernel, a copy of the kernel-executable object file.
It also contains directories; in this example, it contains the usr directory. Within the usr
directory is the bin directory, which mostly contains executable object code of programs, such
as the files ls and vi.

A process identifies a file by specifying that file’s pathname, which is a string composed of zero
or more filenames separated by slash (/) characters. The kernel associates two directories with
each process for use in interpreting pathnames. A process’s root directory is the topmost point
in the filesystem that the process can access; it is ordinarily set to the root directory of the entire
filesystem. A pathname beginning with a slash is called an absolute pathname and is
interpreted by the kernel starting with the process’s root directory.

A pathname that does not begin with a slash is called a relative pathname and is interpreted
relative to the current working directory of the process. (This directory also is known by
the shorter names current directory or working directory.) The current directory itself may
be referred to directly by the name dot, spelled with a single period (.). The filename dot-dot
(..) refers to a directory’s parent directory. The root directory is its own parent.

A process may set its root directory with the chroot system call and its current directory with the
chdir system call. Any process may do chdir at any time, but chroot is permitted only a process
with superuser privileges. Chroot is normally used to set up restricted access to the system.

Using the filesystem shown in Figure 2.2, if a process has the root of the filesystem as its root
directory and has /usr as its current directory, it can refer to the file vi either from the root with
the absolute pathname /usr/bin/vi or from its current directory with the relative pathname
bin/vi.

System utilities and databases are kept in certain well-known directories. Part of the
well-defined hierarchy includes a directory that contains the home directory for each
user—for example, /usr/staff/mckusick and /usr/staff/gnn in Figure 2.2. When users log
in, the current working directory of their shell is set to the home directory. Within their home
directories, users can create directories as easily as they can regular files. Thus, a user can build
arbitrarily complex subhierarchies.

The user usually knows of only one filesystem, but the system may know that this one virtual
filesystem is really composed of several physical filesystems, each on a different device. A
physical filesystem may not span multiple logical devices. Since most physical disk devices are
divided into several logical devices, there may be more than one filesystem per physical device,
but there will be no more than one per logical device. Conversely, several physical devices may
be combined through striping or RAID into a single larger logical device.

One filesystem—the filesystem that anchors all absolute pathnames—is called the root
filesystem and is always available. Others may be mounted—that is, they may be integrated
into the directory hierarchy of the root filesystem. References to a directory that has a filesystem
mounted on it are converted transparently by the kernel into references to the root directory of
the mounted filesystem.

The link system call takes the name of an existing file and another name to create for that file.
After a successful link, the file can be accessed by either filename. A filename can be removed
with the unlink system call. When the final name for a file is removed (and the final process that
has the file open closes it), the file is deleted.

Files are organized hierarchically in directories. A directory is a type of file, but, in contrast to
regular files, a directory has a structure imposed on it by the system. A process can read a
directory as it would an ordinary file, but only the kernel is permitted to modify a directory.
Directories are created by the mkdir system call and are removed by the rmdir system call.
Before 4.2BSD, the mkdir and rmdir system calls were implemented by a series of link and
unlink system calls being performed. There were three reasons for adding system calls explicitly
to create and delete directories:

1. The operation could be made atomic. If the system crashed, the directory would not be left
half-constructed, as could happen when a series of link operations were used.

2. When a networked filesystem is being run, the creation and deletion of files and directories
need to be specified atomically so that they can be serialized.

3. When supporting non-UNIX filesystems, such as an NTFS filesystem, on another partition of
the disk, the other filesystem may not support link operations. Although other filesystems might
support the concept of directories, they probably would not create and delete the directories
with links, as the UNIX filesystem does. Consequently, they could create and delete directories
only if explicit directory create and delete requests were presented.

The chown system call sets the owner and group of a file, and chmod changes protection
attributes. Stat applied to a filename can be used to read back such properties of a file. The
fchown, fchmod, and fstat system calls are applied to a descriptor instead of to a filename to do
the same set of operations. The rename system call can be used to give a file a new name in the
filesystem, replacing one of the file’s old names. Like the directory-creation and
directory-deletion operations, the rename system call was added to 4.2BSD to provide atomicity
to name changes in the local filesystem. Later, it proved useful explicitly to export renaming
operations to foreign filesystems and over the network.

The truncate system call was added to 4.2BSD to allow files to be set to an arbitrary size. Thus,
truncate is poorly named because it may be used to both shorten and lengthen a file. Files may
have holes in them. Holes are void areas in the linear extent of the file where data have never
been written. A process can create these holes by positioning the pointer past the current
end-of-file and writing. Alternatively, a hole may be added to the end of a file by using the
truncate system call to increase its length. When read, holes are treated by the system as
zero-valued bytes.

Once the filesystem had the ability to shorten files, the kernel took advantage of that ability to
shorten large, empty directories. The advantage of shortening empty directories is that it
reduces the time spent in the kernel searching them when names are being created or deleted.

Newly created files are assigned the user identifier of the process that created them and the
group identifier of the directory in which they were created. A three-level access-control
mechanism is provided for the protection of files. The following three levels specify the
accessibility of a file:

1. To the user who owns the file

2. To the group that owns the file

3. To everybody else

Each level of access has separate indicators for read permission, write permission, and execute
permission. If finer granularity access control is needed, FreeBSD 5 also provides ACLs (access
control lists) to allow specification of read, write, execute, and administrative permission on a
per-user or per-group level.

Files are created with zero length and may grow when they are written. While a file is open, the
system maintains a pointer into the file showing the current location in the file associated with
the descriptor. This pointer can be moved about in the file in a random-access fashion.
Processes sharing a file descriptor through a fork or dup system call share the current location
pointer. Descriptors created by separate open system calls have separate current location
pointers.

Filestores

The user-visible part of the filesystem is its hierarchical naming, locking, quotas, attribute
management, and protection. But the bulk of the filesystem implementation involves the
organization and management of the data on the storage media. Laying out the contents of files
on the storage media is the responsibility of the filestore. By default, FreeBSD uses the
traditional Berkeley fast filesystem format. The disk is organized into groups of contiguous
blocks called cylinder groups. Files that are likely to be accessed together, based on their
locations in the filesystem hierarchy, are stored in the same cylinder group. Files that are not
expected to be accessed together are moved into different cylinder groups.

A key responsibility of the filestore is to ensure that the filesystem is always kept in a state in
which it can be recovered after a hardware or software failure. While recoverability can be
maintained by using synchronous writes to the disk, the performance of a filesystem using this
technique would be unacceptably slow. FreeBSD uses a technique called soft updates (see
Sections 9.6 and 9.8) to ensure recoverability while still delivering good performance and fast
restart after a system crash.

Another useful feature of the FreeBSD filestore is the ability to take a filesystem snapshot
quickly. Snapshots can be taken every few hours and mounted in a well-known location so that
users can recover inadvertently deleted files that they created or wrote earlier in the day.
Snapshots can also be used to allow the creation of consistent archives of filesystems that are in
continuous active use. Snapshots are described in Section 9.7.

2.10 The Zettabyte Filesystem

The Zettabyte filesystem (ZFS) is in a class of filesystems that never overwrite existing data. This
type of filesystem design was pioneered at Berkeley and a production-capable implementation
was released as the log-structured filesystem in 4.4BSD.

The idea of a non-overwriting filesystem is sound and was picked up and greatly enhanced by
Sun Microsystems, which released it as the Zettabye filesystem in OpenSolaris. The FreeBSD
Project replaced the little-used log-structured filesystem with ZFS in 2007. Within a few years,
ZFS became the filesystem of choice for FreeBSD installations with large storage components.

The design of ZFS provides many benefits:

• Creation of snapshots (read-only) and clones (writable) is easy and cheap. Many of them can
be created with no performance hit.

• The on-disk filesystem state is never inconsistent. A ZFS filesystem moves from one consistent
state to the next without ever passing through an inconsistent state.

• All the disks on the machine can be pooled together and the pool of space is then shared
among all the filesystems. Allocation of the pool space can be controlled through the use of
several types of quotas and reservations.

• Massive scale supports petabyte-size storage pools with data structures that allow scalability to
zettabytes.

• Provides for fast remote replication and backups.

• Strong data integrity is provided by checksums and disk-level redundancy through mirroring
and single, double, and triple parity RAID.

• Supports a hybrid storage pool by using fast devices such as solid-state disks (SSDs) to cache
reads and non-volatile memory (NVRAM) to accelerate synchronous writes.

ZFS was designed to easily manage and operate enormous filesystems, which it does well. Its
design assumed that it would have many fast 64-bit CPUs with large amounts of memory to
support these enormous filesystems. When these resources are available, it works extremely well.
However, it is neither designed for nor is it well suited to run on resource-constrained systems
using 32-bit CPUs with less than 8 Gbytes of memory and one small, nearly full disk typical of
many embedded systems. Thus, the fast filesystem continues to be the filesystem of choice for
these smaller systems.

2.11 The Network Filesystem

Initially, networking was used to transfer data from one machine to another. Later, it evolved to
allowing users to log in remotely to another machine. The next logical step was to bring the data
to the user, instead of having the user go to the data—and network filesystems were born. Users
working locally do not experience the network delays on each keystroke, so they have a more
responsive environment.

Bringing the filesystem to a local machine was among the first of the major client–server
applications. The server is the remote machine that exports one or more of its filesystems. The
client is the local machine that imports those filesystems. From the local client’s point of view, a
remotely mounted filesystem appears in the file-tree namespace just like any other locally
mounted filesystem. Users and programs running on clients can change into directories on the
remote filesystem and can read, write, and execute binaries within that remote filesystem
identically to the way they can do these operations on a local filesystem.

When the client performs an operation on a remote filesystem, the request is packaged and sent
to the server. The server performs the requested operation and returns either the requested
information or an error explaining why the request was denied. To get reasonable performance,
the client must cache frequently accessed data. The complexity of remote filesystems lies in
maintaining cache consistency between the server and its many clients.

Although many remote-filesystem protocols have been developed over the years, the most
pervasive one in use among UNIX systems is the Network Filesystem (NFS), whose protocol and
most widely used implementation were done by Sun Microsystems. The FreeBSD kernel
supports the NFS protocol, although the implementation was done independently from the
protocol specification [Macklem, 1994]. The continued success of NFS has resulted in a
significant update of the protocol in version 4. The new protocol has little in common with its
predecessors other than its name and its goal of giving a set of clients shared access to a single
store of files. It adds several new features including integrated security, better caching, and

enhanced file and byte-range locking. Both of the currently used NFS protocols, NFSv3 and
NFSv4 are described in Chapter 11.

2.12 Interprocess Communication

Interprocess communication in FreeBSD is organized in communication domains. The
most important domains currently supported include the local domain, for communication
between processes executing on the same machine; the IPv4 domain, for communication
between processes using the TCP/IP protocol suite (version 4); and the IPv6 domain, which is
the newest version of the Internet protocols.

Within a domain, communication takes place between communication endpoints known as
sockets. As mentioned in Section 2.7, the socket system call creates a socket and returns a
descriptor; other IPC system calls are described in Chapter 12. Each socket has a type that
defines its communications semantics; these semantics include properties such as reliability,
ordering, and prevention of the duplication of messages.

Each socket has associated with it a communication protocol. This protocol provides the
semantics required by the socket according to the latter’s type. Applications may request a
specific protocol when creating a socket or may allow the system to select a protocol that is
appropriate for the type of socket being created.

Sockets may have addresses bound to them. The form and meaning of socket addresses are
dependent on the communication domain in which the socket is created. Binding a name to a
socket in the local domain causes a file to be created in the filesystem, while binding an IP
address to a socket only updates an entry in the socket structure.

Normal data transmitted and received through sockets are untyped. Data-representation issues
are the responsibility of libraries built on top of the interprocess-communication facilities.

Networking implementations on UNIX before 4.2BSD usually worked by overloading the
character-device interfaces. One goal of the socket interface was for naive programs to be able to
work without change on stream-style connections. Such programs can work only if the read and
write system calls are unchanged. Consequently, the original interfaces were left intact and were
made to work on stream-type sockets. A new interface was added for datagram sockets, where a
destination address must be presented with each send call.

Implementations of the sockets API exist for pretty much every modern operating system,
including several that differ greatly from UNIX.

FreeBSD also supports several local IPC mechanisms not related to networking, including
semaphores, message queues, and shared memory. These mechanisms are covered in
Section 7.2.

The increasing power of computer systems has lead to the virtualization of many kernel services,
including those related to IPC. A recent feature of FreeBSD is a virtualized network stack in
which elements such as sockets, network addresses, and network routing tables may not be
global across the entire system, but contained within a single network stack instance. The
purpose of these virtualization features is to allow a system administrator to configure a single
system to serve several separate networks as might be common at an ISP.

2.13 Network-Layer Protocols

Most of the communication domains supported by the socket IPC mechanism provide access to
network protocols. These protocols are implemented as a separate software layer logically below
the socket software in the kernel. The kernel provides many ancillary services, such as buffer
management, message routing, standardized interfaces to the protocols, and interfaces to the
network interface drivers for the use of the various network protocols.

Network layer protocols are layered just above or close to the network-interface software that
manages the networking hardware. The Internet protocols IPv4 and IPv6 are two examples of a
network layer protocol. FreeBSD has supported multiple protocols since 4.2BSD, providing
interoperability and resource sharing among the diverse set of machines that exist in the
Internet. Multiple-protocol support also provides for future changes. Today’s protocols designed
for 1- and 10-Gbit Ethernets are likely to be inadequate for tomorrow’s 40- to 100-Gbit networks.
Consequently, the network-communication layer is designed to support multiple protocols. New
protocols are added to the kernel without the support for older protocols being affected. Older
applications can continue to operate using the old protocol over the same physical network as is
used by newer applications running with a newer network protocol.

The original Internet protocols were not designed with security in mind. Protocols for securing
the Internet have been added at multiple layers of the network stack, including the network
layer itself. The IPSec suite of protocols introduces a framework for authenticating packet data
and making them private at the network layer of the system.

Network firewalls such as PF and IPFW that need to modify network data as they pass through a
system are also implemented at the network layer of the kernel software. The FreeBSD kernel
has several packet-processing frameworks that manipulate network data as they pass through
the system and that are outside the normal processing of incoming or outgoing network traffic.

Other packet-processing frameworks exist for protocol experimentation and to give applications
high-speed access to raw network packets without any network or transport layer protocol
processing.

2.14 Transport-Layer Protocols

Transport layer protocols are responsible for end-to-end connectivity in a network. The
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) remains by far the most commonly used end-to-end
transport protocol. However, key Internet services, such as the Domain Name System, allow
users to look up systems by name using the User Datagram Protocol (UDP). The popularity of
TCP has lead to a continuous set of improvements to the protocol that enhances stability and
improves performance. FreeBSD includes a framework specific to TCP that allows the tuning of
certain performance and stability features. Newer transport protocols such as SCTP have added
features for security and failover across communication paths. The UDP, TCP, and SCTP
implementations are described in detail in Chapter 14.

2.15 System Startup and Shutdown

Bootstrapping (or “booting”) the operating system is a complex multistep process that begins
with the hardware platform’s BIOS or firmware loading an escalating series of operating-system
vendor boot loaders, which in turn load a kernel and modules. Once loaded, the kernel begins
execution and after initialization it starts the first user process, init. The init process is
responsible for starting the userspace boot process. The startup details vary by hardware
platform: higher-end servers and workstations will, on the path to kernel load, run a series of
smaller boot loaders that ultimately start /boot/loader, a scriptable loader environment
supporting interactive selection of kernels, and network booting via NFS. By contrast, lower-end
embedded systems often have a kernel that will be loaded directly by firmware without any
intervening stages.

The kernel starts by initializing a variety of internal subsystems such as the kernel memory
allocator and scheduler. It uses platform-specific hardware enumeration methods to identify
available hardware resources and attach drivers. Different techniques reflect different
operational models: some hardware buses are self-enumerating (e.g., PCI), whereas other
require manual description (e.g., many system-on-chip buses). On desktop/server systems, one
kernel will frequently be used on a variety of machine types from many different vendors. By
contrast, embedded installations usually have a kernel configured for each target device. On the
PC, this enumeration is normally done via ACPI, which allows the BIOS to describe the
processor configuration, bus topology, and directly attached hardware devices. On embedded

systems, device enumeration is done via systems such as Flattened Device Trees (FDT) that
provide a static description of directly attached resources. Unlike ACPI, whose hardware
descriptors are almost always shipped with the hardware itself, FDT hardware descriptions are
usually embedded in the kernel. Buses such as PCI can do further dynamic enumeration by
discovering attached devices such as Ethernet NICs, and bridges to further buses to enumerate.

The in-kernel boot process is controlled by a system known as SYSINIT, which takes advantage
of a compiler/linker feature called linker sets. Linker sets allow symbols for data structures and
functions to be tagged for inclusion in a particular part of the kernel. Subsystem initializers are
tagged for inclusion in the kernel initialization section along with information on the order in
which they should be done. When the kernel and its modules are linked, the kernel linker
iterates through various tagged functions, sorting and then invoking them to start those kernel
subsystems. A similar SYSUNINIT mechanism exists to perform ordered shutdown of modules
before unloading them and in preparation for kernel shutdown or reboot.

The kernel starts by initializing its own data structures, such as its virtual-memory structures
that describe physical memory. Next, it starts a set of kernel threads that implement services
such as timers. Devices are enumerated, and device drivers attached. The network stack may
perform not only per-protocol initialization, but also per-device initialization such as address
generation and router discovery. The GEOM subsystem will identify storage devices and
configure transforms such as RAID or encryption via GELI. Encryption services may require the
user to have entered a passphrase in the boot loader. Eventually, a storage device suitable to use
as the root filesystem will be discovered and its filesystem then mounted. Additional processors
are enumerated and their schedulers likewise started. The final kernel-bootstrap step is to create
the first user process with PID 1, to execute the /sbin/init binary. The init process is
responsible for executing the startup scripts that perform filesystem checks, configure network
interfaces, start accounting and quotas, start system daemons such as inetd and sshd, and
bring the system up to full multiuser operation.

In multiuser operation, the system may act as a general timesharing system, supporting direct
or network-based logins by users who then start processes running on their behalf. FreeBSD
often acts as a server, providing file services and serving Web requests to network clients. All
these network-based services can be started automatically at boot time. When used as a server,
there is typically just one human user logged into the system (the administrator).

Exercises

2.1 How does a user process request a service from the kernel?

2.2 How are data transferred between a process and the kernel? What alternatives are
available?

2.3 How does a process access an I/O stream? List three types of I/O streams.

2.4 What are the four steps in the lifecycle of a process?

2.5 Why are process groups provided in FreeBSD?

2.6 Describe four machine-dependent functions of the kernel.

2.7 Describe the difference between an absolute and a relative pathname.

2.8 Give three reasons why the mkdir system call was added to 4.2BSD.

2.9 Define scatter-gather I/O. Why is it useful?

2.10 What is the difference between a pipe and a socket?

2.11 Describe how to create a group of processes in a pipeline.

*2.12 List the three system calls that were required to create a new directory foo in the current
directory before the addition of the mkdir system call.

*2.13 Explain the difference between interprocess communication and networking.

References

Accetta et al., 1986.

M. Accetta, R. Baron, W. Bolosky, D. Golub, R. Rashid, A. Tevanian, & M. Young, “Mach: A New
Kernel Foundation for UNIX Development,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp.
93–113, June 1986.

Cheriton, 1988.

D. R. Cheriton, “The V Distributed System,” Comm ACM, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 314–333, March
1988.

Ewens et al., 1985.

P. Ewens, D. R. Blythe, M. Funkenhauser, & R. C. Holt, “Tunis: A Distributed Multiprocessor
Operating System,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 247–254, June 1985.

Gingell et al., 1987.

R. Gingell, J. Moran, & W. Shannon, “Virtual Memory Architecture in SunOS,” USENIX
Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 81–94, June 1987.

Kernighan & Pike, 1984.

B. W. Kernighan & R. Pike, The UNIX Programming Environment, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1984.

Macklem, 1994.

R. Macklem, “The 4.4BSD NFS Implementation,” in 4.4BSD System Manager’s Manual, pp.
6:1–14, O’Reilly & Associates, Inc., Sebastopol, CA, 1994.

McKusick & Karels, 1988.

M. K. McKusick & M. Karels, “Design of a General Purpose Memory Allocator for the 4.3BSD
UNIX Kernel,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 295–304, June 1988.

McKusick et al., 1994.

M. K. McKusick, M. Karels, S. J. Leffler, W. N. Joy, & R. S. Fabry, “Berkeley Software
Architecture Manual, 4.4BSD Edition,” in 4.4BSD Programmer’s Supplementary Documents,
pp. 5:1–42, O’Reilly & Associates, Inc., Sebastopol, CA, 1994.

Ritchie, 1988.

D. M. Ritchie, “Early Kernel Design,” private communication, March 1988.

Rozier et al., 1988.

M. Rozier, V. Abrossimov, F. Armand, I. Boule, M. Gien, M. Guillemont, F. Herrmann, C. Kaiser,
S. Langlois, P. Leonard, & W. Neuhauser, “Chorus Distributed Operating Systems,” USENIX
Computing Systems, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 305–370, Fall 1988.

Tevanian, 1987.

A. Tevanian, “Architecture-Independent Virtual Memory Management for Parallel and
Distributed Environments: The Mach Approach,” Department of Computer Science,

Carnegie-Mellon University, available from http://reports-archive.adm.cs.cmu.edu/cs.html,
December 1987.

