                          Chapter 3. Kernel Services

3.1 Kernel Organization

The FreeBSD kernel can be viewed as a service provider to user processes. Processes usually
access these services through system calls. Some services, such as process scheduling and
memory management, are implemented as processes that execute in kernel mode or as routines
that execute periodically within the kernel. In this chapter, we describe how kernel services are
provided to user processes, and we explain some of the ancillary processing done by the kernel.
Then we describe the basic kernel services provided by FreeBSD and provide details of their
implementation.

System Processes

All FreeBSD user-level processes originate from a single process that is crafted by the kernel at
startup. Table 3.1 lists the most important of the processes that are created immediately and
exist always. They are kernel processes, and they function wholly within the kernel. Kernel
processes execute code that is compiled into the kernel’s load image and operate with the
kernel’s privileged execution mode. Often these processes have many threads. For example, the
intr process starts a kernel thread for each device to handle interrupts for that device.

Table 3.1 Permanent kernel processes.

After creating the kernel processes, the kernel creates the first process to execute a program in
user mode; it serves as the parent process for all subsequent processes. The first user-mode
process is the init process—historically, process 1. This process does administrative tasks, such
as spawning getty processes for each terminal on a machine, collecting exit status from
orphaned processes, and handling the orderly shutdown of a system from multiuser to
single-user operation. The init process is a user-mode process, running outside the kernel (see
Section 15.4).

System Entry

Entrances into the kernel can be categorized according to the event or action that initiates them:

• Hardware interrupt

• Hardware trap

• Software-initiated trap

Hardware interrupts arise from external events, such as an I/O device needing attention or a
clock reporting the passage of time. (For example, the kernel depends on the presence of a
real-time clock or interval timer to maintain the current time of day, to drive process scheduling,
and to initiate the execution of system timeout functions.) Hardware interrupts occur
asynchronously and may not relate to the context of the currently executing process.

Hardware traps may be either synchronous or asynchronous but are related to the current
executing process. Examples of hardware traps are those generated as a result of an illegal
arithmetic operation, such as dividing by zero.

Software-initiated traps are used by the system to force the scheduling of an event, such as
process rescheduling or network processing, as soon as possible. Software-initiated traps are
implemented by setting a flag that is checked whenever a process is preparing to exit from the
kernel. If the flag is set, the software-interrupt code runs instead of exiting from the kernel.

System calls are a special case of a software-initiated trap—the machine instruction used to
initiate a system call typically causes a hardware trap that is handled specially by the kernel.

Run-Time Organization

The kernel can be logically divided into a top half and a bottom half, as shown in Figure 3.1.
The top half of the kernel provides services to processes in response to system calls or traps.
This software can be thought of as a library of routines shared by all processes. The top half of
the kernel executes in a privileged execution mode, in which it has access both to kernel data
structures and to the context of user-level processes. The context of each process is contained in
two areas of memory reserved for process-specific information. The first of these areas is the
process structure, which has historically contained the information that is necessary even if
the process has been swapped out. In FreeBSD, this information includes the identifiers
associated with the process, the process’s rights and privileges, its descriptors, its memory map,
pending external events and associated actions, maximum and current resource utilization, and
many other things. The second is the thread structure, which has historically contained the
information that is not necessary when the process is swapped out. In FreeBSD, the
thread-structure information of each process includes the hardware thread state block (TSB), its
kernel stack, and minor additional information for debugging and creating a core dump.
Deciding what was to be stored in the process structure and the thread structure was far more
important in previous systems than it was in FreeBSD. As memory became a less limited

resource, most of the thread structure was merged into the process structure for convenience
(see Section 4.2).

Figure 3.1 Run-time structure of the kernel.

The bottom half of the kernel comprises routines that are invoked to handle hardware interrupts.
Activities in the bottom half of the kernel are synchronous with respect to the interrupt
source but are asynchronous, with respect to the top half, and the software cannot depend on
having a specific (or any) process running when an interrupt occurs. Thus, the state information
for the process that initiated the activity is not available. The top and bottom halves of the kernel
communicate through data structures, generally organized around work queues.

The FreeBSD kernel is rarely preempted to run another user process while executing in the top
half of the kernel—for example, while executing a system call—although it will explicitly give up
the processor if it must wait for an event or for a shared resource. Its execution may be
interrupted, however, by the need to run a real-time process or by interrupts for the bottom half
of the kernel. When an interrupt is received, the kernel process that handles that device is
scheduled to run. Normally these device-interrupt processes have a higher priority than user
processes or processes running in the top half of the kernel. Thus, when an interrupt causes a
device-interrupt process to be made runnable, it will usually preempt the currently running
process. When a process running in the top half of the kernel wants to add an entry to the work
list for a device, it needs to ensure that it will not be preempted by that device part way through
linking the new element onto the work list. In FreeBSD, the work list is protected by a mutex.
Any process (top or bottom half) seeking to modify the work list must first obtain the mutex.

Once held, any other process seeking to obtain the mutex will wait until the process holding it
has finished modifying the list and released the mutex.

Processes cooperate in the sharing of system resources, such as the disks and memory. The top
and bottom halves of the kernel also work together in implementing certain system operations,
such as I/O. Typically, the top half will start an I/O operation, and then relinquish the processor;
then the requesting process will sleep, awaiting notification from the bottom half that the I/O
request has completed.

Entry to the Kernel

When a process enters the kernel through a trap or an interrupt, the kernel must save the
current machine state before it begins to service the event. For the PC, the machine state that
must be saved includes the program counter, the user stack pointer, the general-purpose
registers, and the processor status longword. The PC trap instruction saves the program counter
and the processor status longword as part of the exception stack frame; the user stack pointer
and registers must be saved by the software trap handler. If the machine state were not fully
saved, the kernel could change values in the currently executing program in improper ways.
Since interrupts may occur between any two user-level instructions (and on some architectures
between parts of a single instruction), and because they may be completely unrelated to the
currently executing process, an incompletely saved state could cause correct programs to fail in
mysterious and not easily reproducible ways.

The exact sequence of events required to save the process state is completely machine
dependent, although the PC provides a good example of the general procedure. A trap or system
call will trigger the following events:

• The hardware switches into kernel (supervisor) mode, so that memory-access checks are made
with kernel privileges, references to the stack use the per-process kernel stack, and privileged
instructions can be executed.

• The hardware pushes onto the per-process kernel stack the program counter, processor status
longword, and information describing the type of trap. (On architectures other than the PC, this
information can include the system-call number and general-purpose registers as well.)

• An assembly-language routine saves all state information not saved by the hardware. On the
PC, this information includes the general-purpose registers and the user stack pointer, also
saved onto the per-process kernel stack.

After this preliminary state saving, the kernel calls a C routine that can freely use the
general-purpose registers as any other C routine would, without concern about changing the
unsuspecting process’s state.

There are three major kinds of handlers, corresponding to particular kernel entries:

1. Syscall() for a system call

2. Trap() for hardware traps and for software-initiated traps other than system calls

3. The appropriate device-driver interrupt handler for a hardware interrupt

Each type of handler takes its own specific set of parameters. For a system call, they are the
system-call number and an exception frame. For a trap, they are the type of trap, the relevant
floating-point and virtual-address information related to the trap, and an exception frame. (The
exception-frame arguments for the trap and system call are not the same. The PC hardware
saves different information based on different types of traps.) For a hardware interrupt, the only
parameter is a unit (or board) number.

Return from the Kernel

When the handling of the system entry is completed, the user-process state is restored, and
control returns to the user process. Returning to the user process reverses the process of
entering the kernel:

• An assembly-language routine restores the general-purpose registers and user-stack pointer
previously pushed onto the stack.

• The hardware restores the program counter and program status longword, and switches to
user mode, so that future references to the stack pointer use the user’s stack pointer, privileged
instructions cannot be executed, and memory-access checks are done with user-level privileges.

Execution then resumes at the next instruction in the user’s process.

3.2 System Calls

The most frequent trap into the kernel (after clock processing) is a request to do a system call.
System performance requires that the kernel minimize the overhead in fielding and dispatching
a system call. The system-call handler must do the following work:

• Verify that the parameters to the system call are located at a valid user address, and copy them
from the user’s address space into the kernel

• Call a kernel routine that implements the system call

Result Handling

Eventually, the system call returns to the calling process, either successfully or unsuccessfully.
On the PC architecture, success or failure is returned as the carry bit in the user process’s
program status longword: If it is zero, the return was successful; otherwise, it was unsuccessful.
On many machines, return values of C functions are passed back through a general-purpose
register (for the PC, data register EAX). The routines in the kernel that implement system calls
return the values that are normally associated with the global variable errno. After a system call,
the kernel system-call handler leaves this value in the register. If the system call failed, a C
library routine moves that value into errno, and sets the return register to -1. The calling process
is expected to notice the value of the return register, and then to examine errno. The mechanism
involving the carry bit and the global variable errno exists for historical reasons derived from
the PDP-11.

There are two kinds of unsuccessful returns from a system call: those where kernel routines
discover an error and those where a system call is interrupted. The most common case is a
system call that is interrupted when it has relinquished the processor to wait for an event that
may not occur for a long time (such as terminal input), and a signal arrives in the interim. When
signal handlers are initialized by a process, they specify whether system calls that they interrupt
should be restarted or whether the system call should return with an interrupted system call
(EINTR) error.

When a system call is interrupted, the signal is delivered to the process. If the process has
requested that the signal abort the system call, the handler then returns an error, as described
previously. If the system call is to be restarted, however, the handler resets the process’s
program counter to the machine instruction that caused the system-call trap into the kernel.
(This calculation is necessary because the program-counter value that was saved when the
system-call trap was done is for the instruction after the trap-causing instruction.) The handler
replaces the saved program-counter value with this address. When the process returns from the
signal handler, it resumes at the program-counter value that the handler provided and
reexecutes the same system call.

Restarting a system call by resetting the program counter has certain implications. First, the
kernel must not modify any of the input parameters in the process address space (it can modify

the kernel copy of the parameters that it makes). Second, it must ensure that the system call has
not performed any actions that cannot be repeated. For example, in the current system, if any
characters have been read from the terminal, the read must return with a short count. Otherwise,
if the call were to be restarted, the already-read bytes would be lost.

Returning from a System Call

While the system call is running or sleeping with signals blocked, a signal may be posted to the
process, or another process may attain a higher scheduling priority. After the system call
completes, the system-call exit code checks to see whether either event has occurred.

The system-call exit code first checks for a posted signal. Such signals include signals that
interrupted the system call, as well as signals that arrived while a system call was in progress but
were held pending until the system call completed. Signals that are ignored, by default or by
explicit programmatic request, are never posted to the process. Signals with a default action
have that action taken before the process runs again (i.e., the process may be stopped or
terminated as appropriate). If a signal is to be caught (and is not currently blocked), the
system-call exit code arranges to have the appropriate signal handler called rather than have the
process return directly from the system call. After the signal handler returns, the process will
resume execution at system-call return (or system-call execution, if the system call is being
restarted).

After checking for posted signals, the system-call exit code checks to see whether any process
has a priority higher than that of the currently running one. If such a process exists, the
system-call exit code calls the context-switch routine to cause the higher-priority process to run.
At a later time, the current process will again have the highest priority and will resume
execution by returning from the system call to the user process.

If a process has requested that the system do profiling, the system-call exit code also calculates
the amount of time that has been spent in the system call—that is, the system time accounted to
the process between the latter’s entry into and exit from the kernel. This time is charged to the
routine in the user’s process that made the system call.

3.3 Traps and Interrupts

Traps, like system calls, occur synchronously for a process. Traps normally occur because of
unintentional errors, such as division by zero or indirection through an invalid pointer. The
process becomes aware of the problem either by catching a signal or by being terminated. Traps

can also occur because of a page fault, in which case the system makes the page available and
restarts the process without the process being aware that the fault occurred.

The trap handler is invoked like the system-call handler. First, the process state is saved. Next,
the trap handler determines the trap type and then arranges to post a signal or to cause a pagein
as appropriate. Finally, it checks for pending signals and higher-priority processes, and exits like
the system-call handler except that it has no return value.

I/O Device Interrupts

Interrupts from I/O and other devices are handled by interrupt routines that are loaded as part
of the kernel’s address space. These routines handle the console terminal interface, one or more
clocks, and several software-initiated interrupts used by the system for low-priority clock
processing and for networking facilities.

Unlike traps and system calls, device interrupts occur asynchronously. The process that
requested the service is unlikely to be the currently running process and may no longer exist!
The process that started the operation will be notified that the operation has finished when that
process runs again. As occurs with traps and system calls, the entire machine state must be
saved, since any changes could cause errors in the currently running process.

Device-interrupt handlers run only on demand. Unlike the pre-multiprocessing versions of
FreeBSD, modern FreeBSD kernels create a thread context for each device driver. Thus, just as
one process cannot access the context of the previously running process, interrupt handlers
cannot access any of the context of the previously running interrupt handler. The stack normally
used by the kernel is part of a process context. Since each device has its own context, it also has
its own stack on which to run.

Interrupts in pre-multiprocessing FreeBSD systems had no context, so they had to run to
completion without sleeping. In modern FreeBSD kernels, interrupts can block to wait for
resources. However, while blocked they cannot be invoked with another event, so to reduce the
chance for lost interrupts, most handlers still run to completion without sleeping.

An interrupt handler is never invoked from the top half of the kernel. Thus, it must get all the
information it needs from the data structures that it shares with the top half of the
kernel—generally, its global work queue. Similarly, all information provided to the top half of
the kernel by the interrupt handler must be communicated the same way.

Software Interrupts

Many events in the kernel are driven by hardware interrupts. For high-speed devices such as
network controllers, these interrupts are scheduled at a high priority. A network controller must
quickly acknowledge receipt of a packet and reenable the controller to accept more packets to
avoid losing closely spaced packets. However, the further processing of passing the packet to the
receiving process, although time-consuming, does not need to be done quickly. Thus, the further
processing can be scheduled at a lower priority, so critical operations will not be blocked from
executing longer than necessary.

The mechanism for performing lower-priority processing is called a software interrupt.
Typically, a high-priority interrupt creates a queue of work to be done at a lower-priority level.
As with hardware devices in FreeBSD, each software interrupt has a process context associated
with it. The software-interrupt processes are generally given a lower scheduling priority than the
device-driver processes but a higher priority than those given to user processes. Whenever a
hardware interrupt arrives, the process associated with the device driver will attain the highest
priority and be scheduled to run. When there are no device-driver processes that are runnable,
the highest priority software-interrupt process will be scheduled to run. If there are no
software-interrupt processes that are runnable, then the highest priority user process will run. If
either a software-interrupt process or a user process is running when an interrupt arrives and
makes its device-driver process runnable, the scheduler will preempt the software-interrupt or
user process to run the device-driver process.

The delivery of network packets to destination processes is handled by a packet-processing
function that runs at a lower priority than the network-controller device driver. As packets come
in, they are put onto a work queue and the controller is immediately reenabled. Between packet
arrivals, the packet-processing process works to deliver the packets. Thus, the controller can
accept new packets without having to wait for the previous packet to be delivered. In addition to
network processing, software interrupts are used to handle time-related events and process
rescheduling.

3.4 Clock Interrupts

The system is driven by a clock that interrupts at regular intervals. Each interrupt is referred to
as a tick. On the PC, the clock ticks 1000 times per second. At each tick, the system updates the
current time of day as well as user-process and system timers.

Handling 1000 interrupts per second can be time consuming. To reduce the interrupt load, the
kernel computes the number of ticks in the future at which an action may need to be taken. It

then schedules the next clock interrupt to occur at that time. Thus, clock interrupts typically
occur much less frequently than the 1000 ticks-per-second rate implies. This reduced interrupt
rate is particularly helpful for systems with limited power budgets such as laptop computers and
embedded systems as it allows them to spend much more time in low-power-consumption sleep
mode.

Interrupts for clock ticks are posted at a high hardware-interrupt priority. After switching to the
clock-device process, the hardclock() routine is called. It is important that the hardclock()
routine finish its job quickly:

• If hardclock() runs for more than one tick, it will miss the next clock interrupt. Since
hardclock() maintains the time of day for the system, a missed interrupt will cause the system to
lose time.

• Because of hardclock()’s high interrupt priority, nearly all other activity in the system is
blocked while hardclock() is running. This blocking can cause network controllers to miss
packets.

So the time spent in hardclock() is minimized, less critical time-related processing is handled by
a lower-priority software-interrupt handler called softclock(). In addition, if multiple clocks are
available, some time-related processing can be handled by other routines supported by alternate
clocks. On the PC there are two additional clocks that run at a different frequency than the
system clock: the statclock(), which runs at 127 ticks per second to collect system statistics, and
the profclock(), which runs at 8128 ticks per second to collect profiling information.

The work done by hardclock() is as follows:

• If the currently running process has a virtual or profiling interval timer (see Section 3.6), it
decrements the timer and delivers a signal if the timer has expired.

• It increments the current time of day by the number of ticks since the previous call to
hardclock().

• If the system does not have a separate clock for process profiling, the hardclock() routine does
the operations normally done by profclock(), as described in the next section.

• If the system does not have a separate clock for statistics gathering, the hardclock() routine
does the operations normally done by statclock(), as described in the next section.

• If softclock() needs to be run, it makes the softclock process runnable.

Statistics and Process Scheduling

On historic FreeBSD systems, the hardclock() routine collected resource-utilization statistics
about what was happening when the clock interrupted. These statistics were used to do
accounting, to monitor what the system was doing, and to determine future scheduling priorities.
In addition, hardclock() forced context switches so that all processes would get a share of the
CPU.

This approach has weaknesses because the clock supporting hardclock() interrupts on a regular
basis. Processes can become synchronized with the system clock, resulting in inaccurate
measurements of resource utilization (especially CPU) and inaccurate profiling [McCanne &
Torek, 1993]. It is also possible to write programs that deliberately synchronize with the system
clock to outwit the scheduler.

On architectures with multiple high-precision, programmable clocks—such as the PC—a
statistics clock is run at a different frequency than the time-of-day clock. The FreeBSD statclock()
runs at 127 ticks per second and is responsible for accumulating resource usage to processes. At
each tick, it charges the currently running process with a tick; if the process has accumulated
four ticks, it recalculates its priority. If the new priority is less than the current priority, it
arranges for the process to be rescheduled. Thus, processes that become synchronized with the
system clock still have CPU time accounted to them.

The statclock() also collects statistics on what the system was doing at the time of the tick
(sitting idle, executing in user mode, or executing in system mode). Finally, it collects basic
information on system I/O, such as which disk drives are currently active.

To allow the collection of more accurate profiling information, FreeBSD supports a profiling
clock. When one or more processes are requesting profiling information, the profiling clock is
set to run at a tick rate that is relatively prime to the main system clock (8128 ticks per second
on the PC). At each tick, it checks to see if one of the processes that it has been asked to profile is
running. If so, it obtains the current location of the program counter and increments a counter
associated with that location in the profiling buffer associated with the process.

Timeouts

The remaining time-related processing involves processing timeout requests and periodically
reprioritizing processes that are ready to run. These functions are handled by the softclock()
routine.

When hardclock() completes, if there were any softclock() functions to be done, hardclock()
schedules the softclock process to run.

The primary task of the softclock() routine is to arrange for the execution of periodic events,
such as the following:

• Process real-time timer (see Section 3.6)

• Retransmission of dropped network packets

• Watchdog timers on peripherals that require monitoring

• System process-rescheduling events

An important event is the scheduling that periodically raises or lowers the CPU priority for each
process in the system based on that process’s recent CPU usage (see Section 4.4). The
rescheduling calculation is done once per second. The scheduler is started at boot time, and each
time that it runs, it requests that it be invoked again 1 second in the future.

On a heavily loaded system with many processes, the scheduler may take a long time to
complete its job. Posting its next invocation 1 second after each completion may cause
scheduling to occur less frequently than once per second. However, as the scheduler is not
responsible for any time-critical functions, such as maintaining the time of day, scheduling less
frequently than once a second is normally not a problem.

The data structure that describes waiting events is called the callout queue. Figure 3.2 shows
an example of the callout queue. When a process schedules an event, it specifies a function to be
called, a pointer to be passed as an argument to the function, and the number of clock ticks until
the event should occur.

Figure 3.2 Timer events in the callout queue.

The kernel maintains an array of queue headers, each representing a particular time. There is a
pointer that references the queue header for the current time, marked “now” in Figure 3.2. The
queue header that follows the currently referenced one represents events that are one tick in the
future. The queue header after that is two ticks in the future. The list wraps around, so if the last
queue header in the list represents time t, then the first queue header in the list represents time
t + 1. The queue header immediately preceding the currently referenced one represents the time
furthest in the future. In Figure 3.2 there are 200 queue headers, so the queue header
immediately preceding the one marked “now” represents events that are 199 ticks in the future.

Each time the hardclock() routine runs, it increments the callout queue-head pointer. If the
queue is not empty, it schedules the softclock() process to run. The softclock() process scans the
events in the current queue. It compares the current time to the time stored in the event
structure. If the times match, the event is removed from the list and its requested function is
called, being passed the argument specified when it was registered.

When an event n ticks in the future is to be posted, its queue header is calculated by taking the
index of the queue labelled “now” in Figure 3.2, adding n to it, and then taking the resulting
value modulo the number of queue headers. If an event is to occur further in the future than the
number of queue headers, then it will end up on a list with other events that are to happen
sooner. Thus, the actual time of the event is stored in its entry so that when the queue is scanned
by softclock(), it can determine which events are current and which are to occur in the future. In
Figure 3.2, the second entry in the “now” queue will be skipped on the current scan of the queue,
but it will be handled 200 ticks in the future when softclock() next processes this queue.

An argument is provided to the callout-queue function when it is called so that one function can
be used by multiple processes. For example, there is a single real-time timer function that sends
a signal to a process when a timer expires. Every process that has a real-time timer running
posts a timeout request for this function; the argument that is passed to the function is a pointer
to the process structure for the process. This argument enables the timeout function to deliver
the signal to the correct process.

Timeout processing is more efficient when the timeouts are specified in ticks. Time updates
require only an integer decrement, and checks for timer expiration require only an integer
comparison. If the timers contained time values, decrementing and comparisons would be more
complex. The approach used in FreeBSD is based on the work of Varghese & Lauck [1987].
Another possible approach is to maintain a heap with the next-occurring event at the top
[Barkley & Lee, 1988].

3.5 Memory-Management Services

The memory organization and layout associated with a FreeBSD process is shown in Figure 3.3.
Each process begins execution with three memory segments: text, data, and stack. The data
segment is divided into initialized data and uninitialized data (also known as bss). The text is
read-only and is normally shared by all processes executing the file, whereas the data and stack
areas can be written by, and are private to, each process. The text and initialized data for the
process are read from the executable file.

Figure 3.3 Layout of a FreeBSD process in memory and on disk.

An executable file is distinguished by being a plain file (rather than a directory, special file, or
symbolic link) and by having one or more of its execute bits set. Each executable file has an exec
header containing a magic number that specifies the type of the executable file. FreeBSD
supports multiple executable formats including the following:

1. Files that must be read by an interpreter

2. Files that are directly executable including AOUT, ELF, and gzipped ELF

An executable file is initially parsed by the image activation (imgact) framework. The header of
a file to be executed is passed through a list of registered image activators to find a matching
format. When a matching format is found, the corresponding image activator prepares the file
for execution.

Files falling into the first classification have as their magic number (located in the first 2 bytes of
the file) the two-character sequence #! followed by the pathname of the interpreter to be used.

This pathname is currently limited by a compile-time constant to 128 characters. For example,
#!/bin/sh refers to the Bourne shell. The image activator that will be selected is the one that
handles the invocation of interpreters. It will load and run the named interpreter, passing the
name of the file that is to be interpreted as an argument. To prevent loops, FreeBSD allows only
one level of interpretation, and a file’s interpreter may not itself be interpreted.

For performance reasons, most files fall into the second classification and are directly executable.
Information in the header of a directly executable file includes the architecture and operating
system for which an executable was built and whether it is statically linked or uses shared
libraries. The selected image activator can use information such as knowledge of the operating
system for which an executable was compiled to configure the kernel to use the proper system
call interpretation when running the program. For example, an executable built to run on Linux
can be seamlessly run on FreeBSD by using the system-call dispatch vector that provides
emulation of the Linux system calls.

The header also specifies the sizes of text, initialized data, uninitialized data, and additional
information for debugging. The debugging information is not used by the kernel or by the
executing program. Following the header is an image of the text, followed by an image of the
initialized data. Uninitialized data are not contained in the executable file because they can be
created on demand using zero-filled memory.

To begin execution, the kernel arranges to have the text portion of the file mapped into the low
part of the process address space starting at the beginning of the second page of the virtual
address space. The first page of the virtual address space is marked as invalid so that attempts to
read or write through a null pointer will fault. The initialized data portion of the file is mapped
into the address space following the text. An area equal to the uninitialized data region is
created with zero-filled memory after the initialized data region. The stack is also created from
zero-filled memory. Although the stack should not need to be zero filled, early UNIX systems
made it so. In an attempt to save some startup time in 4.2BSD, the developers modified the
kernel to not zero-fill the stack, leaving the random previous contents of the page instead. But
concerns about surreptitious misuse of data from previously running programs and
unrepeatable errors in previously working programs lead to restoration of the zero filling of the
stack by the time that 4.3BSD was released.

Copying into memory the entire text and initialized data portion of a large program causes a
long startup latency. FreeBSD avoids this startup time by demand paging the program into
memory rather than preloading the program. In demand paging, the program is loaded in small
pieces (pages) as it is needed rather than all at once before it begins execution. The system does
demand paging by dividing up the address space into equal-size areas called pages. For each

page, the kernel records the offset into the executable file of the corresponding data. The first
access to an address on each page causes a page-fault trap in the kernel. The page-fault handler
reads the correct page of the executable file into the process memory. Thus, the kernel loads
only those parts of the executable file that are needed. Chapter 6 explains paging details.

It might seem more efficient to load the whole process at once rather than in many little pieces.
However, most processes use less than half of their address space during their entire execution
lifetime. The reason for the low utilization is that typical user commands have many options,
only a few of which are used on any invocation. The code and data structures that support the
unused options are not needed. Thus, the cost of loading the subset of pages that are used is
lower than the cost of initially loading the whole process. In addition to the time saved by
avoiding the loading of the entire process, demand paging also reduces the amount of physical
memory that is needed to run the process.

The uninitialized data area can be extended with zero-filled pages using the system call sbrk,
although most user processes use the library routine malloc(), a more programmer-friendly
interface to sbrk. This allocated memory, which grows from the top of the original data segment,
is called the heap. On the PC, the stack grows down from the top of memory, whereas the heap
grows up from the bottom of memory.

Above the user stack are areas of memory that are created by the system when the process is
started. Directly above the user stack is the number of arguments (argc), the argument vector
(argv), and the process environment vector (envp) set up when the program was executed.
Following them are the argument and environment strings themselves. Next is the signal code,
used when the system delivers signals to the process. At the top is the ps_strings structure, used
by ps to locate the argv of the process.

Historically, most executables were statically linked. In a statically linked binary, all the library
routines and system-call entry stubs are loaded into the binary image at the time that it is
compiled. Today, most binaries are dynamically linked. A dynamically linked binary contains
only the compiled application code and a list of the routines (library and system-call entry stubs)
that it needs. When the executable is run, a set of shared libraries containing the routines that it
needs to use are mapped into its address space as part of its startup. The first time that it calls a
routine, that routine is located in the shared library and a dynamic linkage is created to it.

When the dynamic loader does the mmap system call to allocate space for the shared libraries,
the kernel must find a place within the process address space to place them. The convention in
FreeBSD is to place them just below the administrative lower limit for the stack. Since the stack
will not be permitted to grow below the administrative stack size limit, there is no danger of the
shared libraries being overwritten. A side effect of this implementation is that the stack limit

cannot be safely changed after a binary begins running. Ideally, a bigger stack limit can be set by
the process (such as the shell) before it starts the application. However, applications that know
at startup that they will need a bigger stack can increase their stack limit and then call the exec
system call on themselves to restart with their shared libraries relocated at the bottom of their
new stack limit.

An alternative would be to place the shared libraries just above the heap limit. However, this
would mean that the heap limit could not be increased once the binary began running. As
applications much more frequently want to increase their heap size than their stack size, the
stack limit was selected as the appropriate location to place the shared libraries.

A process requires the use of some global system resources. The kernel maintains a linked list of
processes that has an entry for each process in the system. Among other data, the process
entries record information on scheduling and on virtual-memory allocation. Because the entire
process address space, including the kernel stack for the process, may be swapped out of main
memory, the process entry must record enough information to be able to locate the process and
to bring that process back into memory. In addition, information needed while the process is
swapped out (e.g., scheduling information) must be maintained in the process entry rather than
in the thread structure to avoid the kernel swapping in the process only to decide that it is not at
a high enough priority to be run.

Other global resources associated with a process include space to record information about
descriptors and page tables that record information about physical-memory utilization.

3.6 Timing Services

The kernel provides several different timing services to processes. These services include timers
that run in real time and timers that run only while a process is executing.

Real Time

The system’s time offset since January 1, 1970, Universal Coordinated Time (UTC), also known
as the Epoch, is returned by the system call gettimeofday. Most modern processors (including
the PC processors) maintain a battery-backup time-of-day register. This clock continues to run
even if the processor is turned off. When the system boots, it consults the processor’s
time-of-day register to find out the current time. The system’s time is then maintained by the
clock interrupts. At each interrupt, the system increments its global time variable by an amount
equal to the number of microseconds per tick. For the PC, running at 1000 ticks per second,
each tick represents 1000 microseconds.

External Representation

Time is always exported from the system as microseconds, rather than as clock ticks, to provide
a resolution-independent format. Internally, the kernel is free to select whatever tick rate best
trades off clock-interrupt-handling overhead with timer resolution. As the tick rate per second
increases, the resolution of the system timers improves, but the time spent dealing with
hardclock interrupts increases. As processors become faster, the tick rate can be increased to
provide finer resolution without adversely affecting user applications. Systems with real-time
constraints often run the clock at 5000 or 10,000 ticks per second. As explained in Section 3.4,
the kernel can usually eliminate most of the interrupts associated with a high tick rate.

All filesystem (and other) timestamps are maintained in UTC offsets from the Epoch.
Conversion to local time, including adjustment for daylight saving time, is handled externally to
the system in the C library.

Adjustment of the Time

Often, it is desirable to maintain the same time on all the machines on a network. It is also
possible to keep more accurate time than that available from the basic processor clock. For
example, hardware is readily available that listens to the set of radio stations that broadcast UTC
synchronization signals in the United States. When processes on different machines agree on a
common time, they will wish to change the clock on their host processor to agree with the
networkwide time value. One possibility is to change the system time to the network time using
the settimeofday system call. Unfortunately, the settimeofday system call will result in time
running backward on machines whose clocks were fast. Time running backward can confuse
user programs (such as make) that expect time to invariably increase. To avoid this problem,
the system provides the adjtime system call [Mills, 1992]. The adjtime system call takes a time
delta (either positive or negative) and changes the rate at which time advances by 10 percent,
faster or slower, until the time has been corrected. The operating system does the speedup by
incrementing the global time by 1100 microseconds for each tick and does the slowdown by
incrementing the global time by 900 microseconds for each tick. Regardless, time increases
monotonically, and user processes depending on the ordering of file-modification times are not
affected. However, time changes that take tens of seconds to adjust will affect programs that are
measuring time intervals by using repeated calls to gettimeofday.

Interval Time

The system provides each process with three interval timers. The real timer decrements in real
time. An example of use for this timer is a library routine maintaining a wakeup-service queue.
A SIGALRM signal is delivered to the process when this timer expires. The real-time timer is run
from the timeout queue maintained by the softclock() routine (see Section 3.4).

The profiling timer decrements both in process virtual time (when running in user mode) and
when the system is running on behalf of the process. It is designed to be used by processes to
profile their execution statistically. A SIGPROF signal is delivered to the process when this timer
expires. Each time that profclock() runs, it checks to see whether the currently running process
has requested a profiling timer; if it has, profclock() decrements the timer and sends the process
a signal when zero is reached.

The virtual timer decrements in process virtual time. It runs only when the process is executing
in user mode. A SIGVTALRM signal is delivered to the process when this timer expires. The
virtual timer is also implemented in profclock() as the profiling timer is, except that it
decrements the timer for the current process only if it is executing in user mode and not if it is
running in the kernel.

3.7 Resource Services

All systems have limits imposed by their hardware architecture and configuration to ensure
reasonable operation and to keep users from accidentally (or maliciously) creating resource
shortages. At a minimum, the hardware limits must be imposed on processes that run on the
system. It is usually desirable to limit processes further, below these hardware-imposed limits.
The system measures resource utilization and allows limits to be imposed on consumption
either at or below the hardware-imposed limits.

Process Priorities

The default scheduling policy in the FreeBSD system is managed by the share scheduler that
gives CPU scheduling priority to processes that have not used CPU time recently. This priority
scheme tends to favor processes that execute for only short periods of time—for example,
interactive processes. The priority selected for each process is maintained internally by the
kernel. The calculation of the priority is affected by the per-process nice variable. Positive nice
values mean that the process is willing to receive less than its share of the processor. Negative
values of nice mean that the process wants more than its share of the processor. Most processes

run with the default nice value of zero, asking neither higher nor lower access to the processor.
It is possible to determine or change the nice currently assigned to a process, to a process group,
or to the processes of a specified user. Many factors other than nice affect scheduling, including
the amount of CPU time that the process has used recently, the amount of memory that the
process has used recently, and the current load on the system.

In addition to the share scheduler described here, the FreeBSD system also has a real-time
scheduler available. The real-time scheduler allows processes to precisely control their order of
execution and the amount of time given to each process. The details of the share and real-time
scheduling algorithms are described in Section 4.4.

Resource Utilization

As a process executes, it uses system resources such as the CPU and memory. The kernel tracks
the resources used by each process and compiles statistics describing this usage. The statistics
managed by the kernel are available to a process while the latter is executing. When a process
terminates, the statistics are made available to its parent via the wait family of system calls.

The resources used by a process are returned by the system call getrusage. The resources used
by the current process, or by all the terminated children of the current process, may be
requested. The following information is included:

• The amount of user and system time used by the process

• The memory utilization of the process

• The paging and disk I/O activity of the process

• The number of voluntary and involuntary context switches taken by the process

• The amount of interprocess communication done by the process

The resource-usage information is collected at locations throughout the kernel. The CPU time is
collected by the statclock() function, which is called either by the system clock in hardclock(), or,
if an alternate clock is available, by the alternate-clock interrupt process. The kernel scheduler
calculates memory utilization by sampling the amount of memory that an active process is using
at the same time that it is recomputing process priorities. The vm_fault() routine recalculates
the paging activity each time that it starts a disk transfer to fulfill a paging request (see Section
6.11). The I/O activity statistics are collected each time that the process has to start a transfer to

fulfill a file or device I/O request, as well as when the general system statistics are calculated.
The IPC communication activity is updated each time that information is sent or received.

Resource Limits

The kernel also supports limiting certain per-process resources. These resources include the
following:

• The maximum amount of CPU time that can be accumulated

• The maximum bytes that a process can request be locked into memory

• The maximum size of a process’s data segment

• The maximum size of a process’s stack segment

• The maximum amount of private physical memory that a process may have at any given
moment

• The maximum amount of private or shared physical memory that a process may have at any
given moment

• The maximum amount of physical memory that a process may have dedicated to socket buffers

• The maximum size of a file that can be created by a process

• The maximum size of a core file that can be created by a process

• The maximum number of simultaneous open files for a process

• The maximum number of simultaneous processes allowed to a user

For each resource controlled by the kernel, two limits are maintained: a soft limit and a hard
limit. All users can alter the soft limit within the range of 0 to the corresponding hard limit. All
users can (irreversibly) lower the hard limit, but only the superuser can raise the hard limit. If a
process exceeds certain soft limits, a signal is delivered to the process to notify it that a resource
limit has been exceeded. Normally, this signal causes the process to terminate, but the process
may either catch or ignore the signal. If the process ignores the signal and fails to release
resources that it already holds, further attempts to obtain more resources will result in errors.

Resource limits are generally enforced at or near the locations that the resource statistics are
collected. The CPU time limit is enforced in the process context-switching function. The stack

and data-segment limits are enforced by a return of allocation failure once those limits have
been reached. The file-size limit is enforced by the filesystem.

Filesystem Quotas

In addition to limits on the size of individual files, the kernel optionally enforces limits on the
total amount of space that a user or group can use on a filesystem. Our discussion of the
implementation of these limits is deferred to Section 9.4.

3.8 Kernel Tracing Facilities

Operating-system kernels are large and complex pieces of software, encompassing thousands of
lines of mainly C code, organized into dozens of subsystems and including hundreds of device
drivers. Understanding what is happening within the operating system while it is running is
important not only to developers of the code but also to the much larger group of people who
use the system every day to get their work done. FreeBSD includes several facilities that allows
users and administrators of the system to understand what is happening inside the system as it
executes.

System-Call Tracing

The ktrace facility allows a user to get a detailed trace of the order of, arguments to, and results
from all the system calls done by an application. This information includes such important
details as pathnames being looked up, type and timing of signals being posted, and even the
contents of all input and output operations.

The facility is available for any application without the need for prior compilation or inclusion of
special hooks. Thus, it can be particularly helpful when trying to debug an application for which
the source code is unavailable.

Tracing can be flexibly applied. It can be started at the time an application begins running or to
an already running application. It can be applied to individual processes, to all the processes in a
process group, or through inheritance to all current or future children processes.

The traces are generated in a compact binary format to keep them as dense as possible. The use
of a binary format also minimizes the time spent collecting and writing the information while
the application runs and avoids the need to do string processing in the kernel. The binary dump
is converted to a human-readable format using the kdump program that converts the system

call numbers to names, ioctl values to their macro names, system error numbers to their
standard error strings, and displays the running time between and during system calls.

A similar facility is provided by the truss command popularized in System V and Solaris.
Rather than having specialized hooks inside the kernel to collect tracing information, it collects
its information by stopping and restarting the processes being monitored using the ptrace
system call. As a result, it has higher overhead and provides less information than ktrace.

DTrace

The information collected by ktrace is limited to the set of information available from its fixed
set of hooks in the kernel. Further, this set of hooks has to be limited to those pieces of
information deemed to be most generally useful. If ktrace collected every possibly useful bit of
information, it would generate an overwhelming amount of data for even trivial applications. Its
other major limitation is that it collects information only about system calls. When trying to
track down bugs or performance problems, one needs to analyze the entire software stack that
includes the application itself, the libraries that it uses, and the system calls that it makes. The
DTrace facility was developed to address all these issues [Cantrill et al., 2004]. Originally
written for Sun’s Solaris operating system, DTrace support was added to FreeBSD 8, and is
present by default in kernels starting with FreeBSD 10.

DTrace greatly expands the set of information from system calls by adding thousands of hooks,
referred to as tracepoints, that can identify many details of what is happening. To avoid the
resulting avalanche of data, each tracepoint can be configured to conditionally collect and
output its information. DTrace defines the D language that allows application developers and
systems administrators to write a small D-language program to describe the information that
they want to collect. They can specify the tracepoint that they are interested in inspecting and
refine the information that they output. For example, a D program might monitor a routine that
changes a reference counter to collect the highest value that it ever reached, or collect the total
number of times that a resource was referenced rather than just blindly outputting some
information every time the routine is called. Only those tracepoints that are useful to the
analysis are activated, while all others are left dormant. With its ability to trigger only a small
number of tracepoints at anyone one time, DTrace can collect detailed information on a narrow
set of interesting events with low overhead and carefully bounded output.

The tracing information is expanded into the rest of the software stack by adding DTrace
tracepoints to the system libraries and to the application itself. A standard set of tracepoints is
available with no programming effort required by the library or application developers. The
standard tracepoints are the set of all functions in a library, application, or the kernel itself, and

include the ability to capture parameter information at every subroutine call and return. In
addition to these function boundary tracepoints, many system libraries have had additional
application-specific hooks added by their developers.

The tracing functionality in DTrace is implemented using probes and providers. A probe is a
specific tracepoint within the running kernel, such as a function boundary, while a provider is a
kernel module that supports a set of probes. The DTrace system was designed to be extended so
that new kernel modules or services could have tracepoints that were not envisioned by the
original authors. The providers found in FreeBSD are listed in Table 3.2. The mac_framework,
sched, and vfs providers are unique to FreeBSD. A complete discussion of DTrace providers and
how they are used by developers and administrators can be found in Gregg & Mauro [2011]. In
this section, we describe only how DTrace interacts with the FreeBSD kernel and do not discuss
how to use DTrace in general.

Table 3.2 FreeBSD DTrace providers.

Before the advent of DTrace, any system to which logging or tracing was added demonstrated a
significant probe effect. Consider what happens when a function contains a conditional
statement that determines whether to report a statistic. Whether or not the statistic is reported,
the effect of having the conditional statement in the function, compared to no conditional
statement being present at all, is measurable. The overhead seen by having the conditional
statement is called the probe effect.

DTrace implements its probes by patching the executable when a probe is activated. For
example, to monitor a call to a routine, the first instruction of the called routine is replaced with

a call to the probe. The probe then collects its information, executes the instruction its call
replaced, and returns to the instruction following the one that it patched. When the probe is
deactivated, the original patched-instruction location with the call to the probe is replaced with
the instruction that was originally at that location. This technique avoids any probe effect for
inactive probes. Debuggers, such as lldb, use the same technique to add breakpoints to the
program they are debugging. Patching an instruction stream that is currently executing is both
tricky to do safely, and an explicit violation of the security and privacy of data structures on the
system; thus, super-user privileges are required to enable kernel probes. DTrace is safe to use in
production systems as it ensures that its patches to the program or kernel cannot cause either to
behave incorrectly. An example of a precaution taken by DTrace to ensure safe operation is that
it will not instrument a jump table, an operation that could easily lead to a system failure.

As part of the kernel build process, a separate program, ctfconvert, is executed against all the
kernel’s object files to generate updated object files that can be understood by DTrace. The
ctfconvert program takes information from the debugging section of an object file and creates
a new section .SUNW_ctf that contains type information for each function’s arguments that can
be used by DTrace. Every type that appears in the .SUNW_ctf section of the object file is
converted into data that can be used by the function boundary trace provider to associate data
types with function arguments, allowing userspace D scripts to interrogate function arguments
in much the same way as the debugger allows a programmer to inspect program data with
associated type information. All functions found in the debugging section are exposed to the
user as individual trace-points. The FreeBSD kernel contains over 45,000 function boundary
tracepoints, or fbt probes, each of which can be triggered on entry to or exit from a routine in the
kernel. Because the generation of the function boundary tracing probes happens automatically
at system build time, new probes come into existence whenever new code is added to the
FreeBSD kernel, relieving developers of the need to add tracepoints to the system by hand, and
to keep the tracepoints up to date with other code changes. Function boundary tracepoints can
change with each release of the operating system, which means that function boundary
tracepoints may change or disappear, so cannot be depended upon in scripts when upgrading
across major releases, for example, from FreeBSD 9 to FreeBSD 10. Compiler optimization or
the redefinition of a function as static can also cause a function boundary tracepoint to
disappear. Statically defined tracepoints (SDT) do not change unless they are specifically
updated by a programmer and are therefore considered stable across major releases.

Tracepoints are reached through DTrace providers, each of which is a kernel module that
exposes a uniform interface to the rest of the kernel. All DTrace providers expose a uniform API
via a set of function pointers embedded in a DTrace-provider operations structure, dtrace_pops.
Each provider registers itself with the DTrace system by calling the dtrace_register() routine
that allows DTrace to track all the available providers and expose them to the user through the D

programming language. The dtrace_register() routine passes the dtrace_pops structure for the
provider as one of its arguments. Provider operations include enabling, disabling, suspending,
and resuming probes, as well as retrieving argument names and values, from within the probe.
DTrace understands not only functions but also basic types, such as integers, strings, and
programmer-defined structures.

When the fbt module is loaded, tracepoints are created for the kernel using the kernel’s linker
functions. The fbt_provide_module_function() routine is responsible for disassembling the
entry and exit points of each function in the kernel as well as all the loaded modules, building up
a list of fbt_probe_t structures that contain the address of the functions that can be probed. The
fbt_probe_t structure contains three key components used by DTrace when turning tracing on
or off. The fbtp_patchpoint is the address of the instruction that needs to be replaced when
tracing is enabled or disabled. When the fbt_provide_module_function() runs, it determines
the address of the instruction that must later be replaced with a function call to the DTrace
system during active tracing. The address of that instruction is stored in fbtp_patchpoint. At the
same time, the instruction that must be replaced during tracing is put into the fbtp_savedval
element of the structure and the instruction that will be used to cause the entry point to change
is placed into fbtp_patchval. Whenever the DTrace command enables a tracepoint, the
fbtp_patchpoint is set to the instruction stored in fbtp_patchval. When tracing is turned off, the
instruction stored in fbtp_savedval is again placed back into fbtp_patchpoint. Storing the
instructions during module load time makes the fbt_enable() and fbt_disable() routines shorter
and safer than they would be if the functions to be traced had to be disassembled whenever the
user enabled a trace-point.

While the automatic generation of tracepoints for functions is a powerful feature of DTrace, the
ability to add specific tracepoints not associated with a function boundary is an important part
of the system. Any subsystem or collection of subsystems can be encapsulated as a provider to
be monitored by developers and administrators. The collection of locking statistics for
individual threads is an example of a DTrace provider that was written by hand into the kernel’s
source code. The DTrace lockstat provider piggybacks on the preexisting lockstat statistics
collection by adding a probe to each of the lockstat macros.

The FreeBSD kernel provides several synchronization primitives, referred to collectively as locks,
that are described fully in Section 4.3. To track the locking and unlocking actions of the kernel at
a low level, it is necessary to know more than just the lock that is being requested. We often
want to know if it was necessary to wait for the lock, and if so, which other thread blocked us
from getting it. The information we want from a locking operation is not evident from the
parameters to the lock call, but is embedded within the code implementing the lock. Locking
statistics are collected by manually placing macros at key points in the locking-implementation

code to record data about the lock when it is acquired or released. These locking statistics reside
in the lockstat provider. The macros for collecting the lockstat statistics are written generically
enough that they can be used in all the locking primitives in the system. When a lock is acquired,
the macro is given a pointer to the lock object, a Boolean flag telling whether the lock was
contested, the time that the thread started waiting for the the lock, and the kernel file name and
the line number within the function from which the lock primitive was called. The macros call
an appropriate function to collect statistics on how often the lock is acquired, average time that
it is held, how often it is contested, and when it is contested, as well as the average time that the
blocked thread had to wait. These statistics identify the contested locks in the kernel. One
important way of improving system performance is to use finer-grain locking for the most highly
contested locks in the system. For example, a single global lock controlling access to a hash table
might be replaced with one lock per hash chain.

The lockstat DTrace provider is only available if the lockstat lock profiling has been compiled
into the kernel. Each probe is defined by a lockstat_probe structure that contains the function
and name of the probe, which is exported to the user as well as a probe number and probe
identifier that the lockstat provider uses when the probes fire.

The macro shown in Figure 3.4 is placed into various locking functions to record data whenever
a    lock     is    acquired.    The      lockstat      information    is    collected    by     the
lock_profile_obtain_lock_success() function. The remainder of the macro implements the
lockstat provider probe. The probe is active if its entry in the lockstat_probemap is non-NULL,
which occurs only when a probe is activated via the lockstat provider’s lockstat_enable() routine.
Configuring the kernel to collect lockstat statistics introduces a fixed amount of overhead. The
lockstat DTrace provider introduces a variable amount of overhead depending on which probes
are active at any time.

Figure 3.4 Lockstat probe macro.

Kernel Tracing

Any large software system usually includes a logging system to aid in debugging problems that
arise after the software has been released and FreeBSD is no different. The kernel tracing facility
(KTR) is a set of logging facilities that can be compiled into the kernel with a configuration
option. This tracing facility primarily helps debug the kernel as compared to the other tracing
described in this section that primarily helps debug user-level processes.

Before the addition of KTR, developers would sprinkle calls to printf() throughout their code,
and conditionally compile them in or out of the kernel using

#ifdef DEBUG
printf()
#endif DEBUG

statements. The KTR system introduced a single logging system for the kernel that could be
shared by the entire source base and centrally controlled from kernel configuration files.

Kernel trace events are described by a ktr_entry structure, shown in Figure 3.5. Each entry
contains a timestamp, the CPU on which the event occurred, the file and line of source code
from which the event was logged, a programmer specified description, a pointer to the thread
that executed the event, and up to six parameters.

Figure 3.5 Kernel trace-entry structure.

Calls into the kernel tracing system are implemented as a set of macros, shown in Figure 3.6.
Unlike the printf() routine, the kernel tracing facility does

Figure 3.6 Kernel tracing macros.

not allow for a variable number of arguments. Variable argument parsing is computationally
expensive, and is not appropriate for a kernel logging facility because the extra CPU time
expended might prevent developers from catching timing-related problems.

When support for the KTR system is compiled into the kernel, there is a statically sized array,
used as a circular buffer, that contains all the trace events. It is important to size the event buffer
correctly as it is possible to overwrite entries before they are read out of the kernel if many
events are logged in a short amount of time.

If enabling KTR recorded all the more than the 1700 defined events, the system would grind to a
near halt. Thus, the rate of event generation is controlled by tagging each event with a
programmer-defined event mask. The event mask collects a related set of events so that
recording them can be turned on or off as a group. When a kernel with KTR is first booted, the
system’s event mask is cleared so that no events are recorded. The event mask is set either from
user level, using the debug.ktr.mask sysctl, or in the boot configuration file /boot/loader.conf,
if events are to be recorded from the time the system boots.

Kernel tracing events can be recorded to disk using the asynchronous logging facility which runs
as a kernel resident thread. It reads events from the kernel trace buffer and writes them to a file
specified by the user using a sysctl. Writing events to a file, whether on local disk or a remote
filesystem, introduces extra I/O load onto the system, which may make it inappropriate for
finding timing-related problems in the system.

Exercises

3.1 Describe three types of system activity.

3.2 When can a routine executing in the top half of the kernel be preempted? When can it be
interrupted?

3.3 Why are routines executing in the bottom half of the kernel precluded from using
information located in the current user process?

3.4 Why does the system defer as much work as possible from high-priority interrupts to
lower-priority software-interrupt processes?

3.5 What determines the shortest (nonzero) time period that a user process can request when
setting a timer?

3.6 How does the kernel determine the system call for which it has been invoked?

3.7 How are initialized data represented in an executable file? How are uninitialized data
represented in an executable file? Why are the representations different?

3.8 Describe how the “#!” mechanism can be used to make programs that require emulation
appear as though they were normal executables.

3.9 What facilities does the DTrace facility provide that is not available in the ktrace facility?

*3.10 Describe the security implications of not zero filling the stack region at program startup.

*3.11 Why is the conversion from UTC to local time done by user processes rather than in the
kernel?

*3.12 What is the advantage of having the kernel rather than an application restart an
interrupted system call?

*3.13 Describe a scenario in which the timer-wheel algorithm used for the callout queue does
not work well. Suggest an alternative data structure that runs more quickly than does the
timer-wheel algorithm for your scenario.

*3.14 The SIGPROF profiling timer was originally intended to replace the profil system call to
collect a statistical sampling of a program’s program counter. Give two reasons why the profil
facility had to be retained.

**3.15 What weakness in the process-accounting mechanism makes the latter unsuitable for use
in a commercial environment?

References

Barkley & Lee, 1988.

R. E. Barkley & T. P. Lee, “A Heap-Based Callout Implementation to Meet Real-Time Needs,”
USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 213–222, June 1988.

Cantrill et al., 2004.

B. M. Cantrill, M. W. Shapiro, & A. H. Leventhal, “Dynamic Instrumentation of Production
Systems,” USENIX Annual Technical Conference, General Track, June 2004.

Gregg & Mauro, 2011.

B. Gregg & J. Mauro, DTrace: Dynamic Tracing in Oracle Solaris, Mac OS X and FreeBSD,
Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2011.

McCanne & Torek, 1993.

S. McCanne & C. Torek, “A Randomized Sampling Clock for CPU Utilization Estimation and
Code Profiling,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 387–394, January 1993.

Mills, 1992.

D. L. Mills, “The NTP Time Synchronization Protocol,” RFC 1305, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1305.html, March 1992.

Varghese & Lauck, 1987.

G. Varghese & T. Lauck, “Hashed and Hierarchical Timing Wheels: Data Structures for the
Efficient Implementation of a Timer Facility,” Proceedings of the Eleventh Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles, pp. 25–38, November 1987.

