                               Part II: Processes

                     Chapter 4. Process Management

4.1 Introduction to Process Management

A process is a program in execution. A process has an address space containing a mapping of
its program’s object code and global variables. It also has a set of kernel resources that it can
name and on which it can operate using system calls. These resources include its credentials,
signal state, and its descriptor array that gives it access to files, pipes, sockets, and devices. Each
process has at least one and possibly many threads that execute its code. Every thread
represents a virtual processor with a full context worth of register state and its own stack
mapped into the address space. Every thread running in the process has a corresponding kernel
thread, with its own kernel stack that represents the user thread when it is executing in the
kernel as a result of a system call, page fault, or signal delivery.

A process must have system resources, such as memory and the underlying CPU. The kernel
supports the illusion of concurrent execution of multiple processes by scheduling system
resources among the set of processes that are ready to execute. On a multiprocessor, multiple
threads of the same or different processes may execute concurrently. This chapter describes the
composition of a process, the method that the system uses to switch between the process’s
threads, and the scheduling policy that it uses to promote sharing of the CPU. It also introduces
process creation and termination, and details the signal and process-debugging facilities.

Two months after the developers began the first implementation of the UNIX operating system,
there were two processes: one for each of the terminals of the PDP-7. At age 10 months, and still
on the PDP-7, UNIX had many processes, the fork operation, and something like the wait
system call. A process executed a new program by reading in a new program on top of itself. The
first PDP-11 system (First Edition UNIX) saw the introduction of exec. All these systems allowed
only one process in memory at a time. When a PDP-11 with memory management (a KS-11) was
obtained, the system was changed to permit several processes to remain in memory
simultaneously, to reduce swapping. But this change did not apply to multiprogramming
because disk I/O was synchronous. This state of affairs persisted into 1972 and the first
PDP-11/45 system. True multiprogramming was finally introduced when the system was
rewritten in C. Disk I/O for one process could then proceed while another process ran. The basic
structure of process management in UNIX has not changed since that time [Ritchie, 1988].

The threads of a process operate in either user mode or kernel mode. In user mode, a thread
executes application code with the machine in a nonprivileged protection mode. When a thread
requests services from the operating system with a system call, it switches into the machine’s
privileged protection mode via a protected mechanism and then operates in kernel mode.

The resources used by a thread are split into two parts. The resources needed for execution in
user mode are defined by the CPU architecture and typically include the CPU’s general-purpose
registers, the program counter, the processor-status register, and the stack-related registers, as
well as the contents of the memory segments that constitute FreeBSD’s notion of a program (the
text, data, shared library, and stack segments).

Kernel-mode resources include those required by the underlying hardware such as registers,
program counter, and the stack pointer. These resources also include the state required for the
FreeBSD kernel to provide system services for a thread. This kernel state includes parameters
to the current system call, the current process’s user identity, scheduling information, and so on.
As described in Section 3.1, the kernel state for each process is divided into several separate data
structures, with two primary structures: the process structure and the thread structure.

The process structure contains information that must always remain resident in main memory,
along with references to other structures that remain resident, whereas the thread structure
tracks information that needs to be resident only when the process is executing such as its
kernel run-time stack. Process and thread structures are allocated dynamically as part of process
creation and are freed when the process is destroyed as it exits.

Multiprogramming

FreeBSD supports transparent multiprogramming: the illusion of concurrent execution of
multiple processes or programs. It does so by context switching—that is, by switching
between the execution context of the threads within the same or different processes. A
mechanism is also provided for scheduling the execution of threads—that is, for deciding
which one to execute next. Facilities are provided for ensuring consistent access to data
structures that are shared among processes.

Context switching is a hardware-dependent operation whose implementation is influenced by
the underlying hardware facilities. Some architectures provide machine instructions that save
and restore the hardware-execution context of a thread or an entire process including its
virtual-address space. On others, the software must collect the hardware state from various
registers and save it, then load those registers with the new hardware state. All architectures
must save and restore the software state used by the kernel.

Context switching is done frequently, so increasing the speed of a context switch noticeably
decreases time spent in the kernel and provides more time for execution of user applications.
Since most of the work of a context switch is expended in saving and restoring the operating
context of a thread or process, reducing the amount of the information required for that context
is an effective way to produce faster context switches.

Scheduling

Fair scheduling of threads and processes is an involved task that is dependent on the types of
executable programs and on the goals of the scheduling policy. Programs are characterized
according to the amount of computation and the amount of I/O that they do. Scheduling policies
typically attempt to balance resource utilization against the time that it takes for a program to
complete. In FreeBSD’s default scheduler, which we shall refer to as the timeshare scheduler, a
process’s priority is periodically recalculated based on various parameters, such as the amount
of CPU time it has used, the amount of memory resources it holds or requires for execution, etc.
Some tasks require more precise control over process execution called real-time scheduling.
Real-time scheduling must ensure that threads finish computing their results by a specified
deadline or in a particular order. The FreeBSD kernel implements real-time scheduling using a
separate queue from the queue used for regular timeshared processes. A process with a
real-time priority is not subject to priority degradation and will only be preempted by another
thread of equal or higher real-time priority. The FreeBSD kernel also implements a queue of
threads running at idle priority. A thread with an idle priority will run only when no other
thread in either the real-time or timeshare-scheduled queues is runnable and then only if its idle
priority is equal to or greater than all other runnable idle-priority threads.

The FreeBSD timeshare scheduler uses a priority-based scheduling policy that is biased to favor
interactive programs, such as text editors, over long-running batch-type jobs. Interactive
programs tend to exhibit short bursts of computation followed by periods of inactivity or I/O.
The scheduling policy initially assigns a high execution priority to each thread and allows that
thread to execute for a fixed time slice. Threads that execute for the duration of their slice have
their priority lowered, whereas threads that give up the CPU (usually because they do I/O) are
allowed to remain at their priority. Threads that are inactive have their priority raised. Jobs that
use large amounts of CPU time sink rapidly to a low priority, whereas interactive jobs that are
mostly inactive remain at a high priority so that, when they are ready to run, they will preempt
the long-running lower-priority jobs. An interactive job, such as a text editor searching for a
string, may become compute-bound briefly and thus get a lower priority, but it will return to a
high priority when it is inactive again while the user thinks about the result.

Some tasks, such as the compilation of a large application, may be done in many small steps in
which each component is compiled in a separate process. No individual step runs long enough
to have its priority degraded, so the compilation as a whole impacts the interactive programs. To
detect and avoid this problem, the scheduling priority of a child process is propagated back to its
parent. When a new child process is started, it begins running with its parent’s current priority.
As the program that coordinates the compilation (typically make) starts many compilation
steps, its priority is dropped because of the CPU-intensive behavior of its children. Later
compilation steps started by make begin running and stay at a lower priority, which allows
higher-priority interactive programs to run in preference to them as desired.

The system also needs a scheduling policy to deal with problems that arise from not having
enough main memory to hold the execution contexts of all processes that want to execute. The
major goal of this scheduling policy is to minimize thrashing—a phenomenon that occurs
when memory is in such short supply that more time is spent in the system handling page faults
and scheduling processes than in user mode executing application code.

The system must both detect and eliminate thrashing. It detects thrashing by observing the
amount of free memory. When the system has little free memory and a high rate of new memory
requests, it considers itself to be thrashing. The system reduces thrashing by marking the least
recently run process as not being allowed to run, allowing the pageout daemon to push all the
pages associated with the process to backing store. On most architectures, the kernel also can
push to backing store the kernel stacks of all the threads of the marked process. The effect of
these actions is to cause the process and all its threads to be swapped out (see Section 6.12). The
memory freed by blocking the process can then be distributed to the remaining processes, which
usually can then proceed. If the thrashing continues, additional processes are selected to be
blocked from running until enough memory becomes available for the remaining processes to
run effectively. Eventually, enough processes complete and free their memory that blocked
processes can resume execution. However, even if there is not enough memory, the blocked
processes are allowed to resume execution after about 20 seconds. Usually, the thrashing
condition will return, requiring that some other process be selected for being blocked (or that an
administrative action be taken to reduce the load).

4.2 Process State

Every process in the system is assigned a unique identifier termed the process identifier
(PID). PIDs are the common mechanism used by applications and by the kernel to reference
processes. PIDs are used by applications when the latter send a signal to a process and when
receiving the exit status from a deceased process. Two PIDs are of special importance to each
process: the PID of the process itself and the PID of the process’s parent process.

The layout of process state is shown in Figure 4.1. The goal is to support multiple threads that
share an address space and other resources. A thread is the unit of execution of a process; it
requires an address space and other resources, but it can share many of those resources with
other threads. Threads sharing an address space and other resources are scheduled
independently and in FreeBSD can all execute system calls simultaneously. The process state in
FreeBSD is designed to support threads that can select the set of resources to be shared, known
as variable-weight processes [Aral et al., 1989].

Figure 4.1 Process state.

Each of the components of process state is placed into separate substructures for each type of
state information. The process structure references all the substructures directly or indirectly.
The thread structure contains just the information needed to run in the kernel: information
about scheduling, a stack to use when running in the kernel, a thread state block (TSB), and
other machine-dependent state. The TSB is defined by the machine architecture; it includes the
general-purpose registers, stack pointers, program counter, processor-status word, and
memory-management registers.

The first threading models that were deployed in systems such as FreeBSD 5 and Solaris used an
N:M threading model in which many user level threads (N) were supported by a smaller number
of threads (M) that could run in the kernel [Simpleton, 2008]. The N:M threading model was
light-weight but incurred extra overhead when a user-level thread needed to enter the kernel.
The model assumed that application developers would write server applications in which
potentially thousands of clients would each use a thread, most of which would be idle waiting for
an I/O request.

While many of the early applications using threads, such as file servers, worked well with the
N:M threading model, later applications tended to use pools of dozens to hundreds of worker
threads, most of which would regularly enter the kernel. The application writers took this
approach because they wanted to run on a wide range of platforms and key platforms like
Windows and Linux could not support tens of thousands of threads. For better efficiency with
these applications, the N:M threading model evolved over time to a 1:1 threading model in which
every user thread is backed by a kernel thread.

Like most other operating systems, FreeBSD has settled on using the POSIX threading API often
referred to as Pthreads. The Pthreads model includes a rich set of primitives including the
creation, scheduling, coordination, signalling, rendezvous, and destruction of threads within a
process. In addition, it provides shared and exclusive locks, semaphores, and condition variables
that can be used to reliably interlock access to data structures being simultaneously accessed by
multiple threads.

In their lightest-weight form, FreeBSD threads share all the process resources including the PID.
When additional parallel computation is needed, a new thread is created using the
pthread_create() library call. The pthread library must keep track of the user-level stacks being
used by each of the threads, since the entire address space is shared including the area normally
used for the stack. Since the threads all share a single process structure, they have only a single
PID and thus show up as a single entry in the ps listing. There is an option to ps that requests it
to list a separate entry for each thread within a process.

Many applications do not wish to share all of a process’s resources. The rfork system call creates
a new process entry that shares a selected set of resources from its parent. Typically, the signal
actions, statistics, and the stack and data parts of the address space are not shared. Unlike the
lightweight thread created by pthread_create(), the rfork system call associates a PID with each
thread that shows up in a ps listing and that can be manipulated in the same way as any other
process in the system. Processes created by fork, vfork, or rfork initially have just a single
thread structure associated with them. A variant of the rfork system call is used to emulate the
Linux clone() functionality.

The Process Structure

In addition to the references to the substructures, the process entry shown in Figure 4.1 contains
the following categories of information:

• Process identification: the PID and the parent PID

• Signal state: signals pending delivery and summary of signal actions

• Tracing: process tracing information

• Timers: real-time timer and CPU-utilization counters

The process substructures shown in Figure 4.1 have the following categories of information:

• Process-group identification: the process group and the session to which the process belongs

• User credentials: the real, effective, and saved user and group identifiers; credentials are
described more fully in Chapter 5

• Memory management: the structure that describes the allocation of virtual address space used
by the process; the virtual-address space and its related structures are described more fully in
Chapter 6

• File descriptors: an array of pointers to file entries indexed by the process’s open file
descriptors; also, the open file flags and current directory

• System call vector: the mapping of system call numbers to actions; in addition to current and
deprecated native FreeBSD executable formats, the kernel can run binaries compiled for several
other UNIX variants such as Linux and System V Release 4 by providing alternative system call
vectors when such environments are requested

• Resource accounting: the rlimit structures that describe the utilization of the many resources
provided by the system (see Section 3.7)

• Statistics: statistics collected while the process is running that are reported when it exits and
are written to the accounting file; also includes process timers and profiling information if the
latter is being collected

• Signal actions: the action to take when a signal is posted to a process

• Thread structure: the contents of the thread structure (described at the end of this section)

The state element of the process structure holds the current value of the process state. The
possible state values are shown in Table 4.1. When a process is first created with a fork system
call, it is initially marked as NEW. The state is changed to NORMAL when enough resources are
allocated to the process for the latter to begin execution. From that point onward, a process’s
state will be NORMAL until the process terminates. Its thread(s) will fluctuate among
RUNNABLE—that is, preparing to be or actually executing; SLEEPING—that is, waiting for an
event; and STOPPED—that is, stopped by a signal or the parent process. A deceased process is
marked as ZOMBIE until it has freed its resources and communicated its termination status to
its parent process.

Table 4.1 Process states.

The system organizes process structures into two lists. Process entries are on the zombproc list
if the process is in the ZOMBIE state; otherwise, they are on the allproc list. The two queues
share the same linkage pointers in the process structure, since the lists are mutually exclusive.
Segregating the dead processes from the live ones reduces the time spent both by the wait
system call, which must scan the zombies for potential candidates to return, and by the
scheduler and other functions that must scan all the potentially runnable processes.

Most threads, except the currently executing thread (or threads if the system is running on a
multiprocessor), are also in one of three queues: a run queue, a sleep queue, or a turnstile
queue. Threads that are in a runnable state are placed on a run queue, whereas threads that are
blocked while awaiting an event are located on either a turnstile queue or a sleep queue. Stopped
threads awaiting an event are located on a turnstile queue, a sleep queue, or they are on no
queue. The run queues are organized according to thread-scheduling priority and are described
in Section 4.4. The sleep and turnstile queues are organized in a data structure that is hashed by
an event identifier. This organization optimizes finding the sleeping threads that need to be
awakened when a wakeup occurs for an event. The sleep and turnstile queues are described in
Section 4.3.

The p_pptr pointer and related lists (p_children and p_sibling) are used in locating related
processes, as shown in Figure 4.2. When a process spawns a child process, the child process is
added to its parent’s p_children list. The child process also keeps a backward link to its parent

in its p_pptr pointer. If a process has more than one child process active at a time, the children
are linked together through their p_sibling list entries. In Figure 4.2, process B is a direct
descendant of process A, whereas processes C, D, and E are descendants of process B and are
siblings of one another. Process B typically would be a shell that started a pipeline (see Sections
2.4 and 4.8) including processes C, D, and E. Process A probably would be the
system-initialization process init (see Sections 3.1 and 15.4).

Figure 4.2 Process-group hierarchy.

CPU time is made available to threads according to their scheduling class and scheduling
priority. As shown in Table 4.2, the FreeBSD kernel has two kernel and three user scheduling
classes. The kernel will always run the thread in the highest-priority class. Any kernel-interrupt
threads will run in preference to anything else followed by any runnable real-time threads. Any
top-half-kernel threads are run in preference to runnable threads in the share and idle classes.
Runnable timeshare threads are run in preference to runnable threads in the idle class. The
priorities of threads in the real-time and idle classes are set by the applications using the rtprio
system call and are never adjusted by the kernel. The bottom-half interrupt priorities are set
when the devices are configured and never change. The top-half priorities are set based on
predefined priorities for each kernel subsystem and never change.

Table 4.2 Thread-scheduling classes.

The priorities of threads running in the timeshare class are adjusted by the kernel based on
resource usage and recent CPU utilization. A thread has two scheduling priorities: one for
scheduling user-mode execution and one for scheduling kernel-mode execution. The
td_user_pri field associated with the thread structure contains the user-mode scheduling
priority, whereas the td_priority field holds the current scheduling priority. The current priority
may be different from the user-mode priority when the thread is executing in the top half of the
kernel. Priorities range between 0 and 255, with a lower value interpreted as a higher priority
(see Table 4.2). User-mode priorities range from 120 to 255; priorities less than 120 are used
only by real-time threads or when a thread is asleep—that is, awaiting an event in the
kernel—and immediately after such a thread is awakened. Threads asleep in the kernel are given
a higher priority because they typically hold shared kernel resources when they awaken. The
system wants to run them as quickly as possible once they get a resource so that they can use the
resource and return it before another thread requests it and gets blocked waiting for it.

When a thread goes to sleep in the kernel, it must specify whether it should be awakened and
marked runnable if a signal is posted to it. In FreeBSD, a kernel thread will be awakened by a
signal only if it sets the PCATCH flag when it sleeps. The msleep() interface also handles sleeps
limited to a maximum time duration and the processing of restartable system calls. The msleep()
interface includes a reference to a string describing the event that the thread awaits; this string
is externally visible—for example, in ps. The decision of whether to use an interruptible sleep
depends on how long the thread may be blocked. Because it is complex to handle signals in the
midst of doing some other operation, many sleep requests are not interruptible; that is, a thread
will not be scheduled to run until the event for which it is waiting occurs. For example, a thread
waiting for disk I/O will sleep with signals blocked.

For quickly occurring events, delaying to handle a signal until after they complete is
imperceptible. However, requests that may cause a thread to sleep for a long period, such as
waiting for terminal or network input, must be prepared to have its sleep interrupted so that the
posting of signals is not delayed indefinitely. Threads that sleep interruptibly may abort their
system call because of a signal arriving before the event for which they are waiting has occurred.
To avoid holding a kernel resource permanently, these threads must check why they have been
awakened. If they were awakened because of a signal, they must release any resources that they
hold. They must then return the error passed back to them by sleep(), which will be EINTR if the
system call is to be aborted after the signal or ERESTART if it is to be restarted. Occasionally, an
event that is supposed to occur quickly, such as a disk I/O, will get held up because of a
hardware failure. Because the thread is sleeping in the kernel with signals blocked, it will be
impervious to any attempts to send it a signal, even a signal that should cause it to exit
unconditionally. The only solution to this problem is to change sleep()s on hardware events that
may hang to be interruptible.

In the remainder of this book, we shall always use sleep() when referring to the routine that puts
a thread to sleep, even when one of the mtx_sleep(), sx_sleep(), rw_sleep(), or t_sleep()
interfaces is the one that is being used.

The Thread Structure

The thread structure shown in Figure 4.1 contains the following categories of information:

• Scheduling: the thread priority, user-mode scheduling priority, recent CPU utilization, and
amount of time spent sleeping; the run state of a thread (runnable, sleeping); additional status
flags; if the thread is sleeping, the wait channel, the identity of the event for which the thread
is waiting (see Section 4.3), and a pointer to a string describing the event

• TSB: the user- and kernel-mode execution states

• Kernel stack: the per-thread execution stack for the kernel

• Machine state: the machine-dependent thread information

Historically, the kernel stack was mapped to a fixed location in the virtual address space. The
reason for using a fixed mapping is that when a parent forks, its runtime stack is copied for its
child. If the kernel stack is mapped to a fixed address, the child’s kernel stack is mapped to the
same addresses as its parent kernel stack. Thus, all its internal references, such as frame
pointers and stack-variable references, work as expected.

On modern architectures with virtual address caches, mapping the kernel stack to a fixed
address is slow and inconvenient. FreeBSD removes this constraint by eliminating all but the
top call frame from the child’s stack after copying it from its parent so that it returns directly to
user mode, thus avoiding stack copying and relocation problems.

Every thread that might potentially run must have its stack resident in memory because one task
of its stack is to handle page faults. If it were not resident, it would page fault when the thread
tried to run, and there would be no kernel stack available to service the page fault. Since a
system may have many thousands of threads, the kernel stacks must be kept small to avoid
wasting too much physical memory. In FreeBSD on the Intel architecture, the kernel stack is
limited to two pages of memory. Implementors must be careful when writing code that executes
in the kernel to avoid using large local variables and deeply nested subroutine calls to avoid
overflowing the run-time stack. As a safety precaution, some architectures leave an invalid page
between the area for the run-time stack and the data structures that follow it. Thus, overflowing
the kernel stack will cause a kernel-access fault instead of disastrously overwriting other data

structures. It would be possible to simply kill the process that caused the fault and continue
running. However, the cleanup would be difficult because the thread may be holding locks or be
in the middle of modifying some data structure that would be left in an inconsistent or invalid
state. So the FreeBSD kernel panics on a kernel-access fault because such a fault shows a
fundamental design error in the kernel. By panicking and creating a crash dump, the error can
usually be pinpointed and corrected.

4.3 Context Switching

The kernel switches among threads in an effort to share the CPU effectively; this activity is
called context switching. When a thread executes for the duration of its time slice or when it
blocks because it requires a resource that is currently unavailable, the kernel finds another
thread to run and context switches to it. The system can also interrupt the currently executing
thread to run a thread triggered by an asynchronous event, such as a device interrupt. Although
both scenarios involve switching the execution context of the CPU, switching between threads
occurs synchronously with respect to the currently executing thread, whereas servicing
interrupts occurs asynchronously with respect to the current thread. In addition,
interprocess context switches are classified as voluntary or involuntary. A voluntary context
switch occurs when a thread blocks because it requires a resource that is unavailable. An
involuntary context switch takes place when a thread executes for the duration of its time slice
or when the system identifies a higher-priority thread to run.

Each type of context switching is done through a different interface. Voluntary context switching
is initiated with a call to the sleep() routine, whereas an involuntary context switch is forced by
direct invocation of the low-level context-switching mechanism embodied in the mi_switch()
and setrunnable() routines. Asynchronous event handling is triggered by the underlying
hardware and is effectively transparent to the system.

Thread State

Context switching between threads requires that both the kernel- and user-mode context be
changed. To simplify this change, the system ensures that all of a thread’s user-mode state is
located in the thread structure while most kernel state is kept elsewhere. The following
conventions apply to this localization:

• Kernel-mode hardware-execution state: Context switching can take place in only kernel mode.
The kernel’s hardware-execution state is defined by the contents of the TSB that is located in the
thread structure.

• User-mode hardware-execution state: When execution is in kernel mode, the user-mode state
of a thread (such as copies of the program counter, stack pointer, and general registers) always
resides on the kernel’s execution stack that is located in the thread structure. The kernel ensures
this location of user-mode state by requiring that the system-call and trap handlers save the
contents of the user-mode execution context each time that the kernel is entered (see Section
3.1).

• The process structure: The process structure always remains resident in memory.

• Memory resources: Memory resources of a process are effectively described by the contents of
the memory-management registers located in the TSB and by the values present in the process
and thread structures. As long as the process remains in memory, these values will remain valid
and context switches can be done without the associated page tables being saved and restored.
However, these values need to be recalculated when the process returns to main memory after
being swapped to secondary storage.

Low-Level Context Switching

The localization of a process’s context in that process’s thread structure permits the kernel to
perform context switching simply by changing the notion of the current thread structure and (if
necessary) process structure, and restoring the context described by the TSB within the thread
structure (including the mapping of the virtual address space). Whenever a context switch is
required, a call to the mi_switch() routine causes the highest-priority thread to run. The
mi_switch() routine first selects the appropriate thread from the scheduling queues, and then
resumes the selected thread by loading its context from its TSB.

Voluntary Context Switching

A voluntary context switch occurs whenever a thread must await the availability of a resource or
the arrival of an event. Voluntary context switches happen frequently in normal system
operation. In FreeBSD, voluntary context switches are initiated through a request to obtain a
lock that is already held by another thread or by a call to the sleep() routine. When a thread no
longer needs the CPU, it is suspended, awaiting the resource described by a wait channel, and
is given a scheduling priority that should be assigned to the thread when that thread is
awakened. This priority does not affect the user-level scheduling priority.

When blocking on a lock, the wait channel is usually the address of the lock. When blocking for a
resource or an event, the wait channel is typically the address of some data structure that
identifies the resource or event for which the thread is waiting. For example, the address of a

disk buffer is used while the thread is waiting for the buffer to be filled. When the buffer is filled,
threads sleeping on that wait channel will be awakened. In addition to the resource addresses
that are used as wait channels, there are some addresses that are used for special purposes:

• When a parent process does a wait system call to collect the termination status of its children,
it must wait for one of those children to exit. Since it cannot know which of its children will exit
first, and since it can sleep on only a single wait channel, there is a quandary about how to wait
for the next of multiple events. The solution is to have the parent sleep on its own process
structure. When a child exits, it awakens its parent’s process-structure address rather than its
own. Thus, the parent doing the wait will awaken independently of which child process is the
first to exit. Once running, it must scan its list of children to determine which one exited.

• When a thread does a sigsuspend system call, it does not want to run until it receives a signal.
Thus, it needs to do an interruptible sleep on a wait channel that will never be awakened. By
convention, the address of the signal-actions structure is given as the wait channel.

A thread may block for a short, medium, or long period of time depending on the reason that it
needs to wait. A short wait occurs when a thread needs to wait for access to a lock that protects a
data structure. A medium wait occurs while a thread waits for an event that is expected to occur
quickly such as waiting for data to be read from a disk. A long wait occurs when a thread is
waiting for an event that will happen at an indeterminate time in the future such as input from a
user.

Short-term waits arise only from a lock request. Short-term locks include mutexes, read-writer
locks, and read-mostly locks. Details on these locks are given later in this section. A requirement
of short-term locks is that they may not be held while blocking for an event as is done for
medium- and long-term locks. The only reason that a thread holding a short-term lock is not
running is that it has been preempted by a higher-priority thread. It is always possible to get a
short-term lock released by running the thread that holds it and any threads that block the
thread that holds it.

A short-term lock is managed by a turnstile data structure. The turnstile tracks the current
owner of the lock and the list of threads waiting for access to the lock. Figure 4.3 shows how
turnstiles are used to track blocked threads. Across the top of the figure is a set of hash headers
that allow a quick lookup to find a lock with waiting threads. If a turnstile is found, it provides a
pointer to the thread that currently owns the lock and lists of the threads that are waiting for
exclusive and shared access. The most important use of the turnstile is to quickly find the
threads that need to be awakened when a lock is released. In Figure 4.3, Lock 18 is owned by
thread 1 and has threads 2 and 3 waiting for exclusive access to it. The turnstile in this example
also shows that thread 1 holds contested Lock 15.

Figure 4.3 Turnstile structures for blocked threads.

A turnstile is needed each time a thread blocks on a contested lock. Because blocking is common,
it would be prohibitively slow to allocate and free a turnstile every time one is needed. So each
thread allocates a turnstile when it is created. As a thread may only be blocked on one lock at
any point in time, it will never need more than one turnstile. Turnstiles are allocated by threads
rather than being incorporated into each lock structure because there are far more locks in the

kernel than there are threads. Allocating one turnstile per thread rather than one per lock
results in lower memory utilization in the kernel.

When a thread is about to block on a short-term lock, it provides its turnstile to be used to track
the lock. If it is the first thread to block on the lock, its turnstile is used. If it is not the first
thread to block, then an earlier thread’s turnstile will be in use to do the tracking. The additional
turnstiles that are provided are kept on a free list whose head is the turnstile being used to track
the lock. When a thread is awakened and is being made runnable, it is given a turnstile from the
free list (which may not be the same one that it originally provided). When the last thread is
awakened, the free list will be empty and the turnstile no longer needed, so it can be taken by
the awakening thread.

In Figure 4.3, the turnstile tracking Lock 18 was provided by thread 2 as it was the first to block.
The spare turnstile that it references was provided by thread 3. If thread 2 is the first to be
awakened, it will get the spare turnstile provided by thread 3 and when thread 3 is awakened
later, it will be the last to be awakened so will get the no-longer-needed turnstile originally
provided by thread 2.

A priority inversion occurs when a thread trying to acquire a short-term lock finds that the
thread holding the lock has a lower priority than its own priority. The owner and list of blocked
threads tracked by the turnstile allows priority propagation of the higher priority from the
thread that is about to be blocked to the thread that holds the lock. With the higher priority, the
thread holding the lock will run, and if, in turn, it is blocked by a thread with lower priority, it
will propagate its new higher priority to that thread. When finished with its access to the
protected data structure, the thread with the temporarily raised priority will release the lock. As
part of releasing the lock, the propagated priority will be dropped, which usually results in the
thread from which the priority was propagated getting to run and now being able to acquire the
lock.

Processes blocking on medium-term and long-term locks use sleepqueue data structures rather
than turnstiles to track the blocked threads. The sleepqueue data structure is similar to the
turnstile except that it does not need to track the owner of the lock. The owner need not be
tracked because sleepqueues do not need to provide priority propagation. Threads blocked on
medium- and long-term locks cannot proceed until the event for which they are waiting has
occurred. Raising their priority will not allow them to run any sooner.

Sleepqueues have many similarities to turnstiles including a hash table to allow quick lookup of
contested locks and lists of the threads blocked because they are awaiting shared and exclusive
locks. When created, each thread allocates a sleepqueue structure. It provides its sleepqueue

structure when it is about to be put to sleep and is returned a sleepqueue structure when it is
awakened.

Unlike short-term locks, the medium- and long-term locks can request a time limit so that if the
event for which they are waiting has not occurred within the specified period of time, they will
be awakened with an error return that indicates that the time limit expired rather than the event
occurring. Finally, long-term locks can request that they be interruptible, meaning that they will
be awakened if a signal is sent to them before the event for which they are waiting has occurred.

Suspending a thread takes the following steps in its operation:

1. Prevents events that might cause thread-state transitions. Historically a global scheduling
lock was used, but it was a bottleneck. Now each thread uses a lock tied to its current state to
protect its per-thread state. For example, when a thread is on a run queue, the lock for that run
queue is used; when the thread is blocked on a turnstile, the turnstile’s lock is used; when a
thread is blocked on a sleep queue, the lock for the wait channels hash chain is used.

2. Records the wait channel in the thread structure and hashes the wait-channel value to check
for an existing turnstile or sleepqueue for the wait-channel. If one exists, links the thread to it
and saves the turnstile or sleepqueue structure provided by the thread. Otherwise places the
turnstile or sleepqueue onto the hash chain and links the thread into it.

3. For threads being placed on a turnstile, if the current thread’s priority is higher than the
priority of the thread currently holding the lock, propagates the current thread’s priority to the
thread currently holding the lock. For threads being placed on a sleepqueue, sets the thread’s
priority to the priority that the thread will have when the thread is awakened and sets its
SLEEPING flag.

4. For threads being placed on a turnstile, sort the thread into the list of waiting threads such
that the highest priority thread appears first in the list. For threads being placed on a sleepqueue,
place the thread at the end of the list of threads waiting for that wait-channel.

5. Calls mi_switch() to request that a new thread be scheduled; the associated mutex is released
as part of switching to the other thread.

A sleeping thread is not selected to execute until it is removed from a turnstile or sleepqueue
and is marked runnable. This operation is done either implicitly as part of a lock being released,
or explicitly by a call to the wakeup() routine to signal that an event has occurred or that a
resource is available. When wakeup() is invoked, it is given a wait channel that it uses to find the
corresponding sleepqueue (using a hashed lookup). It awakens all threads sleeping on that wait
channel. All threads waiting for the resource are awakened to ensure that none are inadvertently

left sleeping. If only one thread were awakened, it might not request the resource on which it
was sleeping. If it does not use and release the resource, any other threads waiting for that
resource will be left sleeping forever. A thread that needs an empty disk buffer in which to write
data is an example of a thread that may not request the resource on which it was sleeping. Such
a thread can use any available buffer. If none is available, it will try to create one by requesting
that a dirty buffer be written to disk and then waiting for the I/O to complete. When the I/O
finishes, the thread will awaken and will check for an empty buffer. If several are available, it
may not use the one that it cleaned, leaving any other threads to sleep forever as they wait for
the cleaned buffer.

In instances where a thread will always use a resource when it becomes available, wakeup_one()
can be used instead of wakeup(). The wakeup_one() routine wakes up only the first thread that
it finds waiting for a resource as it will have been asleep the longest. The assumption is that
when the awakened thread is done with the resource, it will issue another wakeup_one() to
notify the next waiting thread that the resource is available. The succession of wakeup_one()
calls will continue until all threads waiting for the resource have been awakened and had a
chance to use it. Because the threads are ordered from longest to shortest waiting, that is the
order in which they will be awakened and gain access to the resource.

When releasing a turnstile lock, all waiting threads are released. Because the threads are
ordered from highest to lowest priority, that is the order in which they will be awakened. Usually
they will then be scheduled in the order in which they were released. When threads end up being
run concurrently, the adaptive spinning (described later in this section) usually ensures that
they will not block. And because they are released from highest to lowest priority, the highest
priority thread will usually be the first to acquire the lock. There will be no need for, and hence
no overhead from, priority propagation. Rather, the lock will be handed down from the highest
priority threads through the intermediate priorities to the lowest priority.

To avoid having excessive numbers of threads awakened, kernel programmers try to use locks
and wait channels with fine-enough granularity that unrelated uses will not collide on the same
resource. For example, they put locks on each buffer in the buffer cache rather than putting a
single lock on the buffer cache as a whole.

Resuming a thread takes the following steps in its operation:

1. Removes the thread from its turnstile or sleepqueue. If it is the last thread to be awakened,
the turnstile or sleepqueue is returned to it. If it is not the last thread to be awakened, a turnstile
or sleepqueue from the free list is returned to it.

2. Recomputes the user-mode scheduling priority if the thread has been sleeping longer than
one second.

3. If the thread had been blocked on a turnstile, it is placed on the run queue. If the thread had
been blocked on a sleepqueue, it is placed on the run queue if it is in a SLEEPING state and if its
process is not swapped out of main memory. If the process has been swapped out, the swapin
process will be awakened to load it back into memory (see Section 6.12); if the thread is in a
STOPPED state, it is not put on a run queue until it is explicitly restarted by a user-level process,
either by a ptrace system call (see Section 4.9) or by a continue signal (see Section 4.7).

If any threads are placed on the run queue and one of them has a scheduling priority higher than
that of the currently executing thread, it will also request that the CPU be rescheduled as soon as
possible.

Synchronization

The FreeBSD kernel supports both symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) and nonuniform
memory access (NUMA) architectures. An SMP architecture is one in which all the CPUs are
connected to a common main memory while a NUMA architecture is one in which the CPUs are
connected to a non-uniform memory. With a NUMA architecture, some memory is local to a
CPU and is quickly accessible while other memory is slower to access because it is local to
another CPU or shared between CPUs. Throughout this book, references to multiprocessors and
multiprocessing refer to both SMP and NUMA architectures.

A multiprocessing kernel requires extensive and fine-grained synchronization. The simplist
form of synchronization is a critical section. While a thread is running in a critical section, it can
neither be migrated to another CPU nor preempted by another thread. A critical section protects
per-CPU data structures such as a run queue or CPU-specific memory-allocation data structures.
A critical section controls only a single CPU, so it cannot protect systemwide data structures;
one of the locking mechanisms described below must be used. While critical sections are useful
for only a limited set of data structures, they are beneficial in those cases because they have
significantly lower overhead than locks. A critical section begins by calling critical_enter() and
continues until calling the function critical_exit().

Table 4.3 shows the hierarchy of locking that is necessary to support multiprocessing. The
column labelled Sleep in Table 4.3 shows whether a lock of that type may be held when a thread
blocks for a medium- or long-term sleep.

Table 4.3 Locking hierarchy.

Although it is possible to build locks using single-memory operations [Dekker, 2013], to be
practical, the hardware must provide a memory interlocked compare-and-swap instruction. The
compare-and-swap instruction must allow two operations to be done on a main-memory
location—the reading and comparing to a specified compare-value of the existing value followed
by the writing of a new value if the read value matches the compare-value—without any other
processor being able to read or write that memory location between the two memory operations.
All the locking primitives in the FreeBSD system are built using the compare-and-swap
instruction.

Mutex Synchronization

Mutexes are the primary method of short-term thread synchronization. The major design
considerations for mutexes are as follows:

• Acquiring and releasing uncontested mutexes should be as fast as possible.

• Mutexes must have the information and storage space to support priority propagation. In
FreeBSD, mutexes use turnstiles to manage priority propagation.

• A thread must be able to acquire a mutex recursively if the mutex is initialized to support
recursion.

Mutexes are built from the hardware compare-and-swap instruction. A memory location is
reserved for the lock. When the lock is free, the value of MTX_UNOWNED is stored in the
memory location; when the lock is held, a pointer to the thread owning the lock is stored in the

memory location. The compare-and-swap instruction tries to acquire the lock. The value in the
lock is compared with MTX_UNOWNED; if it matches, it is replaced with the pointer to the
thread. The instruction returns the old value; if the old value was MTX_OWNED, then the lock
was successfully acquired and the thread may proceed. Otherwise, some other thread held the
lock so the thread must loop doing the compare-and-swap until the thread holding the lock (and
running on a different processor) stores MTX_OWNED into the lock to show that it is done with
it.

There are currently two flavors of mutexes: those that block and those that do not. By default,
threads will block when they request a mutex that is already held. Most kernel code uses the
default lock type that allows the thread to be suspended from the CPU if it cannot get the lock.

Mutexes that do not sleep are called spin mutexes. A spin mutex will not relinquish the CPU
when it cannot immediately get the requested lock, but it will loop, waiting for the mutex to be
released by another CPU. Spinning can result in deadlock if a thread interrupted the thread that
held a mutex and then tried to acquire the mutex. To protect an interrupt thread from blocking
against itself during the period that it is held, a spin mutex runs inside a critical section with
interrupts disabled on that CPU. Thus, an interrupt thread can run only on another CPU during
the period that the spin mutex is held.

Spin mutexes are specialized locks that are intended to be held for short periods of time. A
thread may hold multiple spin mutexes, but it is required to release the mutexes in the opposite
order from which they were acquired. A thread may not go to sleep while holding a spin mutex.

On most architectures, both acquiring and releasing an uncontested spin mutex are more
expensive than the same operation on a nonspin mutex. Spin mutexes are more expensive than
blocking locks because spin mutexes have to disable or defer interrupts while they are held to
prevent races with interrupt handling code. As a result, holding spin mutexes can increase
interrupt latency. To minimize interrupt latency and reduce locking overhead, FreeBSD uses
spin mutexes only in code that does low-level scheduling and context switching.

The time to acquire a lock can vary. Consider the time to wait for a lock needed to search for an
item on a list. The thread holding the search lock may have to acquire another lock before it can
remove an item it has found from the list. If the needed lock is already held, it will block to wait
for it. A different thread that tries to acquire the search lock uses adaptive spinning. Adaptive
spinning is implemented by having the thread that wants the lock extract the thread pointer of
the owning thread from the lock structure. It then checks to see if the thread is currently
executing. If so, it spins until either the lock is released or the thread stops executing. The effect
is to spin so long as the current lock holder is executing on another CPU. The reasons for taking
this approach are many:

• Locks are usually held for brief periods of time, so if the owner is running, then it will probably
release the lock before the current thread completes the process of blocking on the lock.

• If a lock holder is not running, then the current thread has to wait at least one context switch
time before it can acquire the lock.

• If the owner is on a run queue, then the current thread should block immediately so it can lend
its priority to the lock owner.

• It is cheaper to release an uncontested lock with a single atomic operation than a contested
lock. A contested lock has to find the turnstile, lock the turnstile chain and turnstile, and then
awaken all the waiters. So adaptive spinning reduces overhead on both the lock owner and the
thread trying to acquire the lock.

The lower cost for releasing an uncontested lock explains the algorithm used to awaken waiters
on a mutex. Historically, the mutex code would only awaken a single waiter when a contested
lock was released, which left the lock in a contested state if there were more than one waiter.
However, leaving a contested lock ensured that the new lock holder would have to perform a
more expensive unlock operation. Indeed, all but the last waiter would have an expensive unlock
operation. In the current FreeBSD system, all the waiters are awakened when the lock is
released. Usually they end up being scheduled sequentially, which results in them all getting to
do cheaper unlock operations. If they do all end up running concurrently, they will then use
adaptive spinning and will finish the chain of lock requests sooner since the context switches to
awaken the threads are performed in parallel rather than sequentially. This change in behavior
was motivated by documentation of these effects noted in Solaris Internals [McDougall & Mauro,
2006].

It is wasteful of CPU cycles to use spin mutexes for resources that will be held for long periods of
time (more than a few microseconds). For example, a spin mutex would be inappropriate for a
disk buffer that would need to be locked throughout the time that a disk I/O was being done.
Here, a sleep lock should be used. When a thread trying to acquire a medium- or long-term lock
finds that the lock is held, it is put to sleep so that other threads can run until the lock becomes
available.

Spin mutexes are never appropriate on a uniprocessor since the only way that a resource held by
another thread will ever be released will be when that thread gets to run. Spin mutexes are
always converted to sleep locks when running on a uniprocessor. As with the multi-processor,
interrupts are disabled while the spin mutexes are held. Since there is no other processor on
which the interrupts can run, interrupt latency becomes much more apparent on a uniprocessor.

Mutex Interface

The mtx_init() function must be used to initialize a mutex before it can be used. The mtx_init()
function specifies a type that the witness code uses to classify a mutex when doing checks of lock
ordering. It is not permissible to pass the same mutex to mtx_init() multiple times without
intervening calls to mtx_destroy().

The mtx_lock() function acquires a mutual exclusion lock for the currently running kernel
thread. If another kernel thread is holding the mutex, the caller will sleep until the mutex is
available. The mtx_lock_spin() function is similar to the mtx_lock() function except that it will
spin until the mutex becomes available. A critical section is entered when the spin mutex is
obtained and is exited when the spin mutex is released. Interrupts are blocked on the CPU on
which the thread holding the spin mutex is running. No other threads, including interrupt
threads, can run on the CPU during the period that the spin mutex is held.

It is possible for the same thread to acquire a mutex recursively with no ill effects if the
MTX_RECURSE bit was passed to mtx_init() during the initialization of the mutex. The witness
module verifies that a thread does not recurse on a non-recursive lock. A recursive lock is useful
if a resource may be locked at two or more levels in the kernel. By allowing a recursive lock, a
lower layer need not check if the resource has already been locked by a higher layer; it can
simply lock and release the resource as needed.

The mtx_trylock() function tries to acquire a mutual exclusion lock for the currently running
kernel thread. If the mutex cannot be immediately acquired, mtx_trylock() will return 0;
otherwise the mutex will be acquired and a nonzero value will be returned. The mtx_trylock()
function cannot be used with spin mutexes.

The mtx_unlock() function releases a mutual exclusion lock; if a higher-priority thread is
waiting for the mutex, the releasing thread will be put to sleep to allow the higher-priority
thread to acquire the mutex and run. A mutex that allows recursive locking maintains a
reference count showing the number of times that it has been locked. Each successful lock
request must have a corresponding unlock request. The mutex is not released until the final
unlock has been done, causing the reference count to drop to zero.

The mtx_unlock_spin() function releases a spin-type mutual exclusion lock; the critical section
entered before acquiring the mutex is exited.

The mtx_destroy() function destroys a mutex so the data associated with it may be freed or
otherwise overwritten. Any mutex that is destroyed must previously have been initialized with
mtx_init(). It is permissible to have a single reference to a mutex when it is destroyed. It is not

permissible to hold the mutex recursively or have another thread blocked on the mutex when it
is destroyed. If these rules are violated, the kernel will panic.

Normally, a mutex is allocated within the structure that it will protect. For long-lived structures
or structures that are allocated from a zone (structures in a zone are created once and used
many times before they are destroyed), the time overhead of initializing and destroying it is
insignificant. For a short-lived structure that is not allocated out of a zone, the cost of initializing
and destroying an embedded mutex may exceed the time during which the structure is used. In
addition, mutexes are large and may double or triple the size of a small short-lived structure (a
mutex is often the size of a cache line, which is typically 128 bytes). To avoid this overhead, the
kernel provides a pool of mutexes that may be borrowed for use with a short-lived structure. The
short-lived structure does not need to reserve space for a mutex, just space for a pointer to a
pool mutex. When the structure is allocated, it requests a pool mutex to which it sets its pointer.
When it is done, the pool mutex is returned to the kernel and the structure freed. An example of
a use of a pool mutex comes from the poll system call implementation that needs a structure to
track a poll request from the time the system call is entered until the requested data arrives on
the descriptor.

Lock Synchronization

Interprocess synchronization to a resource typically is implemented by associating it with a lock
structure. The kernel has several lock managers that manipulate a lock. The operations provided
by all the lock managers are:

• Request shared: Get one of many possible shared locks. If a thread holding an exclusive lock
requests a shared lock, some lock managers will downgrade the exclusive lock to a shared lock
while others simply return an error.

• Request exclusive: When all shared locks have cleared, grant an exclusive lock. To ensure that
the exclusive lock will be granted quickly, some lock managers stop granting shared locks when
an exclusive lock is requested. Others grant new shared locks only for recursive lock requests.
Only one exclusive lock may exist at a time, except that a thread holding an exclusive lock may
get additional exclusive locks if the canrecurse flag was set when the lock was initialized. Some
lock managers allow the canrecurse flag to be specified in the lock request.

• Request release: Release one instance of a lock.

In addition to these basic requests, some of the lock managers provide the following additional
functions:

• Request upgrade: The thread must hold a shared lock that it wants to have upgraded to an
exclusive lock. Other threads may get exclusive access to the resource between the time that the
upgrade is requested and the time that it is granted. Some lock managers allow only a limited
version of upgrade where it is granted if immediately available, but do not provide a mechanism
to wait for an upgrade.

• Request exclusive upgrade: The thread must hold a shared lock that it wants to have upgraded
to an exclusive lock. If the request succeeds, no other threads will have received exclusive access
to the resource between the time that the upgrade is requested and the time that it is granted.
However, if another thread has already requested an upgrade, the request will fail.

• Request downgrade: The thread must hold an exclusive lock that it wants to have downgraded
to a shared lock. If the thread holds multiple (recursive) exclusive locks, some lock managers
will downgrade them all to shared locks; other lock managers will fail the request.

• Request drain: Wait for all activity on the lock to end, and then mark it decommissioned. This
feature is used before freeing a lock that is part of a piece of memory that is about to be released.

Locks must be initialized before their first use by calling their initialization function. Parameters
to the initialization function may include the following:

• A top-half kernel priority at which the thread should run if it was blocked before it acquired the
lock

• Flags such as canrecurse that allow the thread currently holding an exclusive lock to get
another exclusive lock rather than panicking with a “locking against myself” failure

• A string that describes the resource that the lock protects, referred to as the wait channel
message

• An optional maximum time to wait for the lock to become available

Not all types of locks support all these options. When a lock is no longer needed, it must be
released.

As shown in Table 4.3, the lowest-level type of lock is the reader-writer lock. The reader-writer
lock operates much like a mutex except that a reader-writer lock supports both shared and
exclusive access. Like a mutex, it is managed by a turnstile so it cannot be held during a
medium- or long-term sleep and provides priority propagation for exclusive (but not shared)
locks. Reader-writer locks may be recursed.

Next up in Table 4.3 is the read-mostly lock. The read-mostly lock has the same capabilities and
restrictions as reader-writer locks while they also add priority propagation for shared locks by
tracking shared owners using a caller-supplied tracker data structure. Read-mostly locks are
used to protect data that are read far more often than they are written. They work by trying the
read without acquiring a lock assuming that the read will succeed and only fall back to using
locks when the assumption fails. Reads usually happen more quickly but at a higher cost if the
underlying resource is modified. The routing table is a good example of a read-mostly data
structure. Routes are rarely updated, but are read frequently.

The remaining types of locks all permit medium- and long-term sleeping. None of these locks
support priority propagation. The shared-exclusive locks are the fastest of these locks with the
fewest features. In addition to the basic shared and exclusive access, they provide recursion for
both shared and exclusive locks, the ability to be interrupted by a signal, and limited upgrade
and downgrade capabilities.

The lock-manager locks are the most full featured but also the slowest of the locking schemes. In
addition to the features of the shared-exclusive locks, they provide full upgrade and downgrade
capabilities, the ability to be awakened after a specified interval, the ability to drain all users in
preparation for being deallocated, and the ability to pass ownership of locks between threads
and to the kernel.

Condition variables are used with mutexes to wait for conditions to occur. Threads wait on
condition variables by calling cv_wait(), cv_wait_sig() (wait unless interrupted by a signal),
cv_timedwait() (wait for a maximum time), or cv_timedwait_sig() (wait unless interrupted by
a signal or for a maximum time). Threads unblock waiters by calling cv_signal() to unblock one
waiter, or cv_broadcast() to unblock all waiters. The cv_waitq_remove() function removes a
waiting thread from a condition-variable wait queue if it is on one.

A thread must hold a mutex before calling cv_wait(), cv_wait_sig(), cv_timedwait(), or
cv_timedwait_sig(). When a thread waits on a condition, the mutex is atomically released
before the thread is blocked, and then atomically reacquired before the function call returns. All
waiters must use the same mutex with a condition variable. A thread must hold the mutex while
calling cv_signal() or cv_broadcast().

Deadlock Prevention

The highest-level locking primitive prevents threads from deadlocking when locking multiple
resources. Suppose that two threads, A and B, require exclusive access to two resources, R1 and
R2, to do some operation as shown in Figure 4.4. If thread A acquires R1 and thread B acquires

R2, then a deadlock occurs when thread A tries to acquire R2 and thread B tries to acquire R1. To
avoid deadlock, FreeBSD maintains a partial ordering on all the locks. The two partial-ordering
rules are as follows:

1. A thread may acquire only one lock in each class.

2. A thread may acquire only a lock in a higher-numbered class than the highest-numbered class
for which it already holds a lock.

Figure 4.4 Partial ordering of resources.

Figure 4.4 shows two classes. Class 1 with resources R1, R1′, and R1″. Class 2 with resources R2,
R2′, and R2″. In Figure 4.4, Thread A holds R1 and can request R2 as R1 and R2 are in different
classes and R2 is in a higher-numbered class than R1. However, Thread B must release R2 before
requesting R1, since R2 is in a higher class than R1. Thus, Thread A will be able to acquire R2
when it is released by Thread B. After Thread A completes and releases R1 and R2, Thread B will
be able to acquire both of those locks and run to completion without deadlock.

Historically, the class members and ordering were poorly documented and unenforced.
Violations were discovered when threads would deadlock and a careful analysis was done to
figure out what ordering had been violated. With an increasing number of developers and a
growing kernel, the ad hoc method of maintaining the partial ordering of locks became
untenable. A witness module was added to the kernel to derive and enforce the partial ordering
of the locks. The witness module keeps track of the locks acquired and released by each thread.
It also keeps track of the order in which locks are acquired relative to each other. Each time a
lock is acquired, the witness module uses these two lists to verify that a lock is not being
acquired in the wrong order. If a lock order violation is detected, then a message is output to the
console detailing the locks involved and the locations in the code in which they were acquired.

The witness module also verifies that no locks that prohibit sleeping are held when requesting a
sleep lock or voluntarily going to sleep.

The witness module can be configured to either panic or drop into the kernel debugger when an
order violation occurs or some other witness check fails. When running the debugger, the
witness module can output the list of locks held by the current thread to the console along with
the filename and line number at which each lock was last acquired. It can also dump the current
order list to the console. The code first displays the lock order tree for all the sleep locks. Then it
displays the lock order tree for all the spin mutexes. Finally, it displays a list of locks that have
not yet been acquired.

4.4 Thread Scheduling

The FreeBSD scheduler has a well-defined set of kernel-application programming interfaces
(kernel APIs) that allow it to support different schedulers. Since FreeBSD 5.0, the kernel has
had two schedulers available:

•   The     ULE   scheduler   first   introduced   in    FreeBSD   5.0   and    found    in   the file
/sys/kern/sched_ule.c [Roberson, 2003]. The name is not an acronym. If the underscore in
its filename is removed, the rationale for its name becomes apparent. This scheduler is used by
default and is described later in this section.

• The traditional 4.4BSD scheduler found in the file /sys/kern/sched_4bsd.c. This scheduler
is still maintained but no longer used by default.

Because a busy system makes millions of scheduling decisions per second, the speed with which
scheduling decisions are made is critical to the performance of the system as a whole. Other
UNIX systems have added a dynamic scheduler switch that must be traversed for every
scheduling decision. To avoid this overhead, FreeBSD requires that the scheduler be selected at
the time the kernel is built. Thus, all calls into the scheduling code are resolved at compile time
rather than going through the overhead of an indirect function call for every scheduling
decision.

The Low-Level Scheduler

Scheduling is divided into two parts: a simple low-level scheduler that runs frequently and a
more complex high-level scheduler that runs at most a few times per second. The low-level
scheduler runs every time a thread blocks and a new thread must be selected to run. For
efficiency when running thousands of times per second, it must make its decision quickly with a

minimal amount of information. To simplify its task, the kernel maintains a set of run queues
for each CPU in the system that are organized from high to low priority. When a task blocks on a
CPU, the low-level scheduler’s sole responsibility is to select the thread from the highest-priority
non-empty run queue for that CPU. The high-level scheduler is responsible for setting the
thread priorities and deciding on which CPU’s run queue they should be placed. Each CPU has
its own set of run queues to avoid contention for access when two CPUs both need to select a
new thread to run at the same time. Contention between run queues occurs only when the
high-level scheduler decides to move a thread from the run queue of one CPU to the run queue
of another CPU. The kernel tries to avoid moving threads between CPUs as the loss of its
CPU-local caches slows it down.

All threads that are runnable are assigned a scheduling priority and a CPU by the high-level
scheduler that determines in which run queue they are placed. In selecting a new thread to run,
the low-level scheduler scans the run queues of the CPU needing a new thread from highest to
lowest priority and chooses the first thread on the first nonempty queue. If multiple threads
reside on a queue, the system runs them round robin; that is, it runs them in the order that
they are found on the queue, with equal amounts of time allowed. If a thread blocks, it is not put
back onto any run queue. Instead, it is placed on a turnstile or a sleepqueue. If a thread uses up
the time quantum (or time slice) allowed it, it is placed at the end of the queue from which it
came, and the thread at the front of the queue is selected to run.

The shorter the time quantum, the better the interactive response. However, longer time quanta
provide higher system throughput because the system will incur less overhead from doing
context switches and processor caches will be flushed less often. The time quantum used by
FreeBSD is adjusted by the high-level scheduler as described later in this subsection.

Thread Run Queues and Context Switching

The kernel has a single set of run queues to manage all the thread scheduling classes shown in
Table 4.2. The scheduling-priority calculations described in the previous section are used to
order the set of timesharing threads into the priority ranges between 120 and 223. The real-time
threads and the idle threads priorities are set by the applications themselves but are constrained
by the kernel to be within the ranges 48 to 79 and 224 to 255, respectively. The number of
queues used to hold the collection of all runnable threads in the system affects the cost of
managing the queues. If only a single (ordered) queue is maintained, then selecting the next
runnable thread becomes simple but other operations become expensive. Using 256 different
queues can significantly increase the cost of identifying the next thread to run. The system uses
64 run queues, selecting a run queue for a thread by dividing the thread’s priority by 4. To save
time, the threads on each queue are not further sorted by their priorities.

The run queues contain all the runnable threads in main memory except the currently running
thread. Figure 4.5 shows how each queue is organized as a doubly linked list of thread structures.
The head of each run queue is kept in an array. Associated with this array is a bit vector,
rq_status, that is used in identifying the nonempty run queues. Two routines, runq_add() and
runq_remove(), are used to place a thread at the tail of a run queue, and to take a thread off the
head of a run queue. The heart of the scheduling algorithm is the runq_choose() routine. The
runq_choose() routine is responsible for selecting a new thread to run; it operates as follows:

1. Ensures that our caller acquired the lock associated with the run queue.

2. Locates a nonempty run queue by finding the location of the first nonzero bit in the rq_status
bit vector. If rq_status is zero, there are no threads to run, so selects an idle loop thread.

3. Given a nonempty run queue, removes the first thread on the queue.

4. If this run queue is now empty as a result of removing the thread, clears the appropriate bit in
rq_status.

5. Returns the selected thread.

Figure 4.5 Queueing structure for runnable threads.

The context-switch code is broken into two parts. The machine-independent code resides in
mi_switch(); the machine-dependent part resides in cpu_switch(). On most architectures,
cpu_switch() is coded in assembly language for efficiency.

Given the mi_switch() routine and the thread-priority calculations, the only missing piece in the
scheduling facility is how the system forces an involuntary context switch. Remember that
voluntary context switches occur when a thread calls the sleep() routine. Sleep() can be invoked
only by a runnable thread, so sleep() needs only to place the thread on a sleep queue and to
invoke mi_switch() to schedule the next thread to run. Often, an interrupt thread will not want
to sleep() itself but will be delivering data that will cause the kernel to want to run a different
thread than the one that was running before the interrupt. Thus, the kernel needs a mechanism
to request that an involuntary context switch be done at the conclusion of the interrupt.

This mechanism is handled by setting the currently running thread’s TDF_NEEDRESCHED flag
and then posting an asynchronous system trap (AST). An AST is a trap that is delivered to
a thread the next time that thread is preparing to return from an interrupt, a trap, or a system
call. Some architectures support ASTs directly in hardware; other systems emulate ASTs by
checking an AST flag at the end of every system call, trap, and interrupt. When the hardware
AST trap occurs or the AST flag is set, the mi_switch() routine is called instead of the current
thread resuming execution. Rescheduling requests are made by the sched_lend_user_prio(),
sched_clock(), sched_setpreempt(), and sched_affinity() routines.

With the advent of multiprocessor support, FreeBSD can preempt threads executing in kernel
mode. However, such preemption is generally not done for threads running in the timesharing
class, so the worst-case real-time response to events when running with the timeshare scheduler
is defined by the longest path through the top half of the kernel. Since the system guarantees no
upper bounds on the duration of a system call, when running with just the timeshare scheduler
FreeBSD is decidedly not a hard real-time system.

Real-time and interrupt threads do preempt lower-priority threads. The longest path that
preemption is disabled for real-time and interrupt threads is defined by the longest time a
spinlock is held or a critical section is entered. Thus, when using real-time threads, microsecond
real-time deadlines can be met. The kernel can be configured to preempt timeshare threads
executing in the kernel with other higher-priority timeshare threads. This option is not used by
default as the increase in context switches adds overhead and does not help make timeshare
threads response time more predictable.

Timeshare Thread Scheduling

The goal of a multiprocessing system is to apply the power of multiple CPUs to a problem, or set
of problems, to achieve a result in less time than it would run on a single-processor system. If a
system has the same number of runnable threads as it does CPUs, then achieving this goal is
easy. Each runnable thread gets a CPU to itself and runs to completion. Typically, there are

many runnable threads competing for a few processors. One job of the scheduler is to ensure
that the CPUs are always busy and are not wasting their cycles. When a thread completes its
work, or is blocked waiting for resources, it is removed from the processor on which it was
running. While a thread is running on a processor, it brings its working set—the instructions it is
executing and the data on which it is operating—into the CPU’s memory cache. Migrating a
thread has a cost. When a thread is moved from one CPU to another, its CPU-cache working set
is lost and must be removed from the CPU on which it was running and then loaded into the
new CPU to which it has been migrated. The performance of a multiprocessing system with a
naive scheduler that does not take this cost into account can fall beneath that of a
single-processor system. The term processor affinity describes a scheduler that only
migrates threads when necessary to give an idle processor something to do.

A multiprocessing system may be built with multiple processor chips. Each processor chip may
have multiple CPU cores, each of which can execute a thread. The CPU cores on a single
processor chip share many of the processor’s resources, such as memory caches and access to
main memory, so they are more tightly synchronized than the CPUs on other processor chips.

Handling processor chips with multiple CPUs is a derivative form of load balancing among
CPUs on different chips. It is handled by maintaining a hierarchy of CPUs. The CPUs on the
same chip are the cheapest between which to migrate threads. Next down in the hierarchy are
processor chips on the same motherboard. Below them are chips connected by the same
backplane. The scheduler supports an arbitrary depth hierarchy as dictated by the hardware.
When the scheduler is deciding to which processor to migrate a thread, it will try to pick a new
processor higher in the hierarchy because that is the lowest-cost migration path.

From a thread’s perspective, it does not know that there are other threads running on the same
processor because the processor is handling them independently. The one piece of code in the
system that needs to be aware of the multiple CPUs is the scheduling algorithm. In particular,
the scheduler treats each CPU on a chip as one on which it is cheaper to migrate threads than it
would be to migrate the thread to a CPU on another chip. The mechanism for getting tighter
affinity between CPUs on the same processor chip versus CPUs on other processor chips is
described later in this section.

The traditional FreeBSD scheduler maintains a global list of runnable threads that it traverses
once per second to recalculate their priorities. The use of a single list for all runnable threads
means that the performance of the scheduler is dependent on the number of tasks in the system,
and as the number of tasks grow, more CPU time must be spent in the scheduler maintaining
the list.

The ULE scheduler was developed during FreeBSD 5.0 with major work continuing into
FreeBSD 9.0, spanning 10 years of development. The scheduler was developed to address
shortcomings of the traditional BSD scheduler on multiprocessor systems. A new scheduler was
undertaken for several reasons:

• To address the need for processor affinity in multiprocessor systems

• To supply equitable distribution of load between CPUs on multiprocessor systems

• To provide better support for processors with multiple CPU cores on a single chip

• To improve the performance of the scheduling algorithm so that it is no longer dependent on
the number of threads in the system

• To provide interactivity and timesharing performance similar to the traditional BSD scheduler.

The traditional BSD scheduler had good interactivity on large timeshare systems and single-user
desktop and laptop systems. However, it had a single global run queue and consequently a
single global scheduler lock. Having a single global run queue was slowed both by contention for
the global lock and by difficulties implementing CPU affinity.

The priority computation relied on a single global timer that iterated over every runnable thread
in the system and evaluated its priority while holding several highly contended locks. This
approach became slower as the number of runnable threads increased. While the priority
calculations were being done, processes could not fork or exit and CPUs could not context
switch.

The ULE scheduler can logically be thought of as two largely orthogonal sets of algorithms;
those that manage the affinity and distribution of threads among CPUs and those that are
responsible for the order and duration of a thread’s runtime. These two sets of algorithms work
in concert to provide a balance of low latency, high throughput, and good resource utilization.
The remainder of the scheduler is event driven and uses these algorithms to implement various
decisions according to changes in system state.

The goal of equalling the exceptional interactive behavior and throughput of the traditional BSD
scheduler in a multiprocessor-friendly and constant-time implementation was the most
challenging and time consuming part of ULE’s development. The interactivity, CPU utilization
estimation, priority, and time slice algorithms together implement the timeshare scheduling
policy.

The behavior of threads is evaluated by ULE on an event-driven basis to differentiate interactive
and batch threads. Interactive threads are those that are thought to be waiting for and
responding to user input. They require low latency to achieve a good user experience. Batch
threads are those that tend to consume as much CPU as they are given and may be background
jobs. A good example of the former is a text editor, and for the latter, a compiler. The scheduler
must use imperfect heuristics to provide a gradient of behaviors based on a best guess of the
category to which a given thread fits. This categorization may change frequently during the
lifetime of a thread and must be responsive on timescales relevant to people using the system.

The algorithm that evaluates interactivity is called the interactivity score. The interactivity score
is the ratio of voluntary sleep time to run time normalized to a number between 0 and 100. This
score does not include time waiting on the run queue while the thread is not yet the highest
priority thread in the queue. By requiring explicit voluntary sleeps, we can differentiate threads
that are not running because of inferior priority versus those that are periodically waiting for
user input. This requirement also makes it more challenging for a thread to be marked
interactive as system load increases, which is desirable because it prevents the system from
becoming swamped with interactive threads while keeping things like shells and simple text
editors available to administrators. When plotted, the interactivity scores derived from a matrix
of possible sleep and run times becomes a three-dimensional sigmoid function. Using this
approach means that interactive tasks tend to stay interactive and batch tasks tend to stay
batched.

A particular challenge is complex X Window applications such as Web browsers and office
productivity packages. These applications may consume significant resources for brief periods of
time, however the user expects them to remain interactive. To resolve this issue, a
several-second history of the sleep and run behavior is kept and gradually decayed. Thus, the
scheduler keeps a moving average that can tolerate bursts of behavior but will quickly penalize
timeshare threads that abuse their elevated status. A longer history allows longer bursts but
learns more slowly.

The interactivity score is compared to the interactivity threshold, which is the cutoff point for
considering a thread interactive. The interactivity threshold is modified by the process nice
value. Positive nice values make it more challenging for a thread to be considered interactive,
while negative values make it easier. Thus, the nice value gives the user some control over the
primary mechanism of reducing thread-scheduling latency.

A thread is considered to be interactive if the ratio of its voluntary sleep time versus its run time
is below a certain threshold. The interactivity threshold is defined in the ULE code and is not

configurable. ULE uses two equations to compute the interactivity score of a thread. For threads
whose sleep time exceeds their run time, Eq 4.1 is used:

When a thread’s run time exceeds its sleep time, Eq. 4.2 is used instead:

The scaling factor is the maximum interactivity score divided by two. Threads that score below
the interactivity threshold are considered to be interactive; all others are noninteractive. The
sched_interact_update() routine is called at several points in a threads existence—for example,
when the thread is awakened by a wakeup() call—to update the thread’s run time and sleep time.
The sleep- and run-time values are only allowed to grow to a certain limit. When the sum of the
run time and sleep time pass the limit, they are reduced to bring them back into range. An
interactive thread whose sleep history was not remembered at all would not remain interactive,
resulting in a poor user experience. Remembering an interactive thread’s sleep time for too long
would allow the thread to get more than its fair share of the CPU. The amount of history that is
kept and the interactivity threshold are the two values that most strongly influence a user’s
interactive experience on the system.

Priorities are assigned according to the thread’s interactivity status. Interactive threads have a
priority that is derived from the interactivity score and are placed in a priority band above batch
threads. They are scheduled like real-time round-robin threads. Batch threads have their
priorities determined by the estimated CPU utilization modified according to their process nice
value. In both cases, the available priority range is equally divided among possible interactive
scores or percent-cpu calculations, both of which are values between 0 and 100. Since there are
fewer than 100 priorities available for each class, some values share priorities. Both
computations roughly assign priorities according to a history of CPU utilization but with
different longevities and scaling factors.

The CPU utilization estimator accumulates run time as a thread runs and decays it as a thread
sleeps. The utilization estimator provides the percent-cpu values displayed in top and ps. ULE
delays the decay until a thread wakes to avoid periodically scanning every thread in the system.
Since this delay leaves values unchanged for the duration of sleeps, the values must also be
decayed before any user process inspects them. This approach preserves the constant-time and
event-driven nature of the scheduler.

The CPU utilization is recorded in the thread as the number of ticks, typically 1 millisecond,
during which a thread has been running, along with window of time defined as a first and last
tick. The scheduler attempts to keep roughly 10 seconds of history. To accomplish decay, it waits
until there are 11 seconds of history and then subtracts one-tenth of the tick value while moving
the first tick forward 1 second. This inexpensive, estimated moving-average algorithm has the
property of allowing arbitrary update intervals. If the utilization information is inspected after
more than the update interval has passed, the tick value is zeroed. Otherwise, the number of
seconds that have passed divided by the update interval is subtracted.

The scheduler implements round-robin through the assignment of time slices. A time slice is a
fixed interval of allowed run time before the scheduler will select another thread of equal
priority to run. The time slice prevents starvation among equal priority threads. The time slice
times the number of runnable threads in a given priority defines the maximum latency a thread
of that priority will experience before it can run. To bound this latency, ULE dynamically adjusts
the size of slices it dispenses based on system load. The time slice has a minimum value to
prevent thrashing and balance throughput with latency. An interrupt handler calls the scheduler
to evaluate the time slice during every statclock tick. Using the stat-clock to evaluate the time
slice is a stochastic approach to slice accounting that is efficient but only grossly accurate.

The scheduler must also work to prevent starvation of low-priority batch jobs by higher-priority
batch jobs. The traditional BSD scheduler avoided starvation by periodically iterating over all
threads waiting on the run queue to elevate the low-priority threads and decrease the priority of
higher-priority threads that had been monopolizing the CPU. This algorithm violates the desire
to run in constant time independent of the number of system threads. As a result, the run queue
for batch-policy timeshare threads is kept in a similar fashion to the system callwheel, also
known as a calendar queue. A calendar queue is one in which the queue’s head and tail rotate
according to a clock or period. An element can be inserted into a calendar queue many positions
away from the head and gradually migrate toward the head. Because this run queue is special
purpose, it is kept separately from the real-time and idle queues while interactive threads are
kept along with the real-time threads until they are no longer considered interactive.

The ULE scheduler creates a set of three arrays of queues for each CPU in the system. Having
per-CPU queues makes it possible to implement processor affinity in a multiprocessor system.

One array of queues is the idle queue, where all idle threads are stored. The array is arranged
from highest to lowest priority. The second array of queues is designated the realtime queue.
Like the idle queue, it is arranged from highest to lowest priority.

The third array of queues is designated the timeshare queue. Rather than being arranged in
priority order, the timeshare queues are managed as a calendar queue. A pointer references the

current entry. The pointer is advanced once per system tick, although it may not advance on a
tick until the currently selected queue is empty. Since each thread is given a maximum time slice
and no threads may be added to the current position, the queue will drain in a bounded amount
of time. This requirement to empty the queue before advancing to the next queue means that the
wait time a thread experiences is not only a function of its priority but also the system load.

Insertion into the timeshare queue is defined by the relative difference between a thread’s
priority and the best possible timeshare priority. High-priority threads will be placed soon after
the current position. Low-priority threads will be placed far from the current position. This
algorithm ensures that even the lowest-priority timeshare thread will eventually make it to the
selected queue and execute in spite of higher-priority timeshare threads being available in other
queues. The difference in priorities of two threads will determine their ratio of run-time. The
higher-priority thread may be inserted ahead of the lower-priority thread multiple times before
the queue position catches up. This run-time ratio is what grants timeshare CPU hogs with
different nice values, different proportional shares of the CPU.

These algorithms taken together determine the priorities and run times of timesharing threads.
They implement a dynamic tradeoff between latency and throughput based on system load,
thread behavior, and a range of effects based on user-scheduling decisions made with nice.
Many of the parameters governing the limits of these algorithms can be explored in real time
with the sysctl kern.sched tree. The rest are compile-time constants that are documented at the
top of the scheduler source file (/sys/kern/sched_ule.c).

Threads are picked to run, in priority order, from the realtime queue until it is empty, at which
point threads from the currently selected timeshare queue will be run. Threads in the idle
queues are run only when the other two arrays of queues are empty. Real-time and interrupt
threads are always inserted into the realtime queues so that they will have the least possible
scheduling latency. Interactive threads are also inserted into the realtime queue to keep the
interactive response of the system acceptable.

Noninteractive threads are put into the timeshare queues and are scheduled to run when the
queues are switched. Switching the queues guarantees that a thread gets to run at least once
every pass around the array of the timeshare queues regardless of priority, thus ensuring fair
sharing of the processor.

Multiprocessor Scheduling

A principal goal behind the development of ULE was improving performance on multiprocessor
systems. Good multiprocessing performance involves balancing affinity with utilization and the

preservation of the illusion of global scheduling in a system with local scheduling queues. These
decisions are implemented using a CPU topology supplied by machine-dependent code that
describes the relationships between CPUs in the system. The state is evaluated whenever a
thread becomes runnable, a CPU idles, or a periodic task runs to rebalance the load. These
events form the entirety of the multiprocessor-aware scheduling decisions.

The topology system was devised to identify which CPUs were symmetric multi-threading peers
and then made generic to support other relationships. Some examples are CPUs within a
package, CPUs sharing a layer of cache, CPUs that are local to a particular memory, or CPUs
that share execution units such as in symmetric multi-threading. This topology is implemented
as a tree of arbitrary depth where each level describes some shared resource with a cost value
and a bitmask of CPUs sharing that resource. The root of the tree holds CPUs in a system with
branches to each socket, then shared cache, shared functional unit, etc. Since the system is
generic, it should be extensible to describe any future processor arrangement. There is no
restriction on the depth of the tree or requirement that all levels are implemented.

Parsing this topology is a single recursive function called cpu_search(). It is a path-aware,
goal-based, tree-traversal function that may be started from arbitrary subtrees. It may be asked
to find the least- or most-loaded CPU that meets a given criteria, such as a priority or load
threshold. When considering load, it will consider the load of the entire path, thus giving the
potential for balancing sockets, caches, chips, etc. This function is used as the basis for all
multiprocessing-related scheduling decisions. Typically, recursive functions are avoided in
kernel programming because there is potential for stack exhaustion. However, the depth is fixed
by the depth of the processor topology that typically does not exceed three.

When a thread becomes runnable as a result of a wakeup, unlock, thread creation, or other event,
the sched_pickcpu() function is called to decide where it will run. ULE determines the best CPU
based on the following criteria:

• Threads with hard affinity to a single CPU or short-term binding pick the only allowed CPU.

• Interrupt threads that are being scheduled by their hardware interrupt handlers are scheduled
on the current CPU if their priority is high enough to run immediately.

• Thread affinity is evaluated by walking backwards up the tree starting from the last CPU on
which it was scheduled until a package or CPU is found with valid affinity that can run the
thread immediately.

• The whole system is searched for the least-loaded CPU that is running a lower-priority thread
than the one to be scheduled.

• The whole system is searched for the least-loaded CPU.

• The results of these searches are compared to the current CPU to see if that would give a
preferable decision to improve locality among the sleeping and waking threads as they may
share some state.

This approach orders from most preferential to least preferential. The affinity is valid if the sleep
time of the thread was shorter than the product of a time constant and a largest-cache-shared
level in the topology. This computation coarsely models the time required to push state out of
the cache. Each thread has a bitmap of allowed CPUs that is manipulated by cpuset and is
passed to cpu_search() for every decision. The locality between sleeper and waker can improve
producer/consumer type threading situations when they have shared cache state but it can also
cause underutilization when each thread would run faster given its own CPU. These examples
exemplify the types of decisions that must be made with imperfect information.

The next major multiprocessing algorithm runs when a CPU idles. The CPU sets a bit in a
bitmask shared by all processors that says that it is idle. The idle CPU calls tdq_idled() to search
other CPUs for work that can be migrated, or stolen in ULE terms, to keep the CPU busy. To
avoid thrashing and excessive migration, the kernel sets a load threshold that must be exceeded
on another CPU before some load will be taken. If any CPU exceeds this threshold, the idle CPU
will search its run queues for work to migrate. The highest-priority work that can be scheduled
on the idle CPU is then taken. This migration may be detrimental to affinity but improves many
latency-sensitive workloads.

Work may also be pushed to an idle CPU. Whenever an active CPU is about to add work to its
own run queue, it first checks to see if it has excess work and if another CPU in the system is idle.
If an idle CPU is found, then the thread is migrated to the idle CPU using an interprocessor
interrupt (IPI). Making a migration decision by inspecting a shared bitmask is much faster
than scanning the run queues of all the other processors. Seeking out idle processors when
adding a new task works well because it spreads the load when it is presented to the system.

The last major multiprocessing algorithm is the long-term load balancer. This form of migration,
called push migration, is done by the system on a periodic basis and more aggressively
offloads work to other processors in the system. Since the two scheduling events that distribute
load only run when a thread is added and when a CPU idles, it is possible to have a long-term
imbalance where more threads are running on one CPU than another. Push migration ensures
fairness among the runnable threads. For example, with three runnable threads on a
two-processor system, it would be unfair for one thread to get a processor to itself while the
other two had to share the second processor. To fulfill the goal of emulating a fair global run
queue, ULE must periodically shuffle threads to keep the system balanced. By pushing a thread

from the processor with two threads to the processor with one thread, no single thread would
get to run alone indefinitely. An ideal implementation would give each thread an average of 66
percent of the CPU available from a single CPU.

The long-term load balancer balances the worst path pair in the hierarchy to avoid socket-,
cache-, and chip-level imbalances. It runs from an interrupt handler in a randomized interval of
roughly 1 second. The interval is randomized to prevent harmonic relationships between
periodic threads and the periodic load balancer. In much the same way a stochastic sampling
profiler works, the balancer picks the most- and least-loaded path from the current tree position
and then recursively balances those paths by migrating threads.

The scheduler must decide whether it is necessary to send an IPI when adding a thread to a
remote CPU, just as it must decide whether adding a thread to the current CPU should preempt
the current thread. The decision is made based on the current priority of the thread running on
the target CPU and the priority of the thread being scheduled. Preempting whenever the pushed
thread has a higher priority than the currently running thread results in excessive interrupts and
preemptions. Thus, a thread must exceed the timesharing priority before an IPI is generated.
This requirement trades some latency in batch jobs for improved performance.

A notable omission to the load balancing events is thread preemption. Preempted threads are
simply added back to the run queue of the current CPU. An additional load-balancing decision
can be made here. However, the runtime of the preempting thread is not known and the
preempted thread may maintain affinity. The scheduler optimistically chooses to wait and
assume affinity is more valuable than latency.

Each CPU in the system has its own set of run queues, statistics, and a lock to protect these
fields in a thread-queue structure. During migration or a remote wakeup, a lock may be
acquired by a CPU other than the one owning the queue. In practice, contention on these locks is
rare unless the workload exhibits grossly overactive context switching and thread migration,
typically suggesting a higher-level problem. Whenever a pair of these locks is required, such as
for load balancing, a special function locks the pair with a defined lock order. The lock order is
the lock with the lowest pointer value first. These per-CPU locks and queues resulted in nearly
linear scaling with well-behaved workloads in cases where performance previously did not
improve with the addition of new CPUs and occasionally have decreased as new CPUs
introduced more contention. The design has scaled well from single CPUs to 512-thread network
processors.

Adaptive Idle

Many workloads feature frequent interrupts that do little work but need low latency. These
workloads are common in low-throughput, high-packet-rate networking. For these workloads,
the cost of waking the CPU from a low-power state, possibly with an IPI from another CPU, is
excessive. To improve performance, ULE includes a feature that optimistically spins, waiting for
load when the CPU has been context switching at a rate exceeding a set frequency. When this
frequency lowers or we exceed the adaptive spin count, the CPU is put into a deeper sleep.

Traditional Timeshare Thread Scheduling

The traditional FreeBSD timeshare-scheduling algorithm is based on multilevel feedback
queues. The system adjusts the priority of a thread dynamically to reflect resource
requirements (e.g., being blocked awaiting an event) and the amount of resources consumed by
the thread (e.g., CPU time). Threads are moved between run queues based on changes in their
scheduling priority (hence the word “feedback” in the name multilevel feedback queue).
When a thread other than the currently running thread attains a higher priority (by having that
priority either assigned or given when it is awakened), the system switches to that thread
immediately if the current thread is in user mode. Otherwise, the system switches to the
higher-priority thread as soon as the current thread exits the kernel. The system tailors this
short-term-scheduling algorithm to favor interactive jobs by raising the scheduling
priority of threads that are blocked waiting for I/O for 1 or more seconds and by lowering the
priority of threads that accumulate significant amounts of CPU time.

The time quantum is always 0.1 second. This value was empirically found to be the longest
quantum that could be used without loss of the desired response for interactive jobs such as
editors. Perhaps surprisingly, the time quantum remained unchanged over the 30-year lifetime
of this scheduler. Although the time quantum was originally selected on centralized timesharing
systems with many users, it has remained correct for decentralized laptops. While laptop users
expect a response time faster than that anticipated by the original timesharing users, the shorter
run queues on the single-user laptop made a shorter quantum unnecessary.

4.5 Process Creation

In FreeBSD, new processes are created with the fork family of system calls. The fork system call
creates a complete copy of the parent process. The rfork system call creates a new process entry
that shares a selected set of resources from its parent rather than making copies of everything.
The vfork system call differs from fork in how the virtual-memory resources are treated; vfork

also ensures that the parent will not run until the child does either an exec or exit system call.
The vfork system call is described in Section 6.6.

The process created by a fork is termed a child process of the original parent process. From
a user’s point of view, the child process is an exact duplicate of the parent process except for two
values: the child PID and the parent PID. A call to fork returns the child PID to the parent and
zero to the child process. Thus, a program can identify whether it is the parent or child process
after a fork by checking this return value.

A fork involves three main steps:

1. Allocating and initializing a new process structure for the child process

2. Duplicating the context of the parent (including the thread structure and virtual-memory
resources) for the child process

3. Scheduling the child process to run

The second step is intimately related to the operation of the memory-management facilities
described in Chapter 6. Consequently, only those actions related to process management will be
described here.

The kernel begins by allocating memory for the new process and thread entries (see Figure 4.1).
These thread and process entries are initialized in three steps: One part is copied from the
parent’s corresponding structure, another part is zeroed, and the rest is explicitly initialized. The
zeroed fields include recent CPU utilization, wait channel, swap and sleep time, timers, tracing,
and pending-signal information. The copied portions include all the privileges and limitations
inherited from the parent, including the following:

• The process group and session

• The signal state (ignored, caught, and blocked signal masks)

• The p_nice scheduling parameter

• A reference to the parent’s credential

• A reference to the parent’s set of open files

• A reference to the parent’s limits

The child’s explicitly set information includes:

• The process’s signal-actions structure

• Zeroing the process’s statistics structure

• Entry onto the list of all processes

• Entry onto the child list of the parent and the back pointer to the parent

• Entry onto the parent’s process-group list

• Entry onto the hash structure that allows the process to be looked up by its PID

• A new PID for the process

The new PID must be unique among all processes. Early versions of BSD verified the uniqueness
of a PID by performing a linear search of the process table. This search became infeasible on
large systems with many processes. FreeBSD maintains a range of unallocated PIDs between
lastpid and pidchecked. It allocates a new PID by incrementing and then using the value of
lastpid. When the newly selected PID reaches pidchecked, the system calculates a new range of
unused PIDs by making a single scan of all existing processes (not just the active ones are
scanned—zombie and swapped processes also are checked).

The final step is to copy the parent’s address space. To duplicate a process’s image, the kernel
invokes the memory-management facilities through a call to vm_forkproc(). The vm_forkproc()
routine is passed a pointer to the initialized process structure for the child process and is
expected to allocate all the resources that the child will need to execute. The call to
vm_forkproc() returns through a different execution path directly into user mode in the child
process and via the normal execution path in the parent process.

Once the child process is fully built, its thread is made known to the scheduler by being placed
on the run queue. The alternate return path will set the return value of fork system call in the
child to 0. The normal execution return path in the parent sets the return value of the fork
system call to be the new PID.

4.6 Process Termination

Processes terminate either voluntarily through an exit system call or involuntarily as the result
of a signal. In either case, process termination causes a status code to be returned to the parent
of the terminating process (if the parent still exists). This termination status is returned through
the wait4 system call. The wait4 call permits an application to request the status of both
stopped and terminated processes. The wait4 request can wait for any direct child of the parent,

or it can wait selectively for a single child process or for only its children in a particular process
group. Wait4 can also request statistics describing the resource utilization of a terminated child
process. Finally, the wait4 interface allows a process to request status codes without blocking.

Within the kernel, a process terminates by calling the exit() routine. The exit() routine first kills
off any other threads associated with the process. The termination of other threads is done as
follows:

• Any thread entering the kernel from userspace will thread_exit() when it traps into the kernel.

• Any thread already in the kernel and attempting to sleep will return immediately with EINTR
or EAGAIN, which will force them back out to userspace, freeing resources as they go. When the
thread attempts to return to userspace, it will instead hit exit().

The exit() routine then cleans up the process’s kernel-mode execution state by doing the
following:

• Canceling any pending timers

• Releasing virtual-memory resources

• Closing open descriptors

• Handling stopped or traced child processes

With the kernel-mode state reset, the process is then removed from the list of active
processes—the allproc list—and is placed on the list of zombie processes pointed to by
zombproc. The process state is changed to show that no thread is currently running. The exit()
routine then does the following:

• Records the termination status in the p_xstat field of the process structure

• Bundles up a copy of the process’s accumulated resource usage (for accounting purposes) and
hangs this structure from the p_ru field of the process structure

• Notifies the deceased process’s parent

Finally, after the parent has been notified, the cpu_exit() routine frees any machine-dependent
process resources and arranges for a final context switch from the process.

The wait4 call works by searching a process’s descendant processes for ones that have entered
the ZOMBIE state (e.g., that have terminated). If a process in ZOMBIE state is found that

matches the wait criterion, the system will copy the termination status from the deceased
process. The process entry then is taken off the zombie list and is freed. Note that resources used
by children of a process are accumulated only as a result of a wait4 system call. When users are
trying to analyze the behavior of a long-running program, they will find it useful to be able to
obtain this resource usage information before the termination of a process. Although the
information is available inside the kernel and within the context of that program, there is no
interface to request it outside that context until process termination.

4.7 Signals

Signals were originally designed to model exceptional events, such as an attempt by a user to kill
a   runaway     program.     They    were    not     intended   to   be   used   as    a   general
interprocess-communication mechanism, and thus no attempt was made to make them
reliable. In earlier systems, whenever a signal was caught, its action was reset to the default
action. The introduction of job control brought much more frequent use of signals and made
more visible a problem that faster processors also exacerbated: If two signals were sent rapidly,
the second could cause the process to die, even though a signal handler had been set up to catch
the first signal. At this time, reliability became desirable, so the developers designed a new
framework that contained the old capabilities as a subset while accommodating new
mechanisms.

The signal facilities found in FreeBSD are designed around a virtual-machine model, in
which system calls are considered to be the parallel of a machine’s hardware instruction set.
Signals are the software equivalent of traps or interrupts, and signal-handling routines do the
equivalent function of interrupt or trap service routines. Just as machines provide a mechanism
for blocking hardware interrupts so that consistent access to data structures can be ensured, the
signal facilities allow software signals to be masked. Finally, because complex run-time stack
environments may be required, signals, like interrupts, may be handled on an alternate
application-provided run-time stack. These machine models are summarized in Table 4.4

Table 4.4 Comparison of hardware-machine operations and the corresponding software
virtual-machine operations.

FreeBSD defines a set of signals for software and hardware conditions that may arise during
the normal execution of a program; these signals are listed in Table 4.5. Signals may be
delivered to a process through application-specified signal handlers or may result in default
actions, such as process termination, carried out by the system. FreeBSD signals are designed to
be software equivalents of hardware interrupts or traps.

Table 4.5 Signals defined in FreeBSD.

Each signal has an associated action that defines how it should be handled when it is delivered
to a process. If a process contains more than one thread, each thread may specify whether it
wishes to take action for each signal. Typically, one thread elects to handle all the
process-related signals such as interrupt, stop, and continue. All the other threads in the process
request that the process-related signals be masked out. Thread-specific signals such as
segmentation fault, floating point exception, and illegal instruction are handled by the thread
that caused them. Thus, all threads typically elect to receive these signals. The precise
disposition of signals to threads is given in the later subsection on posting a signal. First, we
describe the possible actions that can be requested.

The disposition of signals is specified on a per-process basis. If a process has not specified an
action for a signal, it is given a default action (see Table 4.5) that may be any one of the
following:

• Ignoring the signal

• Terminating all the threads in the process

• Terminating all the threads in the process after generating a core file that contains the
process’s execution state at the time the signal was delivered

• Stopping all the threads in the process

• Resuming the execution of all the threads in the process

An application program can use the sigaction system call to specify an action for a signal,
including these choices:

• Taking the default action

• Ignoring the signal

• Catching the signal with a handler

A signal handler is a user-mode routine that the system will invoke when the signal is
received by the process. The handler is said to catch the signal. The two signals SIGSTOP and
SIGKILL cannot be masked, ignored, or caught; this restriction ensures that a software
mechanism exists for stopping and killing runaway processes. It is not possible for a process to
decide which signals would cause the creation of a core file by default, but it is possible for a
process to prevent the creation of such a file by ignoring, blocking, or catching the signal.

Signals are posted to a process by the system when it detects a hardware event, such as an illegal
instruction, or a software event, such as a stop request from the terminal. A signal may also be
posted by another process through the kill system call. A sending process may post signals to
only those receiving processes that have the same effective user identifier (unless the sender is
the superuser). A single exception to this rule is the continue signal, SIGCONT, which always
can be sent to any descendant of the sending process. The reason for this exception is to allow
users to restart a setuid program that they have stopped from their keyboard.

Like hardware interrupts, each thread in a process can mask the delivery of signals. The
execution state of each thread contains a set of signals currently masked from delivery. If a
signal posted to a thread is being masked, the signal is recorded in the thread’s set of pending
signals, but no action is taken until the signal is unmasked. The sigprocmask system call
modifies the set of masked signals for a thread. It can add to the set of masked signals, delete
from the set of masked signals, or replace the set of masked signals. Although the delivery of the
SIGCONT signal to the signal handler of a process may be masked, the action of resuming that
stopped process is not masked.

Two other signal-related system calls are sigsuspend and sigaltstack. The sigsuspend call
permits a thread to relinquish the processor until that thread receives a signal. This facility is
similar to the system’s sleep() routine. The sigaltstack call allows a process to specify a run-time
stack to use in signal delivery. By default, the system will deliver signals to a process on the

latter’s normal run-time stack. In some applications, however, this default is unacceptable. For
example, if an application has many threads that have carved up the normal run-time stack into
many small pieces, it is far more memory efficient to create one large signal stack on which all
the threads handle their signals than it is to reserve space for signals on each thread’s stack.

The final signal-related facility is the sigreturn system call. Sigreturn is the equivalent of a
user-level   load-processor-context    operation.    The   kernel   is   passed   a pointer     to   a
(machine-dependent) context block that describes the user-level execution state of a thread. The
sigreturn system call restores state and resumes execution after a normal return from a user’s
signal handler.

Posting of a Signal

The implementation of signals is broken up into two parts: posting a signal to a process and
recognizing the signal and delivering it to the target thread. Signals may be posted by any
process or by code that executes at interrupt level. Signal delivery normally takes place within
the context of the receiving thread. When a signal forces a process to be stopped, the action can
be carried out on all the threads associated with that process when the signal is posted.

A signal is posted to a single process with the psignal() routine or to a group of processes with
the gsignal() routine. The gsignal() routine invokes psignal() for each process in the specified
process group. The actions associated with posting a signal are straightforward, but the details
are messy. In theory, posting a signal to a process simply causes the appropriate signal to be
added to the set of pending signals for the appropriate thread within the process, and the
selected thread is then set to run (or is awakened if it was sleeping at an interruptible priority
level).

The disposition of signals is set on a per-process basis. The kernel first checks to see if the signal
should be ignored, in which case it is discarded. If the process has specified the default action,
then the default action is taken. If the process has specified a signal handler that should be run,
then the kernel must select the appropriate thread within the process that should handle the
signal. When a signal is raised because of the action of the currently running thread (for
example, a segment fault), the kernel will only try to deliver it to that thread. If the thread is
masking the signal, then the signal will be held pending until it is unmasked. When a
process-related signal is sent (for example, an interrupt), then the kernel searches all the
threads associated with the process, searching for one that does not have the signal masked. The
signal is delivered to the first thread that is found with the signal unmasked. If all threads
associated with the process are masking the signal, then the signal is left in the list of signals
pending for the process for later delivery.

Each time that a thread returns from a call to sleep() (with the PCATCH flag set) or prepares to
exit the system after processing a system call or trap, it uses the cursig() routine to check
whether a signal is pending delivery. The cursig() routine determines the next signal that should
be delivered to a thread by inspecting the process’s signal list, p_siglist, to see if it has any
signals that should be propagated to the thread’s signal list, td_siglist. It then inspects the
td_siglist field to check for any signals that should be delivered to the thread. If a signal is
pending and must be delivered in the thread’s context, it is removed from the pending set, and
the thread invokes the postsig() routine to take the appropriate action.

The work of psignal() is a patchwork of special cases required by the process-debugging and
job-control facilities and by intrinsic properties associated with signals. The steps involved in
posting a signal are as follows:

1. Determine the action that the receiving process will take when the signal is delivered. This
information is kept in the p_sigignore and p_sigcatch fields of the process’s process structure.
If a process is not ignoring or catching a signal, the default action is presumed to apply. If a
process is being traced by its parent—that is, by a debugger—the parent process is always
permitted to intercede before the signal is delivered. If the process is ignoring the signal,
psignal()’s work is done and the routine can return.

2. Given an action, psignal() selects the appropriate thread and adds the signal to the thread’s
set of pending signals, td_siglist, and then does any implicit actions specific to that signal. For
example, if the signal is the continue signal, SIGCONT, any pending signals that would normally
cause the process to stop, such as SIGTTOU, are removed.

3. Next, psignal() checks whether the signal is being masked. If the thread is currently masking
delivery of the signal, psignal()’s work is complete and it may return.

4. If the signal is not being masked, psignal() must either perform the action directly or arrange
for the thread to execute so that the thread will take the action associated with the signal. Before
setting the thread to a runnable state, psignal() must take different courses of action depending
on the state of the thread as follows:

SLEEPING

The thread is blocked awaiting an event. If the thread is sleeping noninterruptibly, then nothing
further can be done. Otherwise, the kernel can apply the action—either directly or indirectly—by
waking up the thread. There are two actions that can be applied directly. For signals that cause a
process to stop, all the threads in the process are placed in the STOPPED state, and the parent
process is notified of the state change by a SIGCHLD signal being posted to it. For signals that

are ignored by default, the signal is removed from the signal list and the work is complete.
Otherwise, the action associated with the signal must be done in the context of the receiving
thread, and the thread is placed onto the run queue with a call to setrunnable().

STOPPED

The process is stopped by a signal or because it is being debugged. If the process is being
debugged, then there is nothing to do until the controlling process permits it to run again. If the
process is stopped by a signal and the posted signal would cause the process to stop again, then
there is nothing to do, and the posted signal is discarded. Otherwise, the signal is either a
continue signal or a signal that would normally cause the process to terminate (unless the signal
is caught). If the signal is SIGCONT, then all the threads in the process that were previously
running are set running again. Any threads in the process that were blocked waiting on an event
are returned to the SLEEPING state. If the signal is SIGKILL, then all the threads in the process
are set running again no matter what, so that they can terminate the next time that they are
scheduled to run. Otherwise, the signal causes the threads in the process to be made runnable,
but the threads are not placed on the run queue because they must wait for a continue signal.

RUNNABLE, NEW, ZOMBIE

If a thread scheduled to receive a signal is not the currently executing thread, its
TDF_NEEDRESCHED flag is set, so that the signal will be noticed by the receiving thread as
soon as possible.

Delivering a Signal

Most actions associated with delivering a signal to a thread are carried out within the context of
that thread. A thread checks its td_siglist field for pending signals at least once each time that it
enters the system by calling cursig().

If cursig() determines that there are any unmasked signals in the thread’s signal list, it calls
issignal() to find the first unmasked signal in the list. If delivering the signal causes a signal
handler to be invoked or a core dump to be made, the caller is notified that a signal is pending,
and the delivery is done by a call to postsig(). That is,

if (sig = cursig(curthread))
  postsig(sig);

Otherwise, the action associated with the signal is done within issignal() (these actions mimic
the actions carried out by psignal()).

The postsig() routine has two cases to handle:

1. Producing a core dump

2. Invoking a signal handler

The former task is done by the coredump() routine and is always followed by a call to exit() to
force process termination. To invoke a signal handler, postsig() first calculates a set of masked
signals and installs that set in td_sigmask. This set normally includes the signal being delivered,
so that the signal handler will not be invoked recursively by the same signal. Any signals
specified in the sigaction system call at the time the handler was installed also will be included.
The postsig() routine then calls the sendsig() routine to arrange for the signal handler to execute
immediately after the thread returns to user mode. Finally, the signal in td_siglist is cleared and
postsig() returns, presumably to be followed by a return to user mode.

The implementation of the sendsig() routine is machine dependent. Figure 4.6 shows the flow of
control associated with signal delivery. If an alternate stack has been requested, the user’s stack
pointer is switched to point at that stack. An argument list and the thread’s current user-mode
execution context are stored by the kernel on the (possibly new) stack. The state of the thread is
manipulated so that, on return to user mode, a call will be made immediately to a body of code
termed the signal-trampoline code. This code invokes the signal handler (between steps 2
and 3 in Figure 4.6) with the appropriate argument list, and, if the handler returns, makes a
sigreturn system call to reset the thread’s signal state to the state that existed before the signal.
The signal-trampoline code, sigcode() contains several assembly-language instructions that are
copied onto the thread’s stack when the signal is about to be delivered. It is the responsibility of
the trampoline code to call the registered signal handler, handle any possible errors, and then
return the thread to normal execution. The trampoline code is implemented in assembly
language because it must directly manipulate CPU registers, including those relating to the stack
and return value.

Figure 4.6 Delivery of a signal to a process. Step 1: The kernel places a signal context on the
user’s stack. Step 2: The kernel places a signal-handler frame on the user’s stack and arranges to
start running the user process in the sigtramp() code. When the sigtramp() routine starts
running, it calls the user’s signal handler. Step 3: The user’s signal handler returns to the
sigtramp() routine, which pops the signal-handler context from the user’s stack. Step 4: The
sigtramp() routine finishes by calling the sigreturn system call, which restores the previous user
context from the signal context, pops the signal context from the stack, and resumes the user’s
process at the point at which it was running before the signal occurred.

4.8 Process Groups and Sessions

Each process in the system is associated with a process group. The group of processes in a
process group is sometimes referred to as a job and is manipulated as a single entity by
processes such as the shell. Some signals (e.g., SIGINT) are delivered to all members of a
process group, causing the group as a whole to suspend or resume execution, or to be
interrupted or terminated.

Sessions were designed by the IEEE POSIX.1003.1 Working Group with the intent of fixing a
long-standing security problem in UNIX—namely, that processes could modify the state of
terminals that were trusted by another user’s processes. A session is a collection of process

groups, and all members of a process group are members of the same session. In FreeBSD, when
a user first logs onto the system, he is entered into a new session. Each session has a
controlling process, which is normally the user’s login shell. All subsequent processes
created by the user are part of process groups within this session, unless he explicitly creates a
new session. Each session also has an associated login name, which is usually the user’s login
name. This name can be changed by only the superuser.

Each session is associated with a terminal, known as its controlling terminal. Each
controlling terminal has a process group associated with it. Normally, only processes that are in
the terminal’s current process group read from or write to the terminal, allowing arbitration of a
terminal between several different jobs. When the controlling process exits, access to the
terminal is taken away from any remaining processes within the session.

Newly created processes are assigned process IDs distinct from all already-existing processes
and process groups, and are placed in the same process group and session as their parent. Any
process may set its process group equal to its process ID (thus creating a new process group) or
to the value of any process group within its session. In addition, any process may create a new
session, as long as it is not already a process-group leader.

Process Groups

A process group is a collection of related processes, such as a shell pipeline, all of which have
been assigned the same process-group identifier. The process-group identifier is the same
as the PID of the process group’s initial member; thus, process-group identifiers share the
namespace of process identifiers. When a new process group is created, the kernel allocates a
process-group structure to be associated with it. This process-group structure is entered into a
process-group hash table so that it can be found quickly.

A process is always a member of a single process group. When it is created, each process is
placed into the process group of its parent process. Programs such as shells create new process
groups, usually placing related child processes into a group. A process can change its own
process group or that of one of its child process by creating a new process group or by moving a
process into an existing process group using the setpgid system call. For example, when a shell
wants to set up a new pipeline, it wants to put the processes in the pipeline into a process group
different from its own so that the pipeline can be controlled independently of the shell. The shell
starts by creating the first process in the pipeline, which initially has the same process-group
identifier as the shell. Before executing the target program, the first process does a setpgid to set
its process-group identifier to the same value as its PID. This system call creates a new process
group, with the child process as the process-group leader of the process group. As the shell

starts each additional process for the pipeline, each child process uses setpgid to join the
existing process group.

In our example of a shell creating a new pipeline, there is a race condition. As the additional
processes in the pipeline are spawned by the shell, each is placed in the process group created by
the first process in the pipeline. These conventions are enforced by the setpgid system call. It
restricts the set of process-group identifiers to which a process may be set to either a value equal
to its own PID or to a value of another process-group identifier in its session. Unfortunately, if a
pipeline process other than the process-group leader is created before the process-group leader
has completed its setpgid call, the setpgid call to join the process group will fail. As the setpgid
call permits parents to set the process group of their children (within some limits imposed by
security concerns), the shell can avoid this race by making the setpgid call to change the child’s
process group both in the newly created child and in the parent shell. This algorithm guarantees
that, no matter which process runs first, the process group will exist with the correct
process-group leader. The shell can also avoid the race by using the vfork variant of the fork
system call that forces the parent process to wait until the child process either has done an exec
system call or has exited. In addition, if the initial members of the process group exit before all
the pipeline members have joined the group—for example, if the process-group leader exits
before the second process joins the group, the setpgid call could fail. The shell can avoid this
race by ensuring that all child processes are placed into the process group without calling the
wait system call, usually by blocking the SIGCHLD signal so that the shell will not be notified of
a child exit until after all the children have been placed into the process group. As long as a
process-group member exists, even as a zombie process, additional processes can join the
process group.

There are additional restrictions on the setpgid system call. A process may join process groups
only within its current session (discussed in the next section), and it cannot have done an exec
system call. The latter restriction is intended to avoid unexpected behavior if a process is moved
into a different process group after it has begun execution. Therefore, when a shell calls setpgid
in both parent and child processes after a fork, the call made by the parent will fail if the child
has already made an exec call. However, the child will already have joined the process group
successfully, and the failure is innocuous.

Sessions

Just as a set of related processes are collected into a process group, a set of process groups are
collected into a session. A session is a set of one or more process groups and may be associated
with a terminal device. The main uses for sessions are to collect a user’s login shell and the jobs
that it spawns and to create an isolated environment for a daemon process and its children. Any

process that is not already a process-group leader may create a session using the setsid system
call, becoming the session leader and the only member of the session. Creating a session also
creates a new process group, where the process-group ID is the PID of the process creating the
session, and the process is the process-group leader. By definition, all members of a process
group are members of the same session.

A session may have an associated controlling terminal that is used by default for
communicating with the user. Only the session leader may allocate a controlling terminal for the
session, becoming a controlling process when it does so. A device can be the controlling
terminal for only one session at a time. The terminal I/O system (described in Section 8.6)
synchronizes access to a terminal by permitting only a single process group to be the foreground
process group for a controlling terminal at any time. Some terminal operations are restricted to
members of the session. A session can have at most one controlling terminal. When a session is
created, the session leader is dissociated from its controlling terminal if it had one.

A login session is created by a program that prepares a terminal for a user to log into the system.
That process normally executes a shell for the user, and thus the shell is created as the
controlling process. An example of a typical login session is shown in Figure 4.7.

Figure 4.7 A session and its processes. In this example, process 3 is the initial member of the
session—the session leader—and is referred to as the controlling process if it has a controlling
terminal. It is contained in its own process group, 3. Process 3 has spawned two jobs: One is a
pipeline composed of processes 4 and 5, grouped together in process group 4, and the other one
is process 8, which is in its own process group, 8. No process-group leader can create a new
session; thus, process 3, 4, or 8 could not start its own session, but process 5 would be allowed
to do so.

The data structures used to support sessions and process groups in FreeBSD are shown in
Figure 4.8. This figure parallels the process layout shown in Figure 4.7. The pg_members field
of a process-group structure heads the list of member processes; these processes are linked
together through the p_pglist list entry in the process structure. In addition, each process has a

reference to its process-group structure in the p_pgrp field of the process structure. Each
process-group structure has a pointer to its enclosing session. The session structure tracks
per-login information, including the process that created and controls the session, the
controlling terminal for the session, and the login name associated with the session. Two
processes wanting to determine whether they are in the same session can traverse their p_pgrp
pointers to find their process-group structures and then compare the pg_session pointers to see
whether the latter are the same.

Figure 4.8 Process-group organization.

Job Control

Job control is a facility first provided by the C shell [Joy, 1994] and today is provided by most
shells. It permits a user to control the operation of groups of processes termed jobs. The most
important facilities provided by job control are the abilities to suspend and restart jobs and to
do the multiplexing of access to the user’s terminal. Only one job at a time is given control of the
terminal and is able to read from and write to the terminal. This facility provides some of the
advantages of window systems, although job control is sufficiently different that it is often used
in combination with window systems. Job control is implemented on top of the process group,
session, and signal facilities.

Each job is a process group. Outside the kernel, a shell manipulates a job by sending signals to
the job’s process group with the killpg system call, which delivers a signal to all the processes in
a process group. Within the system, the two main users of process groups are the terminal
handler (Section 8.6) and the interprocess-communication facilities (Chapter 12). Both facilities
record process-group identifiers in private data structures and use them in delivering signals.
The terminal handler, in addition, uses process groups to multiplex access to the controlling
terminal.

For example, special characters typed at the keyboard of the terminal (e.g., control-C or
control-\) result in a signal being sent to all processes in one job in the session; that job is in the
foreground, whereas all other jobs in the session are in the background. A shell may change
the foreground job by using the tcsetpgrp() function, implemented by the TIOCSPGRP ioctl on
the controlling terminal. Background jobs will be sent the SIGTTIN signal if they attempt to
read from the terminal, normally stopping the job. The SIGTTOU signal is sent to background
jobs that attempt an ioctl system call that would alter the state of the terminal. The SIGTTOU
signal is also sent if the TOSTOP option is set for the terminal, and an attempt is made to write
to the terminal.

The foreground process group for a session is stored in the t_pgrp field of the session’s
controlling terminal tty structure (see Section 8.6). All other process groups within the session
are in the background. In Figure 4.8, the session leader has set the foreground process group for
its controlling terminal to be its own process group. Thus, its two jobs are in the background,
and the terminal input and output will be controlled by the session-leader shell. Job control is
limited to processes contained within the same session and to the terminal associated with the
session. Only the members of the session are permitted to reassign the controlling terminal
among the process groups within the session.

If a controlling process exits, the system revokes further access to the controlling terminal and
sends a SIGHUP signal to the foreground process group. If a process such as a job-control shell
exits, each process group that it created will become an orphaned process group: a process
group in which no member has a parent that is a member of the same session but of a different
process group. Such a parent would normally be a job-control shell capable of resuming stopped
child processes. The pg_jobc field in Figure 4.8 counts the number of processes within the
process group that have the controlling process as a parent. When that count goes to zero, the
process group is orphaned. If no action were taken by the system, any orphaned process groups
that were stopped at the time that they became orphaned would be unlikely ever to resume.
Historically, the system dealt harshly with such stopped processes: They were killed. In POSIX
and FreeBSD, an orphaned process group is sent a hangup and a continue signal if any of its
members are stopped when it becomes orphaned by the exit of a parent process. If processes
choose to catch or ignore the hangup signal, they can continue running after becoming
orphaned. The system keeps a count of processes in each process group that have a parent
process in another process group of the same session. When a process exits, this count is
adjusted for the process groups of all child processes. If the count reaches zero, the process
group has become orphaned. Note that a process can be a member of an orphaned process
group even if its original parent process is still alive. For example, if a shell starts a job as a
single process A, that process then forks to create process B, and the parent shell exits; then
process B is a member of an orphaned process group but is not an orphaned process.

To avoid stopping members of orphaned process groups if they try to read or write to their
controlling terminal, the kernel does not send them SIGTTIN and SIGTTOU signals, and
prevents them from stopping in response to those signals. Instead, their attempts to read or
write to the terminal produce an error.

4.9 Process Debugging

FreeBSD provides a simple facility for controlling and debugging the execution of a process. This
facility, accessed through the ptrace system call, permits a parent process to control a child
process’s execution by manipulating user- and kernel-mode execution states. In particular, with
ptrace, a parent process can do the following operations on a child process:

• Attaches to an existing process to begin debugging it

• Reads and writes address space and registers

• Intercepts signals posted to the process

• Single steps and continues the execution of the process

• Terminates the execution of the process

The ptrace call is used almost exclusively by program debuggers, such as lldb.

When a process is being traced, any signals posted to that process cause it to enter the
STOPPED state. The parent process is notified with a SIGCHLD signal and may interrogate the
status of the child with the wait4 system call. On most machines, trace traps, generated when
a process is single stepped, and breakpoint faults, caused by a process executing a breakpoint
instruction, are translated by FreeBSD into SIGTRAP signals. Because signals posted to a traced
process cause it to stop and result in the parent being notified, a program’s execution can be
controlled easily.

To start a program that is to be debugged, the debugger first creates a child process with a fork
system call. After the fork, the child process uses a ptrace call that causes the process to be
flagged as “traced” by setting the P_TRACED bit in the p_flag field of the process structure. The
child process then sets the trace trap bit in the process’s processor status word and calls execve
to load the image of the program that is to be debugged. Setting this bit ensures that the first
instruction executed by the child process after the new image is loaded will result in a hardware
trace trap, which is translated by the system into a SIGTRAP signal. Because the parent process
is notified about all signals to the child, it can intercept the signal and gain control over the
program before it executes a single instruction.

Alternatively, the debugger may take over an existing process by attaching to it. A successful
attach request causes the process to enter the STOPPED state and to have its P_TRACED bit set
in the p_flag field of its process structure. The debugger can then begin operating on the
process in the same way as it would with a process that it had explicitly started.

An alternative to the ptrace system call is the /proc filesystem. The functionality provided by
the /proc filesystem is the same as that provided by ptrace; it differs only in its interface. The
/proc filesystem implements a view of the system process table inside the filesystem and is so
named because it is normally mounted on /proc. It provides a two-level view of process space.
At the highest level, processes themselves are named, according to their process IDs. There is
also a special node called curproc that always refers to the process making the lookup request.

Each node is a directory that contains the following entries:

ctl

A write-only file that supports a variety of control operations. Control commands are written as
strings to the ctl file. The control commands are:

attach

Stops the target process and arranges for the sending process to become the debug control
process.

detach

Continues execution of the target process and remove it from control by the debug process (that
need not be the sending process).

run

Continues running the target process until a signal is delivered, a breakpoint is hit, or the target
process exits.

step

Single steps the target process, with no signal delivery.

wait

Waits for the target process to come to a steady state ready for debugging. The target process
must be in this state before any of the other commands are allowed.

The string can also be the name of a signal, lowercase and without the SIG prefix, in which case
that signal is delivered to the process.

dbregs

Sets the debug registers as defined by the machine architecture.

etype

The type of the executable referenced by the file entry.

file

A reference to the vnode from which the process text was read. This entry can be used to gain
access to the symbol table for the process or to start another copy of the process.

fpregs

The floating point registers as defined by the machine architecture. It is only implemented on
machines that have distinct general-purpose and floating-point register sets.

map

A map of the process’s virtual memory.

mem

The complete virtual memory image of the process. Only those addresses that exist in the
process can be accessed. Reads and writes to this file modify the process. Writes to the text
segment remain private to the process. Because the address space of another process can be
accessed with read and write system calls, a debugger can access a process being debugged with
much greater efficiency than it can with the ptrace system call. The pages of interest in the
process being debugged are mapped into the kernel address space. The data requested by the
debugger can then be copied directly from the kernel to the debugger’s address space.

regs

Allows read and write access to the register set of the process.

rlimit

A read-only file containing the process’s current and maximum limits.

status

The process status. This file is read-only and returns a single line containing multiple
space-separated fields that include the command name, the process id, the parent process id,
the process group id, the session id, the controlling terminal (if any), a list of the process flags,
the process start time, user and system times, the wait channel message, and the process
credentials.

Each node is owned by the process’s user and belongs to that user’s primary group, except for
the mem node, which belongs to the kmem group.

In a normal debugging environment, where the target does a fork followed by an exec by the
debugger, the debugger should fork and the child should stop itself (with a self-inflicted
SIGSTOP, for example). The parent should issue a wait and then an attach command via the
appropriate ctl file. The child process will receive a SIGTRAP immediately after the call to exec.

Users wishing to view process information often find it easier to use the procstat command
than to figure out how to extract the information from the /proc filesystem.

Exercises

4.1 For each state listed in Table 4.1, list the system queues on which a process in that state
might be found.

4.2 Why is the performance of the context-switching mechanism critical to the performance of a
highly multiprogrammed system?

4.3 What effect would increasing the time quantum have on the system’s interactive response
and total throughput?

4.4 What effect would reducing the number of run queues from 64 to 32 have on the scheduling
overhead and on system performance?

4.5 Give three reasons for the system to select a new process to run.

4.6 Describe the three types of scheduling policies provided by FreeBSD.

4.7 What type of jobs does the timeshare scheduling policy favor? Propose an algorithm for
identifying these favored jobs.

4.8 When and how does thread scheduling interact with memory-management facilities?

4.9 After a process has exited, it may enter the state of being a ZOMBIE before disappearing
from the system entirely. What is the purpose of the ZOMBIE state? What event causes a
process to exit from ZOMBIE?

4.10 Suppose that the data structures shown in Table 4.3 do not exist. Instead, assume that
each process entry has only its own PID and the PID of its parent. Compare the costs in space
and time to support each of the following operations:

a. Creation of a new process

b. Lookup of the process’s parent

c. Lookup of all of a process’s siblings

d. Lookup of all of a process’s descendants

e. Destruction of a process

4.11 What are the differences between a mutex and a lock-manager lock?

4.12 Give an example of where a mutex lock should be used. Give an example of where a
lock-manager lock should be used.

4.13 A process blocked without setting the PCATCH flag may never be awakened by a signal.
Describe two problems a noninterruptible sleep may cause if a disk becomes unavailable while
the system is running.

4.14 Describe the limitations a jail puts on the filesystem namespace, network access, and
processes running in the jail.

*4.15 In FreeBSD, the signal SIGTSTP is delivered to a process when a user types a “suspend
character.” Why would a process want to catch this signal before it is stopped?

*4.16 Before the FreeBSD signal mechanism was added, signal handlers to catch the SIGTSTP
signal were written as

catchstop()
{
    prepare to stop;
    signal(SIGTSTP, SIG_DFL);
    kill(getpid(), SIGTSTP);
    signal(SIGTSTP, catchstop);
}

This code causes an infinite loop in FreeBSD. Why does it do so? How should the code be
rewritten?

*4.17 The process-priority calculations and accounting statistics are all based on sampled data.
Describe hardware support that would permit more accurate statistics and priority calculations.

*4.18 Why are signals a poor interprocess-communication facility?

**4.19 A kernel-stack-invalid trap occurs when an invalid value for the kernel-mode stack
pointer is detected by the hardware. How might the system gracefully terminate a process that
receives such a trap while executing on its kernel-run-time stack?

**4.20 Describe alternatives to the test-and-set instruction that would allow you to build a
synchronization mechanism for a multiprocessor FreeBSD system.

**4.21 A lightweight process is a thread of execution that operates within the context of a
normal FreeBSD process. Multiple lightweight processes may exist in a single FreeBSD process
and share memory, but each is able to do blocking operations, such as system calls. Describe
how lightweight processes might be implemented entirely in user mode.

References

Aral et al., 1989.

Z. Aral, J. Bloom, T. Doeppner, I. Gertner, A. Langerman, & G. Schaffer, “Variable Weight
Processes with Flexible Shared Resources,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp.
405–412, January 1989.

Dekker, 2013.

Dekker,              “Dekker      Algorithm,”          Wikipedia,       available      from
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dekkers_algorithm, November 2013.

Joy, 1994.

W. N. Joy, “An Introduction to the C Shell,” in 4.4BSD User’s Supplementary Documents, pp.
4:1–46, O’Reilly & Associates, Inc., Sebastopol, CA, 1994.

McDougall & Mauro, 2006.

R. McDougall & J. Mauro, Solaris Internals: Solaris 10 and OpenSolaris Kernel Architecture
(2nd Edition), Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2006.

Ritchie, 1988.

D. M. Ritchie, “Multi-Processor UNIX,” private communication, April 25, 1988.

Roberson, 2003.

J. Roberson, “ULE: A Modern Scheduler For FreeBSD,” Proceedings of the USENIX BSDCon
2003, pp. 17–28, September 2003.

Simpleton, 2008.

Caffeinated   Simpleton,   A     Threading      Model   Overview,    available     from
http://justin.harmonize.fm/Development/2008/09/09/threading-model-overview.html,
September 2008.

