                                Chapter 5. Security

Security is an integral part of contemporary operating-system design, from supporting multiple
users and limiting their interactions via access-control, to mitigating software vulnerabilities via
sandboxing, and implementing cryptographic protection of network and disk data. The FreeBSD
security model addresses a broad range of use cases spanning classic UNIX servers and
workstations, storage appliances, network routers and switches, Internet Service Provider
hosting environments, and even hand-held devices. The security model has tracked these
evolving needs through 30 years of contributions from active security research and development
communities.

The kernel is the heart of FreeBSD’s Trusted Computing Base (TCB), the minimum subset of
system components that must be secure for the system as a whole to be secure. The kernel
protects itself from userspace interference using processor rings and virtual memory; these CPU
features also support the UNIX process model, which isolates application instances from one
another. Processes not only offer robustness in the face of application bugs, but also provide the
underlying assumption of isolation required to implement access control. The kernel also
maintains a tamper-proof credential for each process that holds security information such as the
user and groups on whose behalf the process acts. These credentials are used as inputs to
interprocess and discretionary access controls such as filesystem permissions, which in turn
allow administrators, application authors, and users to specify policies for data sharing in the
system. More recent additions to the FreeBSD security feature set include lightweight jail
virtualization, mandatory access control, the Capsicum capability model (used for sandboxing),
and security event auditing (or logging).

The kernel’s low-level security features are the foundation on which more complex userspace
security models can be based. For example, while the kernel itself has no notion of user
authentication, process credentials, root privilege, and filesystem permissions collectively
protect the password file and allow controlled switching of users at login. As network security
has become more important and threat models have expanded to include physical theft of
computer systems, kernel cryptographic features such as secure pseudorandom number
generation, encryption, and integrity checking have been introduced. These security features
support contemporary cryptographic protocols such as IPSec, ssh, and full-disk encryption.

In this chapter, we consider the underlying model and its practical implementation; these
design principles and low-level services directly affect the subsystems described throughout the
remaining chapters.

5.1 Operating-System Security

Operating-system security is a broad topic spanning the kernel, filesystem layout, and userspace
applications. Historic notions of operating-system security centered on authentication, access
control, and security-event auditing—features explored and largely standardized between the
1960s and 1990s. These features limit and account for user access to data, and were initially
found only in high-end computing systems with hardware support for memory protection:
mainframes, minicomputers, servers, and later high-end workstations [Saltzer & Schroeder,
1975]. By the end of the 1990s, higher-end technologies had become available to personal
workstations and notebook computers, and during the early 2000s, tablets and smart phones.
Fundamental new technologies emerged in the consumer space including digital subscriber
lines, local-area networks (LANs) wide-area networks (WANs), and wireless networking,
making personal computing devices the epicenter, rather than the periphery, of computer
security.

As a result, requirements for operating-system security have expanded to include features
previously found only in research or high-assurance trusted systems. They also incorporate new
technologies necessary to address the world of distributed systems that was unanticipated by
earlier development. Some of these features center on the concept of a trusted computing
base (TCB)—that self-protecting core in the operating system that provides confidence in its
security [Anderson, 1972]. Others place individual computer systems securely in a global
network context through services built on cryptography and cryptographic protocols, also
products of the 1980s and 1990s.

BSD, and later FreeBSD, have been central to this evolution, as they provide a bridge for
advanced operating systems from the traditional world of mainframe computers, first to
commodity server hardware and personal computers (PCs), and later to a variety of embedded
and mobile devices. FreeBSD has developed and adopted new security features to support the
security requirements of personal workstations, network servers, and derived systems including
the security models found in Juniper’s Junos operating system (used throughout Juniper’s
router, switch, and firewall products) and Apple’s Mac OS X and iOS operating systems (used on
Apple Mac computers, and also the iPhone, iPod Touch, and iPad mobile devices) [Watson,
2013].

FreeBSD provides the following security features:

• a self-protecting Trusted Computing Base (TCB) spanning kernel and userspace;

• kernel isolation and process separation based on virtual memory;

• authentication and multiplexing of multiple simultaneous users;

• discretionary and mandatory access-control models;

• sandboxing facilities to contain potentially malicious code;

• a range of mitigation techniques such as stack protection;

• security-event auditing for accountability and intrusion detection;

• Yarrow-based /dev/random supporting hardware and software entropy sources;

• support for Trusted Platform Modules (TPMs);

• a cryptographic framework supporting hardware and software implementations;

• support for full-disk encryption and cryptographic integrity protection;

• distributed authentication models (e.g., Kerberos, x.509 certificates);

• cryptographically protected network protocols (e.g., ssh, TLS, IPSec); and

• binary updates to remedy vulnerabilities discovered after release.

This chapter focuses on the kernel’s security model and facilities—foundations for userspace
security, including the ubiquitous multiuser UNIX model.

5.2 Security Model

The core of the FreeBSD security model is a trusted, self-protecting kernel hosting a user
process model. Discretionary and mandatory access control constrain communication
between processes and access to network and storage facilities. The privilege model allows
controlled violation of access-control policies for the purposes of system operation and
management. Collectively, these features support the definition of FreeBSD’s TCB: a
self-protecting core of the operating system that allows safe execution of untrustworthy code for
mutually   distrusting   users.   Other   features,    such   as   mandatory   access   control,   a
capability-system model, security event auditing, lightweight virtualization, and cryptographic
features both reinforce and build on these low-level elements.

Process Model

The kernel relies on two hardware features to implement process isolation: virtual addressing,
which constructs independent virtual-memory address spaces for each process, and rings, which
restrict access to privileged CPU protection features while in user mode that otherwise might
allow breaking out of process confinement. System calls (e.g., syscall on MIPS and sysenter on
recent X86), virtual-memory traps, and interrupts allow transitions to and from the privileged
kernel; system calls occur via hardware-supported call gates that allow safe transition of control
from an untrusted user process to kernel execution on the same CPU. The kernel is permitted
access to user process memory, but user processes are allowed neither access to kernel memory,
nor to the memory of other processes. Exceptions are granted for the purposes of privileged
system management, debugging, and certain types of interprocess communication (e.g., shared
memory objects).

For most of the history of UNIX systems, only two hardware rings have been employed: user
and supervisor modes. More recently, full system virtualization has popularized the use of
additional rings, in which a hypervisor hosts a general-purpose operating-system kernel in
much the same way that an operating-system kernel hosts user processes. FreeBSD is able to
run on several such virtualization systems, and even host virtual machines itself, but they are
not considered further in this chapter, which focuses on security within a single operating
system instance.

Discretionary and Mandatory Access Control

Kernel services such as the filesystem, interprocess communication, and networking bridge
process   isolation.   They   are   constrained    by   access-control   policies,   which   include
discretionary access control (DAC) and mandatory access control (MAC). As the
name suggests, DAC protects objects at the discretion of the object owner—for example, file
permissions or access control lists (ACLs). In contrast, MAC allows system administrators
to impose mandatory rules across all processes. MAC policies often take the form of
information-flow-based models (e.g., for confidentiality) or rule-based models (e.g., to constrain
the scope of an application program to certain operations regardless of the user that runs it).

Separation of policy and enforcement is a key design goal, preventing code duplication (and
associated bugs), making it easier to extend the security model as requirements change, and
facilitating security review. Access-control implementation is therefore split across two places in
the kernel: centralized implementations of policies, and more widely distributed enforcement
points in various subsystems. For example, the function                  vaccess_acl_posix1e() in

subr_acl_posix1e.c implements POSIX.1e ACL evaluation centrally, but is invoked by several
individual filesystems to check accesses. Mandatory access control and system privilege checks
are similarly structured.

Access control policies depend on the process credential to hold security metadata associated
with a process, such as user IDs and MAC labels, that can be compared with metadata on
filesystem objects, IPC objects, and other processes during access-control decision making.
Credentials are maintained and protected within the kernel address space so that modifications
can only be made in keeping with the security policy.

Trusted Computing Base (TCB)

One critical function of access control is protecting the integrity of the TCB itself from
unauthorized modification that might render other security protections moot. The FreeBSD TCB
consists of the boot loader, kernel, and userspace libraries and programs required to support
boot to multi-user mode, user login, and system administration functions (e.g., setuid-root
binaries). In practice, the TCB includes a significant fraction of the integrated FreeBSD
userspace, from /sbin/init, /etc/rc.d, and the libraries and tools necessary to run them, such
as /lib/libc.so, and /bin/sh, to user login and management components such as
/usr/sbin/sshd and /usr/bin/passwd. In a typical FreeBSD installation, protection of the
TCB occurs primarily through careful configuration of system users and file ownership: most
system files are owned by the root user, and cannot be unmodified by any other users.
Mandatory access-control policies, such as the Biba integrity model discussed in this chapter,
supplements this discretionary form of access control.

Other Kernel-Security Features

Other key concepts described in this chapter include the kernel’s privilege model, that allows
selective exemption from access-control rules for the purposes of system bootstrap,
management, and debugging. FreeBSD also implements a hybrid-capability-system model,
Capsicum, which provides APIs for application compartmentalization (running code
within a sandbox). Complex, security-aware applications such as Web browsers use Capsicum
to limit access to ambient authority, or the full rights of a user, for risky portions of their
functionality (e.g., Web-page rendering). FreeBSD jails build on access-control and privilege
features   to   provide operating-system virtualization.   Security-event auditing logs
security-critical events for administrator review and automated intrusion detection systems.
Low-level cryptographic features in the kernel, such as the kernel’s cryptography framework and

Yarrow random number generator, support higher-level services such as GELI disk encryption
and the IPSec network protocol.

5.3 Process Credentials

Process credentials represent the notion of a subject for a variety of security and
resource-management purposes: they hold UNIX security metadata such as User IDs (UIDs)
and Group IDs (GIDs), MAC labels, event auditing state, and references to current jail state and
resource limits. These fields collectively encapsulate the rights that a process has within the
system, which will vary based on the user owning the process, the groups of which the user is a
member, the jail the process is in, the binary that the process is executing, and other properties,
such as resource limits and MAC policies that may provide (or limit) finer-grained rights on a
per-process basis. When the kernel makes an access-control decision during a system call or in a
trap handler, the authorizing credential is checked against object properties such as file owners,
permissions, and labels. It is also checked against global policies to determine whether the
operation should be allowed to proceed.

User credentials, stored in the kernel ucred structure, are stored in kernel memory to protect
them from undesired modification by user processes; they can be modified only according to
system access-control rules. Each proc structure points to its process credential via the p_ucred
field. Individual threads within a process also have credential references via their td_ucred field.
Per-thread credentials act as a thread-local cache of the process credential that can be accessed
read-only without acquiring the process lock, avoiding contention. Avoiding lock contention is
particularly important during system calls that perform many access-control checks. For
example, pathname lookup uses the credential to determine the portion of the file permissions
bitmask that applies, and what privileges override it, for each looked-up intermediate directory.

Thread    credentials    are   synchronized     with    the   process    credential    by    calling
cred_update_thread() whenever system calls or traps enter the kernel, or when a thread
modifies the process credential. This model allows system calls and traps to use a consistent
credential for their duration, avoiding race conditions when credentials change (e.g., because of
setuid in another thread) that might otherwise lead to inconsistent behavior. However, an
important result of this design choice is that downgrading of privilege by one thread will not
immediately affect in-flight operations in other threads, such as long-running I/O operations,
that will continue using the credential present when the system call began.

The Credential Structure

Credentials are represented by the ucred structure, illustrated in Figure 5.1. The credential
incorporates traditional UNIX IDs, including the effective, real, and saved UIDs and GIDs, and a
variable-length list of additional GIDs, described by cr_ngroups (number of additional groups
present), cr_groups (pointer to the group array), and cr_agroups (number of groups that will
fit in the currently allocated array). Historically, the additional group list was a fixed-size array
in the credential, but was moved to external, variable-size storage as larger group lists became
common. The credential also includes a flags field, cr_flags, that currently stores a single flag,
CRED_FLAG_CAPMODE, indicating that the process is in a Capsicum-capability-mode
sandbox, discussed later in this chapter.

Figure 5.1 The credential structure.

Credentials reference two additional classes of external data structures. Peruser resource usage
policy and accounting utilize reference-counted data structures pointed to by cr_uidinfo,
cr_ruidinfo, and cr_loginclass. Several optional security features conditionally allocate storage,

including MAC (cr_label), security event auditing (cr_audit), and jail (cr_prison).
Reference-counted shared objects not only save space by avoiding storing the same information
for many credentials, but also provide for live reconfiguration of global subject state, such as
changes to a jail’s configuration.

Credential Memory Model

To conserve space, the credential structure is reference counted, copy-on-write, using the cr_ref
field; any credential with a reference count greater than 1 is immutable. Modifications to
credentials require that the original first be duplicated, then any updates done on the new
instance, with the old credential reference replaced with the new one when ready. As credentials
are rarely modified, this model conserves kernel memory and reduces cache footprint. Kernel
functions managing credentials are shown in Table 5.1.

Table 5.1 Functions for managing credentials.

Access-Control Checks

Access-control checks accept a thread (almost always the current thread) or an explicit
credential as an argument. The latter form handles cases where processes authorize operations
in asynchronous contexts. For example, credentials are cached with each open file descriptor
and propagated with I/O to the buffer cache. This propagation allows them to be used
asynchronously with NFS write-behind.

Credentials cached with sockets likewise allow asynchronous packet delivery to be authorized by
the firewall based on socket ownership. In both cases, authorization decisions may be made in

threads whose credentials differ from the original context, but that act on behalf of the earlier
(potentially less-privileged) context.

5.4 Users and Groups

Users and groups are inputs to several types of basic UNIX access control: interprocess access
control that determines whether one process may signal, debug, or otherwise observe, another;
discretionary access control, that includes file permissions and ACLs; and resource accounting
and limits, that allow tracking and control of resource utilization. Users and groups are named
by two independent 32-bit number spaces called user identifiers (UIDs) and group
identifiers (GIDs). Users and groups are typically assigned to represent real-world users and
the projects or organizations of which they are members. Pseudo-users are sometimes assigned
to represent system roles, such as the superuser (root user), or the execution of services,
such as the mail system, allowing them to be assigned ownership of files, resource limits, etc.
Likewise, groups delegate access to system objects, such as the right to dial out on modems or
the right to read audit trail files.

UIDs and GIDs are assigned by an external administrative authority, and are pushed into the
kernel via system calls, such as at user login or when file ownership is set. Using an outside
administrative authority allows user and group information to originate from databases in the
filesystem, or from distributed directory services such as NIS or LDAP. In effect, the kernel user
and group credential is a cache of authoritative data elsewhere—a property that must be
understood by administrators because of its implications on deletion of users, removal from
groups, etc. For example, removing a user from a group list in /etc/group does not affect
existing user processes, which will continue to hold that GID in their credential. Likewise,
deletion of a user from /etc/master.passwd does not terminate processes he or she may own,
nor revoke his or her access to filesystem objects.

The credential of the first process, init, has its UID and GID fields set to zero. Zero is a reserved
UID normally termed the superuser (usually given the user name root), that is trusted by the
system and is permitted to do any supported kernel operation. Each additional process created
with fork will inherit the credential of its parent, including its UIDs and GIDs.

User and group identifiers may then be manipulated using system calls such as setuid and setgid,
subject to access-control rules, or may be set as a result of executing a set-user-identifier or
set-group-identifier program. Credential manipulation rules are carefully structured so that
privilege, once given up, can be reacquired only by executing authorized programs. When a user
logs in, the login program (see Section 15.4) sets the UID and GIDs before running the user’s
login shell; thus, all later processes will inherit the appropriate identifiers.

UIDs and GIDs are stored with both subjects (process credentials) and objects (e.g., files and
shared memory objects) to identify ownership for the purposes of resource accounting, resource
limits, checking system privileges, and access control. As with processes, a set of controlled
system calls, such as chown and chgrp, manipulates file-object ownership. Use of file ownership
is described in Section 15.7.

Setuid and Setgid Binaries

Often, it is desirable to grant a user additional privileges. For example, a user who wants to send
mail must be able to append the message to another user’s mailbox file. Making the target
mailbox writable by all users would permit a user other than its owner to modify messages in it
(whether maliciously or unintentionally). To solve this problem, the kernel allows the creation of
programs that are granted additional privileges while they are running—also a privileged
operation. Programs that run with a different UID are called set-user-identifier (setuid)
programs;    programs      that   run   with   an     additional   group   privilege   are   called
set-group-identifier (setgid) programs [Ritchie, 1979]. When a setuid or setgid program is
executed, the rights of the process are augmented to include those of the additional UID or GID
associated with the program. The UID of the program is termed the effective UID of the
process, whereas the original UID of the process is termed the real UID. Similarly, executing a
setgid program augments a process’s permissions with those of the program’s GID, and the
effective GID and real GID are defined accordingly.

Systems can use setuid and setgid programs to provide controlled access to files or services. For
example, the program that adds mail to a user’s mailbox runs with the privileges of the
superuser, which allow it to write to any file in the system. Thus, users do not need permission
to write to other users’ mailboxes, but can still do so by running this program. Naturally, such
programs must be written carefully to have only a limited set of functionality!

The kernel stores a process’s UID and GIDs in the process credential. Historically, GIDs were
implemented as one distinguished GID (the effective GID) and a supplementary array of GIDs,
which were logically treated as one set of GIDs. In FreeBSD, the distinguished GID is the first
entry in the array of GIDs.

FreeBSD implements the setgid facility by setting the zeroth element of the supplementary
groups array of the process that executed the setgid program to the group of the file. Because of
the additional group, the setgid program may be able to access more files than can a user
process that runs a program without the special privilege. To avoid losing the privileges
associated with the group in the zeroth array element when running a setgid program, the login
program duplicates the zeroth array element into the first array element when initializing the

user’s supplementary group array. Thus, when a setgid program is run and modifies the zeroth
element, the user does not lose any privileges as the group that had been contained in the zeroth
array element is still available in the first array element.

The setuid facility is implemented by the effective UID of the process being changed from that of
the user to that of the program being executed. As with setgid, the protection mechanism will
now permit access without any change or special knowledge that the program is running setuid.
Since a process can have only a single UID at a time, it is possible to lose some privileges while
running setuid. The previous real UID is still maintained as the real UID when the new effective
UID is installed. The real UID, however, is not used for any validation checking.

A setuid process may wish to revoke its special privilege temporarily while it is running. For
example, it may need its special privilege to access a restricted file at only the start and end of its
execution. During the rest of its execution, it should have only the real user’s privileges. In
earlier versions of BSD, revocation of privilege was done by switching of the real and effective
UIDs. Since only the effective UID is used for access control, this approach provided the desired
semantics and a place to hide the special privilege. The drawback of this approach was that it
was easy to lose track of the real and effective UIDs.

In FreeBSD, an additional identifier called the saved UID records the identity of setuid
programs. When a program is exec’ed, its effective UID is copied to its saved UID. The first line
of Table 5.2 shows an unprivileged program for which the real, effective, and saved UIDs are all
those of the real user. The second line of Table 5.2 shows a setuid program being run that causes
the effective UID to be set to its associated special-privilege UID. The special-privilege UID has
also been copied to the saved UID.

Table 5.2 Actions affecting the real, effective, and saved UIDs.

The seteuid system call sets only the effective UID; it does not affect the real or saved UIDs. The
seteuid system call is permitted to set the effective UID to the value of either the real or the
saved UID. Lines 3 and 4 of Table 5.2 show how a setuid program can give up and then reclaim
its special privilege while continuously retaining its correct real UID. Lines 5 and 6 show how a
setuid program can run a subprocess without granting the latter the special privilege. First, it
sets its effective UID to the real UID. Then, when it exec’s the subprocess, the effective UID is
copied to the saved UID, and all access to the special-privilege UID is lost. A similar saved GID
mechanism permits processes to switch between the real GID and the initial effective GID.

5.5 Privilege Model

In FreeBSD, user processes are permitted access to kernel-managed objects (such as files and
IPC primitives) subject to access-control policy; as described in the previous section, privileges
are collectively granted to the root user. Privilege refers to a set of rights that, implicitly or
explicitly, connote the ability to bypass the system access-control policy. We consider these two
cases separately.

Implicit Privilege

Implicit privilege arises out of configuration of the system and its access-control policies, and
describes rights held by a user or process that would allow it to violate integrity of the TCB or
another security policy. Implicit privilege is best explained through an example: integrity of the
system boot depends on the integrity of the kernel loaded from disk. In traditional UNIX
systems, including FreeBSD in its default configuration, the kernel is owned by the root user,
and protected by restrictive file permissions. If the kernel file were owned by a malicious user,
or the permissions were not configured correctly, then system integrity could be violated. As a
result, the root user is implicitly trusted to maintain the correct configuration and support
integrity of the system. Implicit trust is not a property of the structure of the kernel
access-control model, but an application of it.

Physical access to a system also holds implicit privilege in many computer systems, as access to
the system might, for example, allow tampering with storage devices without passing through
OS protections.

Explicit Privilege

In general, rights granted solely by access-control policies are enough to operate the system in
its steady state. However, certain cases require that user processes be given additional explicit
privilege that exempts them from access control to do critical system functions including:

• Kernel management operations that have global consequences across the system, such as
rebooting, or configuring IPv4 addresses on a network interface.

• Kernel management operations that effectively grant kernel privilege, such as the loading of
kernel modules. Misuse of these functions would violate integrity of the TCB.

• System management operations that imply system privileges, such as maintenance of system
binaries (including the kernel).

• Configuring access-control policies and, particularly, setting up process credentials during the
login process.

• Higher-level management operations that depend on bypassing per-object protections, such as
backing up the system, or changing the owner or permissions on a file in the role of system
administrator.

• Certain classes of debugging operations that offer insight into global behaviors normally
limited to avoid information leaks, such as using DTrace or hardware-performance-monitoring
counters on the kernel itself.

FreeBSD’s privilege model is an outlet for these cases by allowing processes to execute with
elevated privilege—i.e., outside the confines of the access-control policy. FreeBSD contains an
explicit enumeration of kernel privileges in sys/priv.h, and call sites around the kernel invoke
the functions priv_check() and priv_check_cred(), passing both an authorizing credential and
the privilege requested to test centrally for privileges (an instance of the separation of policy and
enforcement). Table 5.3 illustrates several examples of named privileges that support system
management, credential management, and overriding discretionary access control. However,
FreeBSD does not currently have a mechanism for fine-grained delegation of privileges to
arbitrary processes—it instead relies on a simple check of the effective or, in certain cases
involving resource limits, the real UID for the root user, sometimes known as the superuser
policy. As the system starts its first process with a UID of 0, the implicit authority of the root
user allows the system bootstrap to take place naturally, with privileges dropped when the login
process switches to another UID.

Table 5.3 Example kernel privileges.

The privilege model is augmented by FreeBSD jails, which restrict access to certain privileges for
root users within jails, as discussed later in this chapter. Further, pluggable mandatory
access-control policies can restrict or grant access to privileges. For example, the Biba integrity
policy limits access to most, but not all, system privileges when the root user is executing a
process without the policy’s own notion of privilege. The limited system privilege allows Biba to
restrict loading kernel modules when executing at low integrity, while still allowing overriding of
discretionary access-control rules, subject to the integrity policy. The current privilege interfaces
have been designed to support future introduction of a general-purpose and fine-grained
privilege model.

5.6 Interprocess Access Control

Interprocess operations are system calls that allow one process (the subject) to monitor, manage,
or debug another process (the target). As these operations bypass process isolation, they are
subject to access control. Interprocess access controls are particularly tricky to enforce: ease of
monitoring is in direct competition with information flow-centric controls (e.g., the historic
choice to allow users to list each others’ processes in UNIX), and it proves difficult to reason
about the implied set of rights gained access to when debugging a second process. Interprocess
access control is centralized in kern_prot.c, and falls into several categories.

Visibility

Process visibility controls access to sysctl nodes, such as those used by ps to list processes, and
system calls, such as sched_getparam. The subject is always a process credential (cr_cansee),
or process (p_cansee), and the target is the individual process being monitored.

The behavior of cr_cansee is controlled by two global tunables: see_other_uids, which limits
process visibility between users; and see_other_gids, which limits visibility between processes
with nonoverlapping group sets. For reasons of both ease-of-use and historic compatibility,
displaying processes owned by other users and groups is enabled by default. Privilege can
override both of these features.

Two other aspects are considered when authorizing process visibility: jail and MAC. Jail
requires that, if the subject process is in a jail, then the target process must also be in the same
jail. For information-flow MAC policies such as Biba or Multilevel Security, checks determine
whether information may flow from the target to the subject.

Signals

Controls on signal delivery are much more complex than those on visibility: checks vary
depending on whether the subject process, or just its credential, is available; signals may be
authorized based on a common login session, not just the credentials involved; control depends
on which specific signal is being sent; and application races in signal-handling have led to past
security vulnerabilities, complicating access-control logic.

Two functions, cr_cansignal() and p_cansignal(), check signal delivery based on a subject
credential or thread, target process, and signal number. The p_cansignal() function allows
SIGCONT if the processes share a tty, and allows SIGTHR and other threading-related signals
within groups of processes acting as a thread group. It then invokes cr_cansignal().

The cr_cansignal() function enforces a variety of checks, all of which must pass: if the subject is
in a jail, then the object must be in the same jail; MAC must authorize signal delivery (e.g., via
information flow checks); and UID and GID visibility rules are checked. If a process has changed
credential since the last execve, that is, P_SUGID is set in the process’s flags, then only certain
signals can be delivered—for example, SIGKILL but not SIGTHR to prevent manipulation of
internal process state. Finally, credentials are checked: if neither of the subject’s real or effective
UIDs match the target’s real or saved UIDs, then privilege is required.

Scheduling Control

Scheduling checks occur when one process attempts to manipulate the scheduling properties of
another process—for example, assigning a process to a CPU set, or changing its scheduling
priority. p_cansched() accepts a subject thread and target process, and does a similar set of
checks to signal delivery: jail protections are enforced, MAC is queried, UID and GID visibility
constraints are enforced, and the subject real and effective UIDs are compared to the target’s
real UID. Privilege overrides UID-based checks.

Waiting on Process Termination

The wait4 system call allows a parent process to wait for a child process termination; interfering
with this mechanism, regardless of visibility and information flow goals, can have serious
consequences for the correctness of shells or the init process, which must reap zombie
processes to reclaim resources. Only jail and MAC checks are enforced here: a parent process is
allowed to collect child termination information regardless of UID and GID differences.

Debugging

Control of debugging and tracing interfaces requires great care to avoid inappropriately granting
a subject access to a target process’s rights, confidential mappings, or data (e.g., passwords or
private keys) in the target process address space. Thus, the rules authorizing debugging are
complicated and are employed by various subsystems including conventional process debugging
(ptrace), kernel tracing (ktrace), and also certain process-monitoring features, such as the sysctl
nodes providing access to target process-address-space layout and file-descriptor information.

First, the global unprivileged_proc_debug tunable is checked to determine whether debugging
features are available to unprivileged users (they are by default). Then, jail and MAC policies are
allowed to authorize the operation, followed by UID and GID visibility rules.

The next category of checks is concerned with whether the subject process has a superset of the
rights present in the target process—that is, whether full control of a target process grants the
subject additional rights. First, the target process-group set is checked to ensure it is a subset of
the subject’s; then, the effective, real, and saved UIDs are similarly compared. Finally, credential
change in the target (which might indicate that rights or data had been inherited from a UID no
longer in the credential) is checked. Privilege can override any of these checks.

Two further rules are enforced: first, that debugging the init process is only permitted when the
securelevel is less than or equal to zero; and second, that processes mid-exec cannot be
debugged, as their credentials (or other properties) may be in a state of flux that could lead to an
inconsistent access-control result.

5.7 Discretionary Access Control

Discretionary access control (DAC) allows each user to control the access rights granted
over his or her objects to other users of the system. DAC is often contrasted with MAC: in DAC,
object owners share (or not) access to objects at their own discretion, whereas in MAC, the
system administrator determines when users are able to share data. The primary focus of DAC is
filesystem objects: files, directories, fifos, and special devices. However, DAC controls access to
System V and POSIX shared memory segments, semaphores, and queues.

FreeBSD has historically implemented the UNIX permissions model, in which each file or
directory is associated with a short bitmask of rights, or file permissions. This model is simple,
easy-to-understand, and consumes minimal resources: per-file 32-bit UID and GID inode fields
are supplemented by a 32-bit file mode specifying rights granted to the file’s group, and any
other users on the system. More recently, access control lists (ACLs) have offered greater
flexibility, at some cost to performance and administrative complexity, allowing object owners
to specify rights for additional users and groups. FreeBSD supports two flavors of ACLs:
POSIX.1e (more compatible with historic file permissions) and NFSv4 (more compatible with
Windows and its CIFS protocol) [P1003.1e, 1998; Shepler et al., 2003].

The Virtual-Filesystem Interface and DAC

In early UNIX versions, the UNIX filesystem was solely responsible for implementing
discretionary access control: it stored file ownership information, maintained the file
permissions bitmask, and made checks when operations requiring authorization occurred. As
the number of filesystem types increased, code implementing common access-control checks
was centralized. Today, many virtual-filesystem interface (VFS)–linked kernel components,
including system calls such as open and execve, IPC implementations such as local domain

sockets and POSIX message queues, and the NFS server, request DAC checks before initiating
I/O operations. Filesystems also invoke checks directly; for example, when performing
pathname lookup or modifying file attributes.

Historically, a single vnode operation, VOP_ACCESS(), accepted a bitmask of coarse-grained
VFS permissions that reflected underlying UNIX mode bits: VEXEC, VWRITE (optionally with
VAPPEND), VREAD, and VADMIN. When NFSv4 ACLs were introduced, new VFS permissions
were required reflecting finer-grained NFSv4 ACL permissions. For example, previously
VWRITE encapsulated both the rights to modify a file’s data and to unlink an entry within a
directory, reflecting similar behavior in the UNIX file permissions bitmask. In NFSv4 ACLs,
ACL_WRITE_DATA and ACL_DELETE_CHILD are separate permissions; as a result, VWRITE
has now been subdivided into VWRITE and VDELETE_CHILD. A complete list of current
permissions appears in Table 5.4.

Table 5.4 VFS-layer access-control permissions passed to vaccess().

VOP_ACCESS() continues to accept the older, more limited set of VFS permissions; a new
vnode operation, VOP_ACCESSX(), accepts finer-grained permissions. All filesystems
implement one of these two operations, relying on the VFS layer to provide a wrapper function
where required: vop_stdaccessx(), for example, maps fine-grained VFS permissions into
historic ones supported by older filesystems using vfs_unixify_accmode(). Filesystems
implementing NFSv4 ACLs must implement the newer VOP_ACCESSX().

In addition to a VFS permissions bitmask, the vnode operations also accept the file or directory
to be operated on, a process credential, and thread pointer.

Internal use of the same abstraction allows filesystems to implement multiple access-control
models more easily: for example, UFS’s ufs_accessx() selects between POSIX.1e and NFSv4
ACLs on a per-mountpoint basis (for a discussion of UFS, see Chapter 9). Internal to these
vnode operations, the filesystem will load any necessary metadata (e.g., ACLs), and make
filesystem-specific checks (e.g., file flags). Most filesystems rely on a subset of three
model-specific but filesystem-independent authorization functions: vaccess() for UNIX
permissions, vaccess_acl_posix1e() for POSIX.1e ACLs, or vaccess_acl_nfs4() for NFSv4 ACLs.
Filesystems pass on the process credential from the vnode operation, but also extract and
directly pass file metadata such as file type, owner, group, and mode, along with any ACLs
required by the model. Access-control implementations compare credential data and VFS
permissions bitmask with file ownership, UNIX mode bits, and ACL entries, returning success
(0) or an errno value on failure.

Object Owners and Groups

All objects supporting DAC have an owner and group represented by a UID and GID pair stored
as object metadata. For filesystem objects, the UID and GID are stored in the inode’s i_uid and
i_gid fields. For IPC objects, the UID and GID are stored as fields of the in-memory data
structure describing the object.

Users have full access to objects they own, and can set the group field, permissions, and optional
ACLs to control access by other users and groups. The semantics of the object GID depend on
the ACL model used. For UNIX permissions, an object’s group controls whether processes
owned by other users will be affected by the group or “other” entries in the object’s file
permissions.

When a process creates a new object, the object inherits the process’s effective UID as its owner.
New files and directories inherit their groups from their parent directory at creation time. New
IPC objects inherit their group from the creating process’s effective GID. File UIDs and GIDs
can be modified after creation using the chown, fchown, and lchown system calls. Changing a
file’s UID requires privilege (e.g., root access). A file’s GID can be set by its owner to any group
of which that user is a member.

UNIX Permissions

In the UNIX permissions model, each object has associated file permissions that describe the
rights granted to the object’s owner, group, and “other”. In UFS, file permissions are stored as
the lower 12 bits of the 16-bit file mode stored in the i_mode field; the remainder holds the
inode’s file type. A file’s ownership and permissions can be queried using the stat, lstat, and
fstat system calls; permissions may be set using the chmod, lchmod, and fchmod system calls.

When processes create filesystem objects, they specify initial permissions as an argument to the
system call. Requested permissions will be masked by a process’s umask, which specifies the
maximum creation-time permissions that may be set on any object created by the process.
Interpretation of the umask depends on whether ACLs are enabled on the filesystem. However,
the commonly used umask of 022 allows new objects to be readable by any user on the system,
but prevents them from being world-writable unless explicitly set that way using a separate
system call.

File permissions are interpreted in the context of the accessing credential’s effective UID,
effective GID, and additional groups. These identifiers are compared with the i_uid and i_gid to
select which portion of the file’s permissions bitmask will be used in authorization. Each file has
three sets of permission bits for read, write, or execute permission for each of owner, group, and
“other”. If the target object is a directory, then the read bit authorizes listing of entries in the
directory, and the execute bit authorizes lookup of further files and subdirectories under it.

The vaccess() function combines credential, requested VFS permissions (mapped as shown in
Table 5.5), and file owner, group, and permissions bitmask as follows:

1. If the UID of the file is the same as the effective UID of the thread, only the owner
permissions apply; the group and other permissions are not checked.

2. If the UIDs do not match, but the GID of the file matches an effective or additional GID of the
thread, only the group permissions apply; the owner and other permissions are not checked.

3. Only if the UID and GIDs of the thread fail to match those of the file are the permissions for
all others checked. If these permissions do not allow the requested operation, it will fail.

Table 5.5 Mapping of VFS permissions to UNIX permissions.

If the permissions present are insufficient to authorize the requested access, privilege will be
checked and may override DAC protections.

Three additional mode bits relate to the UNIX security model. The setuid and setgid bits control
credential UID and GID transition on execution of a binary as discussed earlier in the chapter.
There is one further quirk: the sticky bit. If present in a directory’s permissions, the bit
prevents users from unlinking children files or subdirectories that they do not own. This feature
is used almost exclusively for the shared /tmp directory.

Access Control Lists (ACLs)

UNIX permissions allow users to protect or share data with little storage or performance
overhead; however, the expressiveness of the model is limited. Group permissions are the only
means by which a file owner can differentiate rights granted to specific users from rights
granted to any other users of the system—but each file is limited to a single group. Any time a
file or directory must have permissions assigned to a previously unused combination of users, a
new group must be created—which under UNIX requires system-administrator intervention. In
multiuser environments where UNIX groups represent projects or teams, the permissions
model is unable to easily describe common setups such as having a directory be readable and

writable by one group, read-only for a second group, but inaccessible to other users of the
system.

File permissions may be seen as a degraded form of access control list (ACL): a per-object list of
users, groups, and their individual assigned permissions. A full ACL implementation provides
greater expressive power at the cost of increased complexity, storage overhead, and performance
overhead. FreeBSD supports two ACL models: POSIX.1e, which emphasizes compatibility with
UNIX permissions; and NFSv4, a newer model improving interoperability between the network
filesystem (NFS) and Windows, now also used by Mac OS X. UFS supports simple UNIX
permissions (the default), POSIX.1e ACLs, and NFSv4 ACLs. ZFS supports only NFSv4 ACLs
(for a discussion of ZFS, see Chapter 10). Different ACL models may have markedly different
semantics: not only may different rights be expressed, and different compatibility behavior be
present for traditional UNIX permissions, but semantics such as the effect of entry ordering can
differ. For example, POSIX.1e ACLs, as described by the user, are ordering independent (and
will be sorted internally); in contrast, NFSv4 ACLs are interpreted differently based on the order
in which entries are specified.

Each ACL is described by an acl data structure containing an array of acl_entry structures,
illustrated in Figure 5.2. Each entry consists of a tag, ID, file permissions, entry type, and flags.
The tag and ID identify the principal described by the entry—typically a UID or GID. The
entry_type and flags fields are used only for NFSv4 ACLs: the former indicates whether a
particular ACL entry grants or denies rights; the latter indicates how the ACL entry will be
inherited. The perm field contains a bitmask of granted or denied rights specific to the ACL
model.

Figure 5.2 ACLs consist of a struct acl embedding instances of struct acl_entry.

System-call APIs are portable across models: the same system calls check, delete, get, and set
ACLs on filesystem objects, as illustrated in Table 5.6. Each system call accepts an object name
or file descriptor, a pointer to an acl structure in user memory, and an ACL type. ACLs set on
files must be of the appropriate type, and valid for the target (e.g., default ACLs may be set only

on directories); userspace programs can test an ACL for both internal consistency and
applicability to a specific filesystem object via the aclcheck() system calls. Table 5.7 lists
currently supported types; others may be added in the future as further ACL models are
introduced. ACL models may allow more than one ACL to be set on a file at a time: for example,
POSIX.1e supports both access and default ACLs on directories, controlling (respectively) access
control and ACL inheritance.

Table 5.6 ACL system calls are portable across different ACL models.

Table 5.7 ACL models may support multiple types of ACL.

ACL-aware filesystems implement three ACL-related vnode operations: VOP_GETACL(),
VOP_SETACL(),      and   VOP_ACLCHECK().       The    ACL   implementation     is   split   across
filesystem-independent VFS code and individual filesystems implementations. Code portable
across ACL models and filesystems may be found in vfs_acl.c, and includes ACL system-call
code and utility functions for managing ACL memory. Model-specific ACL code may be found in

subr_acl_posix1e.c and subr_acl_nfs4.c. These files include functions for ACL evaluation
replacing vaccess(). They check the validity of ACLs, and implement new-file/directory creation
(e.g., ACL inheritance and mode initialization).

ACL-aware filesystems include three adaptations to implement ACLs: they provide
filesystem-specific storage of ACLs by implementing VOP_GETACL() and VOP_SETACL(); they
invoke VFS-layer ACL utility functions during file creation to ensure that the file mode and ACLs
on a new object are properly initialized; and they invoke VFS-layer vaccess() variations, passing
loaded ACLs as needed to implement access-control checks for various ACL models.

UFS is able to store the file owner, group, and permissions in each file’s inode because of their
small size (4 bytes each). ACLs, however, are substantially larger (several hundred bytes);
instead, they are stored in extended attributes outside of the inode. As a result, additional disk
accesses are required to read and update ACLs. UFS uses system extended attributes, which
prevents direct modification of ACL contents, even by the file owner. To centralize as much
access-control logic as possible, UFS performs internal checks using the VOP_ACCESSX()
vnode operation. ufs_vaccessx() loads ACLs and then invokes vaccess(), vaccess_acl_posix1e(),
or vaccess_acl_nfs4() depending on the ACL model enabled on the filesystem.

POSIX.1e Access Control Lists

POSIX.1e ACLs extend UNIX permissions to provide greater expressive power, at the cost of
greater complexity, storage requirements, and performance overheads. As in the file
permissions model, files and directories have an owner UID, an associated GID, and file
permissions bitmask that holds permissions for the owner, group, and “other”, that make up the
canonical entries in a file’s ACL. POSIX.1e allows these permissions to be supplemented with
further file permissions reflecting read, write, and execute rights for both additional users and
additional groups.

All files and directories have access ACLs that direct access control during pathname lookup and
file open. The access ACL directly solves many of the problems experienced with UNIX
permissions in multi-user environments: the file owner can add additional entries that assign
specific rights to multiple users and groups without encountering the single-group limit or
requiring administrator intervention to create groups when working with small sets of users.

In POSIX.1e, ACLs have six possible tag values illustrated in Table 5.8. The object owner, group,
and “other” entries are the canonical entries inherited from the UNIX model. The mask entry
plays a key role in compatibility with the permissions model. Applications continue to request
simple file permissions via open, mkdir; set rights and masks via chmod and umask; and

retrieve file modes via stat. Likewise, users may reasonably expect reasonable behavior when
seeing permissions listed by ls or set via the chmod command. When only canonical entries are
present on a file or directory, then the group bits in set or retrieved via permissions will affect
the object-group ACL entry. However, if any additional user or group entries exist in an ACL,
then a new mask entry will be present, whose value will be set or retrieved instead. During ACL
evaluation, the mask entry limits the maximum rights granted by any noncanonical ACL entry.
As a result, setting a conservative umask or file permissions will cause rights set via additional
user and group fields to be limited to those the user specified for the file group. Likewise, the
file-mode output of ls will provide a conservative (overly permissive) estimate of rights granted
by any ACL present on the file, preferring to err on the side of suggesting less, rather than
greater, protection than is actually present.

Table 5.8 POSIX.1e ACL entry tags.

POSIX.1e ACL evaluation is implemented by vaccess_acl_posix1e() in subr_acl_posix1e.c.
VFS permissions are mapped to POSIX.1e ACL permissions as shown in Table 5.9. It replaces
vaccess()’s checks with the following algorithm that returns a result for the first ACL entry to
match the thread’s credential:

1. The file or directory’s access ACL (type ACL_TYPE_ACCESS) is searched for object-owner,
mask, and “other” entries, to be consulted at various points in evaluation.

2. If the credential’s effective UID matches the object-owner ACL entry, then the access request
is checked against the entry’s permissions. If sufficient, success is returned. If insufficient,
appropriate privilege is checked to supplement the entry’s permissions; if sufficient, success is
returned. Otherwise, access is denied and no further entries are consulted.

3. If the credential’s effective UID matches an additional user ACL entry, then the access request
is checked against the entry’s permissions—limited to those also granted by the ACL mask entry.
If sufficient, success is returned. If insufficient, appropriate privilege is checked to supplement

the entry’s permissions; if sufficient, success is returned. Otherwise, access is denied and no
further entries are consulted.

4. If either one of the credential’s effective or additional GIDs matches the object-group entry or
any of the additional group ACL entries, then the access request is checked against the entry’s
permissions—limited to those also granted by the ACL mask entry. If any entry is sufficient,
success is returned.

5. If no group entries were sufficient without privilege, then any matching group entries will be
retried with appropriate privilege checked to supplement the entry’s permissions; if sufficient,
success is returned. Otherwise, if there were any matching groups, access is denied and no
further entries are consulted.

6. Finally, the ACL “other” entry will be consulted; if sufficient, success is returned. If
insufficient, appropriate privilege is checked to supplement the entry’s permissions; if sufficient,
success is returned. Otherwise, access is denied.

Table 5.9 Mapping of VFS permissions to POSIX.1e ACL permissions.

A mask entry will always be present if any noncanonical ACL entries are present, and it applies
to all entries but the object’s owner and “other” entries. When multiple group entries match a
credential, then best match, rather than first match, selects an entry. Privilege is checked for a
matching entry only if the entry’s permissions are insufficient—this limitation of privilege

checking avoids unnecessary exercise of privilege, which in the future may be recorded in
event-audit records.

In addition, directories may have default ACLs (type ACL_TYPE_DEFAULT) used when new
objects are created in the directory; these entries are combined with the system-call mode field
and process umask by acl_posix1e_newfilemode(). FreeBSD implements the behavior specified
by POSIX.1e by allowing the umask to restrict all rights granted in the resulting ACL; this
behavior differs from Linux in which the directory’s mask entry is allowed to override the umask.
Both models have merit: strict adherence to POSIX.1e causes users and applications aware of
the permissions model to always get conservative behavior when setting the umask and file
modes; allowing the mask to override the umask makes it possible to create project directories
in which the directory owner need not worry about how process umasks are set for other users
and can, instead, ensure that (for example) files are always group writable.

The UFS implementation of POSIX.1e ACLs uses the inode UID, GID, mode fields to hold
canonical ACL entries. If an extended ACL is present, then additional entries are placed in an
extended attribute. If an ACL mask entry is present, then the group permissions in the inode
mode will be used for the mask entry, and permissions for the object-group entry will be stored
in the extended attribute instead. This approach is consistent with file permissions passed via
the system-call interface that also uses group bits for the file mask, and avoids
extended-attribute operations when implementing stat and chmod.

NFSv4 Access Control Lists

Whereas POSIX.1e ACLs are designed for UNIX compatibility, the primary design consideration
for NFSv4 ACLs is compatibility with Windows clients accessing a UNIX server via the Network
File System or CIFS protocols. As such, NFSv4 ACLs are modeled on those found in Windows’
filesystem NTFS. Largely because of inclusion of ZFS, FreeBSD has adopted Solaris semantics
for NFSv4 ACLs. There are necessarily design tradeoffs: where in POSIX.1e ACLs, compatibility
for users and applications that were aware only of the UNIX permissions model was a key goal,
in NFSv4 ACLs, users may experience unexpected behavior as ACL entries override more
UNIX-like expectations. For example, an ACL entry on a file granting deletion rights may
override a lack of write permission on its parent directory, to provide greater compatibility with
the Windows model.

In the NFSv4 ACL model, filesystem objects each have a single ACL of type ACL_TYPE_NFS4.
In contrast to UNIX permissions and POSIX.1e ACLs, NFSv4 ACL evaluation takes into account
all entries that match the credential’s effective UID, effective GID, and additional groups, not
just the first entry that matches the credential.

The set of tags supported by NFSv4 ACL entries is similar to those in POSIX.1e ACLs (see Table
5.10). An additional tag ACL_EVERYONE allows object owners to specify rights applicable to all
users and groups. There is no notion of an ACL_MASK entry in NFSv4, although changes to file
mode do affect ACL interpretation, and the mode is updated to reflect ACL changes.

Table 5.10 NFSv4 ACL entry tags.

NFSv4 defines four types of ACL entries: allow entries, deny entries, audit entries, and alarm
entries. Only allow and deny entries are implemented in FreeBSD; setting ACL entries of other
types will return an error. NFSv4 ACLs are defined as deny by default: operations not explicitly
authorized by ACL entries will be rejected. Further, explicit deny entries can block access that
might otherwise be granted by other allow entries. An exception to deny by default in the
FreeBSD implementation is that file owners are always allowed to get and set the file’s mode and
ACL, regardless of ACL contents. Table 5.11 contains a complete list of mappings from VFS
permissions to NFSv4 ACL permissions.

Table 5.11 Mapping of VFS permissions to NFSv4 ACL permissions.

NFSv4 ACL evaluation is implemented in vaccess_acl_nfs4(). The function begins by
determining the set of NFSv4 ACL permissions that must be granted:

1. access_mask is initialized to the set of NFSv4 permissions corresponding to the requested
VFS permissions, calculated by _access_mask_from_accmode().

2. If the filer owner is equal to the credential’s effective UID, then ACL_READ_ACL,
ACL_WRITE_ACL, ACL_READ_ATTRIBUTES, and ACL_WRITE_ATTRIBUTES are removed
from access_mask.

3. If the target object is not a directory and ACL_APPEND_DATA is requested, then it is
replaced with ACL_WRITE_DATA.

Next, vaccess_acl_nfs4() must determine whether or not the ACL and other properties, such as
file mode and ownership, would grant the request:

4. _acl_denies() is invoked to iterate over and evaluate ACL entries: its conclusion will be
stored in a local variable denied. Each time a matching allow entry is encountered, any rights it
grants are removed from access_mask. If at any point a matching entry is encountered that
denies remaining permissions in access_mask, then denied will be set to EPERM, with
_acl_denies() returning immediately. If, while iterating over entries, access_mask reaches 0,

denied will be set to 0, with _acl_denies() returning immediately. If the end of the ACL is
reached without access_mask reaching 0, then denies will be set to EPERM, reflecting a
default-deny model.

After _acl_denies() returns, several other factors are considered that may deny access:

5. If the original operation request included VADMIN, and the effective UID is not equal to the
file owner, then denied will be set to EPERM.

6. If VEXEC has been requested, the object is not a directory, and the operation has not already
been denied, then the equivalent file permissions for the ACL is calculated by
acl_nfs4_sync_mode_from_acl(). Following the same rule enforced in execve, if the file mode
does not include S_IXUSR, S_IXGRP, or S_IXOTH, then denied will be set to EACCES.

If after these tests denied is 0 (success), then vaccess_acl_nfs4() will return success. Otherwise,
it continues:

7. If VEXPLICIT_DENY was set, and _acl_denies() did not fail because of a deny entry, then
success can be returned. This test is used only during file unlink, where finding a
VDELETE_CHILD deny entry can block unlink of a child in a directory, but failing to find an
allow entry is not sufficient to cause it to fail: general write permission on the parent directory is
also able to authorize unlink in the UNIX model.

8. Appropriate privilege will then be checked for any remaining ungranted rights, which may
cause vaccess_acl_nfs4() to return success.

9. Finally, an error value is selected: if the operation would have required ownership of the file
or directory, or involves unlinking, then EPERM will be returned; otherwise, EACCES will
reflect a DAC failure.

Unlike POSIX.1e ACLs, ACL inheritance is combined in the single NFSv4 ACL, rather than
stored in a separate default ACL. Per-ACL-entry flags indicate whether the entry is to be
inherited by new files or subdirectories, and whether or not the entry is used for access control
or just inheritance. acl_nfs4_compute_inherited_acl() computes the ACL of a newly created
filesystem object given the parent’s ACL and system-call requested permissions (combined with
umask). acl_nfs4_inherit_entries() allows an entry to be inherited if it is not an object-owner,
object-group, or everyone entry; if the entry is tagged as inheritable by directories or files; if the
object is not a directory, then only file-inheritable entries are used; and if the entry type must be
either allow or deny.

As with POSIX.1e ACLs, some effort has gone into UFS to allow what NFSv4 terms trivial ACLs
to be stored only using inode fields; only if more complex ACLs are defined will they overflow
into extended attributes. acl_nfs4_is_trivial() performs this calculation before writing out an
ACL by first converting the ACL to a file mode, then converting it back to an ACL and
determining whether it is semantically identical to the original ACL. Two NFSv4 ACLs are
semantically identical if they have the same number of entries, and each entry has identical tag,
ID, permissions, entry type, and flags.

5.8 Capsicum Capability Model

Through the mid-2000s, operating-system security research focused on multi-user systems:
discretionary and mandatory access-control models, fine-grained privilege, auditing, and
virtualization. As UNIX systems were scaled down for use in personal and mobile devices, such
as laptop computers, phones, tablets, and embedded and appliance devices, the aims of local OS
security changed significantly. Rather than control the interactions of multiple users, developers
instead sought to limit the rights of applications, or even components of applications, to protect
a single user, the system owner, from application vulnerabilities exploited by malicious content
originating from the Internet. Conventional OS security notions such as users and groups
sometimes found use in these environments (Android), and as well as in mandatory
access-control schemes (iOS, SELinux), but have proven mediocre tools for the particular
problem of application compartmentalization, sometimes referred to as privilege
separation.

Application compartmentalization decomposes programs into multiple isolated components
each running with different rights such that compromise of one component yields only its
individual rights, rather than the the total rights of the composed application, mitigating the
effects of a security vulnerability. In early work pioneered by Provos et al. [2002], and similar
work by Kilpatrick [2003], the goal was to reduce the exposure of all-powerful root privilege to
attacks in which arbitrary code execution was available to attackers (e.g., buffer overflows). In
later application-level work by Reis & Gribble [2009], and OS work by Watson et al. [2010],
compartmentalization is also applied to complex, security-aware applications without access to
system privilege, such as Web browsers. The argument for this approach is straightforward: in
computer systems with a single user, that user’s access to his or her own data overshadows the
importance of historic root access as all critical data on the system is available to the user
without local privilege escalation.

Capsicum is a capability-based scheme first shipped in FreeBSD 9 to provide improved OS
support for application compartmentalization. Capsicum adopts ideas from historic capability
systems in which ambient authority is deemphasized: rather than allowing all processes to

name all system objects, and then performing explicit access control based on permissions or
labels, sandboxes gain access to objects through program-driven delegation. This approach
matches the requirements of security-aware applications that must support their own
distributed system or user-facing security models such as the World Wide Web’s same-origin
policy or powerboxes that grant file access to sandboxes via a privileged file-open dialog box.

Capsicum Application Structure

While simple Capsicum-enabled applications may consist of a single sandboxed process, in
practice most complex applications consist of a set of tightly interconnected processes
collectively known as a logical application. Often, one process will have ambient authority,
acting as a gateway and source of global rights that will be selectively delegated to one or more
sandboxed processes encapsulating specific protection domains. For example, the Capsicumized
gunzip, illustrated in Figure 5.3, consists of two processes. The first process executes the main
loop, walking a series of pathname arguments on the command line with the ambient authority
required to open files by pathname. It selectively delegates open file descriptors to a second
sandboxed process that reads data from a read-only input capability, performs potentially risky
decompression operations on the data, and writes the decompressed data to a write-only output
capability. In the event of a vulnerability in the decompression logic allowing arbitrary code
execution, the attacker gains access to only the delegated capabilities rather than ambient
authority that would allow access to all the user’s files.

Figure 5.3 Compartmentalized gunzip using Capsicum.

Trade-offs necessarily exist in multiprocess sandboxing designs: the security benefits of
finer-grained compartmentalization must be weighed against context switch and interprocess
communication performance overhead; and debugging multiprocess programs is substantially
more difficult. For example, gunzip could be refined to use a new sandbox for each file being
decompressed, further limiting the data and capabilities leaked as a result of an exploit in one of

several files passed on the same command line. However, this restriction comes at the cost of
additional per-file process creation and destruction. Capsicum has proven effective for use in a
variety of high-risk applications, but research into the best approaches for applying
compartmentalization to software along with methods for decreasing overhead, remains active.

Capability Systems

Capsicum is a hybrid capability system that blends ideas from historic capability-system
research with a contemporary UNIX design. In capability systems, tasks do operations on all
resources via capabilities—unforgeable tokens of authority. In capability-based operating
systems, capabilities are communications endpoints that refer to objects; invocations on the
capability are implemented via message passing to a process that implements the underlying
object. Capabilities consist of not just a reference to an object, but also a mask of rights limiting
the set of methods that can be invoked via the capability. Applications are constructed from sets
of processes linked by capabilities; each process embodies a protection domain consisting of
access to a subset of overall capabilities in the system. By minimizing capabilities held by each
process, the scope of damage in the presence of a fault—or an exploited vulnerability—is also
minimized.

Capabilities are unforgeable in that their integrity is protected by the TCB that prevents tasks
from bypassing the protection model by constructing capabilities to arbitrary objects. For
OS-based schemes, capabilities are maintained in kernel; userspace code uses per-process
indices to identify on which capability a system call should operate. Processes can obtain
capabilities by creating a new object, inheriting a capability from the parent process, being
explicitly delegated the capability by another process (e.g., via message passing), or by deriving
it from another capability that they already hold. Refinement allows processes to create new
capabilities to objects for which they already hold a capability; rights on the new capability must
be a subset of rights on the original capability.

Capability systems support the construction of both hierarchical and nonhierarchical security
relationships between pairs of communicating processes. Hierarchical relationships are those in
which one process holds a struct subset of rights of the other (asymmetric distrust).
Nonhierarchical relationships are those in which the two processes have nonidentical sets of
rights, and yet neither is a strict subset of the other (symmetric distrust). Both types of
relationships are valuable in application compartmentalization.

Conventional sandboxing is hierarchical in that the sandbox has a strict subset of rights relative
to the ambient process that created it—for example, as seen in our earlier gunzip example. An
example of a useful nonhierarchical relationship is that found in an assured pipeline between

two processes implementing a protocol proxy between two network interfaces. Each is granted
the right to communicate on its own interface, and to communicate with the other process;
however, neither has permission to access directly the other’s network interface. This restriction
allows both processes to enforce rules defensively on messages sent and received on its interface
even if the other process has been compromised.

Capsicum extends UNIX semantics to introduce capability-system behavior in three ways: file
descriptors are modified to have capability-like properties; a new capability mode is added that
restrict process use of ambient authority; and new capability-based primitives, such as process
descriptors, are introduced to translate UNIX services into forms that are more suitable for
capability-based software designs.

Capabilities

In UNIX, file descriptors have many of the properties of capabilities: the kernel protects their
integrity making them unforgeable, they encapsulate not just a reference to an object, but also
reference-specific access rights, and may be inherited across fork or passed between processes
using UNIX domain sockets. Despite these similarities, there are significant differences that
require modification to the file-descriptor model to build a capability system. Perhaps the most
important is that only a few of the many file-descriptor system calls are controlled by the
existing per-descriptor f_flag access-right mask. For example, a read-only descriptor returned
by open will not permit write I/O operations to be done; however, the fchmod system call is
allowed regardless of open-time flags. There is also no way to refine rights on a file descriptor
after it has been created but before delegating it on to other processes.

In Capsicum, these problems are solved by introducing a new type of file descriptor, the
capability, that allows rights to be restricted and refined in a fine-grained manner suitable for
delegation to sandboxes. Capability rights, a selection of which is illustrated in Table 5.12,
correspond to common operations on file descriptors. Once held, capabilities for objects may be
passed as arguments to any system calls to which the original file descriptors could be passed,
subject to appropriate rights being present. There is no one-to-one mapping of system calls to
rights: system calls may require more than one right and a single right may authorize more than
one system call. For example, the write, writev, pwrite, and pwritev system calls all require
CAP_WRITE to authorize a write on the file descriptor. However, pwrite and pwritev also
require CAP_SEEK as they write to locations other than the file descriptor’s current offset. lseek,
in contrast, requires only CAP_SEEK.

Table 5.12 Selection of capability rights.

Capabilities are created using the cap_rights_limit system call, similar to dup2, which accepts
an existing file descriptor (possibly already a capability) and a requested access-rights mask,
returning a new capability with the new mask. The operation fails if the requested mask includes
any rights not already held on the argument capability, enforcing a monotonic decrease in
rights.

Capabilities are implemented via a struct filecaps embedded in each file-descriptor array entry,
struct filedescent. The capability rights for a descriptor include a mask of basic CAP_ rights that
authorize system calls on the descriptor, as shown in Figure 5.4. It also includes whitelists of
specific ioctl and fcntl commands that are permitted. ioctl operations are device-specific, and so
the regular mask on system calls alone provides insufficient granularity to usefully delegate
device nodes to sandboxes. For example, the whitelist allows the high-availability storage
daemon (hastd) to delegate kernel GEOM_GATE devices while permitting only suitable ioctl
commands.

Figure 5.4 Each file-descriptor array entry has a capability mask that controls access.

Capabilities are evaluated when a file descriptor is looked up in a system call, typically in fget(),
which accepts a mask of required capability rights for the operation as an argument. fget()
invokes cap_rights() to extract the set of rights for a file descriptor, and then passes it to
cap_check() to confirm that the rights are sufficient to authorize the current system call on this
specific object.

Capability Mode

In strict capability systems, global capabilities are assigned to the first process, from which all
other capabilities will be directly or indirectly derived and then distributed through descendent
processes as the system runs. In UNIX, access to global namespaces, such as the filesystem
namespace accessible via open, gives processes the ability to acquire undelegated capabilities.
Capsicum therefore differentiates between regular UNIX processes, which retain ambient
authority, and those in capability mode, for which global namespace access is denied.

Capability-mode processes must be delegated any rights they are to use, supporting fine-grained
sandboxing based on a capability model. This hybrid approach allows portions of applications to
run with the full rights of the user, but other components may have access to only explicitly
delegated files, directories, devices, or network connections.

A process enters capability mode by invoking the cap_enter system call that sets the
CRED_FLAG_CAPMODE flag on the cr_flags field of the process credential. A child process
created with fork inherits the parent process credential, and so also inherits the capability-mode
flag. Processes may query whether they are in capability mode using cap_getmode, but there is
no system call to clear the flag and exit capability mode. Within capability mode, all system calls
must implement capability discipline: their actions must be scoped to the current process or an
object named using file-descriptor arguments.

System calls that naturally implement capability discipline when used with regular files and
directory descriptor arguments are left unfettered: for example, the read and write system calls
are not limited in capability mode. Similarly, certain system calls act only on the local process,
such as getuid and signal, and are also not limited in capability mode. These calls are listed in
capabilities.conf, which causes the SYF_CAPENABLED flag to be set in their system call
descriptions when the kernel is compiled. When a capability-mode process invokes a system call
without the SYF_CAPENABLED flag set, ECAPMODE will be returned by the system-call
handler.

Certain system calls implement multiple functions, only some of which follow capability
discipline. Their use may be permitted in capability mode, but certain aspects of their function
are restricted. For example, shm_open is permitted in capability mode, but only to create
anonymous, rather than named, shared memory objects. Likewise, while the open system call is
entirely blocked because of its dependence on the global filesystem namespace, openat is
permitted as long as it is used only to open files “under” the passed directory descriptor, rather
than relative to the filesystem root or current working directory. Implementing filesystem
subtree delegation proves tricky because of concurrency, and because the only effective
technique appears to be to prevent use of “..” in capability-mode path lookup.

System calls implement restrictions using IN_CAPABILITY_MODE(), which checks whether
the current thread should be limited. Sometimes checks are per-system call, such as in
shm_open, but frequently, checks are done centrally, such as in namei(), which implements
checks that lookups are under, rather than outside of, delegated directory descriptors for openat,
fchmodat, etc.

5.9 Jails

Jail, first introduced in FreeBSD 4.0, is a lightweight operating-system based virtualization
framework that allows safe delegation of subsets of a FreeBSD system to guest root users [Kamp
& Watson, 2000]. Administrators of guest instances, known as jails, can hold root access,
manage their own users and groups, install third-party software packages, and perform a variety
of other administrative activities safely without putting the host system at risk. When configured
to use ZFS, guest administrators can also manage data sets, set quotas, and prepare snapshots,
all localized to their individual jail. Combined with more recent IPC and network-stack
virtualization features, administrators can be granted the ability to manage networking
properties such as routing, VLANs, and firewalls. As of FreeBSD 9.0, enhanced resource control
allows resource limits to be set and strictly enforced for jails, including on CPU time, resident
memory use, open files, swap use, number of processes, and number of threads.

Jails see widespread use in confining integrated system-scale applications, such as
database/Web server combinations, where independently run services may require root
privilege but must also safely cohabit a single server system. They are an especially popular tool
for Internet Service Providers (ISPs) as customers can be granted administrative rights
(including root privilege) for systems they manage, while also allowing high-density
hosting—hundreds and even thousands of virtual instances on a single server. Security and
hosting density are frequently cited benefits of virtualization, but there are others—not least,
larger numbers of smaller and more specialized installations can be easier to manage, especially
where applications have complex and sensitive package dependencies making combined
upgrades tricky.

Jail’s origins lie in the chroot, or change root, system call, which transforms a process’s
filesystem namespace by modifying the process-local root vnode (fd_rdir) to differ from the
boot-time global root vnode. chroot saw early use in facilitating reproducible software builds,
but in the 1990s it became a popular technique for confining system daemons such as
anonymous FTP servers. The technique proved neither particularly convenient, nor particularly
secure. In practice, changing a process’s root directory proves tricky, as applications often
require access to system configuration files, libraries, and IPC channels reached via the
filesystem namespace. These requirements sometimes lead to replication of system content into
a per-application root; for example, when BIND’s named daemon runs chroot’ed for security, it
requires its own devfs mount.

More importantly, chroot is by design a namespace transformation rather than a security tool:
countless nonfilesystem system calls exist that permit access to global resources that may either
allow “escape” from chroot’s constraints, or the ability to negatively impact system operation in

ways that a sandboxing model would ideally not allow. For example, several supported
architectures have machine-dependent system calls unrestricted by chroot that provide direct
access to the hardware I/O space for root-owned processes. Finally, relevant to both usability
and security, chroot required root privilege, as the ability to change the filesystem namespace
affects the security of setuid binaries that rely on the sanctity of system directories such as
/usr/lib and /etc for correct—and secure—operation; being able to change where these paths
point can lead to security vulnerabilities.

Capsicum has now replaced chroot as the preferred means of confinement within a single
application by virtue of an unprivileged sandboxing primitive and application-centered security
model. Jails address the other important use case for chroot: the virtualization-like effect of
giving a set of applications their own filesystem namespace. Jail reuses ideas from chroot for
lightweight filesystem virtualization; it also addresses potential “escape” techniques and
restricts or denies use of system services that might allow processes in a jail to have more global
effects. This latter notion is necessarily configurable as the desirable limits on availability and
scope of system services vary with the specific requirements of a deployment environment and
its applications.

Jails are collections of processes with a common set of namespace transformations (including
filesystem root), virtualized networking and IPC subsystems, and mutual visibility for
interprocess operations. Within the kernel, each jail is represented by a reference-counted
prison structure as illustrated in Figure 5.5. Each process is in exactly one jail by virtue of the
cr_prison pointer in its process credential. At boot, the first user process, init, is placed in the
statically allocated prison0. As with other credential properties, jail references are inherited
across exec and fork, and so a new process will be in the same jail as its parent unless it is
explicitly changed. Jails can be nested, which is represented by a tree of prison structures linked
by their pr_children, pr_sibling, and pr_parent fields. Jails extend chroot with a number of
restrictions that:

• Prevent further use of chroot from allowing “escape” by differentiating between each process’s
current root directory (fd_rdir) and jail root directory (fd_jdir). Both will be tested for (and
blocked) when evaluating “..” lookups. With the introduction of nested jails, pr_parent pointers
must be walked to check the root of each ancestor jail.

• Limit the set of privileges available to root-owned processes in jail; for example, the
restrictions do not permit loading of kernel modules or direct kernel-memory access.

Figure 5.5 Prison structures are the in-kernel representations of jails.

• Block interprocess operations on processes not in the same jail; for example, they do not allow
a jailed process to signal processes outside the jail, or in another jail, using kill, or attach a
debugger to them using ptrace.

• Do not allow processes in a jail to bind sockets to IPv4 and IPv6 addresses that have not been
delegated to the jail. Likewise, they force loopback network requests to connect only to sockets
bound in the jail.

• Prevent jailed processes from opening terminal devices already in use by another jail, in order
to prevent capture or forgery of user input via a pseudo-terminal.

• Limit use of the mount system call to jail-safe filesystems, marked as VFCF_JAIL in their VFS
declaration: nullfs, tmpfs, procfs devfs, and ZFS.

Jail implements these protections using several strategies across various kernel subsystems.
Entirely blocked services (such as jail-unsafe filesystems) are protected by calls to jailed() on the
process’s credential. The centralized priv_check() function calls out to prison_priv_check() to
validate privileges requested by a jail against a whitelist; examples are shown in Table 5.13.

Certain constraints are implemented by rewriting system-call arguments; for example, the use
of IP addresses is scoped by rewriting sockaddr_in arguments to bind and connect to replace
INADDR_ANY with the jail’s own IP address. Finally, system calls such as ptrace have their
arguments checked for appropriate scope: p_candebug() checks that if an invoking process is in
a jail, that the target process is in the same jail. Pseudo-terminal access is likewise scoped by
tagging opened terminal devices with the jail of the process that first opened them; later
attempts to open a device will fail if the process is not in the same jail.

Table 5.13 Example privileges permitted and denied to jailed processes.

The simplest way for a process to create a new jail is via the jail system call, which takes a jail
structure specifying a new root directory, hostname, jail name, and lists of IPv4 and IPv6
addresses. The jail program is careful to close any open directory descriptors and resources
from outside of the jail that might allow escape before executing the requested binary. Each jail

is assigned a unique jail ID (JID), which can then be specified as an argument to other system
calls that will act on the jail after creation. Processes can attach to an existing jail using the
jail_attach system call, which allows new commands to be injected into the jail from outside;
extreme care is also required to prevent the undesirable leakage of resources into the jail. Jails
can be destroyed using the jail_remove system call, which will terminate any processes in the
jail.

In FreeBSD 8.0, new system calls were introduced to ease management of increasingly flexible
and configurable jails. The jail_get and jail_set system calls allow getting and setting sets of
name-value variables on an existing jail by JID. Possible option names are shown in Table 5.14.
In FreeBSD 8, jail was also integrated with the experimental VIMAGE facility, which allows IPC
and network-stack virtualization, described in greater detail in Chapter 12 and Chapter 13. With
this feature enabled, jailed root users can manage per-jail firewalls and routing tables, as well as
use packet-sniffing tools such as tcpdump. Instead of delegating IP addresses, virtual (or real)
network interfaces are assigned to jails.

Table 5.14 Jail options used with jail_get() and jail_set().

Unlike hypervisor-based virtualization systems such as bhyve, jails share a single kernel across
all instances; this allows significantly greater efficiency than virtual-machine approaches,
supports more integrated scheduling and memory management, and facilitates sharing between
virtual machines through regular OS-based IPC primitives such as pipes and sockets. Through
nullfs mounts and ZFS copy-on-write features, jail storage footprints can be minimized—while
also easing management of many virtual systems. On the other hand, jail-based virtualization is
more visible to guest administrators who cannot upgrade the kernel version, use tools that
require access to kernel memory, or directly access hardware. Jails also share a larger common
TCB than hypervisor-based solutions such as Xen, where common attack surfaces between
mutually distrusting guests are limited to a narrower hypercall interface and common
paravirtualized backend drivers (described in Chapter 8). Since their development, the approach
promoted by FreeBSD jails has also been adopted in other systems, including Solaris Zones and
Linux Containers.

5.10 Mandatory Access-Control Framework

Mandatory access control (MAC) describes a class of security models in which system or
security-administrator-defined policies constrain the behavior and interactions of all system
users. Whereas in DAC, object owners protect (or share) objects at their own discretion, MAC

enforces systemwide security invariants regardless of user preference. The security research
literature has defined a diverse set of mandatory security policies, the most influential of which
are described in the next section. There is also significant user-community interest in
product-specific security customization for appliance and embedded systems, such as firewalls
and smart phones. However, it is neither desirable to integrate all possible security models
directly into FreeBSD, nor to encourage extensive and difficult-to-maintain local modifications
of the OS kernel within every FreeBSD-derived product.

The MAC framework offers a logical solution to this problem: a kernel access-control-extension
infrastructure able to represent many different policies, offering improved maintainability and
significant flexibility supported by the OS vendor [Watson et al., 2003; Watson, 2012]. Similar
to the device-driver framework and VFS, the MAC framework allows policies compiled into the
kernel, or encapsulated in kernel modules, to modify the kernel security policy using
well-defined kernel-programming interfaces (KPIs). Policy modules can augment kernel
access-control decisions, and make use of common policy infrastructure, such as object labelling,
to avoid code replication or the need for direct kernel modification. Unlike filesystem stacking,
previously proposed for access-control extension, the framework supports enforcement of
ubiquitous policies spanning a broad range of kernel object types, from files to network
interfaces. The framework also supports tight integration of access-control policies with the
kernel concurrency model, unlike system-call interposition, another widely discussed technique
for kernel access-control extension [Watson, 2007].

Mandatory Policies

Early mandatory security models focused on information flow, and require ubiquitous
enforcement across all kernel services. Bell and LaPadula’s multilevel security (MLS),
protects confidentiality by controlling information flow through the operating system [Bell &
LaPadula, 1973]. The Biba integrity policy is the logical dual of MLS, protecting integrity [Biba,
1977]. Fraser’s low-watermark mandatory access control (LOMAC) is an integrity policy that
tracks the dynamic flow of taint through a system [Fraser, 2000]. These models are concerned
with maintaining invariants by permitting or denying operations that lead to the upgrade or
downgrade of information. To have this effect, they place security labels holding
policy-specific metadata on both subjects (credentials) and objects (files, sockets, etc.) to
support access-control decisions.

In MLS, subject labels capture the user’s security clearance and object labels capture an objects
classification; in Biba and LOMAC, labels represent subject and object integrity.
Information-flow control is imposed by controlling use of read and write functions; for example,
in MLS, a user with a SECRET clearance is not permitted to “write down” secret data to a file

marked UNCLASSIFIED; likewise, a user with a SECRET clearance is not permitted to “read up”
top-secret data from a file marked TOP SECRET. Integrity models instead prevent the upward
flow of lower-integrity data, blocking the upward write of data from low-integrity subjects to
higher-integrity files. Biba prevents “read down” by blocking read operations on lower-integrity
files, whereas LOMAC allows “read down” operations to succeed, but downgrades the subject
label of the reader, preventing later writes to higher-integrity objects, maintaining the same
information flow invariant.

Boebert’s Type Enforcement (TE) and Badger’s Domain and Type Enforcement (DTE) have also
proven influential, with TE seeing widespread deployment in SELinux and McAfee’s
FreeBSD-based Sidewinder firewall [Boebert & Kain, 1985; Badger et al., 1995; Loscocco &
Smalley, 2001]. Both models are flexible and fine-grained, with subjects and objects labelled
with symbolic domains and types. An administrator-controlled rule set defines how these labels
are interpreted, authorizing permitted interactions and domain transitions. Processes in the
user_d domain might be allowed to read, but not write, objects of type system_t, regardless of
filesystem ownership and permissions. Transitions between domains occur by executing
specially labelled programs in a similar way to setuid binaries, subject to policy. Processes can
also transition between domains dynamically, again subject to policy.

Finally, a broad class of hardening policies are also relevant, which take less principled
approaches, but offer direct control over OS-level services and features in a more
system-centered way, rather than relying on abstract information-flow or label-centered
approaches. For example, the ugidfw filesystem firewall policy allows a global set of
system-administrator-defined rules to control the interactions of users, groups, and
files/directories like a network firewall. This policy is similar, notionally, to TE, but applies only
to the filesystem, and relies on existing UID and GID elements of the process credential rather
than on supplemental security labels.

Guiding Design Principles

The dual goals of explicit access-control extensibility and engagement with downstream system
vendors lead to several philosophical and programmatic design principles:

1. Do not commit to a particular access-control policy as there is no consensus on a single true
policy or even policy language. Policy is therefore captured by C code that can compute results
dynamically, perhaps based on a configurable policy or labels, or that can implement purely
static decisions.

2. Avoid policy-specific intrusions into kernel subsystems: encapsulate these details behind
policy-agnostic kernel interfaces. This approach leads naturally to an object-centered design:
access-control checks are relative to a subject (process credential), object, and method.

3. To avoid code redundancy, provide policy-agnostic infrastructure such as access-control
instrumentation points, label storage, label APIs, and tracing. Where possible, user APIs are also
policy-agnostic to permit shared command-line tools.

4. Policy authors determine their own security and performance trade-offs. The MAC
framework supports heavy-weight policy designs (such as the ubiquitous labelling of network
packets required by Biba and MLS), but only policies using those functions need pay for them.

5. Support multiple simultaneous and independent policies. Most commercial trusted systems
include at least two different mandatory policies: MLS for confidentiality, and Biba for TCB
protection. This approach allows third parties to extend the security model while base OS
policies are in place. Where possible, provide predictable, deterministic, and ideally sensible
compositions of simultaneously loaded policies.

6. Impose structures that simplify assurance arguments. In the parlance of Anderson, the MAC
framework acts as a reference monitor: tamper-proof, always invoked, and small enough to
be subjected to analysis and tests [Anderson, 1972]. The goals of tamper resistance and
nonbypassability are done through enforcement of access-control policies by the kernel. The
goal of analyzability is done through separation of policy and mechanism. Access-control
policies can be validated separately from the services they protect and the framework that allows
their enforcement.

7. Design for an increasingly concurrent operating system kernel. As even hand-held systems
have grown native parallelism, and demands on kernel scalability have grown, new security
policies need not only to behave correctly, but also scale with the kernel features they protect.

Architecture of the MAC Framework

The MAC framework architecture, illustrated in Figure 5.6, consists of a thin service layer
linking security-aware user applications, kernel services, and access-control-policy modules.
Policies employ the framework’s infrastructure to instrument policy-relevant kernel security
decisions, store and retrieve security labels on objects, and dynamically compose with other
loaded modules. In addition, the MAC framework implements a set of DTrace probes that
support debugging and profiling using the D script language, see Section 3.8. The framework
also exposes policy-independent but security-aware system calls so that policy-agnostic

monitoring and management tools, such as getfmac and setfmac, can query and manipulate
labels on objects. Several different interfaces are defined:

Figure 5.6 The MAC framework is a pluggable framework for kernel policy augmentation.

• The kernel services entry-point KPI is invoked by kernel services, such as the Virtual File
System (VFS) and interprocess communication (IPC), to notify the MAC framework of object
events such as allocation and destruction, and to do access-control checks. Roughly 240 entry
points are defined, most representing specific methods on particular object classes; generally,
access-control entry points take the perspective that a subject (typically represented by a process
credential) is invoking a method on an object. Kernel subsystems are responsible for providing
opaque storage for labels on their objects in the form of a void * pointer to be maintained by the
framework.

• The policy entry-point KPI sits between the MAC framework and registered policies. Many
policy entry points correspond directly to kernel entry points, albeit with explicit label
references added to the argument set. These label references are supplemented by policy
life-cycle events and a library of infrastructure functions available to policies, such as memory
allocation and label storage. Policy modules need to implement and invoke those KPIs that they
require, and the specifics of how object labels are stored is opaque to policies to insulate them
from changes in kernel implementation details.

• The label-management API allows userspace programs to query and set security labels on
various object types including files, sockets, and processes without knowing the details of loaded
policies.

• A set of DTrace probes allow framework operations to be monitored using D scripts: probes
are available on entry and return from every MAC framework access-control entry point,
providing access to arguments and return values so that decisions can be monitored or
manipulated.

Framework Startup

To meet the nonbypassability requirements of a reference monitor, the MAC framework must be
initialized and ready to handle access-control checks by the time the first user process, init,
begins execution. Ubiquitously labelled policies, such as Biba and MLS, require that the
framework be available significantly earlier to maintain security labels on all kernel objects from
inception. As a result, the framework is initialized early in boot—shortly after the kernel memory
allocator, console, and locking primitives become available, but before device probing and
process creation have begun. Initialization occurs in several phases:

1. Framework data structures, locks, and memory allocation are initialized.

2. Policies compiled into the kernel or loaded before boot are registered.

3. The global mac_late is set, indicating that from this point onward, kernel objects controlled
by the framework may be allocated.

4. The MAC framework steady state is entered and kernel boot continues.

Policies loaded after mac_late are not assured complete access to all events on all controlled
objects, and are unable to rely on label memory being present for objects allocated prior to
policy registration. These constraints are compatible with many UNIX-centric policies, and even
some labelling policies, but not policies such as MLS and Biba that require ubiquitous labelling
and control to enforce information-flow constraints. In practice, no special behavior currently
appears to be necessary at kernel shutdown.

Policy Registration

Policies must register with the MAC framework to instrument access-control decisions, receive
object life-cycle events, label object classes, and access framework services. The kernel linker
identifies MAC policies in the kernel and modules using the linker set facility. Each policy

declares a set of properties including whether or not the policy may be attached after boot (i.e.,
after mac_late is set), and whether the policy may be unloaded. These properties are stored in a
statically allocated per-policy data structure, mac_policy_conf, illustrated in Figure 5.7, along
with a reference to the complete set of policy entry points, stored in a mac_policy_ops
structure.

Figure 5.7 MAC policies are described by mac_policy_conf and mac_policy_ops structures.

When an entry point is invoked by a kernel service, the set of loaded policies is stabilized for the
lifetime of that invocation; attempts to change the set of loaded policies must wait to let in-flight
invocations drain before continuing. This design ensures consistent implementation of
access-control checks, and the prevention of implementation races such as use of code in a
policy after its containing module has been unloaded.

Figure 5.8 illustrates the policy life cycle: MAC policy mpo_init() and mpo_destroy() entry
points are invoked, respectively, during policy registration and deregistration. Exclusive
framework locks are held over both entry points to ensure that all steady-state entry-point
invocations on the policy are bracketed by the two events, allowing safe policy initialization and
cleanup.

Figure 5.8 MAC policies have an explicit life cycle.

Framework Entry-Point Design Considerations

The kernel service entry point KPI is the means by which kernel subsystems, such as filesystems
and the network stack, engage the reference monitor in security-relevant events and decisions.
Wherever possible, the MAC framework takes the perspective that kernel subsystems implement
objects whose instances may be labelled, and that policies may be adequately enforced through
controls on method invocation. This approach is a natural fit for the kernel architecture, which
often takes on an object-oriented structure, despite an absence of supporting language features
in C.

In most cases, selection of the objects to protect is a straightforward result of analyzing the APIs
offered to userspace via system calls: methods on sockets, pipes, and files seem natural to
protect using the framework. In other cases, design choices are less clear: should all sysctl
management-information base (MIB) nodes be independent objects each with their own labels,
or should they be treated collectively as a single object with read and write methods? The MAC
framework takes the latter approach on the basis that sysctl nodes frequently provide access to
many individual back-end objects, as is the case with nodes that export process information for
use by ps. Here, it is the underlying process labels that are used for authorization.

Once objects have been identified, selecting and placing entry points also requires careful
thought: the more granular the KPI, the more expressive policies can be—however, this
granularity is at the cost of policy complexity. A consistent approach to placing entry-point
invocations is also important: the fewer the calling sites, the easier they are to validate—however,
too few invocations lead to inadequate protection. MAC entry-point design is necessarily
somewhat subjective, but generally requires placing the checks deep enough to allow both
adequate insight into object types, and a single enforcement point for a particular level of
abstraction.

As an example: in early versions of the MAC framework, access-control checks for files were
done in the filesystems themselves—in later versions, these access-control checks were moved to
the common VFS code invoking all filesystems to provide more consistent protection and
simpler implementation. Placing VFS access control too high in the call stack for I/O system
calls, however, would place them before file descriptors are differentiated into specific object
types such as vnodes and sockets. Filesystems are necessarily involved in the storage strategy for
persistent labels within the filesystem, but where possible, rely on common infrastructure code
in the MAC framework to implement common models, such as extended attribute-based storage.
Similarly, the labelling of vnodes rather than the on-demand provision of labels by filesystems

when policies make access-control decisions was motivated by a desire to share abstractions
across filesystems and provide a uniform caching model.

Policy Entry-Point Considerations

Most policy entry points are entered because of invocation of a corresponding kernel-service
entry point:

• Object life-cycle events, such as socket creation and destruction

• Access-control requests checking a subject’s use of a method on an object

• General and sometimes subject-free decision requests

Policy entry-point KPIs have been designed with great care to provide enough information so
that policies can meet functional goals while also discouraging unsafe constructions that might,
for example, lead to concurrency vulnerabilities, or excess dependence on kernel-internal binary
interfaces that are subject to change between minor releases. Thus, it is desirable to limit
policy-module exposure to kernel-internal data structures where not specifically required for
policy semantics. It is simultaneously desirable to offer the flexibility to use those internal
structures where required to avoid policy developers simply bypassing formal KPIs, which
would be counter to the maintainability goals of the MAC framework.

Structuring the MAC framework to prevent bugs in policy modules, and the framework itself, is
a central concern. Where possible, the framework employs language types to detect programmer
errors; its structure also enables static analysis (such as completeness checking on controlling
access to classes) through its use of symbols. Programmability and binary compatibility goals
sometimes come into conflict. Earlier versions of the framework, prior to the advent of C99
sparse-static-structure initialization, declared policy entry points via an array of integer
entry-point names and function pointers cast to void *. On face value, this approach offered
stronger binary compatibility by allowing new entry points to be defined without disrupting
current data-structure layouts. However, it also discards type information for arguments to
entry-point functions. When we experimentally switched to explicit, typed entry-point functions,
we discovered a number of previously unnoticed bugs in policy modules that had been
incorrectly interpreting their arguments.

Kernel Service Entry-Point Invocation

To understand how the MAC framework is integrated into the kernel, and its relationship with
policies, we will consider an example in the form of access-control checks that occur when a file
is read. An excerpt from vn_write(), the kernel function implementing the write system call on
files, is shown in Figure 5.9. When the MAC framework is compiled into the kernel, vn_write()
calls mac vnode check write() to authorize the request. The framework will return 0 to allow the
write to continue, or in the event that one or more policies denies the request, a nonzero errno
value is returned. In most cases, the framework is able to select the error number returned to
userspace; this approach allows policies to indicate, for example, whether an error is a result of
violation of a policy’s rules (EACCES) or holds inadequate privilege (EPERM).

Figure 5.9 Example MAC framework invocation from VFS.

vn_write() passes several arguments into the entry point: the credential authorizing the write
(active_cred), the credential cached in the file descriptor at the time of file open (file_cred), and
the vnode on which the write is being done (vp). The stability of arguments to entry points is
ensured by the kernel synchronization model’s interaction with the calling code. Credential
contents are copy-on-write, and references held by the calling thread and file descriptor prevent
them from being garbage collected. The vnode is protected by a reference count, and vnode data,
including the MAC label on the vnode, is stabilized by the vnode lock; vn_write() holds the lock

over both check and use to ensure adequate atomicity. This construction avoids several critical
races that might occur when using other security extension approaches, such as system-call
interposition.

The arguments excluded from entry-point invocation are as interesting as those included. For
example, vn_write()’s data pointer is not passed into the entry point as the data it references
resides in the user address space where it cannot be accessed race-free with respect to the
file-write operation that will follow. Similar design choices throughout the kernel service KPI
discourage the expression of policies that cannot be safely represented within the kernel
synchronization model.

Policy Composition

Kernel entry points correspond to one (or more) policy-level entry points, and will invoke any
policy implementations of those entry points on each call. Policy entry-point invocation is
nontrivial: access to the policy list must be synchronized to prevent races with policy load and
unload, the subset of policies interested in the event must have their entry point
implementations called, and the results of those calls must be sensibly composed. With one
exception, the granting of system privileges, MAC framework polices are only able to restrict,
not grant, rights, which leads to a simple composition in which the set of rights granted is the
intersection of those granted by the base system and any registered policies. This meta-policy is
simple, deterministic, predictable by developers, and above all, useful.

Policy entry points may be placed in three broad categories based on return type: event
notifications that do not return a value, access-control checks that return an errno value, and
decision functions that return a Boolean. The composition policy requires that for an
access-control check to succeed, all policies expressing interest in the entry point must return
success; as policies may return different error numbers in response to the same access-control
check, a composition function, mac_error_select(), orders and selects from among available
error values, as illustrated in Figure 5.10. Invocation of policy entry points and composition of
the results are done using a set of composition macros that combine synchronization, selective
policy invocation, and composition:

• MAC_POLICY_PERFORM() broadcasts event notifications to all interested policies. Events
may relate to policy changes, label management, policy management, or kernel object life-cycle
events.

• MAC_POLICY_CHECK() composes access-control results returned by multiple policies. Each
policy contributes an errno value; these values are composed using mac_error_select(), a

function that encodes an ordering of failure classes. Success is returned only if all interested
policies accept the request.

• MAC_POLICY_BOOLEAN() composes boolean values returned by entry points augmenting
general kernel decisions. A boolean “and” is used during IP fragment reassembly; for example,
all interested policies must accept a fragment for it to be matched with a reassembly queue.

Figure 5.10 MAC policy results are combined using an explicit composition meta-policy.

• MAC_POLICY_GRANT(), added in FreeBSD 7, is used in allowing policies to grant privileges.
In contrast to MAC_POLICY_CHECK(), its composition function returns success if any
interested policy returns 0.

Some MAC framework operations invoke more than one entry point. For example, a label-set
system call will need to allocate and initialize temporary label storage for the object type, copy in
and internalize the userspace version of the label, perform an access control check, set the label,
and free the temporary storage, each of which requires a separate policy entry-point invocation.
This sequence supports one of the more interesting aspects of policy composition: a two-phase
commit on relabelling operations. This approach allows one policy to provide access-control
logic limiting the setting of labels associated with another policy on an object; for example, the
Biba policy can prevent MLS labels from being set on a high-integrity object by a low-integrity
subject.

Object Labelling

Several access-control policies of interest require additional policy-specific meta-data associated
with subjects (process credentials), and often some or all objects (files, pipes, network interfaces,
etc.). This metadata is referred to as a label, and provides subject- or object-specific information
required to make access-control decisions. For example, Biba labels subjects and objects with
integrity levels, and MLS labels subjects with clearance information and objects with
data-classification levels and compartments. The MAC framework provides a policy-agnostic
label abstraction for kernel objects, system calls for querying and setting those labels (subject to
control by policies), and persistent storage for labels on filesystem objects.

As shown in Figure 5.11, policy modules control label content and semantics—not just in terms
of the bytes stored, but also the runtime requirements for memory management,
synchronization, and persistence. For example, policies might store independent label data for
every object, or might reference-count a central data structure referred to by many different
subjects. Providing label infrastructure avoids the need for policy authors to replicate label
storage facilities, and by integrating the label model with the kernel’s synchronization model,
avoids race conditions.

Figure 5.11 Policies impose semantics on the MAC framework’s opaque label facility.

Label Life Cycle and Memory Management

The MAC framework represents label storage using label, which can be converted into
policy-specific data for policies requesting label storage on an object type. In-memory kernel
data structures for labelled kernel objects, including process credentials, virtual filesystem
nodes, and IPC objects, are extended to hold references to labels, which are managed by the
MAC framework. Table 5.15 enumerates the kernel data structures that have label storage; for
some types, such as vnode, a label pointer is added to the data structure itself, referencing label
storage allocated and managed by the framework; where kernel data structures already support
a metadata scheme, such as mbuf tags, that facility holds the label data.

Table 5.15 Kernel object types supporting MAC labels.

The label structure is opaque to both kernel subsystems and MAC policies; the former invoke
kernel-service entry points to manage the field, and the latter employ two accessor functions,

mac_label_get() and mac_label_set() to retrieve and set policy-specific opaque values of type
uintptr_t, which is large enough to hold a pointer or an integer. Internally, the MAC framework
implements label as an array of uintptr_t indexed by a per-policy slot number allocated on
policy load if requested by the policy. However, that mechanism may be changed in the future.

As of FreeBSD 8, labels are allocated only when a policy specifically registers an initialization
entry-point function for that object’s label. As a result, policies loaded after boot may find that
label structures are not present for objects instantiated before the policy was loaded, and must
be able to handle that case. Alternatively, policies can be marked as unloadable after boot.

In the FreeBSD kernel, data-structure allocation occurs in a number of forms; most frequently,
the slab allocator is used (described in Section 6.3), which caches partially initialized instances
of objects to avoid complete reinitialization on each reuse. In other cases, the kernel’s malloc()
allocator is used, in which case full object reinitialization occurs on each allocation. In rare cases,
a subsystem manages its own memory cache in more complex ways, such as the vnode cache,
that leaves structures fully initialized and available for continued use until the memory is
reclaimed because of pressure from the pageout daemon. The memory model for each labelled
object is reflected in MAC framework and policy entry points, requiring variation in the
handling of labels across object types.

Differing dispositions with respect to waiting for memory allocation under pressure are also
propagated to MAC framework label allocation in the form of arguments, indicating whether
sleeping is permitted, that are also exposed to policy entry points; failing to allocate a label will
also lead to object allocation failure. Contexts that prevent sleeping include interrupt threads
and kernel threads holding nonsleepable locks; in both of these scenarios, allowing
unconditional (and therefore potentially sleeping) memory allocations could lead to deadlock;
thus, allocations must be allowed to fail, with effects on the complexity of calling code, which
must be able to handle that failure.

Kernel object allocation is significantly more complex than simply allocating memory: once
memory is available, its fields must be initialized, including locks, and it must be hooked up to
namespaces, etc. Similarly, label allocation is notionally separate from object creation and object
association, the two mechanisms by which MAC policies may initialize their own label state in a
given security context.

Object creation occurs when an API to create a new object is invoked: for example, a call to open
may create a new file, socket a new socket, and pipe a new pipe. In these scenarios, the security
properties of the new object (including any policy-specific MAC label data) will be initialized
from sources such as the creating process’s credential or the security properties of a parent
object (such as a parent directory).

Object association occurs when the kernel associates an instance of a kernel data structure with
an existing underlying object in persistent storage, for which the kernel data structure is simply
a cache. For example, a specific file will have a vnode allocated for it only after it is pulled into
the in-memory working set of the filesystem, and may be detached from the vnode if it falls out
of the working set and the vnode must be reused for another file. In that scenario, label
association occurs at the point where the vnode is associated with the on-disk file, at which
point MAC policies are given the opportunity to set up policy-specific label states, perhaps
derived from the mount point from which the file is being loaded, or from extended attributes
from the on-disk file. Both the source of file label data and its interpretation are policy specific,
but the MAC framework provides the necessary entry points to interpret and propagate label
data as required. For kernel services such as the filesystem, creation and association operations
implemented by policy modules are permitted to fail, in turn propagating failure back to the
kernel service. This design prevents creation of a file if, for example, storage for its security label
cannot be allocated in the filesystem.

Object destruction, which may represent the destruction of an actual object (such as a process
exiting), or simply the recycling of in-memory storage for some persisting object (such as a file
falling out of the vnode cache), also triggers the destruction of the object’s label. The MAC
framework is given the opportunity to release storage for the label, permitting policies to free
any allocated storage or references associated with that label.

Label Synchronization

Where supported by the semantics of kernel locking, the MAC framework allows policy modules
to borrow existing kernel locks on labelled objects. This design offers not only the benefit of
improved performance by reducing the number of locks and locking operations, but also allows
label access to be synchronized with object access, avoiding time-of-check-to-time-of-use races.
Locking protocols are documented for each policy entry point, and enforced by locking
assertions in debugging versions of the kernel, allowing policy developers to rely on
synchronization properties.

In some cases, these semantics are insufficient for policy requirements: for example, if a policy
shares mutable label data between multiple objects (such as a reference-counted sandbox
descriptor), then additional synchronization may be required to protect policy data. Similar
concerns may arise where read-write locking is used on an object, and a policy needs to mutate
the label (taint tracking in LOMAC, for example) while only a read lock is held by the framework;
here, the policy must provide supplemental locking to ensure mutual exclusion on label data.

Another interesting case is the process credential, which itself is a reference-counted, read-only
object—an important performance optimization that reduces the memory overhead of credential
data, and also allows for lock-free and thread-local use of credentials in almost all access-control
scenarios. When the kernel needs to modify credentials, it will do a copy-on-write, allocating a
new credential, copying old data, and modifying required fields; however, this design means
that much of the time, credential data is shared among not just threads, but also processes.
Performing credential copy-on-write cannot be done in arbitrary contexts because of memory
allocation constraints and lock order, so the LOMAC policy uses an additional process label,
protected by its own locks, to tag processes for taint propagation asynchronously on the next
system-call return. However, existing object locking usually is able to protect label data for
objects. The mac test module validates that framework expectations for locking and label life
cycles in entry points are maintained. Detailed coverage of specific object behavior can be found
in Watson [2012].

Policy-Agnostic Label Management from Userspace

The MAC framework supports label manipulation by two classes of applications: those aware of
MAC but unaware of specific policies, and those intended to manage the labels of specific MAC
policies.

Policy-agnostic but MAC-aware applications, including traditional UNIX monitoring tools such
as /bin/ps, /bin/ls, and /sbin/ifconfig, have been extended to display subject and object
label information. New commands, such as /bin/getfmac and /bin/setfmac, have been
added to set the MAC labels on system objects such as files. The system login process has also
been extended to set labels on process credentials based on user classes defined in
/etc/login.conf. These programs all treat labels in an abstract, policy-agnostic manner. The
user-land   framework     relies   on   a configuration    file,   /etc/mac.conf, to      determine
administrator-defined defaults for labels to query and list on files, interfaces, and processes.

Policy-specific applications are aware of the semantics of specific security policies, and if
applicable, the security labels they place on objects. Depending on the nature of the the
application, developers may choose to use the policy-agnostic interfaces provided by the MAC
framework, or new policy-specific interfaces exported specifically by the policy. For example,
applications that are aware of the semantics of MLS labels may perform labelling operations
involving only MLS label elements via policy-agnostic labelling interfaces. On the other hand,
the ugidfw policy module exports a rule list via the kernel sysctl management interface.

To implement these functions, the kernel provides new system calls and socket options to
support querying and setting labels in a policy-agnostic format, including mac_get_file,

mac_get_fd, mac_set_file, and mac_set_fd, that get and set labels on files and file descriptors.
Applications handle MAC labels via the opaque mac_t type, which is implemented as a string
buffer internally.

Labels manipulated by applications are multipart, consisting of a series of name and value pairs,
allowing label components from different policies to be manipulated simultaneously (and with
mutual atomicity) up and down the software stack. Applications can convert labels to and from
an explicit text format for printing and user input; however, label parsing is generally left up to
the kernel, a design trade-off that appears acceptable, but motivated an expansion of safe
string-handling routines in the kernel. The string “biba/low,mls/10,” for example, describes a
label that consists of two elements: a low-integrity Biba label, and an MLS label of sensitivity 10.
Applications may address all of the elements available on an object or any subset. In earlier
MAC framework designs, we intended to allow the userspace framework for labels to be
run-time extended using plug-in modules, as is the case for the kernel, but this design was
abandoned in favor of a simpler approach.

5.11 Security Event Auditing

Security event auditing, often referred to simply as audit, is the secure, reliable, fine-grained,
and configurable logging of security-relevant system events. Events of potential interest include
security-related user authentication and authorization activities, as well as administrative events
that affect system security, such as network interface reconfiguration or rebooting. Historically,
OS vendors have provided audit facilities to support forensic analysis following compromise;
however, FreeBSD’s audit system has been designed more broadly to also allow live intrusion
detection and general-purpose system monitoring. For the purposes of this section, we are
concerned primarily with the kernel portions of the audit implementation and their effect on
general kernel design.

The FreeBSD event-auditing system was developed jointly by Apple and the FreeBSD Project
during Common Criteria certification of Mac OS X, targeting the Common Access Protection
Profile (CAPP). FreeBSD userspace audit libraries and tools are loosely compatible with Sun’s
Basic Security Module (BSM) APIs, and are separately distributed as OpenBSM. Its
BSM-compatible APIs and file format have been significantly extended to support
operating-system portability and operating-system features not present in Solaris—e.g.,
Capsicum in FreeBSD and catalogue operations in Mac OS X; it has also made byte-order
independent. The FreeBSD and Mac OS X kernel audit implementations are also derived from
the OpenBSM code base [Watson & Salamon, 2006].

Audit Events and Records

Auditable events are those that the audit system is able to log, which include kernel-centered
activity (e.g., filesystem and network accesses) and user-level events (e.g., authentication). CAPP
requires that the set of auditable events in an operating system include any exercise of the
system’s access-control policies, authentication, security management, and audit management.
The kernel audit framework is primarily focused on capturing events originating in system calls,
which reflect the actions of subjects (processes) on controlled kernel objects. User processes,
such as login and su, may also submit audit records describing user-level events using the
audit system call. The act of submitting an audit record via audit is also an auditable event that
may need to be logged.

Each audited security event is described by an audit record that contains information on the
subject responsible for the event (e.g., the process, user, and where they were logged in from),
any objects affected by the event (e.g., files), and event-specific data (e.g., the new mode set on a
file by chmod). Records are stored sequentially to files, referred to as audit trails. Auditing is
subject to an audit pre-selection policy that specifies the subset of auditable events that will
actually be logged—without this feature, even casual system usage would generate vast
quantities of log data, filling disks rapidly, and severely impact performance. Audit trails can
also be reduced, or filtered post-capture, to remove generated records that may be of less
interest over time. For example, administrators might have a policy of keeping detailed
file-access logs for 1 month, but login information for 12 months. Here, the auditreduce
command thins the longs incrementally.

CAPP also describes attributable events, which may be traced back to an authenticated user—for
example, a file access by a logged-in user, and nonattributable events that occur as part of
system operation—for example, the starting of a security-relevant daemon during system boot.
The idea of attribution required adding a new audit UID (AUID) in the process credential,
illustrated in Figure 5.12. The AUID tracks the authenticated user who initiated an event,
regardless of any UID changes that may have occurred as a result of executing setuid binaries.
The process credential has also been extended to include the audit terminal and audit session
that will be tagged onto each audit record generated for the process, and the audit mask, which
together with global-audit configuration, will control which events will be audited for the
process.

Figure 5.12 Audit-related additions to the process credential.

BSM Audit Records and Audit Trails

BSM audit trails are binary files made up of a sequence of machine-readable tokens, as
illustrated in Figure 5.13. Tokens have a type, captured by its token ID, and a value, whose
parsing is type-specific; omission of a length field from most token types makes unrecognized
tokens unparseable—arguably a weakness to the design, but one that saves considerable space.
Records begin with one of several possible header tokens that will include the total length of the
record, a timestamp, and an event type indicating what the record describes—for example,
whether it is a open system call or event submitted by login. The header is followed by a series
of data tokens holding credential information, arguments and return values for the event, and at
the end, a trailer token terminating the record. In addition to record-oriented tokens, audit trail
files also begin and end with stand-alone file tokens that contain start and stop timestamps.

Figure 5.13 Records consist of tokens holding state, arguments, and return values.

While the FreeBSD kernel generates BSM directly, internal data structures used for the majority
of in-kernel processing are not BSM-specific, so they could be easily replaced to add support for
a new file format. However, records submitted by userspace via the audit system call also
contain BSM.

Kernel-Audit Implementation

Key components of the kernel-audit implementation are illustrated in Figure 5.14 and include
the following:

• System calls to set the global-audit configuration, including global pre-select parameters for
unattributed events and trail rotation; this global-audit configuration is mostly used by auditd

Figure 5.14 The audit daemon and login process configure audit state for user processes.

• Extensions to the process credential to hold the AUID and audit masks, managed with new
system calls used by programs such as login and sshd

• System-call entry code that performs initial pre-selection and optionally allocates an audit
record for the thread

• System-call instrumentation that captures arguments to the event, such as file paths or UIDs

• System-call return code that performs further pre-selection, once the system call return value
is known, and commits the record to the global-audit queue

• The audit worker thread, responsible for managing delivery of records to the active audit trail
and audit pipes; it also processes audit-trail rotation requests synchronously

• Audit pipe code responsible for further pipe-specific filtering that instruments both system call
entry and return ioctls to configure filtering

Mandatory monitoring and high reliability are both key requirements for the audit system: if an
event is configured to be audited, then either the event occurs and is audited, or it must not be
allowed to occur. Nonbypassability is implemented by performing auditing in the TCB; that is,

the kernel and trustworthy user processes; access to the audit trail is strictly controlled to ensure
integrity and confidentiality. Reliability, however, has a host of further implications, including
the need to track remaining disk storage carefully to ensure that records for in-progress events
can be stored. These requirements are quite different from those implemented by the system log
daemon, syslogd, that is intended for public log data, submittable by any user, and which will
drop records rather than affect system availability when they are submitted too quickly or fill the
disk.

Figure 5.15 illustrates the arrangement of queues in the system, each with different size and
reliability properties. Individual threads may carry up to two audit records describing
in-progress activities: an active kernel audit record, and an optional user-audit record submitted
via audit. On system-call return, audit records are submitted to the global queue that is both
reliable and bounded in length to prevent outstripping of available disk space. Once the audit
worker thread has removed a record from the global queue, it will convert the record to BSM
and optionally deliver it to the global-audit trail, based on global and per-process configuration,
and to any open audit pipes, subject to either global configuration or per-pipe configuration,
depending on how the pipe has been configured.

Figure 5.15 Records pass through a series of reliable and lossy kernel queues.

Figure 5.16 illustrates the data structures involved: the thread structure points at the current
kaudit_record, if any, for the in-flight system call. This structure describes both a
kernel-originated record, whose fields are stored in audit_record, with a bitmask showing
which fields have been set so that they can be converted to tokens, and k_udata, that points at

the BSM record as submitted from userspace. The global audit_queue is simply a linked list of
outstanding records, along with metadata on queue limits and length.

Figure 5.16 Per-thread in-flight audit record and global-audit record queue.

5.12 Cryptographic Services

The FreeBSD kernel integrates several low-level cryptographic services, including a framework
supporting software and hardware implementations of common encryption and cryptographic
hash functions, and a Yarrow-based cryptographic pseudo-random number generator.
Higher-level services, such as full-disk encryption (GBDE and GEOM), the GSSAPI
implementation used for NFS, and IPSec, depend integrally on these low-level cryptographic
services to provide local and distributed security. Random numbers support many other kernel
services, some with significant security implications; the kernel is well-placed to collect entropy
inputs to pseudo-random number generation. Cryptographic and random-number generation
services are also made available to userspace via /dev/crypto, /dev/random, and the
kern.arandom sysctl.

Cryptographic Framework

Underlying cryptographic services such as GELI and IPSec is a set of APIs and libraries that
support cryptography. The cryptographic subsystem in FreeBSD supports both symmetric and
asymmetric cryptography. Symmetric cryptography, used by IPSec, uses the same key to encrypt
data as it does to decrypt it. Asymmetric cryptography, which implements public-key encryption,
uses one key to encrypt data and another key to decrypt it. This section describes how
symmetric cryptography is implemented as it relates to a specific client, IPSec.

The cryptographic subsystem was ported from OpenBSD and optimized for a fully preemptive
multiprocessing kernel [Leffler, 2003]. In FreeBSD, cryptographic algorithms exist either in
software or in special-purpose hardware. The software module that provides support for
cryptography is implemented in exactly the same way as the drivers for cryptographic hardware.
This similarity means that, from the cryptography subsystem’s point of view, the software and
hardware drivers are the same. Upper-level consumers of the cryptography subsystem, such as
IPSec, are all presented with the same API whether the cryptographic operations they request
are being done in hardware or software.

The cryptography subsystem is implemented by two sets of APIs and two kernel threads. One set
of APIs is used by software that wishes to use cryptography; the other set is used by
device-driver writers to provide an interface to their hardware. The model of computation
supported by the cryptographic subsystem is one of job submission and callbacks where
consumers submit work to a queue and supply a pointer to a function that will be called when
the job is completed.

Before a cryptography consumer can submit work to the cryptography subsystem, it must first
create a session. A session is a way of encapsulating information about the type of work that the
consumer is requesting. It is also a way of controlling the amount of resources consumed on the
device, since some devices have a limitation to the amount of concurrent work they can support.
A consumer creates a session using the crypto_newsession() routine that returns either a valid
session identifier or an error.

Once the consumer has a proper session identifier, it then requests a cryptographic descriptor,
shown in Figure 5.17. The consumer fills in the fields of the cryptographic descriptor, including
supplying an appropriate callback in the crp_callback element. When the descriptor is ready, it
is handed to the cryptographic subsystem via the crypto_dispatch() routine that puts it on a
queue to be processed. When the work is complete, the callback is invoked. All callbacks have
this form:

int (*crp_callback)(
  struct cryptop *arg);

Figure 5.17 Cryptographic descriptor.

If an error has occurred, the error code is contained in the crp_etype field of the cryptographic
descriptor that is passed to the callback.

A set of device drivers provides the low-level interface to specialized cryptographic hardware.
Each driver provides three function pointers to the cryptographic subsystem when it registers
itself. Driver registration is done via a call to the crypto_register() routine.

crypto_register(
  u_int32_t driverid,
  int alg,
  u_int16_t maxoplen,
  u_int32_t flags,
  int (*newsession)(void*, u_int32_t*, struct cryptoini*),
  int (*freesession)(void*, u_int64_t),
  int (*process)(void*, struct cryptop *, int),
  void *arg);

The newsession() or freesession() routines are called by the cryptographic subsystem whenever
the crypto_newsession() or crypto_freesession() routines are called by a consumer. The
process() routine is called by the crypto_proc() kernel thread to pass operations into the device.

The lower half of the cryptographic subsystem uses two software interrupt threads and two
queues to control the underlying hardware. Whenever there are requests on the crp_q queue,
the crypto_proc() thread dequeues them and sends them to the underlying device, using the
crypto_invoke() routine. Once invoked, the underlying hardware has the responsibility to
handle the request. The only requirement is that when the hardware has completed its work, the
device driver associated with the hardware must invoke crypto_done() that either enqueues the
callback on the crp_ret_q queue or, more rarely, directly calls the consumer’s callback. The
crp_ret_q queue is provided because the crypto_done() routine often will be called from an
interrupt context, and running the consumer’s callback with interrupts locked out will degrade
the interactive performance of the system. When running in an interrupt context, the callback
will be queued and then handled later by the crypto_ret_proc software interrupt thread. This
use of queues and software interrupt threads effectively decouples the kernel from any possible
performance issues introduced by a variety of cryptographic hardware.

Unfortunately, there are several problems with the system just described:

• Using multiple threads requires two context switches per cryptographic operation. The context
switches are nontrivial and severely degrade throughput.

• Some callback routines do little work, and so moving all callbacks out of the device driver’s
interrupt-service routine adds another context switch that is expensive and unnecessary.

• The dispatch queue batches operations, but many consumers of the cryptographic subsystem,
including IPSec, do not batch operations, so this shunting of work into the dispatch queue is
unnecessary overhead.

To address these performance problems, several changes were made to the cryptographic
subsystem. Cryptographic drivers are now supplied a hint if there is more work to follow when
work is submitted to them. The drivers can decide whether to batch work based on this hint and,
where requests are not batched, completely bypass the crp_q queue. Cryptographic requests
whose callback routines are short mark their requests so that the underlying device executes
them directly instead of queueing them on the crypto_ret_q queue. The optimization of
bypassing the crypto_req_q queue is especially useful to consumers of the /dev/crypto device,
whose callback routine awakens only the thread that wrote to it. All these optimizations are
described more fully in Leffler [2003].

Random-Number Generator

Random (or unpredictable) numbers are relied on throughout the FreeBSD kernel and
userspace. For example, some network protocols use randomly generated identifiers rather than

globally managed identifiers to benefit from unique names for hosts and users (e.g., UUIDs)
while avoiding the cost of global registries. Strong random numbers—those unpredictable to
even a motivated adversary—are of particular importance to security and robustness. They
generate:

• PIDs, and stack canaries, used for exploit mitigation;

• IP IDs, TCP initial sequence numbers (ISN), and the key for TCP SYN cookies (described in
Section 14.3);

• authentication and encryption keys and initialization vectors (IV)s used in network protocols:
kernel includes IPSec, and SCTP; userspace includes TLS, ssh, Kerberos, and GSSAPI;

• authentication and encryption keys, IVs used for GELI and GBDE;

• initial UFS inode generation numbers for NFS file handles;

• salt for cryptographic hashes used in the system password database; and

• keys, IVs, and nonces for third-party applications such as pretty-good privacy (PGP) e-mail
encryption.

Computers are by design highly deterministic, making unpredictable numbers hard to acquire in
the volumes that may be required by software. Even when in-hardware random-number
generators are present, there are open questions about their effectiveness as they can suffer
biases and supply-chain attacks that are difficult to identify or mitigate. Software developers
therefore rely on pseudo-random number generators (PRNGs) to generate sequences of
numbers that, given a smaller secret key (or seed) as an initial input, will prove effectively
unpredictable to attackers. Seeds are generated by collecting entropy from around the system to
which attackers will not have access: explicit hardware entropy sources, the layout and probe
time of hardware busses and peripherals present in the system, unique serial numbers, and
unpredictable timings from the system—e.g., interpacket and interrupt arrival times.

While the kernel is well-placed to collect entropy, generating and protecting seeds are
technically challenging: weak or improperly protected seeds may allow attackers to reduce the
search space for keys (or even completely reconstruct past pseudo-random sequences). Given
adequate processing and a strong cryptographic number generator, however, not all inputs to
the seed need be unpredictable, so systems can safely include sources that might be accessible to
some attackers. For example, interpacket arrival times contribute usefully to the seed even if
some adversaries might be able to sniff the same wireless network.

Entropy is fed into the in-kernel random-number generator, which provides a stream of
pseudo-random bytes for in-kernel use. Entropy is exported to userspace via /dev/random
and the kern.arandom sysctl. Sometimes the generator provides the random data directly—for
example, read system calls on /dev/random. In other cases, differing security and
performance trade-offs allow use of a cheaper generator seeded from the strong generator; for
example, the arc4random() interface used in the network stack, and the kern.arandom sysctl
used for stack-canary initialization by the C runtime.

A key concern in random-number generator designs is perfect forward secrecy (PFS), which
guarantees that information about random numbers produced at a later time cannot attack
random numbers generated earlier in the sequence. For example, PFS prevents adversaries that
may gain access to a system following a theft (or via export of random numbers) from gaining an
advantage in breaking keys that protect on-disk storage or communications with another party
the previous day. PFS is done through intermittently reseeding the generator with new entropy;
the reseeding interval controls the window over which an attacker who has compromised the
system can derive information about earlier random sequences. Some care must be taken,
however: if entropy is mixed into the generator too frequently, then an attacker may be able to
gain information about the entropy source by inspecting generator output over time.

To address these concerns, FreeBSD employs the Yarrow cryptographic pseudo-random number
generator to generate sequences of random numbers for use throughout the system [Kelsey et al.,
1999; Murray, 2002]. Yarrow itself has four major components: an entropy accumulator that
gathers entropy samples in one of two pools using a cryptographic hash; a reseed mechanism
that, at routine intervals, reseeds the generator key; a generation mechanism that generates a
pseudo-random sequence from the key; and reseed control that determines at what interval
reseeding from fresh entropy should occur. These structures are directly reflected in the
software implementation.

An important design choice in Yarrow is using existing strong cryptographic primitives, such as
triply-DES and SHA-1 in the design, which comes at significant performance cost, but avoids use
of custom cryptographic primitives that have seen less cryptanalysis. The FreeBSD
implementation supports multiple cryptographic hashes and encryption algorithms, an
extension to the original design; by default, AES and SHA-256 are used—both defined after
Yarrow was published.

FreeBSD is able to collect entropy samples, which include both a timestamp and
context-dependent data (e.g., packet headers). Configurable entropy sources include:

• low-level hardware interrupt processing,

• scheduling of a hardware interrupt to a thread,

• scheduling of a software interrupt (SWIs) to a thread,

• packet headers injected via Ethernet interfaces,

• packet headers injected via point-to-point interfaces,

• attach times during boot-time hardware enumeration,

• keyboard and mouse input,

• hardware random-number sources, such as Intel’s rdrand instruction, and

• entropy preserved in a file across reboot.

Entropy gathering occurs throughout the kernel. Individual sources will check whether they are
enabled before invoking random_harvest(). A timestamp is collected, typically via the
high-precision cycle counter available in most contemporary CPU designs. However, some older
architectures may not support the cycle counter, in which case a slower real-time clock will be
used. Sources also pass a pointer to optional data, its length, an estimated number of bits of
entropy in the sample, and the entropy source type.

The function random_harvestq_internal() enqueues entropy samples to a global linked list,
with further processing deferred to a dedicated kernel thread to avoid performing
computationally intensive hashes in performance-sensitive contexts such as interrupt handling.
If the queue is full, then the sample is discarded to bound memory use. random_kthread()
wakes up 10 times a second to drain the pending queue of samples and inject them into Yarrow
via random_process_event(). random_kthread() also samples high-volume dedicated
hardware    entropy    sources    such   as    rdrand      at   the   same   interval   by   invoking
live_entropy_sources_feed(). This sampling interval, combined with limits on linked-list size,
bounds the total amount of entropy that can be collected each second, and therefore limits the
amount of CPU capacity that will be spent on computationally expensive hashing.

As entropy events arrive in Yarrow, they are alternately injected into either the slow pool or the
fast pool, which each consist of an instance of the selected cryptographic hash function. The
maximum entropy that a pool can store is limited by the width of the hash: 160 bits for SHA-1
and 256 bits for SHA-256 The complete sample, including data and timestamp, is passed to the
hash, and the entropy estimate provided by the caller updates the per-source running estimate.
The fast pool will reseed Yarrow when any one source has contributed at least 100 bits of
accumulated entropy. The slow pool will reseed Yarrow when any two sources have both

contributed at least 160 bits of accumulated entropy. Yarrow’s authors call for the use of
statistical tests to help measure entropy gathered from sources. However, devising valid
statistical tests has proven to be tricky and they are the most criticized aspect of the algorithm.
FreeBSD relies solely on a programmer estimate of entropy in each sample.

This approach spreads entropy from different sources over time to prevent a particularly fast,
low-quality (or even compromised) source of entropy from diluting the pool—while still allowing
strong fast-moving sources to reseed frequently. When a reseed occurs, the contents of the
fast-pool hash are always included; slow-pool contents are only included when a slow reseed is
triggered. The cryptographic hash is applied multiple times to ensure that if hash context and
key size differ, then all bits of stored entropy are evenly distributed over all bits of keying
material.

Yarrow’s generator runs only when randomness is required, as opposed to entropy
accumulation, which runs whenever entropy samples are available. Thus, generator cost is
proportional to randomness consumed, whereas accumulator cost is proportional to entropy
sampled, and there is greater tolerance for the performance overhead of a contemporary
encryption algorithm versus a cheaper cryptographic hash. Yarrow’s seed is not used directly as
a key; instead, it is used by generator_gate() to generate a short-lived current key. This
approach prevents the same encryption key from being used too many times, which might
otherwise allow output cycles to arise in the PRNG. Key generation feeds output bits from the
PRNG back in as keying material; as it does not introduce any new entropy, it does not
constitute reseeding. By default, the key will be regenerated every 10 output blocks.

When a read system call occurs on /dev/random, Yarrow is queried to determined whether it
has been seeded; if not, it will block. If it has been seeded, then it is invoked to do counter-mode
encryption using the current key. While some systems differentiate random and urandom
devices, offering blocking and nonblocking entropy sources, FreeBSD simply provides the
output of Yarrow directly to both device nodes, so once unblocked by seeding, Yarrow will
provide unlimited randomness on either device.

The /dev/random framework offers significant pluggability and flexibility, allowing both new
entropy sources and new cryptographic PRNGs to be introduced. In the current implementation,
FreeBSD passes all entropy sources through Yarrow, but can be configured to allow direct use of
hardware randomness sources if desired. Direct use of hardware randomness may be suitable on
low-end embedded devices where cryptographic schemes are particularly expensive, or where a
high level of trust can be placed in hardware sources. The authors of Yarrow have since
published a new scheme, Fortuna, that may in the long term replace Yarrow in FreeBSD; the
framework should allow both implementations to live side by side, with compile-time or

run-time selection. Another potential future direction would be to replicate PRNG instances
across CPUs, rather than using a single instance that requires communication between
processors.

5.13 GELI Full-Disk Encryption

GELI is a GEOM class that offers cryptographic privacy and integrity protection for storage
devices that might be lost or stolen. Its primary concern is ensuring that, once a shutdown has
occurred, confidential data cannot be recovered from the disk without access to suitable
cryptographic keys or passphrases. A secondary concern is detecting corruption of on-disk data
if the device is recovered.

Confidentiality and Integrity Protection

Confidentiality is ensured by applying symmetric encryption to each sector before it is written to
the disk, and decryption when the sector is read back in. While a provider is active (e.g., while
the filesystem is mounted), its encryption keys are held in memory; when the provider is
detached, or on system shutdown, keying material is discarded. GELI can also be configured to
discard keying material when a system is suspended, requiring that it be present when the
notebook is resumed to load further data from disk. Encryption occurs at measurable
computational cost, but requires only one additional sector of metadata storage (at the end of
the device) to support any number of data sectors. The default (and recommended) encryption
algorithm is the advanced-encryption standard (AES) AESXTS, an AES-derived block cipher
designed for use with storage devices.

Optional integrity protection is done by calculating keyed cryptographic hashes for disk sectors
on write; sector hashes are validated on each read from disk. Sector-level verification failures
are coerced into read failures that must be handled by the filesystem or application. Integrity
checking comes with additional computational costs, but also requires that hash values be
stored for each on-disk sector. The hash cannot be stored within a 512-byte sector while
maintaining filesystem sector-size expectations; to mitigate this overhead, GELI coalesces
multiple 512-byte sectors into 4-Kbyte sectors with one hash in each underlying disk sector,
resulting in about an 11 percent storage overhead. The recommended cryptographic hash is
HMAC SHA-256; integrity protection is disabled by default. GELI makes use of the kernel
cryptographic framework, and is therefore able to use offloaded or CPU-accelerated
cryptography, substantially improving performance.

Key Management

Each GELI partition is protected by two underlying cryptographic keys: a data-encryption key
and an initialization-vector key that collectively make up the GELI per-provider master key.
Separate per-block keys for data encryption, initialization vectors (IVs), and integrity checking
are generated from the master key using cryptographic hashes rather than using the master key
directly. This approach avoids reusing the same keys for multiple purposes (e.g., confidentiality
and authentication), a practice heavily discouraged in contemporary cryptography.

Master keys are stored encrypted on the disk and must be decrypted before the provider can be
attached. Typical use decrypts the master key using one or both of a passphrase entered on the
console (“something you know”) and a keyfile stored on a removable USB device (“something
you have”). Up to two copies of the master keying material, encrypted using different
passphrases or keyfiles, may be stored in on-disk metadata. This approach allows, for example,
the daily user of a corporate notebook to specify one passphrase and key, but the employer to
retain its own recovery passphrase or key in a vault to be used if the user passphrase is forgotten
or USB stick is lost. GELI can also operate with randomly generated keys for swap partitions,
entirely preventing data persistence across reboot.

Protecting the master key on-disk is critical to the security of GELI. Instances of the master are
protected on disk with a derived key generated by passing a concatenation of the on-disk keyfile,
on-disk salt, and user passphrase (optionally strengthened using PKCS#5v2) through unkeyed
HMAC SHA-512. The master-key encryption key is generated by running HMAC SHA-512 over
the string “\x01” keyed with the derived key. The same encryption algorithm and key length are
used for the master key as are configured for block storage. The decrypted master key is
validated by passing the derived key into HMAC SHA-512 over the string “\x00” and comparing
it with the decrypted verification hash. The comparison will fail if the passphrase or keyfile do
not match on-disk storage.

Once decrypted, the master keys are stored in memory for the lifetime of the provider. The
implementation is careful to zero memory that holds keys once they are no longer required.
Zeroing memory is especially important for the passphrase and keyfile, which are not used after
the GELI instance has attached.

Starting GELI

GELI providers are attached automatically at system boot, or explicitly at runtime using the
/sbin/geli command. During boot, suitably configured instances will be discovered using
GELI’s taste method, g_eli_taste(), which will be called as GEOM itself discovers new devices

and partitions. After boot, the ioctl system call is used by /sbin/geli to trigger GELI’s config
method, g_eli_config(), which will configure a new GELI provider for a device or partition.

Only GELI instances marked as G_ELI_FLAG_BOOT will be automatically started; required
key files must have been preloaded by the boot loader, and GELI may need to suspend the boot
before root-filesystem mount to interactively requested a user passphrase. For post-boot
attachment, keying material and passphrase are passed explicitly in the configuration request.
After the root filesystem has been mounted, auto-starting new GELI instances is disabled, and
only a user-driven configuration is supported.

GELI’s metadata is found in the last sector of the underlying device or partition. GELI supports
several multiple on-disk layout versions, allowing backward compatibility despite an evolving
feature set; version 7 of the disk trailer appears in Figure 5.18. The metadata includes the
encrypted master keys protecting all data stored in the GELI instance. Other information, such
as the encryption algorithm, key length, and salt, is unencrypted. Metadata is decoded by
g_eli_taste() into a g_eli_metadata structure that initializes the g_eli_softc data structure,
shown in Figure 5.19, which holds information about the attached provider.

Figure 5.18 GELI v7 on-disk metadata, including encrypted master keys.

Figure 5.19 The g_eli_softc structure describes active GELI sessions.

Cryptographic Block Protection

GELI uses per-sector IVs to prevent identical data written to different sectors from having the
same ciphertext, which might allow attackers to gain insight into on-disk layout and content.
With most encryption algorithms, the per-sector IV is calculated by passing HMAC SHA-256,
keyed with the master key’s IV generation key, over the little-endian representation of the
sector’s byte offset. GELI caches a partially calculated version of the hash in its softc structure
for performance reasons. AES-XTS, the default encryption algorithm, takes sector number as a
direct argument, and so does not require explicit IV calculations by GELI.

Recent versions of GELI vary per-sector encryption keys across the disk to limit direct reuse of
the underlying master-key data-encryption key. A key number is associated with each 512 Mbyte
chunk of the disk; keys are calculated by passing a concatenation of the string “ekey” with the
little-endian representation of the key number to HMAC SHA-512 keyed with the master-key
data-encryption key. Because this calculation is expensive, GELI maintains a red-black tree of
cached calculated key value. Entries in the cache are reference-counted so that the cryptographic
framework can prevent cache entries from being freed while they are in use.

When suitably configured, GELI will generate and check keyed cryptographic hashes on sector
data. This approach imposes an additional metadata overhead for each block; to minimize this
overhead, GELI providers with authentication enabled will typically be configured to use larger
(4-Kbyte) block sizes, reducing overhead. As with per-block encryption keys and IVs, per-block

authentication keys are generated by passing a concatenation of the provider’s data-encryption
key and sector offset in bytes through SHA-256. As the hash of the data-encryption key is
common to all blocks, a partially calculated hash is stored in the softc, which is combined with
the per-block offset during I/O.

I/O Model

All GELI I/O activity originates in either g_eli_taste(), when GEOM discovers a new partition
during the boot, or g_eli_start(), which is invoked each time a new I/O request for the provider
is delivered down the storage stack from another layered GEOM provider, a filesystem, or direct
access to a /dev node by a user process. When a read operation is fielded, GELI will issue an
I/O operation to the underlying storage provider and then invoke the crypto framework to
decrypt (and optionally authenticate) the resulting data. When a write operation is fielded, GELI
will optionally hash and then encrypt the data using the crypto framework before issuing I/O to
the underlying storage provider. Interactions with both the underlying provider and crypto
framework are asynchronous: GELI provides callback functions that will be invoked when the
operation completes. Both success and failure are returned to GEOM by invoking g_io_request()
that will, in turn, trigger notification to the GEOM consumer that initiated the I/O operation.

GELI creates a pool of per-CPU worker threads to process cryptographic operations to avoid
congesting the GEOM thread that would otherwise synchronously execute I/O start and
completion events including encryption, decryption, and hashing. The g_eli_worker() routine
implements the thread worker body, which sleeps on the g_eli_softc structure pointer and
extracts new work from sc_queue using g_eli_takefirst() when signalled. A GELI instance is
marked     as   suspended      by    g_eli_suspend_one(),      which     it   does    by    setting
G_ELI_FLAG_SUSPEND in sc_flags. Once suspended, all I/O requests will be stalled.
Suspension clears softc keying material, which must be restored before I/O can be resumed. I/O
is resumed by g_eli_ctl_resume() clearing the G_ELI_FLAG_SUSPEND flag.

Limitations

As with all security features, GELI must be used with an awareness of its threat model and
guarantees. For example, integrity protection can detect sector data that was written without
access to a master key for the provider. It is unable, however, to detect “replay attacks” in which
an older version of a sector replaces a newer version, as both will pass integrity checks. Multiple
losses of the same storage device therefore leave the disk vulnerable to rewinding—a difficult
problem to address, and one that GELI documents as outside of its threat model. GELI also
excludes a number of other attacker models including:

• Online snooping of encrypted I/O traffic on its way to the disk rather than offline analysis, for
example, tcpdump of iSCSI traffic carrying GELI-protected data.

• Social engineering to gain access to the key or passphrase. Any encryption scheme that
depends on a remembered passphrase can be broken if the person can be tricked into giving up
the passphrase. It does, however, provide significant benefit in limiting the access of an attacker
who has acquired a stolen notebook.

Exercises

5.1 Describe the difference between discretionary and mandatory access controls.

5.2 How do definitions of “implicit privilege” and “explicit privilege” affect TCB protection in
FreeBSD? What are the potential risks and benefits to implementing a flexible, fine-grained
privilege model?

5.3 Is it possible for a file to have UNIX permissions set such that its owner cannot read it, even
though a group can? Is this situation possible if the owner is a member of the group that can
read the file? Explain your answers.

*5.4 How do distributed authentication and authorization systems, such as Kerberos or NFS,
interact with local authentication and access control?

*5.5 When should distributed-filesystem access-control enforcement occur on the client, and
when on the server?

*5.6 Access control has changed significantly between historic DAC and MAC models, and more
contemporary approaches such as Capsicum. What similar considerations might apply to the
more traditional audit framework present in FreeBSD?

**5.7 FreeBSD uses a model in which the first process starts with complete privilege, which is
discarded as events such as user authentication take place. This model has proven a problem in
the past when system login services, such as sshd, have had security vulnerabilities that yielded
root privilege. How might the model be restructured so that user authentication takes place
without any privilege, and privilege is escalated rather than dropped?

**5.8 What sort of hardware support would make it more efficient for the kernel to implement
the FreeBSD security policies?

**5.9 This chapter has primarily considered the protection of objects maintained by a single
instance of the operating system, such as local files and IPC objects. As virtualization becomes
more prevalent, how might hypervisor and operating system access-control models interact?

References

Anderson, 1972.

J. P. Anderson, “Computer Security Technology Planning Study,” Technical Report, Electronic
Systems Division, Air Force Systems Command, Hanscom Field, Bedford, MA, October 1972.

Badger et al., 1995.

L. Badger, D. F. Sterne, D. L. Sherman, K. M. Walker, & S. A. Haghighat, “Practical Domain and
Type Enforcement for UNIX,” Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, IEEE, May 1995.

Bell & LaPadula, 1973.

D. E. Bell & L. J. LaPadula, “Secure computer systems: Mathematical foundations and model,”
Technical Report M74-244, The MITRE Corporation, Bedford, MA, May 1973.

Biba, 1977.

K. Biba, “Integrity considerations for secure computer systems,” Technical Report TR-3153, The
MITRE Corporation, Bedford, MA, April 1977.

Boebert & Kain, 1985.

W. E. Boebert & R. Y. Kain, “A practical alternative to hierarchical integrity policies.,”
Proceedings of the 8th National Computer Security Conference, October 1985.

Fraser, 2000.

T. Fraser, “LOMAC: Low Water-Mark Integrity Protection for COTS Environments,”
Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, IEEE, May 2000.

Kamp & Watson, 2000.

P. Kamp & R. Watson, “Jails: Confining the Omnipotent Root,” Proceedings of the Second
International System Administration and Networking Conference (SANE), available from
http://docs.freebsd.org/44doc/papers/jail/, May 2000.

Kelsey et al., 1999.

J. Kelsey, B. Schneier, & N. Ferguson, “Yarrow-160: Notes on the Design and Analysis of the
Yarrow Cryptographic Pseudorandom Number Generator,” Proceedings of the Sixth Annual
Workshop          on      Selected    Areas      in      Cryptography,        available      from
https://www.schneier.com/paper-yarrow.html, August 1999.

Kilpatrick, 2003.

D. Kilpatrick, “Privman: A Library for Partitioning Applications,” Proceedings of the USENIX
Annual Technical Conference, pp. 273–284, June 2003.

Leffler, 2003.

S. J. Leffler, “Cryptographic Device Support for FreeBSD,” Proceedings of BSDCon 2003,
September 2003.

Loscocco & Smalley, 2001.

P. A. Loscocco & S. D. Smalley, “Integrating Flexible Support for Security Policies into the Linux
Operating System,” Proceedings of the USENIX Annual Technical Conference, USENIX
Association, June 2001.

Murray, 2002.

M. R. V. Murray, “An Implementation of the Yarrow PRNG for FreeBSD,” Proceedings of
BSDCon 2002, available from https://www.usenix.org/legacy/event/bsdcon02/murray.html,
February 2002.

P1003.1e, 1998.

P1003.1e, “Unpublished Draft Standard for Information Technology—Portable Operating
System Interface (POSIX)—Part 1: System Application Program Interface—Amendment:
Protection, Audit and Control Interfaces [C Language] IEEE Standard 1003.1e Draft 17,” Editor
Casey Schaufler, Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Piscataway, NJ, 1998.

Provos et al., 2002.

N. Provos, M. Friedl, & P. Honeyman, “Preventing Privilege Escalation,” Proc. of the 12th
USENIX Security Symposium, pp. 207–225, August 2002.

Reis & Gribble, 2009.

C. Reis & S. D. Gribble, “Isolating Web Programs in Modern Browser Architectures,”
EuroSys ’09: Proceedings of the 4th ACM European Conference on Computer Systems, pp.
219–232, April 2009.

Ritchie, 1979.

D. M. Ritchie, “Protection of Data File Contents,” United States Patent, no. 4,135,240, United
States Patent Office, Washington, DC, January 16, 1979. Assignee: Bell Telephone Laboratories,
Inc., Murray Hill, NJ, Appl. No.: 377,591, Filed: July 9, 1973.

Saltzer & Schroeder, 1975.

J. H. Saltzer & M. D. Schroeder, “The Protection of Information in Computer Systems,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 1278–1308, September 1975.

Shepler et al., 2003.

S. Shepler, B. Callaghan, D. Robinson, R. Thurlow, C. Beame, M. Eisler, & D. Noveck, “Network
File    System      (NFS)     version       4   Protocol,”    RFC   3530,   available    from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc3530.html, April 2003.

Watson, 2007.

R. N. M. Watson, “Exploiting concurrency vulnerabilities in system call wrappers,” WOOT07:
Proceedings of the first USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies, USENIX Association,
Boston, MA, August 2007.

Watson, 2012.

R. N. M. Watson, “New approaches to operating system security extensibility,” Technical Report
UCAM-CL-TR-818, University of Cambridge, Computer Laboratory, William Gates Building, 15
JJ Thomson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0FD, April 2012.

Watson, 2013.

R. N. M. Watson, “A Decade of OS access-control extensibility,” Communications of the ACM,
vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 52–63, February 2013.

Watson et al., 2003.

R. N. M. Watson, B. Feldman, A. Migus, & C. Vance, “Design and Implementation of the
TrustedBSD MAC Framework,” Proceedings of the Third DARPA Information Survivability
Conference and Exhibition (DISCEX), IEEE, April 2003.

Watson et al., 2010.

R. N. M. Watson, B. Laurie, J. Anderson, & K. Kennaway, “Capsicum: Practical Capabilities for
UNIX,” Proceedings of the 19th USENIX Security Symposium, August 2010.

Watson & Salamon, 2006.

R. N. M. Watson & W. Salamon, “The FreeBSD Audit System,” Proceedings of UKUUG LISA
2006, March 2006.

