                    Chapter 6. Memory Management

6.1 Terminology

A central component of any operating system is the memory-management system. As the
name implies, memory-management facilities are responsible for the management of memory
resources available on a machine. These resources are typically layered in a hierarchical fashion,
with memory-access times inversely related to their proximity to the CPU (see Figure 6.1). The
primary memory system is main memory; the next level of storage is secondary storage or
backing storage. Main-memory systems usually are constructed from random-access
memories, whereas secondary stores are placed on disk drives. In certain workstation
environments, the common two-level hierarchy is a three-level hierarchy, with the addition of
file-server machines or network-attached storage connected to a workstation via a local-area
network [Gingell et al., 1987].

Figure 6.1 Hierarchical layering of memory.

Each level in this hierarchy may have its own hierarchy. For example, there are usually several
layers of caches between the CPU and the main memory. The secondary storage often has
dynamic- or flash-memory caches to speed access to the moving-head disk drives.

In a multiprogrammed environment, it is critical for the operating system to share available
memory resources effectively among the processes. The operation of any memory-management
policy is directly related to the memory required for a process to execute. That is, if a process

must reside entirely in main memory for it to execute, then a memory-management system
must be oriented toward allocating large units of memory. On the other hand, if a process can
execute when it is only partially resident in main memory, then memory-management policies
are likely to be substantially different. Memory-management facilities usually try to optimize the
number of runnable processes that are resident in main memory. This goal must be considered
with the goals of the scheduler (Section 4.4) so that conflicts that can adversely affect overall
system performance are avoided.

Although the availability of secondary storage permits more processes to exist than can be
resident in main memory, it also requires additional algorithms that can be complicated. Space
management typically requires algorithms and policies different from those used for main
memory, and a policy must be devised for deciding when to move processes between main
memory and secondary storage.

Processes and Memory

Each process operates in a virtual address space that is defined by the architecture of the
underlying hardware on which it executes. A virtual address space is a range of memory
locations that a process references independently of the physical memory present in the system.
In other words, the virtual address space of a process is independent of the physical address
space of the CPU. For a machine to support virtual memory, we also require that the whole of a
process’s virtual address space does not need to be resident in main memory for that process to
execute.

References to the virtual address space—virtual addresses—are translated by hardware into
references to physical memory. This operation, termed address translation, permits
programs to be loaded into physical memory at any location without requiring
position-dependent virtual addresses in the program to be changed. This relocation of
position-dependent addressing is possible because the addresses known to the program do not
change. Address translation and virtual addressing are also important in efficient sharing of a
CPU, because they permit context switching to be done quickly.

When multiple processes are coresident in main memory, we must protect the physical memory
associated with each process’s virtual address space to ensure that one process cannot alter the
contents of another process’s virtual address space unless they explicitly choose to share parts of
their address space. This protection is implemented in hardware and is usually tightly coupled
with the implementation of address translation. Consequently, the two operations usually are
defined and implemented together as hardware termed the memory-management unit
(MMU).

Virtual memory can be implemented in many ways, some of which are software based, such as
overlays. Most effective virtual-memory schemes are, however, hardware based. In these
schemes, the virtual address space is divided into fixed-size units, termed pages, as shown in
Figure 6.2. Virtual-memory references are resolved by the address-translation unit to a page in
main memory and an offset within that page. Hardware protection is applied by the
memory-management unit on a page-by-page basis.

Figure 6.2 Paged virtual-memory scheme.

Paging

Address translation provides the implementation of virtual memory by decoupling the virtual
address space of a process from what is contained in the physical address space of the CPU.
Each page of virtual memory is marked as resident or nonresident in main memory. If a
process references a location in virtual memory that is not resident, a hardware trap termed a
page fault is generated. The servicing of page faults, or paging, permits processes to execute
even if they are only partially resident in main memory.

Coffman & Denning [1973] characterize paging systems by three important policies:

1. When the system loads pages into memory—the fetch policy

2. Where the system places pages in memory—the placement policy

3. How the system selects pages to be removed from main memory when pages are unavailable
for a placement request—the replacement policy

The performance of modern computers is heavily dependent on one or more high-speed
hardware caches to reduce the need to access the much slower main memory. The placement
policy should ensure that contiguous pages in virtual memory make the best use of the
processor-memory cache and the address-translation cache [Kessler & Hill., 1992]. FreeBSD
uses superpages to ensure good placement. Under a pure demand-paging system, a
demand-fetch policy is used, in which only the missing page is fetched, and replacements occur
only when main memory is full. In practice, paging systems do not implement a pure
demand-paging algorithm. Instead, the fetch policy often is altered to do prepaging—fetching
pages of memory other than the one that caused the page fault—and the replacement policy is
invoked before main memory is full.

Replacement Algorithms

The replacement policy is an important aspect of any paging system. There are many algorithms
from which we can select in designing a replacement strategy for a paging system. Much
research has been carried out in evaluating the performance of different page-replacement
algorithms [Jiang et al., 2005; Bansal & Modha, 2004; Belady, 1966; Marshall, 1979; King,
1971].

A process’s paging behavior for a given input is described in terms of the pages referenced over
the time of the process’s execution. This sequence of pages, termed a reference string,
represents the behavior of the process at discrete times during the process’s lifetime.
Corresponding to the sampled references that constitute a process’s reference string are
real-time values that reflect whether the associated references resulted in a page fault. A useful
measure of a process’s behavior is the fault rate, which is the number of page faults
encountered during processing of a reference string, normalized by the length of the reference
string.

Page-replacement algorithms typically are evaluated in terms of their effectiveness on reference
strings that have been collected from execution of real programs. Formal analysis can also be
used, although it is difficult to do unless many restrictions are applied to the execution
environment. The most common metric used in measuring the effectiveness of a
page-replacement algorithm is the fault rate.

Page-replacement algorithms are defined by the criteria that they use for selecting pages to be
reclaimed. For example, the optimal replacement policy [Denning, 1970] states that the

“best” choice of a page to replace is the one with the longest expected time until its next
reference. Clearly, this policy is not applicable to dynamic systems, as it requires a priori
knowledge of the paging characteristics of a process. The policy is useful for evaluation purposes,
however, as it provides a yardstick for comparing the performance of other page-replacement
algorithms.

Practical page-replacement algorithms require a certain amount of state information that the
system uses in selecting replacement pages. This state typically includes the reference pattern of
a process, sampled at discrete time intervals. On some systems, this information can be
expensive to collect [Babao lu & Joy, 1981]. As a result, the “best” page-replacement algorithm
may not be the most efficient.

Working-Set Model

The working-set model helps identify the set of pages that a process is actively using. The
working-set model assumes that processes exhibit a slowly changing locality of reference.
For a period of time, a process operates in a set of subroutines or loops, causing all its memory
references to refer to a fixed subset of its address space, termed the working set. The process
periodically changes its working set, abandoning certain areas of memory and beginning to
access new ones. After a period of transition, the process defines a new set of pages as its
working set. In general, if the system can provide the process with enough pages to hold that
process’s working set, the process will experience a low page-fault rate. If the system cannot
provide the process with enough pages for the working set, the process will run slowly and will
have a high page-fault rate.

Precise calculation of the working set of a process is impossible without a priori knowledge of
that process’s memory-reference pattern. However, the working set can be approximated by
various means. One method of approximation is to track the number of pages held by a process
and that process’s page-fault rate. If the page-fault rate increases above a high watermark, the
working set is assumed to have increased, and the number of pages held by the process is
allowed to grow. Conversely, if the page-fault rate drops below a low watermark, the working set
is assumed to have decreased, and the number of pages held by the process is reduced.

Swapping

Swapping is the term used to describe a memory-management policy in which entire
processes are moved to and from secondary storage when main memory is in short supply.
Swap-based memory-management systems usually are less complicated than are demand-paged
systems, since there is less bookkeeping to do. However, pure swapping systems typically are

less effective than are paging systems, since the degree of multiprogramming is lowered by the
requirement that processes be fully resident to execute. Swapping is sometimes combined with
paging in a two-tiered scheme, whereby paging satisfies memory demands until a severe
memory shortfall requires drastic action, in which case swapping is used.

In this chapter, a portion of secondary storage that is used for paging or swapping is termed a
swap area or swap space. The hardware devices on which these areas reside are termed
swap devices.

Advantages of Virtual Memory

There are several advantages to the use of virtual memory on computers capable of supporting
this facility properly. Virtual memory allows large programs to be run on machines with
main-memory configurations that are smaller than the program size. On machines with a
moderate amount of memory, it allows more programs to be resident in main memory to
compete for CPU time, as the programs do not need to be completely resident. When programs
use sections of their program or data space for some time, leaving other sections unused, the
unused sections do not need to be present. Also, the use of virtual memory allows programs to
start up faster, since they generally require only a small section to be loaded before they begin
processing arguments and determining what actions to take. Other parts of a program may not
be needed at all during individual runs. As a program runs, additional sections of its program
and data spaces are paged in as needed (demand paging). Finally, there are many algorithms
that are more easily programmed by sparse use of a large address space than by careful packing
of data structures into a small area. Such techniques are too expensive for use without virtual
memory, but they may run much faster when that facility is available, without using an
inordinate amount of physical memory.

On the other hand, the use of virtual memory can degrade performance. It is more efficient to
load a program all at one time than to load it entirely in small sections on demand. There is a
cost for each operation, including saving and restoring state and determining which page must
be loaded, so some systems use demand paging for only those programs that are larger than
some minimum size.

Hardware Requirements for Virtual Memory

Nearly all versions of UNIX have required some form of memory-management hardware to
support transparent multiprogramming. To protect processes from modification by other
processes, the memory-management hardware must prevent programs from changing their own
address mapping. The FreeBSD kernel runs in a privileged mode (kernel mode or system

mode) in which memory mapping can be controlled, whereas processes run in an unprivileged
mode (user mode). There are several additional architectural requirements for support of
virtual memory. The CPU must distinguish between resident and nonresident portions of the
address space, must suspend programs when they refer to nonresident addresses, and must
resume programs’ operation once the operating system has placed the required section in
memory. Because the CPU may discover missing data at various times during the execution of
an instruction, it must provide a mechanism to save the machine state so that the instruction
can be continued or restarted later. This ability to restart an instruction is called a precise
exception. The CPU may implement restarting by saving enough state when an instruction
begins that the state can be restored when a fault is discovered. Alternatively, instructions could
delay any modifications or side effects until after any faults would be discovered so that the
instruction execution does not need to back up before restarting. On some computers,
instruction backup requires the assistance of the operating system.

Most machines designed to support demand-paged virtual memory include hardware support
for the collection of information on program references to memory. When the system selects a
page for replacement, it must save the contents of that page if they have been modified since the
page was brought into memory. The hardware usually maintains a per-page flag showing
whether the page has been modified. Many machines also include a flag recording any access to
a page for use by the replacement algorithm.

6.2 Overview of the FreeBSD Virtual-Memory System

The FreeBSD virtual-memory system is based on the Mach 2.0 virtual-memory system
[Tevanian, 1987; Rashid et al., 1987], with updates from Mach 2.5 and Mach 3.0. The Mach
virtual-memory system was adopted because it features efficient support for sharing and a clean
separation of machine-independent and machine-dependent features, as well as multiprocessor
support. Although parts of the original Mach abstractions persist, little of the code still remains.
None of the original Mach system-call interface remains. It has been replaced with the interface
first proposed for 4.2BSD that has been widely adopted by the UNIX industry; the FreeBSD
interface is described in Section 6.5.

The virtual address space of most architectures is divided into two parts: address space
dedicated to the kernel at high addresses and address space dedicated to run user processes at
low addresses. A typical address space layout is shown in Figure 6.3. Here, the kernel and its
associated data structures reside at the top of the address space. The initial text and data areas
of the user process start near the beginning of memory. By default, the first 4 or 8 Kbyte of
memory are kept off-limits to the process. The reason for this restriction is to limit the ability to
convert a kernel null-pointer dereference into a privilege escalation attack. This restriction also

eases program debugging; indirecting through a null pointer will cause an invalid address fault
instead of reading or writing the program text.

Figure 6.3 Layout of virtual address space.

Memory allocations made by the running process using the malloc() library routine are done in
the memory that starts immediately following the data area and grows to higher addresses. The
argument vector and environment vectors are at the top of the user portion of the address space.
The user’s stack starts just below these vectors and grows to lower addresses.

For a process running on an architecture with 64 bits of address space, its stack is mapped so far
above its malloc() arena that the two spaces should never run into each other as the process
would run out of memory resources long before the two address spaces would meet.

For processes running on 32-bit architectures, the top 1 Gbyte of the address space is reserved
for use by the kernel. Systems with many small processes making heavy use of kernel facilities
such as networking can be configured to use the top 2 Gbyte for the kernel. The remaining 3
Gbyte or 2 Gbyte of address space is available for use by processes. Unless administratively
limited, the stack and malloc() arena of a process can each grow until they meet.

The kernel’s address space on a 64-bit architecture is usually large enough to support a fixed
and permanent mapping to all the physical memory on the machine. This direct mapping to the
physical address space greatly simplifies many kernel operations since the kernel can always
directly read any page of physical memory.

On a 32-bit architecture, the physical memory usually exceeds the address space dedicated to
the kernel. Thus, the kernel must set aside part of its address space to temporarily map in
physical pages that it needs to read. Each time that it wants to read a new physical page, it must
find an existing page that it can unmap to make room for the new page. It must then manipulate
its memory mapping, invalidating the old mapping and any caching associated with that
mapping, and then enter the new mapping. The cost of cache invalidation on multiprocessor
machines is high because the cache on every CPU must be invalidated.

User Address-Space Management

The virtual-memory system implements protected address spaces into which can be mapped
data sources (objects) such as files, or private and anonymous pieces of swap space. Physical
memory is used as a cache of recently used pages from these objects and is managed by a global
page-replacement algorithm.

In FreeBSD and other modern UNIX systems that support the mmap system call, address-space
usage is less structured. Shared library implementations may place text or data arbitrarily,
rendering the notion of predefined regions obsolete. By default, shared libraries are placed just
above the run-time configured maximum heap area.

At any time, the currently executing process is mapped into the virtual address space. When the
system decides to context switch to another process, it must save the information about the
current-process address mapping, then load the address mapping for the new process to be run.
The details of this address-map switching are architecture dependent. Most architectures need
to change only a few memory-mapping registers that point to the base, and to give the length of
memory-resident page tables.

Both the kernel and user processes use the same basic data structures for the management of
their virtual memory. The data structures used to manage virtual memory are as follows:

vmspace

Structure that encompasses both the machine-dependent and machine-independent structures
describing a process’s address space

vm_map

Highest-level data structure that describes the machine-independent virtual address space

vm_map_entry

Structure that describes the mapping from a virtually contiguous range of addresses that share
protection and inheritance attributes to the backing-store vm_object

vm_object

Structure that describes a source of data such as physical memory or other resources containing
instructions or data

shadow vm_object

Special vm_object that represents modified copy of original data, described in Section 6.5.

vm_page

The lowest-level data structure that represents the physical memory being used by the
virtual-memory system

In the remainder of this section, we describe briefly how all these data structures fit together.
The remainder of this chapter describes the details of the structures and how the structures are
used.

Figure 6.4 shows a typical process address space and associated data structures. The vmspace
structure encapsulates the virtual-memory state of a particular process, including the
machine-dependent and machine-independent data structures, as well as statistics. The
machine-dependent vm_pmap structure is opaque to all but the lowest level of the system and
contains all information necessary to manage the memory-management hardware. This pmap
layer is the subject of Section 6.13 and is ignored for the remainder of the current discussion.
The machine-independent data structures include the address space that is described by a
vm_map structure. The vm_map points to an ordered linked list of vm_map_entry structures,
a binary-search tree for speeding up lookups during memory allocation and page-fault handling,
and a pointer to the associated machine-dependent vm_pmap structure contained in the
vmspace. A vm_map_entry structure describes a virtually contiguous range of addresses that
have the same protection and inheritance attributes. Every vm_map_entry points to a chain of
vm_object structures that describes sources of data (objects) that are mapped at the indicated
address range. At the tail of the vm_object chain is the original mapped data object, usually
representing a persistent data source, such as a file. Interposed between that vm_object and the
map entry are zero or more transient shadow vm_objects that represent modified copies of the
original data. These shadow vm_objects are discussed in detail in Section 6.5.

Figure 6.4 Data structures that describe a process address space.

Each vm_object structure contains an ordered list of vm_page structures representing the
physical-memory cache of the vm_object. A vm_page structure is most commonly and quickly
found using the radix tree maintained for each vm_object. The page is keyed within this radix
tree by its logical offset from the start of the vm_object. The cached pages are also kept in an
ordered list to provide fast iteration over all the pages within a range of virtual addresses. The
vm_page structure also records the type of, and a pointer to, the pager structure (not shown)
that contains information on how to page in or page out data from its backing store.

At boot time, the kernel allocates an array of vm_page structures with an entry for every page of
physical memory managed by the virtual-memory system where page N is entry N in the array.
The structure also contains the status of the page (e.g., modified or referenced) and links for
various paging queues.

All structures have the necessary interlocks for multithreading in a multiprocessor environment.
The locking is fine grained, with at least one lock per instance of a data structure. Many of the
structures have different locks protecting their individual fields.

6.3 Kernel Memory Management

For 64-bit address-space architectures, the kernel is always permanently mapped into the high
part of every process address space. However, for 32-bit address-space architectures, there are
two ways in which the kernel’s memory can be organized. The most common is for the kernel to
be permanently mapped into the high part of every process address space. In this model,

switching from one process to another does not affect the kernel portion of the address space.
The alternative organization is to switch between having the kernel occupy the whole address
space and mapping the currently running process into the address space. Having the kernel
permanently mapped does reduce the amount of address space available to a large process (and
the kernel), but it also reduces the cost of data copying. Many system calls require data to be
transferred between the currently running user process and the kernel. With the kernel
permanently mapped, the data can be copied via the efficient block-copy instructions. If the
kernel is alternately mapped with the process, data copying requires either the use of temporary
mappings or the use of special instructions that copy to and from the previously mapped
address space. Both of these approaches are up to a factor of 2 slower than the standard
block-copy instructions. Since up to one-third of the kernel time is spent in copying between the
kernel and user processes, slowing this operation by a factor of 2 significantly slows system
throughput.

When the kernel is permanently mapped into the address space, it is able to freely read and
write the address space of the user process but the converse is not true. The kernel’s range of
virtual address space is marked inaccessible to all user processes. Writing is restricted so user
processes cannot tamper with the kernel’s data structures. Reading is restricted so user
processes cannot watch sensitive kernel data structures, such as the terminal input queues, that
include such things as users typing their passwords.

Usually, the hardware dictates which organization can be used. All the architectures supported
by FreeBSD map the kernel into the top of the address space.

When the system boots, the first task that the kernel must do is to set up data structures to
describe and manage its address space. Table 6.1 lists the kernel’s hierarchy of allocators to
manage its address space. The relationship of the elements of the hierarchy are shown in Figure
6.5. The remainder of this section describes this hierarchy starting from the low-level vm_map
up to the per-CPU-level buckets.

Table 6.1 Kernel memory allocator hierarchy.

Figure 6.5 Kernel memory allocator hierarchy.

Kernel Maps and Submaps

Like any process, the kernel has a vm_map with a corresponding set of vm_map_entry
structures that describe the use of a range of addresses (see Figure 6.6). Submaps are a special
kernel-only construct used to isolate and constrain address-space allocation for kernel
subsystems. One use is in subsystems that require contiguous pieces of the kernel address space.
To avoid intermixing of unrelated allocations within an address range, that range is covered by a
submap, and only the appropriate subsystem can allocate from that map. Maps associate data
objects with similar sizes and lifetimes to minimize internal and external fragmentation
respectively. Parts of the kernel may also require addresses with particular alignments or even
specific addresses. Both can be ensured by use of submaps. Finally, submaps can be used to
limit statically the amount of address space and hence the physical memory consumed by a
subsystem.

Figure 6.6 Kernel address-space maps.

An example layout of the kernel map is shown in Figure 6.6. The kernel’s address space is
described by the vm_map structure shown in the upperleft corner of the figure. Pieces of the
address space are described by the vm_map_entry structures that are linked in ascending
address order from K0 to K8 on the vm_map structure. Here, the kernel text, initialized data,
uninitialized data, and initially allocated data structures reside in the range K0 to K1 and are
represented by the first vm_map_entry. The next vm_map_entry is associated with the
address range from K2 to K6. This piece of the kernel address space is being managed via a
submap headed by the referenced vm_map structure. This submap currently has two parts of its
address space used: the address range K2 to K3, and the address range K4 to K5. These two
address ranges represent the kernel exec arguments arena and the pipe buffer arena,
respectively. The final part of the kernel address space is being managed in the kernel’s main
map, the address range K7 to K8 representing the kernel I/O staging area.

Kernel Address-Space Allocation

The virtual-memory system implements a set of primitive functions for allocating and freeing
the page-aligned, page-size virtual-memory ranges that the kernel uses. These ranges may be
allocated either from the main kernel-address map or from a submap. The allocation routines
take a map and size as parameters but do not take an address. Thus, specific addresses within a
map cannot be selected. There are different allocation routines for obtaining pageable and
nonpageable memory ranges.

Pageable kernel virtual memory is allocated with kmap_alloc_wait(). A pageable range has
physical memory allocated on demand, and this memory can be written out to backing store by
the pageout daemon (described in Section 6.12) as part of the latter’s normal replacement policy.
The kmap_alloc_wait() function will block until address space is available. The
kmap_free_wakeup() function deallocates kernel pageable memory and wakes up any
processes waiting for address space in the specified map. Currently, pageable kernel memory is
used for temporary storage of exec arguments and for pipe buffering.

A nonpageable, or wired, range has physical memory assigned at the time of the call, and this
memory is not subject to replacement by the pageout daemon. Wired pages never cause a page
fault as that might result in a blocking operation. Wired memory is allocated from either the
general allocator malloc(), or the zone allocator described in the last two subsections of this
section.

The base functions used by the general and zone allocators for allocating wired memory are
kmem_malloc() and kmem_free(). Normally, the allocator will block to wait for memory to be
freed to satisfy the allocation if memory is not immediately available. The allocator has a
nonblocking option that protects callers against inadvertently blocking. Callers that hold
non-sleepable locks use the nonblocking option so they will fail if insufficient physical memory
is available to fill the requested range. This nonblocking option is used when allocating memory
at interrupt time and during other critical sections of code.

Historically, the two general-purpose allocators used kernel submaps to manage their address
space. In FreeBSD 10, the management of the allocators address space was replaced with the
vmem resource manager first described in Solaris [Bonwick, 1994; Bonwick & Adams, 2001]. At
system boot, the kernel address ranges associated with the wired-memory arena are fully
allocated in a single large piece and that piece of kernel memory is then managed by the vmem
resource allocator.

The motivation for the change to vmem is that the kernel-map allocator tends to fragment its
address space badly over time. The time to find a free piece of space goes up logarithmically with
the number of allocated pieces that it is managing. By contrast, vmem allocates space in
constant-time. The kernel-map allocator uses a first-fit strategy while vmem uses an
approximation to a best-fit strategy. Best fit results in lower fragmentation and less wasted
memory.

The data structures that vmem uses to manage its address-space arena are shown in Figure 6.7.
The granularity that it manages are single pages of memory. Shown across the bottom of Figure
6.7 is the set of pages that it is managing. The arena is broken up into the free memory (hashed)
and allocated memory (white). Each piece of free or allocated memory is described by a
boundary tag. All the boundary tags are linked together in a segment list sorted from lowest to
highest address.

Figure 6.7 Vmem data structures. Key: bt—boundary tag.

The boundary tags that reference allocated memory are kept in a hash table using their starting
address as their hash key. When a piece of memory is freed, its boundary tag is looked up and
removed from the hash table. If either (or both) of its neighbors on the sorted list of boundary
tags is free, they can be coalesced. The resulting free piece is then placed on the appropriate
freelist. When coalescing has occurred, any unneeded boundary tags are freed. Taking the
memory off the hash list when it is freed helps to detect multiple attempts to free the same

memory. A second attempt to free it will not find it on the hash list and can issue an appropriate
error.

The boundary tags that reference free memory are on power-of-two freelists where freelist[n] is
a list of free segments that are in the range 2 n to 2n+1–1. To allocate a segment, we search the
appropriate freelist for a segment large enough to satisfy the allocation. This approach, called
segregated fit, approximates best fit because any segment on the chosen freelist is a good fit
[Wilson et al., 1995].

Approximations to best fit are appealing because they exhibit low fragmentation in practice for a
wide variety of workloads [Johnstone & Wilson, 1998].

The algorithm for selecting a free segment depends on the allocation policy specified in the
allocation request. Given a requested size in the range 2 n to 2n+1–1, the following policies are
available:

• VM_BESTFIT: Search for the smallest segment on freelist[n] that can satisfy the allocation. If
none are found, search for the smallest segment on freelist[n + 1] that can satisfy the allocation.

• VM_INSTANTFIT: If the size is exactly 2n, take the first segment on freelist[n]. Otherwise,
take the first segment on freelist[n+1]. Any segment on this freelist is necessarily large enough
to satisfy the allocation, yielding constant-time performance with a reasonably good fit. Instant
fit is the default in FreeBSD because it guarantees constant-time performance, provides low
fragmentation in practice, and is easy to implement.

• VM_NEXTFIT: Ignore the freelists altogether and search the arena for the next free segment
after the one previously allocated. This option is not supported in FreeBSD 10. The vmem in
Solaris supports it for allocating resources like process identifiers.

There are many other techniques for choosing a suitable free segment in logarithmic time such
as keeping all free segments in a size-sorted tree. For a through survey, see Wilson et al. [1995].

Each vmem arena is protected by a single lock as allocations from the vmem arena are
infrequent. Most of the allocations are done by the general-purpose allocators that are described
in the last two subsections. The general purpose allocators manage their own arenas bringing
memory in from vmem when needed, and returning it to vmem when prompted to do so by the
pageout daemon. Thus, the fine-grained locking for handling multi-threaded allocations are in
these general purpose allocators.

The Slab Allocator

A slab is a collection of items of identical size. Figure 6.8 shows how slabs are allocated from the
vmem layer. As required by the vmem layer, each slab is a multiple of the page size. The size of
the slab is dependent on the size of the objects that it will contain. If a slab contains N objects,
then the internal fragmentation is at most 1/N. Thus, the choice of slab size can control the
amount of internal fragmentation. However, larger slabs are more likely to cause external
fragmentation since the probability of being able to reclaim a slab decreases as the number of
objects per slab increases.

Figure 6.8 Slab data structures.

In the Solaris implementation of vmem, the size selected for the slab when allocating large
objects must be big enough to hold at least eight of the objects so that waste is at most 12.5
percent. Objects smaller than an eighth of a page are allocated on a single-page slab.

FreeBSD 11 does not implement the Solaris policy. It limits the slab size to a single page unless
the object itself needs more than one page. Here, the allocation will be the number of pages
required to hold one object. Historically, the reason for the single-page limitation was to reduce
fragmentation in the kernel submap used by the slab allocator. Since the running time for the
kernel-map allocator was logarithmic in the number of map entries, the time to allocate memory
for the slab was affected by fragmentation. Going to primarily single-page requests mitigated
this bad behavior.

With the addition of the vmem allocator, these concerns have been reduced because it allocates
in constant-time regardless of fragmentation. However, the FreeBSD developers chose to gain
more operational experience with the vmem allocator before putting it out in a production
release with a more challenging workload.

Figure 6.8 shows three slabs. The top two slabs place the header that describes the slab
internally to the memory that holds the objects. The bottom slab places the header that
describes the slab in a separate allocation external to the memory that holds the objects. The
decision on whether to place the header internally or externally is based primarily on the size of
the objects. An external header is used if doing so makes it possible to fit an extra object in the
memory. For example, if an object is a power-of-2 size, then an internal header would allow one
fewer objects per slab than would be possible if an external header were used.

Most slabs have some unused space. FreeBSD 11 always puts the unused space at the end. In
Solaris, the unused space is sprinkled between the front and back in cache-alignment sized steps
to improve cache line utilization (hardware caching is described in Section 6.11). For example, if
the cache line is 64 bytes and the slab has 160 unused bytes, the slabs will start the object
allocations at 0-, 64-, and 128-byte offsets. Solaris reports significant performance improvement
using this scheme [Bonwick & Adams, 2001].

When an object is freed, the zone manager must determine the slab to which it belongs to be
able to return it. In Solaris, the slab is found using a hash table that maps the address of the
object to its corresponding slab header in the same way that the vmem system uses a hash table
to find the appropriate boundary tag. Instead of using a hash table, FreeBSD stores a pointer in
the vm_page structure that refers back to the slab header. The vm_page structure is found by
using pmap_kextract() to get the physical page address from the slab’s virtual address. The
physical address indexes the array of vm_page structures. Since every slab uses at least one
page, there is always a vm_page structure available to store the back pointer. Because wired
memory is not on any page queue, the existing page-queue linkage field can be used for this
purpose. Thus, no extra space must be added to the vm_page structure to support this
functionality.

Because the kernel must allocate a vm_page structure for every physical page of memory on the
machine, it is desirable to keep the vm_page structure as small as possible. To keep their size
small, vm_page structures do not contain a mutex to control access to their fields like most
other kernel data structures. Rather, there is a pool of mutexes from which a vm_page selects a
lock using a hash of its address. The result is some lock contention when multiple pages hash to
the same lock, but is far better than a single global lock.

The off-page slab header in Figure 6.8 shows its important fields. Slabs are allocated and
managed by kegs, described later in this section. Kegs use the linkage fields to track the slabs
that they are managing. The use of objects is tracked using the bitmask and the freecount. The
bitmask has one bit per object, set when it is free and cleared if it is in use. The freecount tracks
the number of available objects in the slab. When it reaches zero, all the objects have been

allocated. Finally the data-start field points to the starting location of the first object in the slab.
If the objects are offset from the beginning of the slab, the data-start pointer will reflect the
offset.

The Keg Allocator

A keg is a collection of slabs of items of identical size. Slabs are allocated to the keg as necessary.
Figure 6.9 shows how the keg data structure manages its collection of slabs. The keg tracks the
number of pages in each of its slabs, the number of objects held in each of its slabs, and a list of
its client zones. Typically, a keg has a single client zone, but it may have more than one. The keg
maintains its slabs in three lists:

• Those whose objects are currently all allocated

• Those whose objects are currently partially allocated

• Those whose objects are currently all free

Figure 6.9 Keg data structure.

When an allocation request is made to a keg, it first tries to allocate from a slab on its partially
allocated list. If the partially allocated list has no slabs, it tries to allocate from a slab on its fully
populated slab list. If the fully populated slab list has no slabs, it calls the vmem layer to allocate
a new slab of its selected number of pages. The slab is broken up into the number of objects that
it can hold as described above. The newly allocated slab has the requested object removed and is
placed on the partially allocated list.

When an item is freed, it is returned to the slab from which it came. If it is the first object to be
freed, the slab will move from the empty list to the partial list. If it is the last object to be freed,
the slab will move from the partial list to the fully populated list.

Items in a keg with a single client zone are type stable. The memory in the keg will not be used
for any other purpose. A structure in the keg need only be initialized the first time that it is
handed out for use. Later uses may assume that the initialized values will retain their contents
as of the previous free.

Objects are handed out and returned as needed. Only when the pageout daemon does a memory
callback is an unused slab of objects uninitialized and the slab freed. A callback is provided on
each object in the slab to allow any persistent state to be cleaned up before the slab memory is
freed.

The Zone Allocator

A zone manages a set of objects in one or more kegs. The zone allocator keeps track of the active
and free items, and provides functions for allocating items from the zone and for releasing them
back to make them available for later use. Figure 6.10 shows how the zone allocator manages the
objects in its zone. A zone typically gets its objects from a single keg, though it may source its
objects from multiple kegs. The role of the zone is to fill buckets with objects that it then makes
available to service allocation requests.

Figure 6.10 Zone and bucket data structures.

The details of a bucket are shown on the right of Figure 6.10. A bucket holds an array of pointers
to available objects. The size field gives the size of the array and count is the number of available
objects in the array. The count is equal to size when the array is full and zero when it is empty.

Unlike the global lock used by vmem and the slab allocator, each zone and its keg have their own
locks, so different zones can be accessed simultaneously without blocking. As described in the
next two subsections on kernel malloc() and the kernel zone allocator, most zones are used for
specific objects such as vnodes, process entries, etc. A set of zones are used by malloc() to supply
power-of-two sized objects ranging in size from 16 bytes to the number of bytes in a page. Since
each power-of-2 has its own zone, allocations for one power-of-2 size does not block allocations
for other power-of-2 sizes.

High demand on a single zone can still lead to lock contention. To aid performance on
multiprocessor systems, a zone provides separate buckets of objects to each CPU on the system.
Each CPU is able to allocate or free objects from its two buckets without the need for any lock.
The only requirement is that it needs to put a critical section around the insertion and removal
of an object from one of its buckets. As described in Section 4.3, a critical section prevents the
currently running thread from being preempted or moved to a different CPU.

As described in Section 4.4, the scheduler uses processor affinity to try to keep a thread running
on the same CPU. Objects such as process entries allocated from the CPU’s bucket are more
likely to already be in the cache for that processor. Thus, accesses to that structure are likely to
be faster than they would be if the object was drawn from a global pool.

Each CPU holds two buckets of size M, its current allocation bucket and its previous allocation
bucket. The reason for holding two buckets is to ensure that the CPU can allocate or free at least
M objects before it needs to get the zone lock to replenish its supply or to return a full bucket. If
it had only one bucket with just one object in it and two allocation requests, it would service the
first from its bucket and then need to get a new bucket to service the second allocation request.
If it then had two free requests, it would put the first object in its now-full bucket and then
would need to replace that bucket with an empty bucket to return the second object.

By having two buckets, it can simply switch the two buckets to continue servicing requests. If
both buckets become full, it can turn in a full one and replace it with an empty one. Or, if both
become empty, it can turn in an empty one and replace it with a full one. Once it has turned in
one bucket, it will be able to service at least M allocation or free requests before having to
replace one of its buckets.

The zone keeps a list of full buckets. When a CPU requests a full bucket, the zone returns one
from its list. If the list becomes empty, the zone allocates an empty bucket (from a bucket zone)
and requests that its keg fill it with objects. When a CPU has emptied a bucket, it returns it to its
bucket zone.

The level of contention for the keg lock can be controlled by the size of the bucket. If the number
of objects held by a bucket doubles, the number of requests to the keg drops by at least half.
FreeBSD tunes the size of the bucket based on the measured contention. Low rates of contention
get smaller buckets; high rates of contention get larger buckets.

The contention is measured by doing a trylock() for the keg lock when it is needed. If the
trylock() fails because some other CPU has the lock, the thread does a blocking lock. Once it gets
the lock, it increments the desired bucket size for its keg. Unlike the Solaris implementation, it is
not necessary to notify every CPU that the bucket size has changed. The size of each bucket is
stored in its header, so the bucket size can change over time. As new buckets are created, they
will have the larger size. Eventually, the older and smaller buckets will be retired and all the
buckets will have the new size. The more actively a bucket is used, the more quickly it will be
replaced, so the remaining small buckets are not involved in creating lock contention.

Zones only release memory when requested to do so by the paging daemon. Thus, if there is a
spike in demand for a zone, it will have a long list of full buckets. When the paging daemon
requests that memory be handed back, the zone walks its list of full buckets and, for each bucket,
returns all its objects to its keg and frees the bucket. In turn, the keg returns the objects to its
slabs. Once the return of objects from the zone to the keg is completed, the keg returns all the
slabs on its full list to vmem. The vmem layer then unwires and frees its areas of unused pages
so that they are available for other uses. When allocating the freed areas in the future, the vmem
layer must first request that the kernel mapping layer populate them with wired pages.

During periods of heavy paging activity, the paging daemon can request that the size of buckets
be reduced. If memory becomes critically low, the paging daemon can request that the per-CPU
caches be flushed. Per-CPU cache flushing requires binding a flushing thread to each CPU in
succession so that it can access the private per-CPU bucket pointers.

The zone allocator provides the uma_zone_set_max() function to set the upper limit of items in
the zone. The limit on the total number of items in the zone includes the allocated and free items,
including the items in the per-CPU caches. On multiprocessor systems, it may not be possible to
allocate a new item for a particular CPU because the limit has been hit and all the free items are
in the caches of the other CPUs. It is not possible to reclaim buckets from the CPU caches
because the caches are not protected by locks. Only a thread running on the CPU itself can enter
a critical section to manipulate the cache.

Kernel Malloc

The kernel provides a generalized nonpageable memory-allocation and freeing mechanism that
can handle requests of arbitrary size, as well as allocate memory at interrupt time. Malloc() is
the preferred way to allocate kernel memory other than large, fixed-size structures that are
better handled by the zone allocator. This mechanism has an interface similar to that of the
well-known memory allocator provided for applications programmers through the C library
routines malloc() and free(). Like the C library interface, the allocation routine takes a
parameter specifying the size of memory that is needed. The range of sizes for memory requests
are not constrained. The free routine takes a pointer to the storage being freed, but it does not
require the size of the piece of memory being freed.

Often, the kernel needs a memory allocation for the duration of a single system call. In a user
process, such short-term memory would be allocated on the run-time stack. Because the kernel
has a limited run-time stack, it is not feasible to allocate even moderate blocks of memory on it.
Consequently, such memory must be allocated dynamically. For example, when the system must
translate a pathname, it must allocate a 1-Kbyte buffer to hold the name. Other blocks of
memory must be more persistent than a single system call and have to be allocated from
dynamic memory. Examples include protocol control blocks that remain throughout the
duration of a network connection.

The design specification for a kernel memory allocator is similar, but not identical, to the design
criteria for a user-level memory allocator. One criterion for a memory allocator is that it make
good use of the physical memory. Use of memory is measured by the amount of memory needed
to hold a set of allocations at any point in time. Percentage utilization is expressed as

Here, requested is the sum of the memory that has been requested and not yet freed; required is
the amount of memory that has been allocated for the pool from which the requests are filled.
An allocator requires more memory than requested because of fragmentation and a need to have
a ready supply of free memory for future requests. A perfect memory allocator would have a
utilization of 100 percent. In practice, a 50 percent utilization is considered good [Korn & Vo,
1985].

Good memory utilization in the kernel is more important than in user processes. Because user
processes run in virtual memory, unused parts of their address space can be paged out. Thus,
pages in the process address space that are part of the required pool and are not being requested

do not need to tie up physical memory. Since the kernel malloc arena is not paged, all pages in
the required pool are held by the kernel and cannot be used for other purposes. To keep the
kernel-utilization percentage as high as possible, the kernel should release unused memory in
the required pool rather than hold it, as is typically done with user processes.

The most important criterion for a kernel memory allocator is that it be fast. A slow memory
allocator will degrade the system performance because memory allocation is done frequently.
Speed of allocation is more critical when executing in the kernel than it is in user code because
the kernel must allocate many data structures that user processes can allocate cheaply on their
run-time stack. In addition, the kernel represents the platform on which all user processes run,
and if it is slow, it will degrade the performance of every process that is running.

Another problem with a slow memory allocator is that programmers of frequently used kernel
interfaces will think that they cannot afford to use the memory allocator as their primary one.
Instead, they will build their own memory allocator on top of the original by maintaining their
own pool of memory blocks. Multiple allocators reduce the efficiency with which memory is
used. The kernel ends up with many different free lists of memory instead of a single free list
from which all allocations can be drawn. For example, consider the case of two subsystems that
need memory. If they have their own free lists, the amount of memory tied up in the two lists
will be the sum of the greatest amount of memory that each of the two subsystems has ever used.
If they share a free list, the amount of memory tied up in the free list may be as low as the
greatest amount of memory that either subsystem used. As the number of subsystems grows, the
savings from having a single free list grow.

The kernel memory allocator uses a hybrid strategy. Small allocations are done using a
power-of-2 list strategy. Using the zone allocator, the kernel creates a set of zones with one for
each power-of-two between 16 and the page size. The allocation simply requests a block of
memory from the appropriate zone. Usually, the zone will have an available piece of memory in
one of the buckets of the CPU on which it is running that it can return. Only if the CPUs buckets
are both empty will the zone allocator have to do a full allocation. As described in the zone
allocator subsection, when forced to do an additional allocation, it fills a whole bucket with the
appropriately sized pieces. This strategy speeds future allocations because several pieces of
memory become available as a result of the call into the allocator.

Freeing a small block is also fast. The memory is simply returned to the zone from which it
came.

Because of the inefficiency of power-of-2 allocation strategies for allocations larger than a page,
the allocation method for blocks larger than a page is based on allocating pieces of memory in
multiples of pages. The algorithm switches to the slower but more memory-efficient strategy for

allocation sizes larger than a page using the vmem allocator. This value is chosen because the
power-of-2 algorithm yields sizes of 2, 4, 8, 16, . . ., n pages, whereas the large block algorithm
that allocates in multiples of pages yields sizes of 2, 3, 4, 5, . . ., n pages. Thus, for allocations of
greater than one page, the large block algorithm will use less than or equal to the number of
pages used by the power-of-2 algorithm, so the threshold between the large and small allocators
is set at one page.

Large allocations are first rounded up to be a multiple of the page size. The allocator then uses
the algorithm described in the previous subsection to find space in the vmem arena.

Because the size is not specified when a block of memory is freed, the allocator must keep track
of the sizes of the pieces that it has handed out. Many allocators increase the allocation request
by a few bytes to create space to store the size of the block in a header just before the allocation.
However, this strategy doubles the memory requirement for allocations that request a
power-of-two-size block. Therefore, the kernel memory allocators store the size externally. For
allocations up to the size of a page that are allocated from a zone, the zone allocator associates
the size information with the memory page. Locating the allocation size outside the allocated
block improved utilization far more than expected. The reason is that many allocations in the
kernel are for blocks of memory whose size is exactly a power of 2. The size of these requests
would be nearly doubled if the more typical strategy were used. Now they can be accommodated
with no wasted memory.

The allocator can be called from anywhere in the kernel. Clients show their willingness (and
ability) to wait with a flag to the allocation routine. For clients that are willing to wait, the
allocator guarantees that their request will succeed. Thus, these clients do not need to check the
return value from the allocator. If memory is unavailable and the client cannot wait, the
allocator returns a null pointer. These clients must be prepared to cope with this (typically
infrequent) condition. Clients that cannot wait because they hold a short-term lock often release
it, wait for memory to become available, then reacquire their lock. The other strategy is to give
up and hope to succeed later.

Kernel Zone Allocator

Some commonly allocated items in the kernel such as process, thread, vnode, and control-block
structures are not well handled by the general purpose malloc() interface. These structures
share several characteristics:

• They tend to be large and hence wasteful of space. For example, the process structure is about
550 bytes, which when rounded up to a power-of-2 size requires 1024 bytes of memory.

• They tend to be common. Because they are individually wasteful of space, collectively they
waste too much space compared to a denser representation.

• They are often linked together in long lists. If the allocation of each structure begins on a page
boundary, then the list pointers will all be at the same offset from the beginning of the page.
When traversing these structures, the linkage pointers will all be competing for a small set of
hardware cache lines causing many steps along the list to produce a cache miss, making the list
traversal slow.

• These structures often contain many lists and locks that must be initialized before use. If there
is a dedicated pool of memory for each structure, then these substructures need to be initialized
only when the pool is first created rather than after every allocation.

For these reasons, FreeBSD allocates a separate zone for each of these kernel structures. Thus,
there is a zone that contains only process structures, another that contains only vnodes, etc.

A new zone is created with the uma_zcreate() function. It must specify the size of the items to
be allocated and register two sets of functions. The first set is called whenever an item is
allocated or freed from the zone. These routines typically track the number of allocated items.
The second set is called whenever memory is allocated or freed from the zone’s keg. When a new
slab of memory is allocated to the zone’s keg, all the locks and list heads for each object in the
new slab are initialized. When making allocations from the zone, the kernel knows that the locks
and list heads are already initialized and ready for use. Similarly, they need not be destroyed
when the structure is freed. Only when memory is reclaimed from the zone’s keg is it necessary
to destroy the locks.

Items are allocated with uma_zalloc(), which takes a zone identifier returned by uma_zcreate().
Items are freed with uma_zfree(), which takes a zone identifier and a pointer to the item to be
freed. No size is needed when allocating or freeing, since the item size was set when the zone
was created.

The creation of separate zones runs counter to the desire to keep all memory in a single pool to
maximize utilization efficiency. However, the benefits from segregating memory for the set of
structures for which the zone allocator is appropriate outweighs the efficiency gains from
keeping them in the general pool. The zone allocator minimizes the waste of the separate pools
by freeing memory from a zone based on a reduction in demand for objects from the zone and
when notified of a memory shortage by the pageout daemon.

6.4 Per-Process Resources

As we have already seen, a process requires a process entry and a kernel stack. The next major
resource that must be allocated is its virtual memory. The initial virtual-memory requirements
are defined by the header in the process’s executable. These requirements include the space
needed for the program text, the initialized data, the uninitialized data, and the run-time stack.
During the initial startup of the program, the kernel will build the data structures necessary to
describe these four areas. Most programs need to allocate additional memory. The kernel
typically provides this additional memory by expanding the uninitialized data area.

Most FreeBSD programs use shared libraries. The header for the executable will describe the
libraries that it needs (usually the C library, and possibly others). The kernel is not responsible
for locating and mapping these libraries during the initial execution of the program. Finding,
mapping, and creating the dynamic linkages to these libraries is handled by an interpreter
specified in the header. For ELF binaries, the interpreter is /libexec/ld-elf.so. This startup
code runs before control is passed to the main entry point of the program.

FreeBSD Process Virtual-Address Space

The initial layout of the address space for a process is shown in Figure 6.11. As discussed in
Section 6.2, the address space for a process is described by that process’s vmspace structure.
The contents of the address space are defined by a list of vm_map_entry structures, each
structure describing a region of virtual address space that resides between a start and an end
address. A region describes a range of memory that is being treated in the same way. For
example, the text of a program is a region that is read-only and executable, and is demand paged
from the file on disk that contains it. Thus, the vm_map_entry also contains the protection
mode to be applied to the region that it describes. Each vm_map_entry structure also has a
pointer to the vm_object that provides the initial data for the region. Finally, each
vm_map_entry structure has an offset that describes where within the vm_object the mapping
begins.

Figure 6.11 Layout of an address space.

The example shown in Figure 6.11 represents a process just after it has started execution. The
first two map entries both point to the same vm_object; here, that vm_object is the executable.
The executable consists of two parts: the text of the program that resides at the beginning of the
file and the initialized data area that follows at the end of the text. Thus, the first
vm_map_entry describes a read-only region that maps the text of the program. The second
vm_map_entry describes the copy-on-write region that maps the initialized data of the

program that follows the program text in the file (copy-on-write is described in Section 6.6). The
offset field in the entry reflects this different starting location. The third and fourth
vm_map_entry structures describe the uninitialized data and stack areas, respectively. Both of
these areas are represented by anonymous vm_objects. An anonymous vm_object provides
a zero-filled page on first use and arranges to store modified pages in the swap area if memory
becomes tight. Anonymous vm_objects are described in more detail later in this section.

Page-Fault Dispatch

When a process attempts to access a piece of its address space that is not currently resident, a
page fault occurs. The page-fault handler in the kernel is presented with the virtual address that
caused the fault and the type of access that was attempted (execute, read, or write). The fault is
handled with the following four steps:

1. Find the vmspace structure for the faulting process; from that structure, find the
binary-search tree for its vm_map_entries.

2. Look up the faulting address. If the lookup fails, the faulting address is not within any valid
part of the address space for the process, so send the process a segment fault signal. Lookups are
done using Tarjan and Sleator’s top-down splay algorithm. This algorithm reorders the tree so
that the most recently found entry is moved to the top of the tree. Recently found entries remain
near the top of the tree. The benefit of this algorithm is that it takes advantage of the frequent
locality of page faults. The drawback is that lookups often need to exclusively acquire the tree’s
lock to do the permutation causing lock contention between page-faulting threads sharing the
same address space.

3. Having found a vm_map_entry that contains the faulting address, convert that address to an
offset within the underlying vm_object. Calculate the offset within the vm_object as

object_offset = fault_address
  - vm_map_entry->start_address
  + vm_map_entry->object_offset

Subtract off the start address to give the offset into the region mapped by the vm_map_entry.
Add in the object_offset to give the absolute offset of the page within the vm_object.

4. Present the absolute object_offset to the underlying vm_object, which allocates a vm_page
structure and uses its pager to fill the page. The vm_object then returns a pointer to the
vm_page structure, which is mapped into the faulting location in the process address space.

Once the appropriate page has been mapped into the faulting location, the page-fault handler
returns and reexecutes the faulting instruction.

Mapping to Vm_objects

A vm_object holds information about either a file or an area of anonymous memory. Whether a
file is mapped by a single process in the system or by many processes in the system, it will
always be represented by a single vm_object. Thus, the vm_object is responsible for
maintaining all the state about those pages of a file that are resident. All references to that file
will be described by vm_map_entry structures that reference the same vm_object. A vm_object
never stores the same page of a file in more than one physical-memory page, so all mappings
will get a consistent view of the file.

A vm_object stores the following information:

• A collection of the pages for that vm_object that are currently resident in main memory; a
page may be mapped into multiple address spaces, but it is always claimed by exactly one
vm_object

• A count of the number of vm_map_entry structures or other vm_objects that reference the
vm_object

• The size of the file or anonymous area described by the vm_object

• The number of memory-resident pages held by the vm_object

• For shadow objects, a pointer to the next vm_object in the chain (shadow objects are described
in Section 6.5)

• The type of pager for the vm_object; the pager is responsible for providing the data to fill a
page and for providing a place to store the page when it has been modified (pagers are covered
in Section 6.10)

There are three types of vm_objects in the system:

• Named vm_objects represent files; they may also represent hardware devices that are able to
provide mapped memory such as frame buffers.

• Anonymous vm_objects represent areas of memory that are zero filled on first use; they are
abandoned when they are no longer needed.

• Shadow vm_objects hold private copies of pages that have been modified; they are abandoned
when they are no longer referenced.

Shadow and all anonymous vm_objects (other than POSIX shmem) are often referred to as
“internal” vm_objects in the source code. The type of a vm_object is defined by the type of pager
that it uses to fulfill page-fault requests.

A named vm_object uses the device pager if it maps a hardware device, the vnode pager if it is
backed by a file in the filesystem, or the swap pager if it backs a POSIX shmem object. The
device pager services a page fault by returning the appropriate physical address for the device
being mapped. Since the device memory is separate from the main memory on the machine, it
will never be selected by the pageout daemon. Thus, the device pager never has to handle a
pageout request.

The vnode pager provides an interface to vm_objects that represent files in the filesystem. The
vnode pager keeps a reference to a vnode that represents the file being mapped in the vm_object.
The vnode pager services a pagein request by doing a read on the vnode; it services a pageout
request by doing a write to the vnode. Thus, the file itself stores the modified pages. In cases
where it is not appropriate to modify the file directly, such as an executable that does not want
to modify its initialized data pages, the kernel must interpose a shadow vm_object between the
vm_map_entry and the vm_object representing the file; see Section 6.5.

Anonymous or POSIX shmem vm_objects use the swap pager. An anonymous or POSIX shmem
vm_object services pagein requests by getting a page of memory from the free list and zeroing
that page. When a pageout request is made for a page for the first time, the swap pager is
responsible for finding an unused page in the swap area, writing the contents of the page to that
space, and recording where that page is stored. If a pagein request comes for a page that had
been previously paged out, the swap pager is responsible for finding where it stored that page
and reading back the contents into a free page in memory. A later pageout request for that page
will cause the page to be written out to the previously allocated location.

Shadow vm_objects also use the swap pager. They work just like anonymous or POSIX shmem
vm_objects, except that the swap pager does not need to provide their initial pages. The initial
pages are created by the vm_fault() routine by copying existing pages in response to
copy-on-write faults.

Further details on the pagers are given in Section 6.10.

Vm_objects

Each virtual-memory vm_object has a pager type, pager handle, and pager private data
associated with it. The vm_objects that map files have a vnode-pager type associated with them.
The handle for the vnode-pager type is a pointer to the vnode on which to do the I/O, and the
private data is the size of the vnode at the time that the mapping was done. Every vnode that
maps a file has a vm_object associated with it. When a fault occurs for a file that is mapped into
memory, the vm_object associated with the file can be checked to see whether the faulted page
is resident. If the page is resident, it can be used. If the page is not resident, a new page is
allocated, and the vnode pager is requested to fill the new page.

Caching in the virtual-memory system is done by a vm_object that is associated with a file or
region that it represents. Each vm_object contains pages that are the cached contents of its
associated file or region. All vm_objects are reclaimed as soon as their reference count drops to
zero. Pages associated with reclaimed vm_objects are moved to the free list. Each vm_object
that represents anonymous memory is reclaimed as part of cleaning up a process as it exits.
However, vm_objects that refer to files are persistent. When the reference count on a vnode
drops to zero, it is stored on a least recently used (LRU) list known as the vnode cache;
vnodes are described in Section 7.3. The vnode does not release its vm_object until the vnode is
reclaimed and reused for another file. Unless there is pressure on the memory, the vm_object
associated with the vnode will retain its pages. If the vnode is reactivated and a page fault occurs
before the associated page is freed, that page can be used rather than being reread from disk.

This cache is similar to the text cache found in earlier versions of BSD in that it provides
performance improvements for short-running but frequently executed programs. Frequently
executed programs include those used to list the contents of directories, show system status, or
perform the intermediate steps involved in compiling a program. For example, consider a
typical application that is made up of multiple source files. Each of several compiler steps must
be run on each file in turn. The first time that the compiler is run, the executable files associated
with its various components are read in from the disk. For each file compiled thereafter, the
previously created executable files are found, as well as any previously read header files,
alleviating the need to reload them from disk each time.

Vm_objects to Pages

When the system is first booted, the kernel looks through the physical memory on the machine
to find out how many pages are available. After the physical memory that will be dedicated to
the kernel has been deducted, all the remaining pages of physical memory are described by

vm_page structures. These vm_page structures are all initially placed on the memory free list.
As the system starts running and processes begin to execute, they generate page faults. Each
page fault is matched to the vm_object that covers the faulting piece of address space. The first
time that a piece of a vm_object is faulted, it must allocate a page from the free list and must
initialize that page either by zero-filling it or by reading its contents from the filesystem. That
page then becomes associated with the vm_object. Thus, each vm_object has its current set of
vm_page structures linked to it.

If memory becomes scarce, the paging daemon will search for pages that have not been used
actively. Before these pages can be used by a new vm_object, they must be removed from all the
processes that currently have them mapped, and any modified contents must be saved by the
vm_object that owns them. Once cleaned, the pages can be removed from the vm_object that
owns them and can be placed on the free list for reuse. The details of the paging system are
described in Section 6.12.

6.5 Shared Memory

In Sections 6.2 and 6.4, we explained how the address space of a process is organized. This
section shows the additional data structures needed to support shared address space between
processes. Traditionally, the address space of each process was completely isolated from the
address space of all other processes running on the system. The only exception was read-only
sharing of program text. All interprocess communication was done through well-defined
channels that passed through the kernel: pipes, sockets, files, and special devices. The benefit of
this isolated approach is that, no matter how badly a process destroys its own address space, it
cannot affect the address space of any other process running on the system. Each process can
precisely control when data are sent or received; it can also precisely identify the locations
within its address space that are read or written. The drawback of this approach is that all
interprocess communication requires at least two system calls: one from the sending process
and one from the receiving process. For high volumes of interprocess communication, especially
when small packets of data are being exchanged, the overhead of the system calls dominates the
communications cost.

Shared memory provides a way to reduce interprocess-communication costs dramatically. Two
or more processes that wish to communicate map the same piece of read–write memory into
their address space. Once all the processes have mapped the memory into their address space,
any changes to that piece of memory are visible to all the other processes, without any
intervention by the kernel. Thus, interprocess communication can be achieved without any
system-call overhead other than the cost of the initial mapping. The drawback to this approach
is that, if a process that has the memory mapped corrupts the data structures in that memory,

all the other processes mapping that memory also see the corrupted data structures. In addition,
there is the complexity faced by the application developer who must develop data structures to
control access to the shared memory and must cope with the race conditions inherent in
manipulating and controlling such data structures that are being accessed concurrently.

Some UNIX variants have a kernel-based semaphore mechanism to provide the needed
serialization of access to the shared memory. However, both getting and setting such
semaphores require system calls. The overhead of using such semaphores is comparable to that
of using the traditional interprocess-communication methods. Unfortunately, these semaphores
have all the complexity of shared memory, yet confer little of its speed advantage. The primary
reason to introduce the complexity of shared memory is for the commensurate speed gain. If
this gain is to be obtained, most of the data-structure locking needs to be done in the shared
memory segment itself. The kernel-based semaphores should be used for only those rare cases
where there is contention for a lock and one process must wait. Consequently, modern
interfaces, such as POSIX Pthreads, are designed such that the semaphores can be located in the
shared memory region. The common case of setting or clearing an uncontested semaphore can
be done by the user process, without calling the kernel. There are two cases where a process
must perform a system call. If a process tries to set an already-locked semaphore, it must call
the kernel to block until the semaphore is available. This system call has little effect on
performance because the lock is contested, so it is impossible to proceed, and the kernel must be
invoked to do a context switch anyway. If a process clears a semaphore that is wanted by
another process, it must call the kernel to awaken that process. Since most locks are uncontested,
the applications can run at full speed without kernel intervention.

Mmap Model

When two processes wish to create an area of shared memory, they must have some way to
name the piece of memory that they wish to share, and they must be able to describe its size and
initial contents. The system interface describing an area of shared memory accomplishes all
these goals by using files as the basis for describing a shared memory segment. A process creates
a shared memory segment by using

void *addr = mmap(
  void *addr,     /* base address */
  size_t len,    /* length of region */
  int prot,     /* protection of region */
  int flags,    /* mapping flags */

  int fd,       /* file to map */
  off_t offset); /* offset to begin mapping */

to map the file referenced by descriptor fd, starting at file offset offset into its address space,
starting at addr and continuing for len bytes with access permission prot. The flags parameter
allows a process to specify whether it wants to make a shared or private mapping. Changes
made to a shared mapping are written back to the file and are visible to other processes.
Changes made to a private mapping are not written back to the file and are not visible to other
processes. Two processes that wish to share a piece of memory request a shared mapping of the
same file into their address space. Thus, the existing and well-understood filesystem namespace
identifies shared objects. The contents of the file are used as the initial value of the memory
segment. All changes made to the mapping are reflected back into the contents of the file, so
long-term state can be maintained in the shared memory region, even across invocations of the
sharing processes.

Some        applications   want     to   use   shared    memory      purely    as    a   short-term
interprocess-communication mechanism. They need an area of memory that is initially zeroed
and whose contents are abandoned when they are done using it. Such processes want neither to
pay the relatively high startup cost associated with paging in the contents of a file to initialize a
shared memory segment nor to pay the shutdown costs of writing modified pages back to the file
when they are done with the memory. Although FreeBSD does provide the limited and quirky
naming scheme of the System V shmem interface as a rendezvous mechanism for such
short-term shared memory (see Section 7.2), the designers ultimately decided that all naming of
memory objects for mmap should use the filesystem namespace. To provide an efficient
mechanism for short-term shared memory, mappings that do not require stability across system
reboots use the MAP_NOSYNC flag to avoid the overhead of periodic syncing of dirty pages.
When this flag is specified, dirty pages are only written to the filesystem when memory is in high
demand.

When a mapping is no longer needed, it can be removed using

munmap(void *addr, size_t len);

The munmap system call removes any mappings that exist in the address space, starting at addr
and continuing for len bytes. There are no constraints between previous mappings and a later
munmap. The specified range may be a subset of a previous mmap, or it may encompass an area
that contains many mmap’ed files. When a process exits, the system does an implied munmap
over its entire address space.

During its initial mapping, a process can set the protections on a page to allow reading, writing,
and/or execution. The process can change these protections later by using

mprotect(const void *address, int length, int protection);

This feature can be used by debuggers when they are trying to track down a memory-corruption
bug. By disabling writing on the page containing the data structure that is being corrupted, the
debugger can trap all writes to the page and verify that they are correct before allowing them to
occur.

Traditionally, programming for real-time systems has been done with specially written
operating systems. In the interests of reducing the costs of real-time applications and of using
the skills of the large body of UNIX programmers, companies developing real-time applications
now use UNIX-based systems for writing these applications. Two fundamental requirements of
a real-time system are guaranteed maximum latencies and predictable execution times.
Predictable execution time is difficult to provide in a virtual-memory-based system, since a page
fault may occur at any point in the execution of a program, resulting in a potentially large delay
while the faulting page is retrieved from the disk or network. To avoid paging delays, the system
allows a process to force its pages to be resident, and not paged out, by using

mlock(const void *address, size_t length);

As long as the process limits its accesses to the locked area of its address space, it can be sure
that it will not be delayed by page faults. To prevent a single process from acquiring all the
physical memory on the machine to the detriment of all other processes, the system imposes a
resource limit to control the amount of memory that may be locked. Typically, this limit is set to
no more than one-third of the physical memory, and it may be set to zero by a system
administrator who does not want random processes to be able to monopolize system resources.

When a process has finished with its time-critical use of an mlock’ed region, it can release the
lock on the pages using

munlock(const void *address, size_t length);

After the munlock call, the pages in the specified address range are still accessible, but they may
be paged out if memory is needed and they are not accessed.

An application may need to ensure that certain records are committed to disk without forcing
the writing of all the dirty pages of a file done by the fsync system call. For example, a database
program may want to commit a single piece of metadata without writing back all the dirty blocks
in its database file. A process does this selective synchronization using

msync(void *address, int length, int flags);

Only those modified pages within the specified address range are written back to the filesystem.
The msync system call has no effect on anonymous regions.

Shared Mapping

When multiple processes map the same file into their address space, the system must ensure
that all the processes view the same set of memory pages. As shown in Sections 6.2 and 6.4, each
file that is being used actively by a client of the virtual-memory system is represented by a
vm_object. Each mapping that a process has to a piece of a file is described by a vm_map_entry
structure. An example of two processes mapping the same file into their address space is shown
in Figure 6.12. When a page fault occurs in one of these processes, the process’s vm_map_entry
references the vm_object to find the appropriate page. Since all mappings reference the same
vm_object, the processes will all get references to the same set of physical memory, thus
ensuring that changes made by one process will be visible in the address spaces of the other
processes as well.

Figure 6.12 Multiple mappings to a file.

Two processes sharing a mapping do not have to place it at the same virtual address in their
address spaces. Moreover, a process may have two or more vm_map entries to the same file (or
region of that file) in its address space. For example, when running an executable, a process has
a vm_map entry referencing the text portion of the executable and a vm_map entry referencing
the initialized-data portion of the executable.

Private Mapping

A process may request a private mapping of a file. A private mapping has two main effects:

1. Changes made to the memory mapping the file are not reflected back into the mapped file.

2. Changes made to the memory mapping the file are not visible to other processes mapping the
file.

An example of the use of a private mapping would be during program debugging. The debugger
will request a private mapping of the program text so that, when it sets a breakpoint, the
modification is not written back into the executable stored on the disk and is not visible to the
other (presumably nondebugging) processes executing the program.

The kernel uses shadow vm_objects to prevent changes made by a process from being reflected
back to the underlying vm_object. The use of a shadow vm_object is shown in Figure 6.13.
When the initial private mapping is requested, the file vm_object is mapped into the
requesting-process address space, with copy-on-write semantics.

Figure 6.13 Use of a shadow vm_object for a private mapping.

If the process attempts to write a page of the vm_object, a page fault occurs and traps into the
kernel. If this fault is the first for the private mapping to the vm_object, then a new shadow
vm_object must be created. First, a new shadow vm_object is allocated with a pager type of
swap (pagers are described in Section 6.10). The new shadow vm_object is set to point to the
original vm_object that it will shadow. The faulting vm_map_entry is then changed to
reference the shadow vm_object. The kernel makes a copy of the page to be modified and hangs
it from the shadow vm_object. In this example, process A has modified page 0 of the file
vm_object. The kernel has copied page 0 to the shadow vm_object that is being used to provide
the private mapping for process A.

If free memory is limited, it would be better simply to move the modified page from the file
vm_object to the shadow vm_object. The move would reduce the immediate demand on the free
memory, because a new page would not have to be allocated. The drawback to this optimization
is that, if there is a later access to the file vm_object by some other process, the kernel will have
to allocate a new page. The kernel will also have to pay the cost of doing an I/O operation to
reload the page contents. In FreeBSD, the virtual-memory system never moves a page from a file
vm_object rather than copying it.

When a page fault for the private mapping occurs, the kernel traverses the list of vm_objects
headed by the vm_map_entry, looking for the faulted page. The first vm_object in the chain
that has the desired page is the one that is used. If the search gets to the final vm_object on the
chain without finding the desired page, then the page is requested from that final vm_object.
Thus, pages on a shadow vm_object will be used in preference to the same pages in the file
vm_object itself. The details of page-fault handling are given in Section 6.11.

When a process removes a mapping from its address space (either explicitly from an munmap
request or implicitly when the address space is freed on process exit), pages held by its shadow
vm_object are not written back to the file vm_object. The shadow-vm_object pages are simply
placed back on the memory free list for immediate reuse.

When a process forks, it does not want changes to its private mappings made after it forked to
be visible in its child; similarly, the child does not want its changes to be visible in its parent.
The result is that each process needs to create a shadow vm_object if it continues to make
changes in a private mapping. When process A in Figure 6.13 forks, a set of shadow-vm_object
chains is created, as shown in Figure 6.14. In this example, process A modified page 0 before it
forked and then later modified page 1. Its modified version of page 1 hangs off its new shadow
vm_object, so those modifications will not be visible to its child. Similarly, its child has modified
page 0. If the child were to modify page 0 in the original shadow vm_object, that change would

be visible in its parent. Thus, the child process must make a new copy of page 0 in its own
shadow vm_object.

Figure 6.14 Shadow-object chains.

If the system runs short of memory, the kernel may need to reclaim inactive memory held in a
shadow vm_object. The kernel assigns to the swap pager the task of backing the shadow
vm_object. The swap pager sets up data structures (described in Section 6.10) that can describe
the entire contents of the shadow vm_object. It then allocates enough swap space to hold the
requested shadow pages and writes them to that area. These pages can then be freed for other
uses. If a later page fault requests a swapped-out page, then a new page of memory is allocated
and its contents are reloaded with an I/O from the swap area.

Collapsing of Shadow Chains

When a process with a private mapping removes that mapping either explicitly with an munmap
system call or implicitly by exiting, its parent or child process may be left with a chain of shadow
vm_objects. Usually, these chains of shadow vm_objects can be collapsed into a single shadow
vm_object, often freeing up memory as part of the collapse. Consider what happens when
process A exits in Figure 6.14. First, shadow vm_object 3 can be freed along with its associated
page of memory. This deallocation leaves shadow vm_objects 1 and 2 in a chain with no
intervening references. Thus, these two vm_objects can be collapsed into a single shadow
vm_object. Since they both contain a copy of page 0, and since only the page 0 in shadow
vm_object 2 can be accessed by the remaining child process, the page 0 in shadow vm_object 1
can be freed along with shadow vm_object 1 itself.

If the child of process A were to exit instead, then shadow vm_object 2 and the associated page
of memory could be freed. Shadow vm_objects 1 and 3 would then be in a chain that would be
eligible for collapse. Here, there are no common pages, so vm_object 3 would retain its own
page 1 and acquire page 0 from shadow vm_object 1. Vm_object 1 would then be freed. In
addition to merging the pages from the two vm_objects, the collapse operation requires a
similar merger of any swap space that has been allocated by the two vm_objects. If page 2 had
been copied to vm_object 3 and page 4 had been copied to vm_object 1, but these pages were
later reclaimed, the pager for vm_object 3 would hold a swap block for page 2, and the pager for
vm_object 1 would hold a swap block for page 4. Before freeing vm_object 1, its swap block for
page 4 would have to be moved over to vm_object 3.

A performance problem can arise if either a process or its children repeatedly fork. Without
some intervention, they can create long chains of shadow vm_objects. If the processes are
long-lived, the system does not get an opportunity to collapse these shadow-vm_object chains.
Traversing these long chains of shadow vm_objects to resolve page faults is time consuming,
and many inaccessible pages can build up forcing the system to needlessly page them out to
reclaim them.

One alternative would be to calculate the number of live references to a page after each
copy-on-write fault. When only one live reference remained, the page could be moved to the
shadow vm_object that still referenced it. When all the pages had been moved out of a shadow
vm_object, it could be removed from the chain. For example, in Figure 6.14, when the child of
process A wrote to page 0, a copy of page 0 was made in shadow vm_object 2. At that point, the
only live reference to page 0 in vm_object 1 was from process A. Thus, the page 0 in vm_object 1
could be moved to vm_object 3. That would leave vm_object 1 with no pages, so it could be
reclaimed leaving vm_objects 2 and 3 pointing at the file vm_object directly. Unfortunately, this

strategy would add considerable overhead to the page-fault handling routine which would
noticeably slow the overall performance of the system, so FreeBSD does not make this
optimization.

FreeBSD uses a lower-cost heuristic to reduce the copying of shadow pages. When a page of a
top-level shadow object is faulted, the kernel checks whether a lower-level shadow object
contains a copy of the page. If that lower-level shadow object has the page and is referenced only
by the top-level shadow object, (i.e., in principle the chain could be collapsed) the page is moved
rather than copied from the lower-level shadow object to the top-level shadow object and
mapped with write access.

Private Snapshots

When a process makes read accesses to a private mapping of a vm_object, it continues to see
changes made to that vm_object by other processes that are writing to the vm_object through
the filesystem or that have a shared mapping to the vm_object. When a process makes a write
access to a private mapping of an vm_object, a snapshot of the corresponding page of the
vm_object is made and is stored in the shadow vm_object, and the modification is made to that
snapshot. Thus, further changes to that page made by other processes that are writing to the
page through the filesystem or that have a shared mapping to the vm_object are no longer
visible. However, changes to unmodified pages of the vm_object continue to be visible. This mix
of changing and unchanging parts of the file can be confusing.

To provide a more consistent view of a file, a process may want to take a snapshot of the file at
the time that it is initially privately mapped. Historically, both Mach and 4.4BSD provided a
copy vm_object whose effect was to take a snapshot of a vm_object at the time that the private
mapping was set up. The copy vm_object tracked changes to a vm_object by other processes
and kept original copies of any pages that changed. Only Mac OS/X implemented copy
vm_objects, and there are no major applications that depend on them. The copy-vm_object
code in the virtual-memory system was large and complex, and it noticeably slowed
virtual-memory performance. Consequently, copy vm_objects were deemed unnecessary and
were removed from FreeBSD as part of the early cleanup and performance work done on the
virtual-memory system. Applications that want to get a snapshot of a file can do so by reading it
into their address space or by making a copy of it in the filesystem and then referring to the
copy.

6.6 Creation of a New Process

Processes are created with a fork system call. The fork is usually followed shortly thereafter by
an exec system call that overlays the virtual address space of the child process with the contents
of an executable image that resides in the filesystem. The process then executes until it
terminates voluntarily by exiting or involuntarily by receiving a signal. In Sections 6.6 to 6.9, we
trace the management of the memory resources used at each step in this cycle.

A fork system call duplicates the address space of an existing process, creating an identical child
process. The fork set of system calls is the only way that new processes are created in FreeBSD.
Fork duplicates all the resources of the original process (except for its kqueue descriptors) and
copies that process’s address space.

The virtual-memory resources of the process that must be allocated include the child’s process
structure and its associated substructures, and its kernel stack. In addition, the kernel can be
requested through the procctl system call to reserve storage (either memory, filesystem space, or
swap space) used to back the process. The general outline of the implementation of a fork is as
follows:

• If requested to do so, reserve virtual address space for the child process

• Allocate a process entry and thread structure for the child process, and fill it in

• Copy to the child the parent’s process group, credentials, file descriptors, limits, and signal
actions

• Allocate a new kernel stack, copying the bottom frame that returns from the system call in the
current one to initialize it

• Allocate a vmspace structure

• Duplicate the address space by creating copies of the parent vm_map_entry structures
marked copy-on-write

• Arrange for the child process to return 0, to distinguish its return value from the new PID that
is returned to the parent process

The allocation and initialization of the process structure, and the arrangement of the return
value, were covered in Chapter 4. The remainder of this section discusses the other steps
involved in duplicating a process.

Reserving Kernel Resources

The first resource to be reserved when an address space is duplicated is the required virtual
address space. To avoid running out of memory resources, the kernel must ensure that it does
not promise to provide more virtual memory than it is able to deliver. The total virtual memory
that can be provided by the system is limited to the amount of physical memory available for
paging plus the amount of swap space that is provided. A few pages are held in reserve to stage
I/O between the swap area and main memory.

The reason for this restriction is to ensure that processes get synchronous notification of
memory limitations. Specifically, a process should get an error back from a system call (such as
sbrk, fork, or mmap) if there are insufficient resources to allocate the needed virtual memory. If
the kernel promises more virtual memory than it can support, it can deadlock trying to service a
page fault. Trouble arises when it has no free pages to service the fault and no available swap
space to save an active page. Here, the kernel has no choice but to send a kill signal to the
process unfortunate enough to be page faulting. Such asynchronous notification of insufficient
memory resources is unacceptable.

Excluded from this limit are those parts of the address space that are mapped read-only, such as
the program text. Any pages that are being used for a read-only part of the address space can be
reclaimed for another use without being saved because their contents can be refilled from the
original source. Also excluded from this limit are parts of the address space that map shared
files. The kernel can reclaim any pages that are being used for a shared mapping after writing
their contents back to the filesystem from which they are mapped. Here, the filesystem is being
used as an extension of the swap area. Finally, any piece of memory that is used by more than
one process (such as an area of anonymous memory being shared by several processes) needs to
be counted only once toward the virtual-memory limit.

The limit on the amount of virtual address space that can be allocated causes problems for
applications that want to allocate a large piece of address space but want to use the piece only
sparsely. For example, a process may wish to make a private mapping of a large database from
which it will access only a small part. Because the kernel has no way to guarantee that the access
will be sparse, when requested to reserve space, it takes the pessimistic view that the entire file
will be modified and denies the request if it has insufficient resources.

Tracking the outstanding virtual memory accurately and determining when to limit further
allocation is a complex task. Because most processes use only about half of their virtual address
space, limiting outstanding virtual memory to the sum of process address spaces is needlessly
conservative. However, allowing greater allocation runs the risk of running out of

virtual-memory resources. Although FreeBSD calculates the outstanding-memory load, it only
enforces a total memory limit if the vm.overcommit sysctl has been enabled. Because the
vm.overcommit follows the conservative approach of limiting outstanding virtual memory to the
sum of process address spaces, vm.overcommit is turned off by default. Thus, it does not
enforce any total memory limit so it can be made to promise more than it can deliver. When
memory resources run out, it picks a process to kill favoring processes with large memory use.
An important future enhancement will be to develop a heuristic for better determining when
virtual-memory resources are in danger of running out and need to be limited. As a stopgap
measure, FreeBSD 10 added the procctl system call that can be accessed using the protect
utility to allow the system administrator to identify processes that are critical to system
operation and should not be considered as candidates to be killed.

Duplication of the User Address Space

The next step in fork is to allocate and initialize a new process structure. This operation must be
done before the address space of the current process is duplicated because it records state in the
process structure. From the time that the process structure is allocated until all the needed
resources are allocated, the parent process is locked against swapping to avoid deadlock. The
child is in an inconsistent state and cannot yet run or be swapped, so the parent is needed to
complete the copy of its address space. To ensure that the child process is ignored by the
scheduler, the kernel sets the process’s state to NEW during the entire fork procedure.

Historically, the fork system call operated by copying the entire address space of the parent
process. When large processes fork, copying the entire user address space is expensive and
wasteful if the fork is followed immediately by an exec, which discards all the existing pages
before allocating the new pages for the program that it has been requested to run. All the pages
that are on secondary storage must be read back into memory to be copied. If there is not
enough free memory for both complete copies of the process, this memory shortage will cause
the system to begin paging to create enough memory to do the copy (see Section 6.12). The copy
operation may result in parts of the parent and child processes being paged out, as well as the
paging out of parts of unrelated processes.

The technique used by FreeBSD to create processes without this overhead is called
copy-on-write. Rather than copy each page of a parent process, both the child and parent
processes resulting from a fork are given references to the same physical pages. The page tables
are changed to prevent either process from modifying a shared page. Instead, when a process
attempts to modify a page, the kernel is entered with a protection fault. On discovering that the
fault was caused by an attempt to modify a shared page, the kernel simply copies the page and
changes the protection field for the page to allow modification once again. Only pages modified

by one of the processes need to be copied. Because processes that fork typically overlay the child
process with a new image with exec shortly thereafter, this technique significantly improves the
performance of fork.

Using copy-on-write for fork is done by traversing the list of vm_map_entry structures in the
parent and creating a corresponding entry in the child. Each entry must be analyzed and the
appropriate action taken:

• If the entry maps a shared region, the child can take a reference to it.

• If the entry maps a privately mapped region (such as the data area or stack), the child must
create a copy-on-write mapping of the region. The parent must be converted to a copy-on-write
mapping of the region. If either process later tries to write the region, it will create a shadow
object to hold the modified pages.

With the virtual-memory resources allocated, the system sets up the kernel-and user-mode state
of the new process. It then clears the NEW flag and places the process’s thread on the run queue;
the new process can then begin execution.

Creation of a New Process Without Copying

When a process (such as a shell) wishes to start another program, it will generally fork, do a few
simple operations such as redirecting I/O descriptors and changing signal actions, and then
start the new program with an exec. In the meantime, the parent shell suspends itself with wait
until the new program completes. For such operations, it is not necessary for both parent and
child to run simultaneously, and therefore only one copy of the address space is required. This
frequently occurring set of system calls led to the implementation of the vfork system call.
Although it is extremely efficient, vfork has peculiar semantics and is generally considered to be
an architectural blemish.

The implementation of vfork will always be more efficient than the copy-on-write
implementation because the kernel avoids copying the address space for the child. Instead, the
kernel simply passes the parent’s address space to the child and suspends the parent. The child
process does not need to allocate any virtual-memory structures, receiving the vmspace
structure and all its pieces from its parent. The child process returns from the vfork system call
with the parent still suspended. The child does the usual activities in preparation for starting a
new program, then calls exec. Now the address space is passed back to the parent process, rather
than being abandoned, as in a normal exec. Alternatively, if the child process encounters an
error and is unable to execute the new program, it will exit. Again, the address space is passed
back to the parent instead of being abandoned.

With vfork, the entries describing the address space do not need to be copied, and the
page-table entries do not need to be set to read-only and then cleared of read-only. Vfork is
likely to remain more efficient than copy-on-write or other schemes that must duplicate the
process’s virtual address space. The architectural quirk of the vfork call is that the child process
may modify the contents and even the size of the parent’s address space while the child has
control. Although modification of the parent’s address space is bad programming practice, some
programs have been known to take advantage of this quirk.

6.7 Execution of a File

The exec system call was described in Sections 2.4 and 3.1; it replaces the address space of a
process with the contents of a new program obtained from an executable file. During an exec,
the target executable image is validated and then the arguments and environment are copied
from the current process image into a temporary area of pageable-kernel virtual memory.

To do an exec, the system must allocate resources to hold the new contents of the virtual address
space, set up the mapping for this address space to reference the new image, and release the
resources being used for the existing virtual memory.

The first step is to check whether the kernel has been requested to reserve memory resources for
the new executable image. If it has, a space reservation must be made for the space needed by
the new executable. Exec does this reservation without first releasing the currently assigned
space, because the system must be able to continue running the old executable until it is sure
that it will be able to run the new one. If the system released the current space and the memory
reservation failed, the exec would be unable to return to the original process. Once the
reservation is made, the address space and virtual-memory resources of the current process are
then freed as though the process were exiting; this mechanism is described in Section 6.9.

Now the process has only a kernel stack. The kernel now allocates a new vmspace structure and
creates the list of four or five vm_map_entry structures:

1. A copy-on-write, fill-from-file entry maps the text segment. A copy-on-write mapping is used,
rather than a read-only one, to allow active text segments to have debugging breakpoints set
without affecting other users of the binary.

2. A private (copy-on-write), fill-from-file entry maps the initialized data segment.

3. An anonymous zero-fill-on-demand entry maps the uninitialized data segment.

4. An anonymous zero-fill-on-demand entry maps the stack segment.

5. For dynamically loaded binaries (most of them), a copy-on-write, fill-from-file entry maps the
runtime loader. Execution will begin in the loader that will map the needed shared libraries, link
the program with the libraries, and finish by invoking the program.

No further operations are needed to create a new address space during an exec system call; the
remainder of the work involves copying the arguments and environment out to the top of the
new stack. Initial values are set for the registers: The program counter is set to the entry point,
and the stack pointer is set to point to the argument vector. The new process image is then ready
to run.

6.8 Process Manipulation of Its Address Space

Once a process begins execution, it has several ways to manipulate its address space. The system
has always allowed processes to expand their uninitialized data area (usually done with the
malloc() library routine). The stack is grown on an as-needed basis. The FreeBSD system also
allows a process to map files and devices into arbitrary parts of its address space and to change
the protection of various parts of its address space, as described in Section 6.5. This section
describes how these address-space manipulations are done.

Change of Process Size

A process can change its size during execution by explicitly requesting more data space with the
sbrk system call. Also, the stack segment will be expanded automatically if an invalid address
fault is encountered because of an attempt to grow the stack below the end of the stack region.
In either case, the size of the process address space must be changed. The size of the request is
always rounded up to a multiple of page size. New pages are marked fill-with-zeros, since there
are no contents initially associated with new sections of the address space.

The first step of enlarging a process’s size is to check whether the new size would violate the size
limit for the process segment involved. If the new size is in range, the following steps are taken
to enlarge the data area:

1. Verify that the address space of the requested size immediately following the current end of
the data area is not already mapped.

2. If requested, verify that the virtual-memory resources are available.

3. If the existing vm_map_entry is the only reference to the swap vm_object, increment the
vm_map_entry’s ending address by the requested size and increase the size of the swap

vm_object by the same amount. If the swap vm_object has two or more references (as it would
after a process forked), a new vm_map_entry must be created with a starting address
immediately following the end of the previous fixed-size entry. Its ending address is calculated
to give it the size of the request. It will be backed by a new swap vm_object. Until this process
forks again, the new entry and its swap vm_object will be able to continue growing.

If the change is to reduce the size of the data segment, the operation is easy: Any memory
allocated to the pages that will no longer be part of the address space is freed. The ending
address of the vm_map_entry is reduced by the size. If the requested size reduction is bigger
than or equal to the range defined by the vm_map_entry, the entire entry is freed, and the
remaining reduction is applied to the vm_map_entry that precedes it. This algorithm is applied
until the entire reduction has been made. Future references to these addresses will result in
invalid address faults, as access is disallowed when the address range has been deallocated.

File Mapping

The mmap system call requests that a file be mapped into an address space. The system call may
request either that the mapping be done at a particular address or that the kernel pick an
unused area. If the request is for a particular address range, the kernel first checks to see
whether that part of the address space is already in use. If it is in use, the kernel first does an
munmap of the existing mapping, then proceeds with the new mapping.

The kernel implements the mmap system call by traversing the list of vm_map_entry
structures for the process. The various types of overlap to consider are shown in Figure 6.15. The
five types are as follows:

1. The new mapping exactly overlaps an existing mapping. The old mapping is deallocated as
described in Section 6.9. The new mapping is created in its place as described in the paragraph
following this list.

2. The new mapping is a subset of the existing mapping. The existing mapping is split into three
pieces (two pieces if the new mapping begins at the beginning or ends at the end of the existing
mapping). The existing vm_map_entry structure is augmented with one or two additional
vm_map_entry structures: one mapping the remaining part of the existing mapping before the
new mapping, and one mapping the remaining part of the existing mapping following the new
mapping. Its overlapped piece is replaced by the new mapping, as described in the paragraph
following this list.

Figure 6.15 Five types of overlap that the kernel must consider when adding a new address
mapping.

3. The new mapping is a superset of an existing mapping. The old mapping is deallocated as
described in Section 6.9, and a new mapping is created as described in the paragraph following
this list.

4. The new mapping starts partway into and extends past the end of an existing mapping. The
existing mapping has its length reduced by the size of the unmapped area. Its overlapped piece
is replaced by the new mapping, as described in the paragraph following this list.

5. The new mapping extends into the beginning of an existing mapping. The existing mapping
has its starting address incremented and its length reduced by the size of the covered area. Its
overlapped piece is replaced by the new mapping, as described in the paragraph following this
list.

In addition to these five basic types of overlap, a new mapping request may span several existing
mappings. Specifically, a new request may be composed of zero or one of type 4, zero to many of
type 3, and zero or one of type 5. When a mapping is shortened, any shadow pages associated
with it are released because they are no longer needed.

Once the old mapping to the address range has been removed, the kernel allocates a
vm_map_entry to describe the new mapping to the address range. If the vm_object being
mapped is already being mapped by another process, the new vm_map_entry gets a reference
to the existing vm_object. This reference is obtained in the same way, as described in Section
6.6, when a new process is being created and needs to map each of the regions in its parent. If
this request is a mapping of a file, then the kernel sets the new vm_map_entry to reference its
vm_object. If this is a mapping to an anonymous region, then the kernel sets the new

vm_map_entry to reference its vm_object but sets the MAP_ENTRY_NEEDS_COPY flag so
that a new shadow vm_object will be created if a page in the vm_object is modified.

Change of Protection

A process may change the protections associated with a region of its virtual memory by using the
mprotect system call. The size of the region to be protected may be as small as a single page.
Because the kernel depends on the hardware to enforce the access permissions, the granularity
of the protection is limited by the underlying hardware. A region may be set for any combination
of read, write, and execute permissions. Many architectures do not distinguish between read
and execute permissions; on such architectures, the execute permission is treated as read
permission.

The kernel implements the mprotect system call by finding the existing vm_map_entry
structure or structures that cover the region specified by the call. If the existing permissions are
the same as the request, then no further action is required. Otherwise, the new permissions are
compared to the maximum protection value associated with the vm_map_entry. The maximum
value is set at mmap time and reflects the maximum value allowed by the underlying file. If the
new permissions are valid, one or more new vm_map_entry structures may have to be set up to
describe the new protections. The set of overlap conditions that must be handled is similar to
that described in the previous subsection. Any vm_map_entries wholly contained within the
mprotect’ed range can simply change their permissions. For vm_map_entries that have to be
split, the vm_map_entry on the unchanged address range retains it old permissions and the
vm_map_entry on the mprotect’ed address range changes to the new permissions. Instead of
replacing the vm_object underlying the new vm_map_entry structures, these vm_map_entry
structures still reference the same vm_object; the difference is that they grant different access
permissions to it.

6.9 Termination of a Process

The final change in process state that relates to the operation of the virtual-memory system is
exit; this system call terminates a process, as described in Chapter 4. The part of exit that is
discussed here is the release of the virtual-memory resources of the process. There are two sets
of virtual-memory resources that need to be freed:

1. The user portions of the address space, both memory and swap space

2. The kernel stack

The first set of resources is freed in exit. The kernel stack is freed in wait. The release of the
kernel stack is delayed because it must be used until the process relinquishes the processor for
the final time.

The first step—freeing the user address space—is identical to the one that occurs during exec to
free the old address space. The free operation proceeds entry by entry through the list of
vm_map_entry structures associated with the address space. The first step in freeing an entry is
to call the machine-dependent routines to unmap and free up any page table or data structures
that are associated with the vm_map_entry. The next step is to traverse its list of shadow
vm_objects. If the entry is the last reference to a shadow vm_object, then any physical pages or
swap space that is associated with the vm_object can be freed. If the shadow vm_object is still
referenced by other vm_map_entry structures, its resources cannot be freed. Finally, if the
underlying vm_object referenced by the vm_map_entry is losing its last reference, then that
vm_object is a candidate for deallocation. If it is a vm_object that will never have any chance of
a future reuse (such as an anonymous vm_object associated with a stack or uninitialized data
area), then its resources are freed as though it were a shadow vm_object. However, if the
vm_object is associated with a vnode (e.g., it maps a file such as an executable), the vm_object
will persist until the vnode is reused for another purpose. Until the vnode is reused, the
vm_object and its associated pages will be available for reuse by newly executing processes or by
processes mapping in a file.

With all its resources free, the exiting process finishes detaching itself from its process group
and notifies its parent that it is done. The process has now become a zombie process—one with
no resources. Its parent will collect its exit status with a wait call. Because the process structure
and kernel stack are allocated using the zone allocator, they will normally be retained for future
use by another process rather than being broken down and their memory pages reclaimed. Thus,
there is nothing for the virtual-memory system to do when wait is called: All virtual-memory
resources of a process are removed when exit is done. On wait, the system just returns the
process status to the caller, releases the process structure and kernel stack back to the zone
allocator, and frees the space in which the resource-usage information was kept.

6.10 The Pager Interface

The pager interface provides the mechanism by which data are moved between backing store
and physical memory. The FreeBSD pager interface is an evolution of the interface present in
Mach 2.0 as evolved by 4.4BSD. The interface is page based, with all data requests made in
multiples of the page size. The vm_page structures are passed around as descriptors providing
the backing-store offset and physical-memory address of the desired data. This interface should
not be confused with the Mach 3.0 external paging interface [Young, 1989], where pagers are

typically user applications outside the kernel and are invoked via asynchronous remote
procedure calls using the Mach interprocess-communication mechanism. The FreeBSD
interface is internal in the sense that the pagers are compiled into the kernel and pager routines
are invoked via simple function calls.

Each virtual-memory vm_object has a pager type, pager handle, and pager private data
associated with it. Conceptually, the pager describes a logically contiguous piece of backing store,
such as a chunk of swap space or a disk file. The pager type identifies the pager responsible for
supplying the contents of pages within the vm_object. Each pager registers a set of functions
that define its operations. These function sets are stored in an array indexed by pager type.
When the kernel needs to perform a pager operation, it uses the pager type to index into the
array of pager functions and then selects the routine that it needs such as getting or putting
pages. For example,

(*pagertab[object->type]->pgo_putpages)
  (object, vmpage, count, flags, rtvals);

writes count pages starting with page vmpage from object.

A pager type is specified when a vm_object is created to represent a file, device, or piece of
anonymous memory. The pager manages the vm_object throughout its lifetime. When a page
fault occurs for a virtual address mapping a particular vm_object, the fault-handling code
allocates a vm_page structure and converts the faulting address to an offset within the
vm_object. This offset is recorded in the vm_page structure, and the page is added to the
collection of pages cached by the vm_object. The page frame and vm_object are then passed to
the underlying pager routine. The pager routine is responsible for filling the page referenced by
the vm_page structure with the appropriate contents for that offset of the vm_object that it
represents.

The pager is also responsible for saving the contents of a dirty page if the system decides to write
out the page to backing store. When the pageout daemon decides that a particular page is no
longer needed, it requests the vm_object that owns the page to free the page. The vm_object
first passes the page with the associated logical offset to the underlying pager to be saved for
future use. The pager is responsible for finding an appropriate place to save the page and doing
any I/O necessary for the save. When it is done, the pager marks the page as clean and notifies
the vm_object that the page has been written so that the pageout daemon can move the
vm_page structure to the cache or free list for future use.

There are seven routines associated with each pager type; see Table 6.2. The pgo_init() routine
is called at boot time to do any one-time type-specific initializations, such as allocating a pool of
private pager structures. The pgo_alloc() routine associates a pager with a vm_object as part of
the creation of the vm_object. The pgo_dealloc() routine disassociates a pager from a
vm_object as part of the destruction of the vm_object.

Table 6.2 Operations defined by a pager.

The pgo_getpages() function is called to return one or more pages of data from a pager. The
main use of this routine is by the page-fault handler. The pgo_putpages() function writes back
one or more pages of data. This routine is called by the pageout daemon to write back one or
more pages asynchronously, and by msync to write back one or more pages synchronously or
asynchronously. Both the get and put routines are called with an array of pointers to vm_page
structures and a count indicating the affected pages.

The pgo_haspage() routine queries a pager to see whether it has data at a particular
backing-store offset. This routine is used in the clustering code of the page-fault handler to
determine whether pages on either side of a faulted page can be read in as part of a single I/O
operation. It is also used when collapsing chains of vm_objects to determine if the allocated
pages of a shadow vm_object completely obscure the allocated pages of the vm_object that it
shadows.

The four most commonly used pagers supported by the system are described in the next four
subsections.

Vnode Pager

The vnode pager handles vm_objects that provide the physical memory for caching data from
files in a filesystem. Whenever a file is opened either explicitly by open or implicitly by exec, the
system must find an existing vnode that represents it or, if there is no existing vnode for the file,
allocate a new vnode for it. Part of allocating a new vnode is to allocate a vm_object to hold the
pages of the file and to associate the vnode pager with the vm_object. The vm_object handle is
set to point to the vnode and the private data stores the size of the file. Any time the vnode
changes size, the vm_object is informed by a call to vnode_pager_setsize().

When a pagein request is received by the vnode pager pgo_getpages() routine, it is passed an
array of pointers to physical pages, the size of the array, and the index into the array of the page
that is required to service the page fault. Only the required page must be read, but the
pgo_getpages() routine is encouraged to provide as many of the others as it can easily read at
the same time. For example, if the required page is in the middle of the block of a file, the
filesystem will usually read the entire file block since the file block can be read with a single I/O
operation. The larger read will fill in the required page along with the pages surrounding it.

The kernel has two types of I/O operations: mapped and unmapped. Mapped I/O requires that
the physical pages be mapped into the kernel’s address space. The I/O is done using a
physical-I/O buffer that maps the pages to be read into the kernel address space long enough for
the pager to call the device-driver strategy routine to load the pages with the file contents. Once
the pages are filled, the kernel mapping can be dropped, the physical-I/O buffer can be released,
and the pages can be returned.

Unmapped I/O does not require the physical pages to be mapped into the kernel’s address space.
Many devices have the ability to do I/O on unmapped pages through the use of a hardware I/O
map. For these devices, it is not necessary for the kernel to map them into its address space.
Rather the vm_page structures can be passed directly to the device. The device can copy the
physical page numbers into its I/O map and proceed with the I/O operation. The details of using
the hardware I/O map are described in Section 8.8.

When the vnode pager is asked to save a page to be freed, it simply arranges to write the page
back to the part of the file from which the page came. The request is made with the
pgo_putpages() routine, which is passed an array of pointers to physical pages, the size of the
array, and the index into the array of the page that must be written. Only the required page must
be written, but the pgo_putpages() routine is encouraged to write as many of the others as it
can easily handle at the same time. The filesystem will write out all the pages that are in the
same filesystem block as the required page. As with the pgo_getpages() routine, the pages are

mapped into the kernel long enough to do the write operation only if the device to which they
are being written does not have the ability to do I/O on unmapped pages.

If a file is being privately mapped, then modified pages cannot be written back to the filesystem.
Such private mapping must use a shadow vm_object with a swap pager for all pages that are
modified. Thus, a privately mapped vm_object will never be asked to save any dirty pages to the
underlying file.

Historically, the BSD kernel had separate caches for the filesystems and the virtual memory.
FreeBSD has eliminated the filesystem buffer cache by replacing it with the virtual-memory
cache. Each vnode has a vm_object associated with it, and the blocks of the file are stored in the
pages associated with the vm_object. The file data is accessed using the same pages whether
they are mapped into an address space or accessed via read and write. An added benefit of this
design is that the filesystem cache is no longer limited by the address space in the kernel that
can be dedicated to it. Absent other demands on the system memory, it can all be dedicated to
caching filesystem data.

The ZFS filesystem integrated from OpenSolaris is the one exception to the integrated buffer
cache. ZFS has its own set of memory that it manages by itself. Files that are mmap’ed from ZFS
must be copied to the virtual-memory managed memory. In addition to requiring two copies of
the file in memory, extra copying occurs every time an mmap’ed ZFS file is being accessed
through the read and write interfaces. As detailed in Section 10.5, ZFS would require extensive
restructuring to integrate its buffer cache into the virtual-memory infrastructure.

Device Pager

The device pager handles vm_objects representing memory-mapped hardware devices.
Memory-mapped devices provide an interface that looks like a piece of memory. An example of
a memory-mapped device is a frame buffer, which presents a range of memory addresses with
one word per pixel on the screen. The kernel provides access to memory-mapped devices by
mapping the device memory into a process’s address space. The process can then access that
memory without further operating-system intervention. Writing to a word of the frame-buffer
memory causes the corresponding pixel to take on the appropriate color and brightness. The
device pager can also be used to create user-level mappings of kernel buffers. For example, a
network driver can make its buffers available to a user-level application to allow the application
to access their contents directly.

The device pager is fundamentally different from the other three pagers described in this section
in that it does not fill provided physical-memory pages with data. Instead, it creates and

manages its own vm_page structures, each of which describes a page of the device space. The
head of the list of these pages is kept in the pager private-data area of the vm_object. This
approach makes device memory look like wired physical memory. Thus, no special code should
be needed in the remainder of the virtual-memory system to handle device memory.

When a device object is mapped, the device-pager allocation routine will validate the desired
range by calling the device d_mmap() routine. If the device allows the requested access for all
pages in the range, an empty page list is created in the private-data area of the vm_object that
manages the device mapping. The device-pager allocation routine does not create vm_page
structures immediately—they are created individually by the pgo_getpages() routine as they are
referenced. The reason for this late allocation is that some devices export a large memory range
in which either not all pages are valid or the pages may not be accessed for common operations.
Complete allocation of vm_page structures for these sparsely accessed devices would be
wasteful.

The first access to a device page will cause a page fault and will invoke the device-pager
pgo_getpages() routine. The device pager creates a vm_page structure, initializes the latter
with the appropriate vm_object offset and a physical address returned by the device d_mmap()
routine, and flags the page as fictitious. This vm_page structure is added to the collection of all
such allocated pages for the vm_object. Since the fault code has no special knowledge of the
device pager, it has preallocated a physical-memory page to fill and has associated that
vm_page structure with the vm_object. The device-pager routine removes that vm_page
structure from the vm_object, returns the structure to the free list, and inserts its own vm_page
structure in the same place.

The device-pager pgo_putpages() routine expects never to be called and will panic if it is. This
behavior is based on the assumption that device-pager pages are never entered into any of the
paging queues and hence will never be seen by the pageout daemon. However, the device-pager
must be prepared to be called if an application does an msync on a part of its address space that
is mapped to a range of device memory. Although there is nothing that needs to be done, this
operation brings up an exception to the higher-level virtual-memory system’s ignorance of
device memory: The vm_object page-cleaning routine will skip pages that are flagged as
fictitious.

Finally, when a device is unmapped, the device-pager deallocation routine is invoked. This
routine deallocates all the vm_page structures that it allocated.

Physical-Memory Pager

The physical-memory pager handles vm_objects that contain nonpagable memory. It is used to
make a copy of the current time-of-day structure accessible to user processes to permit them to
get the time of day without the need to do a system call. It is also used for a page of data that the
kernel shares with all processes that contains the signal trampoline code. The trampoline code
used to be placed at the top of the stack for each process. To make stack overflow exploits more
difficult, the stack region is marked as nonexecutable. So the trampoline code was moved to a
kernel text page that is made read-only and executable to every process. The System V
shared-memory interface uses the physical-memory pager when it has been configured to use
nonpagable memory instead of the default swappable memory.

The first access to a physical-memory-pager page will cause a page fault and will invoke the
pgo_getpages() routine. Like the swap pager, the physical-memory pager zero-fills pages when
they are first faulted. Unlike the swap pager, the page is marked as unmanaged so that it will not
be considered for replacement by the pageout daemon. Unmanaged pages never require finding
all the instances of their mappings, so the associated data structure used to find all mappings
(described in Section 6.13) need not be allocated. Marking its pages unmanaged makes the
memory for the physical-memory pager look like wired physical memory. Thus, no special code
is needed in the remainder of the virtual-memory system to handle physical-memory-pager
memory.

The pgo_putpages() routine of the physical-memory-pager does not expect to be called, and it
panics if it is. This behavior is based on the assumption that physical-memory-pager pages are
never entered into any of the paging queues and hence will never be seen by the pageout
daemon. However, it is possible to msync a range of memory backed by the physical-memory
pager. This operation brings up an exception to the higher-level virtual-memory system’s
ignorance of physical-memory-pager memory: The vm_object page-cleaning routine will skip
pages that are flagged as unmanaged.

Finally, when a vm_object using a physical-memory pager is freed, each of its pages has its
unmanaged flag cleared and is released back to the list of free pages.

Swap Pager

The term swap pager refers to two functionally different pagers. In the most common use, swap
pager refers to the pager that is used by vm_objects that manage anonymous memory. This
pager has sometimes been referred to as the default pager because it is the pager that is used if
no other pager has been requested. It provides what is commonly known as swap space:

nonpersistent backing store that is zero filled on first reference. When an anonymous vm_object
is first created, it is assigned the default pager. The default pager allocates no resources and
provides no storage backing. The default pager handles page faults (pgo_getpage()) by zero
filling and page queries (pgo_haspage()) as not held. The expectation is that free memory will
be plentiful enough that it will not be necessary to swap out any pages. The vm_object will
simply create zero-filled pages during the process lifetime that can all be returned to the free list
when the process exits. When a vm_object is freed with the default pager, no pager cleanup is
required since no pager resources were allocated.

However, on the first request by the pageout daemon to remove an allocated page from an
anonymous vm_object, the default pager replaces itself with the swap pager. The role of the
swap pager is swap-space management: figuring out where to store dirty pages and how to find
dirty pages when they are needed again. Shadow vm_objects require that these operations be
efficient. A typical shadow vm_object is sparsely populated: It may cover a large range of pages,
but only those pages that have been modified will be in the shadow vm_object’s backing store.
In addition, long chains of shadow vm_objects may require numerous pager queries to locate
the correct copy of a vm_object page to satisfy a page fault. Hence, determining whether a pager
contains a particular page needs to be fast, preferably requiring no I/O operations. A final
requirement of the swap pager is that it can do asynchronous writeback of dirty pages. This
requirement was necessitated by the original pageout daemon, which was a single-threaded
process. If a single-threaded pageout daemon blocked waiting for a page-clean operation to
complete before starting the next operation, it often could not keep enough memory free in
times of heavy memory demand. Even with asynchronous I/O, by the time of FreeBSD 10 it was
necessary to create multiple pageout-daemon threads to keep up with the memory demand on
busy systems.

In theory, any pager that meets these criteria can be used as the swap pager. In Mach 2.0, the
vnode pager was used as the swap pager. Special paging files could be created in any filesystem
and registered with the kernel. The swap pager would then suballocate pieces of the files to back
particular anonymous vm_objects. One obvious advantage of using the vnode pager is that swap
space can be expanded by the addition of more swap files or the extension of existing ones
dynamically (i.e., without rebooting or reconfiguring of the kernel). The main disadvantage is
that the filesystem does not provide as much bandwidth as direct access to the disk.

The desire to provide the highest possible disk bandwidth led to the creation of a special
raw-partition pager to use as the swap pager for FreeBSD. Previous versions of BSD also used
dedicated disk partitions, commonly known as swap partitions, so this partition pager became
the swap pager. The remainder of this section describes how the swap pager is implemented and
how it provides the necessary capabilities for backing anonymous vm_objects.

In 4.4BSD, the swap pager preallocated a fixed-size structure to describe the backing space for
the vm_object. For a large vm_object, the structure would be large even if only a few pages of
the vm_object were written to backing store. Worse, the size of the vm_object was frozen at the
time of allocation. Thus, if the anonymous area continued to grow (such as the stack or heap of a
process), a new vm_object had to be created to describe the expanded area. On a system that
was short of memory, the result was that a large process could acquire many anonymous
vm_objects. Changing the swap pager to handle growing vm_objects dramatically reduced this
vm_object proliferation. Another problem with the 4.4BSD swap pager was that it used a block
list to track the swap space usage. The block list grew in size as the swap area became
fragmented. The system tends to swap when it is low on memory. To avoid potential deadlocks,
kernel memory should not be allocated at such times. The 4.4BSD swap pager’s simplistic
management of the swap space led to fragmentation, slow allocation under load, and deadlocks
brought on by its need to allocate kernel memory during periods of shortage. For all these
reasons, the swap pager was completely rewritten in FreeBSD 4.0.

Swap space tends to be sparsely allocated. On average, a process only accesses about half of its
allocated address space during its lifetime. Thus, only about half the pages in a vm_object ever
come into existence. Unless the machine is under heavy memory pressure and the process is
long-lived, most of the pages in the vm_object that do come into existence will never be written
to backing store. So the new swap pager replaced the old fixed-size block map for each
vm_object with a method that allocates a structure for each set of swap blocks that gets
allocated. Each structure tracks the swap blocks used by an aligned and contiguous region of 32
pages belonging to the vm_object. A large vm_object with two pages swapped out will use at
most two of these structures, and only one if the two swapped pages are close to each other (as
they often are). The amount of memory required to track swap space for a vm_object is
proportional to the number of pages that have been written to swap rather than to the size of the
vm_object. The size of the vm_object is no longer frozen when its first page is swapped out,
since any pages that are part of its larger size can be accommodated.

The structures that track swap space usage are kept in a global hash table managed by the swap
pager. While it might seem logical to store the structures separately on lists associated with the
vm_object of which they are a part, the single global hash table has two important advantages:

1. It ensures a short time to determine whether a page of a vm_object has been written to swap.
If the structures were linked onto a list headed by the vm_object, then vm_objects with many
swapped pages would require the traversal of a long list. The long list could be shortened by
creating a hash table for every vm_object, but that would require much more memory than
simply allocating a single large hash table that could be used by all vm_objects.

2. It allows operations that need to scan all the allocated swap blocks to have a centralized place
to find them rather than needing to scan all the anonymous vm_objects in the system. An
example is the swapoff system call that removes a swap partition from use. It needs to page in
all the blocks from the device that is to be taken out of service.

The free space in the swap area is managed with a bitmap with one bit for each page-size block
of swap space. The bitmap for the entire swap area is allocated when the swap space is first
added to the system. This initial allocation reduces the need to allocate kernel memory during
critical low-memory swapping operations.

Doing a linear scan of the swap-block bitmaps to find free space would be unacceptably slow.
Thus, the bitmap is organized in a radix-tree structure with free-space hinting in the radix-node
structures. The use of radix-tree structures makes swap-space allocation and release a
constant-time operation. To reduce fragmentation, the radix tree can allocate large contiguous
chunks at once, skipping over smaller fragmented chunks.

A future improvement would be to keep track of the different-size free areas as swap allocations
are done similarly to the way that the filesystem tracks the different sizes of free space. This
free-space information would increase the probability of doing contiguous allocation and
improve locality of reference.

Swap blocks are allocated at the time that swap out is done. They are freed when the page is
brought back in and becomes dirty or the vm_object is freed.

The swap pager is responsible for managing the I/O associated with the pgo_putpages() request.
Once it identifies the set of pages within the pgo_putpages() request that it will be able to write,
it must allocate a buffer and have those pages mapped into it. Because the swap pager does not
synchronously wait while the I/O is done, it does not regain control after the I/O operation
completes. Therefore, it marks the buffer with a callback flag and sets the routine for the
callback to be swp_pager_async_iodone().

When the write completes, swp_pager_async_iodone() is called. Each written page is marked
as clean, has its busy bit cleared, and calls the vm_page_io_finish() routine to notify the
pageout daemon that the write has completed and to awaken any processes waiting for it. The
swap pager then unmaps the pages from the buffer and releases it. A count of
pageouts-in-progress is kept for the pager associated with each vm_object; this count is
decremented when the pageout completes and, if the count goes to zero, a wakeup() is issued.
This operation is done so that a vm_object that is deallocating a swap pager can wait for the
completion of all pageout operations before freeing the pager’s references to the associated swap
space.

Because the swap pager uses the physical I/O buffers shared with other kernel subsystems and a
fixed number of these buffers are allocated when the system is booted, the swap pager must take
care to ensure that it does not use more than its fair share. Once this limit is reached, the
pgo_putpages() operations block until one of the swap pager’s outstanding writes completes.
This unexpected blocking of the pageout daemon is an unfortunate side effect of pushing the
buffer management down into the pagers. Any single pager hitting its buffer limit stops the
page-out daemon. While the pageout daemon might want to perform additional I/O operations
using other I/O resources such as the network, it is prevented from doing so. Worse, the failure
of any single pager can deadlock the system by preventing the pageout daemon from running.

6.11 Paging

When the memory-management hardware detects an invalid virtual address, it generates a trap
to the system. This page-fault trap can occur for several reasons. Most BSD programs are
created in a format that permits the executable image to be paged into main memory directly
from the filesystem. When a program in a demand-paged format is first run, the kernel marks as
invalid the pages for the text and initialized-data regions of the executing process. The text and
initialized data regions share a vm_object that provides fill-on-demand from the filesystem. As
part of mapping in the vm_object, the kernel traverses the collection of pages associated with
the vm_object and marks them as resident in the newly created process. For regions that are
writable (such as the initialized data of the executable), the pages are marked as copy-on-write.
For a heavily used executable with most of its pages already resident, this prepaging reduces
many of its initial page faults. As missing pages of the text or initialized-data region are first
referenced, or write attempts are made on pages in the initialized-data region, page faults occur.

Page faults can also occur when a process first references a page in the uninitialized-data region
of a program. Here, the anonymous vm_object managing the region automatically allocates
memory to the process and initializes the newly assigned page to zero. Other types of page faults
arise when previously resident pages have been reclaimed by the system in response to a
memory shortage.

The handling of page faults is done with the vm_fault() routine; this routine services all page
faults. Each time vm_fault() is invoked, it is provided the virtual address that caused the fault.
The first action of vm_fault() is to traverse the vm_map_entry list of the faulting process to
find the entry associated with the fault. The routine then computes the logical page within the
underlying vm_object and traverses the list of vm_objects to find or create the needed page.
Once the page has been found, vm_fault() must call the machine-dependent layer to validate
the faulted page and return to restart the process.

The details of calculating the address within the vm_object are described in Section 6.4. Having
computed the offset within the vm_object and determined the vm_object’s protection and
vm_object list from the vm_map_entry, the kernel is ready to find or create the associated page.
The page-fault-handling algorithm is shown in Figure 6.16. In the following overview, the
lettered points are references to the tags down the left side of the code.

Figure 6.16 Page-fault handling.

A. The loop traverses the list of shadow, anonymous, and file vm_objects until it either finds a
vm_object that holds the sought-after page or reaches the final vm_object in the list. If no page
is found, the final vm_object will be requested to produce it.

B. A vm_object with the desired page has been found. If the page is busy, another process may
be in the middle of faulting it in, so this process is blocked until the page is no longer busy. Since
many things could have happened to the affected vm_object while the process was blocked, it
must restart the entire fault-handling algorithm. If the page was not busy, the algorithm exits
the loop with the page.

C. Anonymous vm_objects (such as those used to represent shadow vm_objects) do not
upgrade from the default pager to the swap pager until the first time that they need to write a
page to backing store. Thus, if a vm_object has a pager other than the default pager, then there
is a chance that the page previously existed but was paged out. If the vm_object has a
nondefault pager, then the kernel needs to allocate a page to give to the pager to be filled (see D).
The special case for the vm_object being the first vm_object is to avoid a race condition with
two processes trying to get the same page. The first process through will create the sought-after
page in the first vm_object but keep it marked as busy. When the second process tries to fault
the same page, it will find the page created by the first process and block on it (see B). When the

first process completes the pagein processing, it will unlock the first page, causing the second
process to awaken, retry the fault, and find the page created by the first process.

D. Before calling the pager, check to see if any of the eight pages on either side of the faulting
page are eligible to be brought in at the same time. To be eligible, a page must be part of the
vm_object and neither already in memory nor part of another I/O operation. The pager is given
the range of possible pages and told which one is the required page. It must return the required
page if it holds a copy of it. The other pages are produced only if they are held by the vm_object
and can be easily read at the same time. If the required page is present in the file or swap area,
the pager will bring it back into the newly allocated page. If the pagein succeeds, then the
sought-after page has been found. If the page never existed, then the pagein request will fail.
Unless this vm_object is the first, the page is freed and the search continues. If this vm_object is
the first, the page is not freed, so it will act as a block to further searches by other processes (as
described in C).

E. If the kernel created a page in the first vm_object but did not use that page, it will have to
remember that page so it can use the page in a shadow object or free the page when the pagein is
done (see J).

F. If the search has reached the end of the vm_object list and has not found the page, then the
fault is on an anonymous vm_object chain, and the first vm_object in the list will handle the
page fault using the page allocated in C. The first_page entry is set to NULL to show that it does
not need to be freed, the page is zero filled, and the loop is exited.

G. The search exits the loop with page as the page that has been found or allocated and
initialized, and object as the owner of that page. The page has been filled with the correct data at
this point.

H. If the vm_object providing the page is not the first vm_object, then this mapping must be
private, with the first vm_object being a shadow vm_object of the vm_object providing the page.
If pagein is handling a write fault, then the contents of the page that it has found have to be
copied to the page that it allocated for the first vm_object. Having made the copy, it can release
the vm_object and page from which the copy came, since the first vm_object and first page will
be used to finish the page-fault service. If pagein is handling a read fault, it can use the page that
it found, but it has to mark the page copy-on-write to avoid the page being modified in the
future.

I. If pagein is handling a write fault, then it has made any copies that were necessary, so it can
safely make the page writable. As any pages around the required page that were brought into
memory as part of the clustering were not copied, they are mapped read-only so that if a write is

done on one of them, the full page-fault analysis will be done and a copy made at that time if it is
necessary to do so.

J. As the page and possibly the first_page are released, any processes waiting for that page of
the vm_object will get a chance to run to get their own references.

Note that the page, vm_map, and vm_object locking has been elided in Figure 6.16 to simplify
the explanation.

Hardware-Cache Design

Because the speed of CPUs has increased far more rapidly than the speed of main memory, most
machines today require the use of a memory cache to allow the CPU to operate near its full
potential.

Code that describes the operation of a hardware cache is given in Figure 6.17. An actual cache is
entirely implemented in hardware, so the loop shown in Figure 6.17 would really be done by
parallel comparisons rather than iteratively. Historically, most machines had a direct-mapped
cache. With a direct-mapped cache, an access to byte B followed by an access to byte B +
(CACHELINES × LINESIZE) would cause the cached data for byte B to be lost. Most modern
caches are N-way set associative where N is typically 8 for high-speed caches such as the L1
cache, and 64 for lower-speed but larger caches such as the L3 cache. An N-way set-associative
cache allows access of N different memory regions that overlap the same cache memory without
destroying the previously cached data. But on the Nth + 1 access at that offset, an earlier cached
value is lost.

Figure 6.17 Hardware-cache algorithm. Key: LINESIZE—Number of bytes in each cache line,
typically 64 or 128 bytes; CACHELINES—Number of lines in the cache, 8192 is a typical size;
SETSIZE—1 for a direct mapped cache, 2 for 2-way set associative, 4 for 4-way set associative,
etc.

There are several cache-design choices that require cooperation with the virtual-memory system.
The design option with the biggest effect is whether the cache uses virtual or physical addressing.
A physically addressed cache takes the address from the CPU, runs it through the
memory-management unit (MMU) to get the address of the physical page, then uses this
physical address to find out whether the requested memory location is available in the cache.
Although a translation lookaside buffer (described in the next subsection) significantly reduces
the average latency of the translation, there is still a delay in going through the MMU. A virtually
addressed cache uses the virtual address as that address comes from the CPU to find out

whether the requested memory location is available in the cache. The virtual-address cache is
faster than the physical-address cache because it avoids the time to run the address through the
MMU. However, the virtual-address cache must be flushed completely after each context switch,
because virtual addresses from one process are indistinguishable from the virtual addresses of
another process. By contrast, a physical-address cache does not need to be flushed after a
context switch. In a system with many short-running processes, a virtual-address cache gets
flushed so frequently that it is seldom useful.

A further refinement to the virtual-address cache is to add a process tag to the key field for each
cache line. At each context switch, the kernel loads a hardware context register with the tag
assigned to the process. Each time an entry is recorded in the cache, both the virtual address
and the process tag that faulted it are recorded in the key field of the cache line. The cache looks
up the virtual address as before, but when it finds an entry, it compares the tag associated with
that entry to the hardware context register. If they match, the cached value is returned. If they
do not match, the correct value and current process tag replace the old cached value. When this
technique is used, the cache does not need to be flushed completely at each context switch, since
multiple processes can have entries in the cache. The drawback is that the kernel must manage
the process tags. Usually, there are fewer tags (8 to 16) than there are processes. The kernel
must assign the tags to the active set of processes. When an old process drops out of the active
set to allow a new one to enter, the kernel must flush the cache entries associated with the tag
that it is about to reuse. Another major drawback to virtual caches with process tags are aliases.
An alias is the same page of data that is mapped to different virtual addresses in different
processes. An example of an alias is a shared library that is mapped to different locations in the
address space of different processes. First, the cache is polluted with duplicate read-only data
that reduce its efficiency. Second, two processes using shared memory for IPC have to prevent
aliases to avoid stale data by flushing their tag’s cache entries on every context switch.

A final consideration is a write-through versus a write-back cache. A write-through cache writes
the data back to main memory at the same time as it is writing to the cache, forcing the CPU to
wait for the memory access to conclude. A write-back cache writes the data to only the cache,
delaying the memory write until an explicit request or until the cache entry is reused. The
write-back cache allows the CPU to resume execution more quickly and permits multiple writes
to the same cache block to be consolidated into a single memory write. However, the writes
must be forced any time it is necessary for the data to be visible to a DMA request for a device or
to other CPUs on a multiprocessor.

Hardware Memory Management

The MMU implements address translation and access control when virtual memory is mapped
onto physical memory. One common MMU design uses memory-resident forward-mapped
page tables. These page tables are large contiguous arrays indexed by the virtual address.
There is one element, or page-table entry (PTE), in the array for each virtual page in the
address space. This element contains the physical page to which the virtual page is mapped, as
well as access permissions, status bits telling whether the page has been referenced or modified,
and a bit showing whether the entry contains valid information. For a 4-Gbyte address space
with 4-Kbyte virtual pages and a 32-bit page-table entry, 1 million entries, or 4 Mbyte, would be
needed to describe an entire address space. Since most processes use little of their address space,
most of the entries would be invalid, and allocating 4 Mbyte of physical memory per process
would be wasteful. Thus, most page-table structures are hierarchical, using two or more levels of
mapping. A 64-bit architecture using its entire address space would need five or six levels of
page tables. Implementations in 2014 limit the address space to a 48-bit address space that can
be handled with four levels of page tables. With a hierarchical structure, different portions of the
virtual address space index the various levels of the page tables. The intermediate levels of the
table contain the addresses of the next lower level of the page table. The kernel can mark as
unused large contiguous regions of an address space by inserting invalid entries at the higher
levels of the page table, eliminating the need for invalid page descriptors for each individual
unused virtual page.

The translation of a virtual address to a physical address during an access by a 32-bit CPU using
a two-level page table and 4 Kbyte pages is shown in Figure 6.18 and proceeds as follows:

1. The 10 most significant bits of the virtual address are used to index into the active-directory
table.

2. If the selected directory-table entry is valid and the access permissions grant the access being
made, the next 10 bits of the virtual address are used to index into the page-table page
referenced by the directory-table entry.

3. If the selected page-table entry is valid and the access permissions match, the final 12 bits of
the virtual address are combined with the physical page referenced by the page-table entry to
form the physical address of the access.

Figure 6.18 Two-level page table.

This hierarchical page-table structure requires the hardware to make frequent memory
references to translate a virtual address. To speed the translation process, most
page-table-based MMUs also have a small, fast, hardware cache of recent address translations, a
structure known commonly as a translation looka-side buffer (TLB) that works much like
the hardware cache described in the previous subsection. When a memory reference is
translated, the TLB is first consulted and, only if a valid entry is not found there, the page-table
structure for the current process is traversed. Because most programs exhibit spatial locality in
their memory-access patterns, the typical 1024-entry TLB is large enough to hold their working
set.

As address spaces grew beyond 32 to 48 and, more recently, 64 bits, simple indexed data
structures with three to six levels of tables required to handle address translation caused CPU
architects to consider alternatives. A response to this page-table growth is the inverted page
table, also known as the reverse-mapped page table. In an inverted page table, the

hardware still maintains a memory-resident table, but that table contains one entry per physical
page and is indexed by physical address instead of by virtual address. An entry contains the
virtual address to which the physical page is currently mapped, as well as protection and status
attributes. The hardware does virtual-to-physical address translation by computing a hash
function on the virtual address to select an entry in the hash anchor table (HAT). The entry in
the HAT points to an entry in the inverted page table. The system handles collisions in the
inverted page table by linking together table entries and making a linear search of this chain
until it finds the matching virtual address.

The advantages of an inverted page table are that the size of the table is proportional to the
amount of physical memory and that only one global table is needed, rather than one table per
process. A disadvantage to this approach is that there can be only one virtual address mapped to
any given physical page at any one time. This limitation makes virtual-address
aliasing—having multiple virtual addresses for the same physical page—difficult to handle. As
it is with the forward-mapped page table, a hardware TLB speeds the translation process.

A final common MMU organization consists of just a TLB. This architecture is the simplest
hardware design. It gives the software maximum flexibility by allowing the latter to manage
translation information in whatever structure it desires. However, unlike the other
hardware-based TLBs, a software-based TLB miss raises an exception to the kernel that runs a
handler to fill the missing TLB entry.

Superpages

Typical hardware today has a TLB with 1024 entries. A TLB does a set-associative lookup,
meaning that when presented with a virtual address, it must simultaneously compare that
address with every entry that it holds. The larger the number of entries, the longer it takes for
the TLB to produce an answer. If the TLB takes longer than reading the memory, then it ceases
to be useful. The reason for the slow growth of the size of TLBs is that they generally aim to
produce an answer in less than one clock cycle of the CPU, which limits the number of entries
that they can compare.

The size of hardware TLBs has grown much more slowly than the size of the main memory. Thus,
the working-set size of a typical process has grown more quickly than the ability of the TLB to
reference it. On a machine with 4-Kbyte pages and a 1024-entry TLB, the maximum-size
working set that fits in the TLB is 4 Mbyte. As soon as the working-set size of the program
exceeds 4 Mbyte, the TLB begins to miss translations, thus requiring one or more extra memory
references to read the page-table entries to resolve the location of a virtual page. While most of
these memory references will be in one of the processor’s memory caches, accessing those

caches is typically a factor of 10 slower than resolving the address in the TLB. The small
working-set size becomes even more acute on 64-bit architectures that are also limited to
1024-entry TLBs.

As the hardware vendors have been unable to increase the size of the TLB, their solution to the
small working-set problem is to create superpages. Most hardware allows for multiple page
sizes. The page sizes available are dependent on the architecture. Common sizes in addition to
the standard 4-Kbyte pages are 8-Kbyte, 64-Kbyte, 512-Kbyte, 2-Mbyte, and 4-Mbyte pages.

The PC architecture has a 4-Kbyte regular-size page. Unlike many other architectures, it
provides only a single alternate superpage size: 4-Mbyte super-pages on chips that support a
maximum of 4 Gbyte of physical memory and 2-Mbyte superpages on chips that support more
than 4 Gbyte of physical memory. The smaller superpage size on the machines with more
physical memory is because the additional address bits required to address the larger memory
require page table entries to be 64-bits rather than 32-bits. Thus, each 4-Kbyte page table
references only half as much address space. An address space may have a mix of regular and
superpages but virtual addresses must be aligned to page-size boundaries. Standard-size pages
must begin on 4-Kbyte boundaries and 2-Mbyte super-pages must begin on 2-Mbyte boundaries.
Note that recent 64-bit Intel and AMD processors also support 1 Gbyte superpages.

A process using entirely 2-Mbyte superpages to back its address space can fit a working set of 2
Gbyte into the same 1024-entry TLB. While a 2-Gbyte working set is large for an application
running on a 32-bit architecture, it is quite common for applications running on a 64-bit
architecture.

The implementation of superpages on the PC architecture is shown in Figure 6.19. The pointer
in the first level of the page table is set to point to a superpage rather than to a second level of
page tables. A flag bit in the top-level page table entry is set to indicate that the pointer
references a superpage rather than the usual second-level page table. As can be seen in Figure
6.19, superpages may be mixed with regular pages within an address space. Although the
hardware treats the superpage as a single entity, the software still maintains all 1024 vm_page
structures for its component 4-Kbyte pages. Maintaining the vm_page structures is necessary
so that if a superpage is demoted, the kernel can track the individual 4-Kbyte pages from which
it is built.

Figure 6.19 Superpage hardware operation.

Providing hardware support for superpages is simple and, when used appropriately, is quite
effective at relieving pressure on the TLB. The difficult part is devising the software solution for
using them. Some operating systems simply provide an interface to allow applications to request
superpages for part or all of their address space. This approach rarely works as many application
writers are unaware of the ability to ask for superpages or the need to do so. Many of the
application writers that do ask for superpages do so in an inappropriate context and just end up
wasting system resources and slowing everything down.

The best solution (and the one used by FreeBSD) is to have the operating system monitor its
running processes and assign superpages to those parts of the processes for which they will
provide clear benefit [Navarro et al., 2002]. Here, the application writers do not have to concern
themselves with superpages knowing that they will be used where appropriate.

The kernel must be conservative in choosing to use a superpage within a process. The savings
from using a superpage are reduced misses in the TLB. As described below, the potential cost of

using a superpage is extra memory-to-memory copies or additional disk I/O. It does not take
many memory-to-memory copies or additional disk I/O to completely wipe out any savings of
TLB misses and indeed can quickly add up to more cost than benefit, which makes the
application and potentially the entire system run more slowly than if superpages were not used.
Thus, FreeBSD delays the promotion to superpages until it is clear that they will be a
performance win. While some promotion opportunities are missed, those that are made nearly
always provide a net improvement in performance.

Consideration of using a superpage begins with a superpage reservation. Superpages for a
process are considered on a region-by-region basis (a region is defined by an area of the process
memory described by a vm_map_entry structure; see Section 6.4). On the first page fault for
each region of memory, the virtual-memory system must decide whether the region should be
eligible to use super-pages. A region containing a mapped file must be of at least superpage size
to be eligible for a superpage reservation. Since such a region rarely grows, if it is not already at
least the size of a superpage, it is unlikely that it ever will be superpage size. By contrast,
anonymous memory such as a stack or a heap is always eligible for a superpage reservation since
it often grows. Additionally, kernel memory allocation is always given a reservation.

When a region is denied a superpage reservation, the first and all subsequent page faults are
provided with a normal 4-Kbyte page. If a region is granted a superpage reservation, then a
superpage is assigned to the part of the region that includes the faulted page. However, only the
single 4-Kbyte page within the superpage corresponding to the fault is initialized and placed into
the process page table. Each superpage has a population map to track its used pages. As the
process faults in additional parts of the superpage, the corresponding 4-Kbyte pages get
initialized and added into its page table and the appropriate entry in its population map is
updated.

When a vm_object first gets mapped, the virtual-memory system records its offset into a
superpage. Thus, if a vm_object’s mapping begins at a 7-Mbyte offset and the system has
2-Mbyte superpages, the vm_object is marked as beginning at a 1-Mbyte offset. If another
process asks to map the same vm_object, the virtual memory system will place the vm_object in
that new process at the same offset as it did in the first vm_object. The purpose for tracking and
using the alignment is to avoid the need to copy data around in memory to get necessary
alignment. If the application demands a particular alignment that does not match the current
superpage alignment, then that process will have to map that vm_object using regular 4-Kbyte
page-table entries.

A superpage reservation is eligible for promotion when it faults every page in its reservation. On
the PC architecture, promotion means that the 4-Kbyte page-table page holding the references

to all the individual 4-Kbyte pages is replaced with a pointer to the superpage itself (see Figure
6.19).

The superpage is marked read-only unless it has modified every page in its reservation. The
reason that it is made read-only is that the superpage active-directory entry has only a single bit
to indicate that the page has been modified. If the superpage were made writable and only a
single byte in the superpage is modified, the virtual-memory system would have no way of
knowing where in the superpage the modification had occurred. When it came time to write the
page to backing store, it would have to write the entire 2-Mbyte page. Thus, when a read-only
superpage is modified, it is demoted back to small pages so that the modifications can be
tracked on a 4-Kbyte by 4-Kbyte basis. Only when all the small pages are modified is it
promoted to a writable superpage.

This conservative approach ensures that the kernel does not get forced into doing extra I/O,
thus wiping out the TLB-miss savings. In practice, this approach works well. Applications either
have a large area that they change constantly such as a matrix multiplication, or an area that
they mostly read such as a database.

Providing superpage reservations requires a steady supply of superpages to be available. To this
end, the virtual-memory system must take the stream of cached and freed 4-Kbyte pages and
defragment them back into superpages. The cached and free pages are kept on buddy lists that
aggregate the small pages back into bigger groups. For architectures that support more than one
superpage size, the buddy lists track all the useful page sizes as the smaller groups are
aggregated into bigger groups and eventually make their way up to maximum-size superpages.
When servicing page faults for non-reserved areas of address space, the 4-Kbyte memory page is
taken from a list of pages that have few if any buddies, thus preserving the larger pieces. The
result may be that a cache page with known content is used rather than a free page with no
useful contents. But the benefit of having more superpages available usually outweighs the loss
of a page that is typically not used again.

The pageout daemon (described in Section 6.12) remains unchanged. It continues to move pages
between its lists based on its best estimate of when and how they will be used most effectively.
The superpages used for reservations are built from only pages on the cached and free lists. The
parts of reserved superpages that have not been faulted are counted as free or cached. Thus, the
rate at which pages are consumed from the cache and free lists does not change, which means
that the pageout daemon is not forced to run faster than it did before superpages were added.

We have considered changing the pageout daemon to allow it to grab more actively referenced
pages to fill out holes in the buddy lists. The question then arises as to how many actively
referenced 4-Kbyte pages the pageout daemon can take to complete a superpage before the

filesystem-cache performance is too heavily impacted. It does not take many filesystem rereads
of lost cache data to wipe out the TLB-miss savings from a a single superpage. And the cost is
even higher if the filesystem-cache page was dirty and had to be written to reclaim the page only
to have it reread again. For all of these reasons, we have so far avoided these changes to the
pageout daemon.

The performance improvements of superpages is shown in Table 6.3. These numbers are taken
from much more extensive results in Navarro et al. [2002]. Of the more than 20 workloads
studied in the paper, the only one that showed a slowdown (-1.7 percent) was for one of the
programs in Spec Float 2000.

Table 6.3 Performance of superpages.

The first results column in the table shows the improvements on an architecture with four
superpage sizes while the second column shows the PC architecture with only a single 4-Mbyte
superpage size. Having multiple superpage sizes typically doubles the benefit derived from
superpages. The primary reason for the higher performance is the greater number of superpages
available and, hence, greater opportunity to use them.

6.12 Page Replacement

The service of page faults and other demands for memory may be satisfied from the free list for
some time, but eventually memory must be reclaimed for reuse. Some pages are reclaimed when
processes exit. On systems with a large amount of memory and low memory demand, exiting
processes may provide enough free memory to fill demand. This case arises when there is

enough memory for the kernel and for all pages that have ever been used by any current process.
Obviously, many computers do not have enough main memory to retain all pages in memory.
Thus, it eventually becomes necessary to move some pages to secondary storage—back to the
filesystem or to the swap space. Bringing in a page is demand driven. For paging it out, however,
there is no immediate indication when a page is no longer needed by a process. The kernel must
implement some strategy for deciding which pages to move out of memory so that it can replace
these pages with the ones that are currently needed in memory. Ideally, the strategy will choose
pages for replacement that will not be needed soon. An approximation to this strategy is to find
pages that have not been used actively or recently.

The 4.4BSD system implemented demand paging with a page-replacement algorithm that
approximated global least recently used [Easton & Franaszek, 1979]. In FreeBSD, the one-bit
use field for each page has been augmented with an activity counter to approximate global least
actively used. Both these algorithms are examples of a global page-replacement
algorithm: one in which the choice of a page for replacement is made according to systemwide
criteria. A local page-replacement algorithm would choose a process for which to replace
a page and then chose a page based on per-process criteria. Although the algorithm in FreeBSD
is similar in nature to that in 4.4BSD, its implementation is considerably different.

The kernel scans physical memory on a regular basis, considering pages for replacement. The
use of a systemwide list of pages forces all processes to compete for memory on an equal basis.
Note that it is also consistent with the way that FreeBSD treats other resources provided by the
system. A common alternative to allowing all processes to compete equally for memory is to
partition memory into multiple independent areas, each localized to a collection of processes
that compete with one another for memory. This scheme is used, for example, by the VMS
operating system [Kenah & Bate, 1984]. With this scheme, system administrators can guarantee
that a process, or collection of processes, will always have a minimal percentage of memory.
Unfortunately, this scheme can be difficult to administer. Allocating too small a number of
pages to a partition can result in underutilization of memory and excessive I/O activity to
secondary-storage devices, whereas setting the number too high can result in excessive
swapping [Lazowska & Kelsey, 1978].

The kernel divides the main memory into five lists:

1. Wired: Wired pages are locked in memory and cannot be paged out. Typically, these pages are
being used by the kernel or the physical-memory pager, or they have been locked down with
mlock. In addition, all the pages being used to hold the thread stacks of loaded (i.e., not
swapped-out) processes are also wired.

2. Active: Active pages are being used by one or more regions of virtual memory. Although the
kernel can page them out, doing so is likely to cause an active process to fault them back again.

3. Inactive: Inactive pages may be dirty and have contents that are still known, but they are not
usually part of any active region. If the contents of the page are dirty, the contents must be
written to backing store before the page can be reused. Once the page has been cleaned, it is
moved to the cache list. If the system becomes short of memory, the pageout daemon may try to
move active pages to the inactive list in the hopes of finding pages that are not really in use. The
selection criteria that are used by the pageout daemon to select pages to move from the active
list to the inactive list are described later in this section. When the free-memory and cache lists
drop too low, the pageout daemon traverses the inactive list to create more cache and free pages.

4. Cache: Cache pages have contents that are still known, but they are not part of any mapping.
If they are faulted into an active region, they will be moved from the cache list to the active list.
If they are used for a read or a write, they will be moved from the cache list first to the buffer
cache and eventually released to the inactive list. An mlock system call can reclaim a page from
the cache list and wire it. Pages on the cache list are similar to inactive pages except that they are
not dirty, either because they are unmodified since they were paged in or because they have
been written to their backing store. They can be claimed for a new use when a page is needed.

5. Free: Free pages have no useful contents and will be used to fulfill new page-fault requests.

The pages of main memory that can be used by user processes are those on the active, inactive,
cache, and free lists. Requests for new pages are usually taken first from the free list if it has
pages available, otherwise they will be taken from the cache list. Cache pages will be used in
preference to free-list pages that are part of a large cluster of pages or a superpage.

Ideally, the kernel would maintain a working set for each process in the system. It would then
know how much memory to provide to each process to minimize the latter’s page-fault behavior.
The FreeBSD virtual-memory system does not use the working-set model because it lacks
accurate information about the reference pattern of a process. It does track the number of pages
held by a process via the resident-set size, but it does not know which of the resident pages
constitute the working set. In 4.3BSD, the count of resident pages was used in making decisions
on whether there was enough memory for a process to be swapped in when that process wanted
to run. This feature was not carried over to the FreeBSD virtual-memory system. Although it
works well during periods of high memory demand, memory is so abundant on current
machines that swapping never happens, so it was not worth the effort to incorporate it into
FreeBSD systems.

Paging Parameters

The memory-allocation needs of processes compete constantly, through the page-fault handler,
with the overall system goal of maintaining a minimum threshold of pages in the inactive, cache,
and free lists. As the system operates, it monitors main-memory utilization and attempts to run
the pageout daemon frequently enough to keep the amount of inactive, cache, and free memory
at or above the minimum threshold shown in Table 6.4. When the page-allocation routine,
vm_page_alloc(), determines that more memory is needed, it awakens the pageout daemon.

Table 6.4 Available-memory thresholds.

The number of pages to be reclaimed by the pageout daemon is a function of the memory needs
of the system. As more memory is needed by the system, more pages are scanned. This scanning
causes the number of pages freed to increase. The pageout daemon determines the memory
needed by comparing the number of available-memory pages against several parameters that
are calculated during system startup. The desired values for the paging parameters are
communicated to the pageout daemon through global variables that may be viewed or changed
with sysctl. Likewise, the pageout daemon records its progress in global counters that may be
viewed or reset with sysctl. Progress is measured by the number of pages scanned over each
interval that it runs.

The goal of the pageout daemon is to maintain the inactive, cache, and free queues between the
minimum and target thresholds shown in Table 6.4. The pageout daemon achieves this goal by
moving pages from more active queues to less active queues to reach the indicated ranges. It
never moves pages to the free list. Rather, pages from the anonymous areas of exiting processes
are placed on the free list. It moves pages from the inactive list to the cache list to keep the sum
of free and cached pages near its target. It moves pages from the active list to the inactive list to
maintain the inactive list near its target.

The Pageout Daemon

Page replacement is done by the pageout daemon. The paging policy of the page-out daemon
is embodied in the vm_pageout() and vm_pageout_scan() routines. When the pageout daemon

reclaims pages that have been modified, it is responsible for writing them to the swap area. Thus,
the pageout daemon must be able to use normal kernel-synchronization mechanisms, such as
sleep(). It therefore runs as a separate process, with its own process structure and kernel stack.
Like init, the pageout daemon is created by an internal fork operation during system startup
(see Section 15.4); unlike init, however, it remains in kernel mode after the fork. The pageout
daemon simply enters vm_pageout() and never returns. Unlike some other users of the disk I/O
routines, the pageout process needs to perform its disk operations asynchronously so that it can
continue scanning in parallel with disk writes.

When running on systems with many CPUs, the demand for pages can vastly exceed the number
of pages that a single pageout daemon can provide. Starting in FreeBSD 10, the paging daemon
was multithreaded so that it would be able to keep up with heavy paging demand.

Historically, the pages were handled by a least recently used algorithm. The drawback to this
algorithm is that a sudden burst of memory activity can flush many useful pages from the cache.
To mitigate this behavior, FreeBSD uses a least actively used algorithm to preserve pages that
have a history of usage so that they will be favored over the once-used pages brought in during a
period of high memory demand.

When a page is first brought into memory, it is given an initial usage count of 5. Further usage
information is gathered by the pageout daemon during its periodic scans of memory. As each
page of memory is scanned, its reference bit is checked. If the bit is set, it is cleared and the
usage counter for the page is incremented (up to a limit of 64) by the number of references to
the page. If the reference bit is clear, the usage counter is decremented. When the usage counter
reaches 0, the page is moved from the active list to the inactive list. Pages that are repeatedly
used build up large usage counts that will cause them to remain on the active list much longer
than pages that are used just once.

The goal of the pageout daemon is to keep the number of pages on the inactive, cache, and free
lists within their desired ranges. Whenever an operation that uses pages causes the amount of
free memory to fall below the minimum thresholds, the pageout daemon is awakened. The
pageout-handling algorithm is shown in Figure 6.20. In the following overview, the lettered
points are references to the tags down the left side of the code.

A. The pageout daemon calculates the number of pages that need to be moved from the inactive
list to the cache list. To avoid saturating the I/O system, the pageout daemon limits the number
of I/O operations that it will start concurrently.

B. Scans the inactive list until the desired number of pages are moved. Skips over busy pages,
since they are likely being paged out and can be moved later when they are clean.

Figure 6.20 Pageout handling

C. If we find a page that has been referenced, then it has been moved to the inactive list
prematurely, so update its usage count and move it back to the active list. Pages with invalid
contents (usually caused by an I/O error) are removed from their vm_object and moved to the
free list. Pages that are clean can be moved to the cache list.

D. Dirty pages need to be paged out, but flushing a page is extremely expensive compared to
freeing a clean page. Thus, dirty pages are given extra time on the inactive queue by cycling
them through the queue twice before being flushed. They cycle through the list once more while
being cleaned. This extra time on the inactive queue will reduce unnecessary I/O caused by
prematurely paging out an active page. The clustering checks for up to 16 dirty pages on either
side of the selected page. The pager is only required to write the selected page. However, it may
write as many of the clustered dirty pages as it finds convenient. The scanning of the inactive list
stops initiating new writes if the number of pageouts in progress hits its limit. In 4.4BSD, the
I/O completions were handled by the pageout daemon. FreeBSD requires that pagers track their
own I/O operations including the appropriate updating of the written pages. The written-page
update at I/O completion does not move the page from the inactive list to the cache list. Rather,
the page remains on the inactive list until it is eventually moved to the cache list during a future
pass of the pageout daemon.

E. The pageout daemon calculates the number of pages that need to be moved from the active
list to the inactive list. As some will eventually need to be moved to the cache list, enough pages
must be moved to the inactive list to leave it at its target level after the cache list has been filled.

F. Scan the active list until the desired number of pages are moved. If we find a page that has
been referenced since our last scan, update its usage count and move it to the end of the active
list.

G. The page is not active, so decrements its usage count. If its usage is still above zero, moves it
to the end of the active list. Otherwise, moves it to the inactive list.

H. If the page-count targets have not been met, the swap-out daemon is started (see next
subsection) to try to clear additional memory.

I. If the kernel has been configured to not impose any limits on the amount of virtual memory
that it will grant, then it can find that it has nearly filled its memory and swap space. It avoids
going into deadlock by killing off the largest unprotected process.

Note that the page and vm_object locking has been elided in Figure 6.20 to simplify the
explanation.

Even when no additional pages are needed, the pageout daemon is awakened often enough to
ensure that it will scan all the pages on the active list once every vm_pageout_update_period
seconds. The default is to scan every active page once every 10 minutes. A 1-minute interval
would be better, but checking all of active memory on large memory machines once per minute
would put too much of a non-work load on the system. And even a 10-minute scan eliminates
the worst-case behaviors when no scanning is done for long periods of time.

Swapping

Although swapping is generally avoided, there are several times when it is used in FreeBSD to
address a serious memory shortage. Swapping is done in FreeBSD when any of the following
situations occur:

• The system becomes so short of memory that the paging process cannot free memory fast
enough to satisfy the demand. For example, a memory shortfall may happen when multiple
large processes are run on a machine lacking enough memory for the minimum working sets of
the processes.

• Processes are completely inactive for more than 10 seconds. Otherwise, such processes would
retain a few pages of memory associated with their thread stacks. Swapping out idle threads is
disabled by default as the extra delay in restarting them is not worth the small amount of
memory that is reclaimed. Swap operations completely remove a process from main memory,
including the process page tables, the pages of the data and the stack segments that are not
already in swap space, and the thread stacks.

Process swapping is invoked only when paging is unable to keep up with memory needs or when
short-term memory needs warrant swapping a process. In general, the swap-scheduling
mechanism does not do well under heavy load; system performance is much better when
memory scheduling can be done by the page-replacement algorithm than when the swap
algorithm is used.

Swap out is driven by the swap-out daemon, vmdaemon. The swap-out policy of the vmdaemon
is embodied in the vm_daemon() routine. If the swapping of idle processes is enabled and the
pageout daemon can find any processes that have been sleeping for more than 10 seconds
(swap_idle_threshold2, the cutoff for considering the time sleeping to be “a long time”), it will
swap them all out. Such processes have the least likelihood of making good use of the memory
that they occupy; thus, they are swapped out even if they are small. If none of these processes
are available, the pageout daemon will swap out all processes that has been sleeping for as
briefly as 2 seconds (swap_idle_threshold1). These criteria attempt to avoid swapping entirely
until the pageout daemon is clearly unable to keep enough memory free.

In 4.4BSD, if memory was still desperately low, the swap-out daemon would select to swap out
the runnable process that had been resident the longest. Once swapping of runnable processes
had begun, the processes eligible for swapping would take turns in memory so that no process
was frozen out entirely. The FreeBSD swap-out daemon will not select a runnable processes to
swap out. So, if the set of runnable processes do not fit in memory, the machine will effectively
deadlock. Current machines have enough memory that this condition usually does not arise. If it
does, FreeBSD avoids deadlock by killing the largest process. If the condition begins to arise in
normal operation, the 4.4BSD algorithm will need to be restored.

The mechanics of performing a swap out are simple. The swapped-in process flag P_INMEM is
cleared to show that the process is not resident in memory. The PS_SWAPPINGOUT flag is set
while the swap out is being done so that neither a second swap out nor a swap in is attempted at
the same time. If a runnable process is to be swapped (which currently never happens), it needs
to be removed from the runnable process queue. The kernel stacks for the threads of the process
are then marked as pageable, which allows the stack pages, along with any other remaining

pages for the process, to be paged out via the standard pageout mechanism. The swapped-out
process cannot be run until after it is swapped back into memory.

The Swap-In Process

Swap-in operations are done by the swapping process, swapper (process 0). This process is the
first one created by the system when the latter is started. The swap-in policy of the swapper is
embodied in the scheduler() routine. This routine swaps processes back in when memory is
available and they are ready to run. At any time, the swapper is in one of three states:

1. Idle: No swapped-out processes are ready to be run. Idle is the normal state.

2. Swapping in: At least one runnable process is swapped out, and scheduler() attempts to find
memory for it.

3. Swapping out: The system is short of memory, or there is not enough memory to swap in a
process. Under these circumstances, scheduler() awakens the pageout daemon to free pages and
to swap out other processes until the memory shortage abates.

If more than one swapped-out process is runnable, the first task of the swapper is to decide
which process to swap in. This decision may affect the decision about whether to swap out
another process. Each swapped-out process is assigned a priority based on:

• The length of time it has been swapped out

• Its nice value

• The amount of time it was asleep since it last ran

In general, the process that has been swapped out longest or was swapped out because it had
slept for a long time before being swapped will be brought in first. Once a process is selected, the
swapper checks to see whether there is enough memory free to swap in the process. Historically,
the system required as much memory to be available as was occupied by the process before that
process was swapped. Under FreeBSD, this requirement was reduced to a requirement that the
number of pages on the free and cache lists be at least equal to the minimum free-memory
threshold. If there is enough memory available, the process is brought back into memory. The
kernel stacks for the threads of the process are swapped in immediately, but the process loads
the rest of its working set by demand paging from the backing store. Thus, not all the memory
that is needed by the process is used immediately. Earlier BSD systems tracked the anticipated
demand and would only swap in runnable processes as free memory became available to fulfill

their expected needs. FreeBSD allows all swapped-out runnable processes to be swapped in as
soon as there is enough memory to load their thread stacks.

The procedure for swap in of a process is the reverse of that for swap out:

1. Memory is allocated for the kernel stack of each of the threads of the process and they are
read back from swap space.

2. The process is marked as resident, and its runnable threads are returned to the run queue
(i.e., those threads that are not stopped or sleeping).

After the swap in completes, the process is ready to run like any other, except that it has no
resident pages. It will bring in the pages that it needs by faulting them.

6.13 Portability

Everything discussed      in   this chapter up      to    this section has    been part of the
machine-independent data structures and algorithms. These parts of the virtual-memory system
require little change when FreeBSD is ported to a new architecture. This section will describe
the machine-dependent parts of the virtual-memory system: the parts of the virtual-memory
system that must be written as part of a port of FreeBSD to a new architecture. The role of the
machine-dependent parts of the virtual-memory system are to manage the page tables used by
the hardware memory-management unit (see Section 6.11) to control access to process and
kernel memory.

Often, a port to another architecture with a similar memory-management organization can be
used as a starting point for a new port. The 32-bit PC architecture uses the typical two-level
page-table organization shown in Figure 6.21. An address space is broken into 4-Kbyte virtual
pages, with each page identified by a 32-bit entry in the page table. Each page-table entry
contains the physical page number assigned to the virtual page, the access permissions allowed,
modify and reference information, and a bit showing that the entry contains valid information.
The 4 Mbyte of page-table entries are likewise divided into 4-Kbyte page-table pages, each of
which is described by a single 32-bit entry in the directory table. Directory-table entries are
nearly identical to page-table entries: They contain access bits, modify and reference bits, a valid
bit, and the physical page number of the page-table page described. One 4-Kbyte page—1024
directory-table entries—covers the maximum-size 4-Gbyte address space. The CR3 hardware
register contains the physical address of the directory table for the currently active process. The
64-bit PC architecture is similar except that it needs more levels of page tables.

Figure 6.21 Two-level page-table organization. Key: V—page-valid bit; M—page-modified bit;
R—page-referenced bit; ACC—page-access permissions.

The Role of the pmap Module

The machine-dependent code describes how the physical mapping is done between the
user-processes and kernel virtual addresses and the physical addresses of the main memory.
This mapping function includes management of access rights in addition to address translation.
The physical-mapping module, usually referred to as the pmap module, manages
machine-dependent translation and access tables that are used either directly or indirectly by
the memory-management hardware. For example, on the PC, the pmap maintains the
memory-resident directory and page tables for each process, as well as for the kernel. The
machine-dependent state required to describe the translation and access rights of a single page
is often referred to as a mapping or mapping structure.

The FreeBSD pmap interface shares many design characteristics with the pmap interface in
Mach 3.0. FreeBSD has added many functions to optimize range operations such as prefaulting
whole files and destroying an entire address space. The pmap module is intended to be logically
independent of the higher levels of the virtual-memory system. The interface deals strictly in
machine-independent page-aligned virtual and physical addresses and in machine-independent
protections.   The   machine-independent     page    size   may   be    a   multiple   of   the
architecture-supported page size. Thus, pmap operations must be able to affect more than one

physical page per logical page. The machine-independent protection is a simple encoding of
read, write, and execute permission bits. The pmap must map all possible combinations into
valid architecture-specific values.

A process’s pmap is considered to be a cache of mapping information kept in a
machine-dependent format. As such, it does not need to contain complete state for all valid
mappings. Mapping state is the responsibility of the machine-independent layer. With one
exception, the pmap module may throw away mapping state at its discretion to reclaim
resources. The exception is wired mappings, which should never cause a fault that reaches the
machine-independent vm_fault() routine. Thus, state for wired mappings must be retained in
its vm_pmap structure until it is removed explicitly.

In general, pmap routines may act either on a set of mappings defined by a virtual address range
or on all mappings for a particular physical address. Being able to act on individual or all virtual
mappings for a physical page requires that the mapping information maintained by the pmap
module be easily found by both virtual and physical addresses. For architectures such as the PC
that support memory-resident page tables, the virtual-to-physical, or forward lookup, may be a
simple emulation of the hardware page-table traversal. Physical-to-virtual, or reverse, lookup
uses a list of pv_entry structures, described in the next subsection, to find all the page-table
entries referencing a page. The list may contain multiple entries only if virtual-address
aliasing is allowed.

There are two strategies that can be used for management of pmap memory resources, such as
user-directory or page-table memory. The traditional and easiest approach is for the pmap
module to manage its own memory. Under this strategy, the pmap module can grab a fixed
amount of wired physical memory at system boot time, map that memory into the kernel’s
address space, and allocate pieces of the memory as needed for its own data structures. The
primary benefit is that this approach isolates the pmap module’s memory needs from those of
the rest of the system and limits the pmap module’s dependencies on other parts of the system.
This design is consistent with a layered model of the virtual-memory system in which the pmap
is the lowest, and hence self-sufficient, layer.

The disadvantage is that this approach requires the duplication of many of the
memory-management functions. The pmap module has its own memory allocator and
deallocator for its private heap—a heap that is statically sized and cannot be adjusted for varying
systemwide memory demands. For an architecture with memory-resident page tables, it must
keep track of noncontiguous chunks of processes’ page tables, because a process may populate
its address space sparsely. Handling this requirement entails duplicating much of the standard
list-management code, such as that used by the vm_map code.

An alternative approach, used by the PC, is to use the higher-level virtual-memory code
recursively to manage some pmap resources. Here, the 4-Kbyte directory table for each user
process is mapped into the address space of the kernel as part of setting up the process and
remains resident until the process exits. While a process is running, its page-table entries are
mapped into a virtually contiguous 4-Mbyte array of page-table entries in the kernel’s address
space. This organization leads to an obscure memory-saving optimization, exploited in the PC
pmap module, where the kernel’s page-table page describing the 4-Mbyte user page-table range
can double as the user’s directory table. The kernel also maintains alternate maps to hold
individual page-table pages of other nonrunning processes if it needs to access their address
space.

Using the same page-allocation routines as all the other parts of the system ensures that
physical memory is allocated only when needed and from the systemwide free-memory pool.
Page tables and other pmap resources also can be allocated from pageable kernel memory. This
approach easily and efficiently supports large sparse address spaces, including the kernel’s own
address space.

The vm_pmap data structures are contained in the machine-dependent include directory in the
file pmap.h. Most of the code for these routines is in the machine-dependent source directory
in the file pmap.c. The main tasks of the pmap module are these:

• System initialization and startup (pmap_bootstrap(), pmap_init(), pmap_growkernel())

• Allocation and deallocation of mappings of physical to virtual pages (pmap_enter(),
pmap_remove(), pmap_qenter(), pmap_qremove())

•   Change   of   access   and   wiring   attributes   for    mappings     (pmap_change_wiring(),
pmap_remove_all(), pmap_remove_write(), pmap_protect())

•    Maintenance      of     physical     page-usage         information    (pmap_clear_modify(),
pmap_is_modified(), pmap_ts_referenced())

• Initialization of physical pages (pmap_copy_page(), pmap_zero_page())

• Management of internal data structures (pmap_pinit(), pmap_release())

Each of these tasks is described in the following subsections.

Initialization and Startup

The first step in starting up the system is for the loader to bring the kernel image from a disk or
the network into the physical memory of the machine. The kernel load image looks much like
that of any other process; it contains a text segment, an initialized data segment, and an
uninitialized data segment. The loader places the kernel contiguously near the beginning of
physical memory. Unlike a user process that is demand paged into memory, the text and data
for the kernel are read into memory in their entirety. Following these two segments, the loader
zeros an area of memory equal to the size of the kernel’s uninitialized memory segment. After
loading the kernel, the loader passes control to the starting address given in the kernel
executable image. When the kernel begins executing, it is either executing with the MMU turned
off using the direct physical addresses or with a minimal predefined set of page tables.

The first task undertaken by the kernel is to set up the kernel vm_pmap, and any other data
structures that are necessary to describe the kernel’s virtual address space. On the PC, the initial
setup includes allocating and initializing the directory and page tables that map the statically
loaded kernel image and memory-mapped I/O address space, allocating a fixed amount of
memory for kernel page-table pages, allocating and initializing the kernel stack for the initial
process, reserving special areas of the kernel’s address space, and initializing assorted critical
vm_pmap-internal data structures. When done, it is possible to enable the MMU or switch to
the fully configured page tables. In either case, the kernel begins running in the context of
process zero.

Once the kernel is running in its virtual address space, it proceeds to initialize the rest of the
system. It determines the size of the physical memory, then calls pmap_bootstrap() and
vm_page_startup() to set up the initial vm_pmap data structures, to allocate the vm_page
structures, and to create a small, fixed-size pool of memory, which the kernel memory allocators
can use so that they can begin responding to memory allocation requests. Next, it makes a call to
set up the machine-independent portion of the virtual-memory system. It concludes with a call
to pmap_init(), which allocates all resources necessary to manage multiple user address spaces
and synchronizes the higher-level kernel virtual-memory data structures with the kernel
vm_pmap.

The pmap_init() function allocates a minimal amount of wired memory to use for kernel
page-table pages. The page-table space is expanded dynamically by the pmap_growkernel()
routine as it is needed while the kernel is running. Once allocated, it is never freed. The limit on
the size of the kernel’s address space is selected at boot time. On 64-bit architectures, the kernel
is typically given an address space large enough to directly map all of physical memory. On
32-bit architectures, the kernel is typically given a maximum of 1 Gbyte of address space.

In 4.4BSD, the memory managed by the buffer cache was separate from the memory managed
by the virtual-memory system. Since all the virtual-memory pages were used to map process
regions, it was sensible to create an inverted page table. This table was an array of pv_entry
structures. Each pv_entry described a single address translation and included the virtual
address, a pointer to the associated vm_pmap structure for that virtual address, a link for
chaining together multiple entries mapping this physical address, and additional information
specific to entries mapping page-table pages. Building a dedicated table was sensible, since all
valid pages were referenced by a vm_pmap, yet few had multiple mappings.

With the merger of the buffer cache into the virtual-memory system in FreeBSD, many pages of
memory are used to cache file data that is not mapped into any process address space. Thus,
preallocating a table of pv_entry structures is wasteful, since many of them would go unused. So,
FreeBSD allocates pv_entry structures on demand as pages are mapped into a process address
space.

Figure 6.22 shows the pv_entry references for a set of pages that have a single mapping. The
purpose of the pv_entry structures is to identify the address space that has the page mapped.
The machine-dependent part of each vm_page structure contains the head of a list of pv_entry
structures and a count of the number of entries on the list. In Figure 6.22, the vm_object has
cached its pages 5, 18, and 79. The list heads in the machine-dependent structures of these
vm_page structures would each point to a single pv_entry structure labelled in the figure with
the number of the vm_page structure that references them. Not shown in Figure 6.22 is that
each vm_pmap structure also maintains a list of all the pv_entry structures that reference it.

Figure 6.22 Physical pages with a single mapping.

Each pv_entry can reference only one physical map. When a vm_object becomes shared
between two or more processes, each physical page of memory may become mapped into two or
more sets of page tables. To track these multiple references, the pmap module must create
chains of pv_entry structures, as shown in Figure 6.23. Copy-on-write is an example of the need
to find all the mappings of a page as it requires that the page tables be set to read-only in all the

processes sharing the vm_object. The pmap module can implement this request by walking the
collection of pages cached by the vm_object to be made copy-on-write. For each page, it
traverses that page’s list of pv_entry structures. It then makes the appropriate change to the
page-table entry associated with each pv_entry structure.

Figure 6.23 Physical pages with multiple mappings.

A system with many shared vm_objects can require many pv_entry structures, which can use
an unreasonable amount of the kernel memory. The alternative would be to keep a list
associated with each vm_object of all the vm_map_entry structures that reference it. When it
becomes necessary to modify the mapping of all the references to the page, the kernel could
traverse this list, checking the address space associated with each vm_map_entry to see if it
held a reference to the page. For each page found, it could make the appropriate update.

The pv_entry structures consume more memory but reduce the time to do a common operation.
For example, consider a system running 1000 processes that all share a common library.
Without the pv_entry list, the cost to change a page to copy-on-write would require checking all
1000 processes. With the pv_entry list, only those processes using the page would need to be
inspected.

Mapping Allocation and Deallocation

The primary responsibility of the pmap module is validating (allocating) and invalidating
(deallocating) mappings of physical pages to virtual addresses. The physical pages represent
cached portions of a vm_object that is providing data from a file or an anonymous memory
region. A physical page is bound to a virtual address because that vm_object is being mapped
into a process’s address space either explicitly by mmap or implicitly by fork or exec.
Physical-to-virtual address mappings are not created at the time that the vm_object is mapped;
instead, their creation is delayed until the first reference to a particular page is made. At that
point, an access fault will occur, and pmap_enter() will be called. The pmap_enter() function is
responsible for any required side effects associated with creation of a new mapping. Such side
effects are largely the result of entering a second translation for an already mapped physical
page—for example, as the result of a copy-on-write operation. Typically, this operation requires
flushing uniprocessor or multiprocessor TLB or cache entries to maintain consistency.

In addition to its use to create new mappings, pmap_enter() may also be called to modify the
wiring or protection attributes of an existing mapping or to rebind an existing mapping for a
virtual address to a new physical address. The kernel can handle changing attributes by calling
the appropriate interface routine, described in the next subsection. Changing the target physical
address of a mapping is simply a matter of first removing the old mapping and then handling it
like any other new mapping request.

The pmap_enter() function is the only routine that cannot lose state or delay its action. When
called, it must create a mapping as requested, and it must validate that mapping before
returning to the caller. On the PC, pmap_enter() must first check whether a page-table entry
exists for the requested address. If a physical page has not yet been allocated to the process
page-table at the location required for the new mapping, a zeroed page is allocated, wired, and
inserted into the directory table of the process.

After ensuring that all page-table resources exist for the mapping being entered, pmap_enter()
validates or modifies the requested mapping as follows:

1. Checks to see whether a mapping structure already exists for this virtual-to-physical address
translation. If one does, the call must be changing the protection or wiring attributes of the
mapping; it is handled as described in the next subsection on pmap_protect(). Returns from
pmap_enter().

2. Otherwise, if a mapping exists for this virtual address but it references a different physical
address, that mapping is removed.

3. The hold count on a page-table page is incremented each time a new page reference is added
and decremented each time an old page reference is removed. When the last valid page is
removed, the hold count drops to zero, the page is unwired, and the page-table page is freed as it
contains no useful information.

4. A page-table entry is created and validated, the hold count is set to 1, and the cache and TLB
entries are flushed as necessary.

5. If the physical address is outside the range managed by the pmap module (e.g., a
frame-buffer page), no pv_entry structure is needed. Otherwise, for the case of a new mapping
for a physical page that is mapped into an address space, a pv_entry structure is created.

6. For machines with a virtually indexed cache, a check is made to see whether this physical
page already has other mappings. If it does, all mappings may need to be marked cache
inhibited, to avoid cache inconsistencies.

When a vm_object is unmapped from an address space, either explicitly by munmap or
implicitly on process exit, the pmap module is invoked to invalidate and remove the mappings
for all physical pages caching data for the vm_object. Unlike pmap_enter(), pmap_remove()
can be called with a virtual-address range encompassing more than one mapping. Hence, the
kernel does the unmapping by looping over all virtual pages in the range, ignoring those for
which there is no mapping and removing those for which there is one.

The pmap_remove() function on the PC is simple. It loops over the specified address range,
invalidating individual page mappings. Since pmap_remove() can be called with large sparsely
allocated regions, such as an entire process virtual-address range, it needs to skip invalid entries
within the range efficiently. It skips invalid entries by first checking the directory-table entry for
a particular address and, if an entry is invalid, skipping to the next 4-Mbyte boundary. When all
page mappings have been invalidated, any necessary global cache flushing is done.

To invalidate a single mapping, the kernel locates and marks as invalid the appropriate
page-table entry. The reference and modify bits for the page are saved in the page’s vm_page
structure for future retrieval. If this mapping was a user mapping, the hold count for the
page-table page is decremented. When the count reaches zero, the page-table page can be
reclaimed because it contains no more valid mappings. When a user page-table page is removed
from the kernel’s address space (i.e., as a result of removing the final valid user mapping from
that page), the process’s directory table must be updated. The kernel does this update by
invalidating the appropriate directory-table entry. If the physical address from the mapping is
outside the managed range, nothing more is done. Otherwise, the pv_entry structure is found
and is deallocated.

The pmap_qenter() and pmap_qremove() are faster versions of the pmap_enter() and
pmap_remove() functions that can be used by the kernel to create and remove temporary
mappings quickly. They can only be used on nonpageable mappings in the address space of the
kernel. For example, the buffer-cache management routines use these routines to map file pages
into kernel memory so that they can be read or written by the filesystem.

Change of Access and Wiring Attributes for Mappings

An important role of the pmap module is to manipulate the hardware access protections for
pages. These manipulations may be applied to all mappings covered by a virtual-address range
within a vm_pmap via pmap_protect(), or they may be applied to all mappings of a particular
physical page across vm_pmaps via pmap_remove_write() and pmap_remove_all(). There are
two features common to both calls. First, either form may be called with a protection value of
VM_PROT_NONE to remove a range of virtual addresses or to remove all mappings for a
particular physical page, which it does by calling pmap_remove(). Second, these routines
should never add write permission to the affected mappings. Thus, calls including
VM_PROT_WRITE should make no changes. This restriction is necessary for the copy-on-write
mechanism to function properly. The request to make the page writable is made only in the
vm_map_entry structure. When a later write attempt on the page is made by the process, a
page fault will occur. The page-fault handler will inspect the vm_map_entry and determine that
the write should be permitted. If it is a copy-on-write page, the fault handler will make any
necessary copies before calling pmap_enter() to enable writing on the page. Thus, write
permission on a page is added only via calls to the pmap_enter() function.

The pmap_protect() function is used primarily by the mprotect system call to change the
protection for a region of process address space (though its functionality is also duplicated in
pmap_enter() as described in step 1 of the previous subsection). The strategy is similar to that
of pmap_remove(): Loop over all virtual pages in the range and apply the change to all valid
mappings that are found. Invalid mappings are left alone.

For the PC, pmap_protect() first checks for the special cases. If the requested permission is
VM_PROT_NONE, it calls pmap_remove() to handle the revocation of all access permission. If
VM_PROT_WRITE is included, it just returns immediately. For a normal protection value,
pmap_protect() loops over the given address range, skipping invalid mappings. For valid
mappings, the page-table entry is looked up, and, if the new protection value differs from the
current value, the entry is modified and any TLB and cache flushing is done. As occurs with
pmap_remove(), any global cache actions are delayed until the entire range has been modified.

The pmap_remove_write() function is used internally by the virtual-memory system to set
read-only permission when a copy-on-write operation is set up (e.g., during fork). The
pmap_remove_all() function removes all access permissions before doing page replacement to
force all references to a page to block pending the completion of its operation.

The addition of write enable must be done on a page-by-page basis by the page-fault handling
routine   as   described    for   pmap_protect().       Otherwise,   pmap_remove_write()       and
pmap_remove_all() traverse the list of pv_entry structures for the requested page, invalidating
the individual mappings as described in the previous subsection. As occurs with
pmap_protect(), the entry is checked to ensure that it is changing before expensive TLB and
cache flushes are done. Note that TLB and cache flushing differ from those for pmap_remove(),
since they must invalidate entries from multiple process contexts, rather than invalidating
multiple entries from a single process context.

The pmap_change_wiring() function is called to wire or unwire a single machine-independent
virtual page within a vm_pmap. As described in the previous subsection, wiring informs the
pmap module that a mapping should not cause a hardware fault that reaches the
machine-independent vm_fault() code. Wiring is typically a software attribute that has no effect
on the hardware MMU state: it simply tells the pmap not to throw away state about the mapping.
As such, if a pmap module never discards state, then it is not strictly necessary for the module
even to track the wired status of pages. The only side effect of not tracking wiring information in
the vm_pmap is that the mlock system call cannot be completely implemented without a wired
page-count statistic.

The PC pmap implementation maintains wiring information. An unused bit in the
page-table-entry structure records a page’s wired status. The pmap_change_wiring() function
sets or clears this bit when it is invoked with a valid virtual address. Since the wired bit is
ignored by the hardware, there is no need to modify the TLB or cache when the bit is changed.

Maintenance of Physical Page-Usage Information

The machine-independent page-management code needs to be able to get basic information
about the usage and modification of pages from the underlying hardware. The pmap module
facilitates the collection of this information without requiring the machine-independent code to
understand the details of the mapping tables by providing a set of interfaces to query and clear
the reference and modify bits. The pageout daemon can call vm_page_test_dirty() to
determine whether a page is dirty. If the page is dirty, the pageout daemon can write it to
backing store and       then call    pmap_clear_modify()       to clear the modify       bit. The
pmap_clear_modify() routine clears the modified bit in the attribute array and then loops over

all pv_entry structures associated with the physical page, clearing the hardware-maintained
page-table-entry bits. This final step may involve TLB or cache flushes along the way or
afterward. Similarly, when the pageout daemon wants to update the active count for a page, it
uses pmap_ts_referenced() to count and clear the number of uses of the page since it was last
scanned.

One important feature of the query routines is that they should return valid information even if
there are currently no mappings for the page in question. Thus, referenced and modified
information cannot just be gathered from the hardware-maintained bits of the various
page-table or TLB entries; rather, there must be a place where the information is retained when
a mapping is removed.

For the PC, the modified information for a page is stored in the dirty field of its vm_page
structure. Initially cleared, the information is updated by calling the vm_page_test_dirty()
routine whenever a mapping for a page is considered for removal. The vm_page_test_dirty()
routine first checks the dirty field and, if it is set, returns immediately. Since this attribute array
contains only past information, it still needs to check status bits in the page-table entries for
currently valid mappings of the page. This information is checked by calling the
machine-dependent pmap_is_modified() routine that traverses the pv_entry structures
associated with the physical page, examining the modified bit for the pv_entry’s associated
page-table entry. It can return TRUE as soon as it encounters a set bit or FALSE if the bit is not
set in any page-table entry. If it returns TRUE, vm_page_test_dirty() sets the dirty field before
returning.

The referenced information for a page is stored in the act_count field and as a flag of its
vm_page structure. Initially cleared, the information is updated periodically by the pageout
daemon. As it scans memory, the pageout daemon calls the pmap_ts_referenced() routine to
collect a count of references to the page. The pmap_ts_referenced() routine returns zero if it is
not passed a managed physical page. Otherwise, it traverses the pv_entry structures associated
with the physical page, examining and clearing the referenced bit for the pv_entry’s associated
page-table entry. It returns the number of referenced bits that it found.

Initialization of Physical Pages

Two interfaces are provided to allow the higher-level virtual-memory routines to initialize
physical memory. The pmap_zero_page() function takes a physical address and fills the page
with zeros. The pmap_copy_page() function takes two physical addresses and copies the
contents of the first page to the second page. Since both take physical addresses, the pmap

module will most likely have to first map those pages into the kernel’s address space before it
can access them.

Each CPU in the PC implementation has a pair of kernel virtual addresses reserved for zeroing
and copying pages. The pmap_zero_page() function maps the specified physical address into
the reserved virtual address, calls bzero() to clear the page, and then removes the temporary
mapping with the single translation-invalidation primitive used by pmap_remove(). Similarly,
pmap_copy_page() creates mappings for both physical addresses, uses bcopy() to make the
copy, and then removes both mappings.

Management of Internal Data Structures

The remaining pmap interface routines are used for management and synchronization of
internal   data    structures.   The   pmap_pinit()   function    creates   an   instance   of   the
machine-dependent vm_pmap structure. It is used by the vmspace_fork() and vmspace_exec()
routines when creating new address spaces during a fork or exec. The pmap_release() function
deallocates the vm_pmap’s resources. It is used by the vmspace_free() routine when cleaning
up a vmspace when a process exits.

Exercises

6.1 What does it mean for a machine to support virtual memory? What four hardware facilities
are typically required for a machine to support virtual memory?

6.2 What is the relationship between paging and swapping on a demand-paged virtual-memory
system? Explain whether it is desirable to provide both mechanisms in the same system. Can
you suggest an alternative to providing both mechanisms?

6.3 What three policies characterize paging systems?

6.4 What is copy-on-write? In most UNIX applications, the fork system call is followed
almost immediately by an exec system call. Why does this behavior make it particularly
attractive to use copy-on-write in implementing fork?

6.5 Explain why the vfork system call will always be more efficient than a clever
implementation of the fork system call.

6.6 When a process exits, all its pages may not be placed immediately on the memory free list.
Explain this behavior.

6.7 Why does the kernel have both the traditional malloc() and free() interface and the zone
allocator? Explain when each type of interface is useful.

6.8 What is the purpose of superpages? Why is it needed?

6.9 What purpose does the pageout-daemon process serve in the virtual-memory system?

6.10 What is clustering? Where is it used in the virtual-memory system?

6.11 Why is the historic use of the sticky bit to lock a process image in memory no longer
useful in FreeBSD?

6.12 Give two reasons for swapping to be initiated.

*6.13 The 4.3BSD virtual-memory system had a text cache that retained the identity of text
pages from one execution of a program to the next. How does the caching of vnode vm_objects
in FreeBSD improve on the performance of the 4.3BSD text cache?

**6.14 FreeBSD reduces the length of shadow chains by checking at each copy-on-write fault
whether the vm_object taking the fault completely shadows the vm_object below it in the chain.
If it does, a collapse can be done. One alternative would be to calculate the number of live
references to a page after each copy-on-write fault and, if only one reference remains, to move
that page to the vm_object that references it. When the last page is removed, the chain can be
collapsed. Implement this algorithm and compare its cost to the current algorithm.

**6.15 The pv_entry structures could be replaced by keeping a list associated with each
vm_object of all the vm_map_entry structures that reference it. If each vm_map_entry
structure had only a single list pointer in it, only the final vm_object would be able to reference
it. Shadow vm_objects would have to find their final vm_object to find their referencing
vm_map_entry structure. Implement an algorithm to find all the references to the pages of a
shadow vm_object using this scheme. Compare its cost with that of the current algorithm using
pv_entry structures.

**6.16 Port the code from 4.3BSD that would forcibly swap out runnable processes when the
paging rate gets too high. Run three or more processes that each have a working set of 40
percent of the available memory. Compare the performance of this benchmark using the 4.3BSD
algorithm and the current algorithm.

References

Babao lu & Joy, 1981.

Ö. Babao lu & W. N. Joy, “Converting a Swap-Based System to Do Paging in an Architecture
Lacking Page-Referenced Bits,” Proceedings of the Eighth Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, pp. 78–86, December 1981.

Bansal & Modha, 2004.

S. Bansal & D. Modha, “CAR: Clock with Adaptive Replacement,” Proceedings of the Third
USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies, pp. 187–200, April 2004.

Belady, 1966.

L. A. Belady, “A Study of Replacement Algorithms for Virtual Storage Systems,” IBM Systems
Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 78–101, April 1966.

Bonwick, 1994.

J. Bonwick, “The Slab Allocator: An Object-Caching Kernel Memory Allocator,” Proceedings of
the 1994 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, pp. 87–98, June 1994.

Bonwick & Adams, 2001.

J. Bonwick & J. Adams, “Magazines and Vmem: Extending the Slab Allocator to Many CPUs and
Arbitrary Resources,” Proceedings of the 2001 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, pp.
15–34, June 2001.

Coffman & Denning, 1973.

E. G. Coffman, Jr. & P. J. Denning, Operating Systems Theory, p. 243, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1973.

Denning, 1970.

P. J. Denning, “Virtual Memory,” Computer Surveys, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 153–190, September
1970.

Easton & Franaszek, 1979.

M. C. Easton & P. A. Franaszek, “Use Bit Scanning in Replacement Decisions,” IEEE
Transactions on Computing, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 133–141, February 1979.

Gingell et al., 1987.

R. Gingell, J. Moran, & W. Shannon, “Virtual Memory Architecture in SunOS,” USENIX
Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 81–94, June 1987.

Jiang et al., 2005.

S. Jiang, F. Chen, & X. Zhang, “CLOCK-Pro: An Effective Improvement of the CLOCK
Replacement,” USENIX Annual Technical Conference, General Track, pp. 323–336, June 2005.

Johnstone & Wilson, 1998.

M. Johnstone & P. Wilson, “The Memory Fragmentation Problem: Solved?,” ISMM’98
Proceedings of the ACM International Symposium on Memory Management, pp. 26–36,
available from ftp://ftp.dcs.gla.ac.uk/pub/drastic/gc/wilson.ps, October 1998.

Kenah & Bate, 1984.

L. J. Kenah & S. F. Bate, VAX/VMS Internals and Data Structures, Digital Press, Bedford, MA,
1984.

Kessler & Hill., 1992.

R. E. Kessler & M. D. Hill., “Page Placement Algorithms for Large Real-Indexed Caches.,” ACM
Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 338–359, available from
ftp://ftp.cs.wisc.edu/markhill/Papers/tocs92_coloring.pdf, July 1992.

King, 1971.

W. F. King, “Analysis of Demand Paging Algorithms,” IFIP, pp. 485–490, North Holland,
Amsterdam, 1971.

Korn & Vo, 1985.

D. Korn & K. Vo, “In Search of a Better Malloc,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings,
pp. 489–506, June 1985.

Lazowska & Kelsey, 1978.

E. D. Lazowska & J. M. Kelsey, “Notes on Tuning VAX/VMS,” Technical Report 78-12-01,
Department of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, December 1978.

Marshall, 1979.

W. T. Marshall, “A Unified Approach to the Evaluation of a Class of ‘Working Set Like’
Replacement Algorithms,” PhD Thesis, Department of Computer Engineering, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, May 1979.

Navarro et al., 2002.

J. Navarro, S. Iyer, P. Druschel, & A. Cox, “Practical, transparent operating system support for
superpages,” USENIX 5th Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, pp.
89–104,                                          available                                      from
http://www.usenix.org/publications/library/proceedings/osdi02/tech/navarro.html, December
2002.

Rashid et al., 1987.

R. Rashid, A. Tevanian, M. Young, D. Golub, R. Baron, D. Black, W. Bolosky, & J. Chew,
“Machine-Independent        Virtual    Memory     Management       for   Paged   Uniprocessor   and
Multiprocessor Architectures,” Operating Systems Review, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 31–39, October
1987.

Tevanian, 1987.

A. Tevanian, “Architecture-Independent Virtual Memory Management for Parallel and
Distributed Environments: The Mach Approach,” Department of Computer Science,
Carnegie-Mellon University, available from http://reports-archive.adm.cs.cmu.edu/cs.html,
December 1987.

Wilson et al., 1995.

P. Wilson, M. Johnstone, M. Neely, & D. Boles, “Dynamic Storage Allocation: A Survey and
Critical Review,” Proceedings of the International Workshop on Memory Management,
available from http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/wilson95dynamic.html, September 1995.

Young, 1989.

M.   W.    Young,      Exporting   a   User     Interface    to   Memory   Management     from    a
Communication-Oriented Operating System, CMU-CS-89-202, Department of Computer
Science, Carnegie-Mellon University, November 1989.

