                           Part III: I/O System

                     Chapter 7. I/O System Overview

Figure 7.1 shows an overview of the entire kernel. This chapter focuses on the upper part of that
figure. It describes the management and operation of file descriptors, the virtual filesystem
interface (VFS), the facilities provided by the kernel to the filesystems operating under the VFS,
and the provision that the kernel makes for stacking multiple filesystems.

Figure 7.1 Kernel I/O structure.

Chapter 8 will describe the lower part of Figure 7.1. It covers the various types of device drivers
in the system, their aggregation and delivery by their client subsystems, and the infrastructure
needed to support and operate them.

7.1 Descriptor Management and Services

For user processes, all I/O is done through descriptors. The user interface to descriptors was
described in Section 2.7. This section describes how the kernel manages descriptors and how it
provides descriptor services, such as locking and polling.

System calls that refer to open files take a file descriptor as an argument to specify the file. The
file descriptor is used by the kernel to index into the descriptor table for the current process
(kept in the filedesc structure, a substructure of the process structure for the process) to locate a
file entry, or file structure. The relationships of these data structures are shown in Figure
7.2.

Figure 7.2 File-descriptor reference to a file entry.

The file entry provides a file type and a pointer to an underlying object for the descriptor. The
object types supported in FreeBSD are shown in Table 7.1:

• For data files, the file entry points to a vnode structure that references a substructure
containing the filesystem-specific information described in Chapters 9 through 11. The vnode
layer is described in Section 7.3. Special files do not have data blocks allocated on the disk; they
are handled by the special-device filesystem that calls appropriate drivers to handle I/O for
them.

• For access to interprocess communication including networking, the FreeBSD file entry may
reference a socket.

• For unnamed high-speed local communication, the file entry will reference a pipe. Earlier
FreeBSD systems used sockets for local communication, but optimized support was added for
pipes to improve their performance.

• For named high-speed local communication, the file entry will reference a fifo. As with pipes,
optimized support was added for fifos to improve performance.

• For POSIX.1-2004-compliant named high-speed local communication, the file entry will
reference a message queue. As with pipes, optimized support was added for message queues to
improve performance.

• For notification of kernel events, the file entry will reference a kqueue. The kqueue interface
is described at the end of this section.

• For systems that have cryptographic support in hardware, the file entry will provide direct
access to that hardware.

• For POSIX.1-2004-compliant shared memory (using the shm_open system call), the file entry
will reference a shared-memory object. Before FreeBSD 7.0, POSIX shared memory was
implemented with files.

• For POSIX.1-2004-compliant semaphores (using the sem_open system call), the file entry will
reference a semaphore.

• For a pseudo-terminals device pair, file entries reference a pseudo-terminal’s master and slave
devices. Pseudo-terminals are described in Section 8.6.

• For compatibility with Linux, a file entry may reference a device directly rather than through
the vnode interface.

• For capability mode in which processes are unable to use PIDs, because PIDs are a global
namespace, a file entry references a process. The descriptor for this file entry allows systems
running in capability mode to create and manage child processes without recourse to PIDs. The
uses for processes referenced by descriptors are described in Section 5.7.

Table 7.1 File descriptor types.

The virtual-memory system supports the mapping of files into a process’s address space. Here,
the file descriptor must reference a vnode or a POSIX shared-memory region that will be
partially or completely mapped into the user’s address space.

Open File Entries

The set of file entries is the focus of activity for file descriptors. They contain the information
necessary to access the underlying objects and to maintain common information.

The file entry is an object-oriented data structure. Each entry contains a type and an array of
function pointers that translate the generic operations on file descriptors into the specific
actions associated with their type. The operations that must be implemented for each type are as
follows:

• Read from the descriptor

• Write to the descriptor

• Truncate the descriptor

• Change the mode or owner of the descriptor

• Poll the descriptor

• Do ioctl operations on the descriptor

• Collect stat information for the descriptor

• Check to see if there are any kqueue events pending for the descriptor

• Close and possibly deallocate the object associated with the descriptor

Note that there is no open() routine defined in the object table. FreeBSD treats descriptors in an
object-oriented fashion only after they are created. This approach was taken because the various
descriptor types have different characteristics. Generalizing the interface to handle all types of
descriptors at open time would have complicated an otherwise simple interface. Vnode
descriptors are created by the open system call; socket descriptors are created by the socket
system call; fifo descriptors are created by the pipe system call; message queues are created
using the mq_open system call.

Each file entry has a pointer to a data structure that contains information specific to the instance
of the underlying object. The data structure is opaque to the routines that manipulate the file
entry. A reference to the data structure is passed on each call to a function that implements a file
operation. All state associated with an instance of an object must be stored in that instance’s
data structure; the underlying objects are not permitted to manipulate the file entry themselves.

The read and write system calls do not take an offset in the file as an argument. Instead, each
read or write updates the current file offset in the file according to the number of bytes
transferred. The offset determines the position in the file for the next read or write. The offset
can be set directly by the lseek system call. Since more than one process may open the same file,
and each such process needs its own offset for the file, the offset cannot be stored in the
per-object data structure. Thus, each open system call allocates a new file entry, and the open
file entry contains the offset.

Some semantics associated with all file descriptors are enforced at the descriptor level, before
the underlying system call is invoked. These semantics are maintained in a set of flags
associated with the descriptor. For example, the flags record whether the descriptor is open for
reading, writing, or both reading and writing. If a descriptor is marked as open for reading only,
an attempt to write it will be caught by the descriptor code. Thus, the functions defined for
performing reading and writing do not need to check the validity of the request; we can
implement them knowing that they will never receive an invalid request.

The application-visible flags are described in the next subsection. In addition to the
application-visible flags, the flags field also has information on whether the descriptor holds a
shared or exclusive lock on the underlying file. The locking primitives could be extended to work
on sockets, as well as on files. However, the descriptors for a socket rarely refer to the same file
entry. The only way for two processes to share the same socket descriptor is for a parent to share
the descriptor with its child by forking or for one process to pass the descriptor to another in a
message.

Each file entry has a reference count. A single process may have multiple references to the entry
because of calls to the dup or fcntl system calls. Also, file structures are inherited by the child
process after a fork, so several different processes may reference the same file entry. Thus, a
read or write by either process on the twin descriptors will advance the file offset. This semantic
allows two processes to read the same file or to interleave output to the same file. Another
process that has independently opened the file will refer to that file through a different file
structure with a different file offset. This functionality was the original reason for the existence
of the file structure; the file structure provides a place for the file offset between the descriptor
and the underlying object.

Each time that a new reference is created, the reference count is incremented. When a
descriptor is closed (in any one of three ways: (1) explicitly with a close: (2) implicitly after an
exec because the descriptor has been marked as close-on-exec: or (3) on process exit), the
reference count is decremented. When the reference count drops to zero, the file entry is freed.

The close-on-exec flag is kept in the descriptor table rather than in the file entry. This flag is not
shared among all the references to the file entry because it is an attribute of the file descriptor
itself. The close-on-exec flag is the only piece of information that is kept in the descriptor table
rather than being shared in the file entry.

Management of Descriptors

The fcntl system call manipulates the file structure. It can be used to make the following changes
to a descriptor:

• Duplicate a descriptor as though by a dup system call.

• Get or set the close-on-exec flag. When a process forks, all the parent’s descriptors are
duplicated in the child. The child process then execs a new process. Any of the child’s
descriptors that were marked close-on-exec are closed. The remaining descriptors are available
to the newly executed process.

• Set the no-delay (O_NONBLOCK) flag to put the descriptor into nonblocking mode. In
nonblocking mode, if any data are available for a read operation, or if any space is available for a
write operation, an immediate partial read or write is done. If no data are available for a read
operation, or if a write operation would block, the system call returns an error (EAGAIN)
showing that the operation would block, instead of putting the process to sleep. This facility is
not implemented for local filesystems in FreeBSD, because local-filesystem I/O is always
expected to complete within a few milliseconds.

• Set the synchronous (O_FSYNC) flag to force all writes to the file to be written synchronously
to the disk.

• Set the direct (O_DIRECT) flag to request that the kernel attempt to write the data directly
from the user application to the disk rather than copying it via kernel buffers.

• Set the append (O_APPEND) flag to force all writes to append data to the end of the file,
instead of at the descriptor’s current location in the file. This feature is useful when, for example,
multiple processes are writing to the same log file.

• Set the asynchronous (O_ASYNC) flag to request that the kernel watch for a change in the
status of the descriptor, and arrange to send a signal (SIGIO) when a read or write becomes
possible.

• Send a signal to a process when an exception condition arises, such as when urgent data arrive
on an interprocess-communication channel.

• Set or get the process identifier or process-group identifier to which the two I/O-related
signals in the previous steps should be sent.

• Test or change the status of a lock on a range of bytes within an underlying file. Locking
operations are described later in this section.

The implementation of the dup system call is easy. If the process has reached its limit on open
files, the kernel returns an error. Otherwise, the kernel scans the current process’s descriptor
table, starting at descriptor zero, until it finds an unused entry. The kernel allocates the entry to
point to the same file entry as does the descriptor being duplicated. The kernel then increments
the reference count on the file entry and returns the index of the allocated descriptor-table entry.
The fcntl system call provides a similar function, except that it specifies a descriptor from which
to start the scan.

Sometimes, a process wants to allocate a specific descriptor-table entry. Such a request is made
with the dup2 system call. The process specifies the descriptor-table index into which the
duplicated reference should be placed. The kernel implementation is the same as for dup, except
that the scan to find a free entry is changed to close the requested entry if that entry is open and
then to allocate the entry as before. No action is taken if the new and old descriptors are the
same.

The system implements getting or setting the close-on-exec flag via the fcntl system call by
making the appropriate change to the flags field of the associated descriptor-table entry. Other
attributes that fcntl manipulates operate on the flags in the file entry. However, the
implementation of the various flags cannot be handled by the generic code that manages the file
entry. Instead, the file flags must be passed through the object interface to the type-specific
routines to do the appropriate operation on the underlying object. For example, manipulation of
the nonblocking flag for a socket must be done by the socket layer, since only that layer knows
whether an operation can block.

The implementation of the ioctl system call is broken into two major levels. The upper level
handles the system call itself. The ioctl call includes a descriptor, a command, and pointer to a
data area. The command argument encodes what the size is of the data area for the parameters

and whether the parameters are input, output, or both input and output. The upper level is
responsible for decoding the command argument, allocating a buffer, and copying in any input
data. If a return value is to be generated and there is no input, the buffer is zeroed. Finally, the
ioctl is dispatched through the file-entry ioctl function, along with the I/O buffer, to the
lower-level routine that implements the requested operation.

The lower level does the requested operation. Along with the command argument, it receives a
pointer to the I/O buffer. The upper level has already checked for valid memory references, but
the lower level may do more precise argument validation because it knows more about the
expected nature of the arguments. However, it does not need to copy the arguments in or out of
the user process. If the command is successful and produces output, the lower level places the
results in the buffer provided by the top level. When the lower level returns, the upper level
copies the results to the process.

Asynchronous I/O

Historically, UNIX systems did not have the ability to do asynchronous I/O beyond the ability to
do background writes to the filesystem. An asynchronous I/O interface was defined by the
POSIX.1b-1993 realtime group. Shortly after its ratification, an implementation was added to
FreeBSD.

An asynchronous read is started with aio_read; an asynchronous write is started with aio_write.
The kernel builds an asynchronous I/O request structure that contains all the information
needed to do the requested operation. If the request cannot be immediately satisfied from kernel
buffers, the request structure is queued for processing by an asynchronous kernel-based I/O
daemon and the system call returns. The next available asynchronous I/O daemon handles the
request using the usual kernel synchronous I/O path.

When the daemon finishes the I/O, the asynchronous I/O structure is marked as finished along
with a return value or error code. The application uses the aio_error system call to poll to find if
the I/O is complete. This call is implemented by checking the status of the asynchronous I/O
request structure created by the kernel. If an application gets to the point where it cannot
proceed until an I/O completes, it can use the aio_suspend system call to wait until an I/O is
done. Here, the application is put to sleep on its asynchronous I/O request structure and is
awakened by the asynchronous I/O daemon when the I/O completes. Alternatively, the
application can request that a specified signal be sent when the I/O is done.

The aio_return system call gets the return value from the asynchronous request once aio_error,
aio_suspend, or the arrival of a completion signal has indicated that the I/O is done. FreeBSD

has also added the nonstandard aio_waitcomplete system call that combines the functions of
aio_suspend     and    aio_return     into   a      single   operation.   For   either   aio_return   or
aio_waitcomplete, the return information is copied out to the application from the
asynchronous I/O request structure and the asynchronous I/O request structure is then freed.

File-Descriptor Locking

Early UNIX systems had no provision for locking files. Processes that needed to synchronize
access to a file had to use a separate “lock file.” A process would try to create a lock file. If the
creation succeeded, then the process could proceed with its update; if the creation failed, the
process would wait and then try again. This mechanism had three drawbacks:

1. Processes consumed CPU time by looping over attempts to create locks.

2. Locks left lying around because of system crashes had to be removed (normally in a
system-startup command script).

3. Processes running as the special system-administrator user, the superuser, are always
permitted to create files, and so were forced to use a different mechanism.

Although it is possible to work around all these problems, the solutions are not straightforward,
so a mechanism for locking files was added in 4.2BSD.

The most general locking schemes allow multiple processes to update a file concurrently. Several
of these techniques are discussed in Peterson [1983]. A simpler technique is to serialize access to
a file with locks. For standard system applications, a mechanism that locks at the granularity of
a file is sufficient. So, 4.2BSD and 4.3BSD provided only a fast, whole-file locking mechanism.
The semantics of these locks include allowing locks to be inherited by child processes and
releasing locks only on the last close of a file.

Certain applications require the ability to lock pieces of a file. Locking facilities that support a
byte-level granularity are well understood. Unfortunately, they are not powerful enough to be
used by database systems that require nested hierarchical locks, but are complex enough to
require a large and cumbersome implementation compared to the simpler whole-file locks.
Because byte-range locks are mandated by the POSIX standard, the developers added them to
BSD reluctantly. The semantics of byte-range locks come from the initial implementation of
locks in System V, which included releasing all locks held by a process on a file every time a close
system call was done on a descriptor referencing that file. The 4.2BSD whole-file locks are
removed only on the last close. A problem with the POSIX semantics is that an application can
lock a file, then call a library routine that opens, reads, and closes the locked file. Calling the

library routine will have the unexpected effect of releasing the locks held by the application.
Another problem is that a file must be open for writing to be allowed to get an exclusive lock. A
process that does not have permission to open a file for writing cannot get an exclusive lock on
that file. To avoid these problems, yet remain POSIX compliant, FreeBSD provides separate
interfaces for byte-range locks and whole-file locks. The byte-range locks follow the POSIX
semantics; the whole-file locks follow the traditional 4.2BSD semantics. The two types of locks
can be used concurrently; they will serialize against each other properly.

Both whole-file locks and byte-range locks use the same implementation; the whole-file locks
are implemented as a range lock over an entire file. The kernel handles the other differing
semantics between the two implementations by having the byte-range locks be applied to
processes, whereas the whole-file locks are applied to descriptors. Because descriptors are
shared with child processes, the whole-file locks are inherited. Because the child process gets its
own process structure, the byte-range locks are not inherited. The last-close versus every-close
semantics are a small bit of special-case code in the close routine that checks whether the
underlying object is a process or a descriptor. It releases locks on every call if the lock is
associated with a process and only when the reference count drops to zero if the lock is
associated with a descriptor.

Locking schemes can be classified according to the extent that they are enforced. A scheme in
which locks are enforced for every process without choice is said to use mandatory locks,
whereas a scheme in which locks are enforced for only those processes that request them is said
to use advisory locks. Clearly, advisory locks are effective only when all programs accessing a
file use the locking scheme. With mandatory locks, there must be some override policy
implemented in the kernel. With advisory locks, the policy is left to the user programs. In the
FreeBSD system, programs with superuser privilege are allowed to override any protection
scheme. Because many of the programs that need to use locks must also run as the superuser,
4.2BSD implemented advisory locks rather than creating an additional protection scheme that
was inconsistent with the UNIX philosophy or that could not be used by privileged programs.
The use of advisory locks carried over to the POSIX specification of byte-range locks and is
retained in FreeBSD.

The FreeBSD file-locking facilities allow cooperating programs to apply advisory shared or
exclusive locks on ranges of bytes within a file. Only one process may have an exclusive lock on a
byte range, whereas multiple shared locks may be present. A shared and an exclusive lock
cannot be present on a byte range at the same time. If any lock is requested when another
process holds an exclusive lock, or an exclusive lock is requested when another process holds
any lock, the lock request will block until the lock can be obtained. Because shared and exclusive

locks are only advisory, even if a process has obtained a lock on a file, another process may
access the file if it ignores the locking mechanism.

So that there are no races between creating and locking a file, a lock can be requested as part of
opening a file. Once a process has opened a file, it can manipulate locks without needing to close
and reopen the file. This feature is useful, for example, when a process wishes to apply a shared
lock, to read information, to determine whether an update is required, and then to apply an
exclusive lock and update the file.

A request for a lock will cause a process to block if the lock cannot be obtained immediately. In
certain instances, this blocking is unsatisfactory. For example, a process that wants only to
check whether a lock is present would require a separate mechanism to find out this information.
Consequently, a process can specify that its locking request should return with an error if a lock
cannot be obtained immediately. Being able to request a lock conditionally is useful to daemon
processes that wish to service a spooling area. If the first instance of the daemon locks the
directory where spooling takes place, later daemon processes can easily check to see whether an
active daemon exists. Since locks exist only while the locking processes exist, locks can never be
left active after the processes exit or if the system crashes.

The implementation of locks is done on a per-filesystem basis. The implementation for the local
filesystems is described in Section 9.5. A network-based filesystem has to coordinate locks with
a central lock manager that is usually located on the server exporting the filesystem. Client lock
requests must be sent to the lock manager. The lock manager arbitrates among lock requests
from processes running on its server and from the various clients to which it is exporting the
filesystem. The most complex operation for the lock manager is recovering lock state when a
client or server is rebooted or becomes partitioned from the rest of the network. The FreeBSD
network-based lock manager is described in Chapter 11.

Multiplexing I/O on Descriptors

A process sometimes wants to handle I/O on more than one descriptor. For example, consider a
remote login program that wants to read data from the keyboard and to send them through a
socket to a remote machine. This program also wants to read data from the socket connected to
the remote end and to write them to the screen. If a process makes a read request when there
are no data available, it is normally blocked in the kernel until the data become available. In our
example, blocking is unacceptable. If the process reads from the keyboard and blocks, it will be
unable to read data from the remote end that are destined for the screen. The user does not
know what to type until more data arrive from the remote end, so the session deadlocks.
Conversely, if the process reads from the remote end when there are no data for the screen, it

will block and will be unable to read from the terminal. Again, deadlock would occur if the
remote end were waiting for input before sending any data. There is an analogous set of
problems to blocking on the writes to the screen or to the remote end. If a user has stopped
output to his screen by typing the stop character, the write will block until the user types the
start character. In the meantime, the process cannot read from the keyboard to find out that the
user wants to flush the output.

FreeBSD provides four mechanisms that permit multiplexing I/O on descriptors: polling I/O,
kernel-event polling, nonblocking I/O, and signal-driven I/O. Polling is done with the
select or poll system call, described in the next subsection. Kernel-event polling is done with the
kevent system call, described in the following subsection. Operations on nonblocking
descriptors finish immediately, partially complete an input or output operation and return a
partial count, or return an error that shows that the operation could not be completed at all.
Descriptors that have signalling enabled cause the associated process or process group to be
notified when the I/O state of the descriptor changes.

There are four possible alternatives that avoid the blocking problem:

1. Set all the descriptors into nonblocking mode. The process can then try operations on each
descriptor in turn to find out which descriptors are ready to perform I/O. The problem with this
busy-waiting approach is that the process must run continuously to discover whether there is
any I/O to be done, wasting CPU cycles.

2. Enable all descriptors of interest to signal when I/O can be done. The process can then wait
for a signal to discover when it is possible to perform I/O. The drawback to this approach is that
signals are expensive to catch. Hence, signal-driven I/O is impractical for applications that do
moderate to large amounts of I/O.

3. Have the system provide a method for asking which descriptors are capable of performing
I/O. If none of the requested descriptors are ready, the system can put the process to sleep until
a descriptor becomes ready. This approach avoids the problem of deadlock because the process
will be awakened whenever it is possible to perform I/O and will be told which descriptor is
ready. The drawback is that the process must do two system calls per operation: one to poll for
the descriptor that is ready to perform I/O and another to perform the operation itself.

4. Have the process register with the system all the events including I/O on descriptors that it is
interested in tracking. Have the system provide a system call for asking which events have
occurred. If none of the registered events have occurred, the system can put the process to sleep
until a registered event occurs. When the system call returns, the process is given a list of the
events that have occurred [Accetta et al., 1986; Lemon, 2001].

The first approach is available in FreeBSD as nonblocking I/O. It typically is used for output
descriptors because the operation typically will not block. Rather than doing a select, poll, or
kevent, which nearly always succeeds, followed immediately by a write, it is more efficient to try
the write and revert to using select, poll, or kevent only during periods when the write returns a
blocking error.

The second approach is available in FreeBSD as signal-driven I/O. It typically is used for rare
events, such as the arrival of out-of-band data on a socket. For such rare events, the cost of
handling an occasional signal is lower than that of checking constantly with select, poll, or
kevent to find out whether there are any pending data.

The third approach is available in FreeBSD via the select or poll system call. Although less
efficient than the fourth approach, it is a more widely available interface.

The fourth approach is available in FreeBSD via the kevent system call. In addition to tracking
the status of multiple descriptors, it handles other notifications such as file modification
monitoring, signals, asynchronous I/O events (AIO), child process state change monitoring and
timers that support nanosecond resolution. Like select and poll, kqueue can timeout when no
I/O is possible. An interface similar in functionality to kevent is available in Linux as epoll and
in Windows and Solaris as completion ports.

The select and poll interfaces provide the same information. They differ only in their
programming interface. The select interface was first developed in 4.2BSD with the introduction
of socket-based interprocess communication. The poll interface was introduced in System V
several years later with its competing STREAMS-based interprocess communication. Although
STREAMS has fallen into disuse, the poll interface has proven popular enough to be retained.
The FreeBSD kernel supports both interfaces.

The select system call is of the form

int error = select(
  int numfds,
  fd_set *readfds,
  fd_set *writefds,
  fd_set *exceptfds,
  struct timeval *timeout);

It takes three masks of descriptors to be monitored, corresponding to interest in reading,
writing, and exceptional conditions. In addition, it takes a timeout value for returning from

select if none of the requested descriptors becomes ready before a specified amount of time has
elapsed. The select call returns the same three masks of descriptors after modifying them to
show the descriptors that are able to perform reading, to perform writing, or that have an
exceptional condition. If none of the descriptors has become ready in the timeout interval, select
returns showing that no descriptors are ready for I/O. If a timeout value is given and a
descriptor becomes ready before the specified timeout period, the time that select spends
waiting for I/O to become ready is subtracted from the time given.

The poll interface copies in an array of pollfd structures, one array entry for each descriptor of
interest. The pollfd structure contains three elements:

• The file descriptor to poll

• A set of flags describing the information being sought

• A set of flags set by the kernel showing the information that was found

The flags specify availability of normal or out-of-band data for reading and the availability of
buffer space for normal or out-of-band data writing. The return flags can also specify that an
error has occurred on the descriptor, that the descriptor has been disconnected, or that the
descriptor is not open. These error conditions are raised by the select call by indicating that the
descriptor with the error is ready to perform I/O. When the application attempts to perform the
I/O, the error is returned by the read or write system call. Like the select call, the poll call takes
a timeout value to specify the maximum time to wait. If none of the requested descriptors
becomes ready before the specified amount of time has elapsed, the poll call returns. If a
timeout value is given and a descriptor becomes ready before the specified timeout period, the
time that poll spends waiting for I/O to become ready is subtracted from the time given.

Implementation of Select

The implementation of select is divided into a generic top layer and many device-or
socket-specific bottom pieces. At the top level, select or poll decodes the user’s request and then
calls the appropriate lower-level poll functions. The select and poll system calls have different
top layers to determine the sets of descriptors to be polled but use all the same device- and
socket-specific bottom pieces. Only the select top layer will be described here. The poll top layer
is implemented in a completely analogous way.

The data structures used to support the select and poll system calls are shown in Figure 7.3. A
selfd structure tracks each request. Across the top of Figure 7.3 is the list of threads waiting for
I/O to become available on a set of descriptors. Each of these threads has a seltd structure that

heads the list of selfd structures tracking the descriptors of interest to the thread. This list is
protected by the mutex in the seltd structure. Down the lefthand side of Figure 7.3 is the set of
sockets and devices that have threads waiting for I/O to become possible. Each of these sockets
and devices has a selinfo structure that heads the list of selfd structures tracking the threads
interested in the socket or device. This list is protected by a pool mutex allocated the first time
an entry is referenced from the selinfo structure.

Figure 7.3 Select data structures.

The select top level takes the following steps:

1. Copies and validates the descriptor masks for read, write, and exceptional conditions.
Performing validation requires checking that each requested descriptor is currently open by the
process.

2. For each descriptor with a bit set in at least one select mask, calls the poll routine for the
socket or device. If the descriptor is not able to perform any of the requested I/O operations, the
poll routine records that the thread wants to perform I/O by allocating a selfd structure and
linking it into the requesting thread’s seltd structure and the associated socket or device selinfo
structure as shown in Figure 7.3. When I/O becomes possible for the descriptor—usually as a
result of an interrupt—a notification will be issued for all the threads selecting on it by
traversing the list of selfd structures headed by the selinfo structure for the socket or device and
awakening each of the associated threads.

3. Because the selection process may take a long time, the kernel does not want to block out I/O
during the time it takes to poll all the requested descriptors. Instead, the kernel arranges to
detect the occurrence of I/O that may affect the status of the descriptors being polled. When
such I/O occurs, the associated socket or device traverses the list of setfd structures, headed by
its selinfo structure, setting the PENDING flag in the flags field of the associated thread’s seltd
structure and marks the associated setfd structure as ready to do I/O. If the top-level select code
finds that the PENDING flag for the thread has been set while it has been performing the polling,
and it has not found any descriptors that are ready to perform an operation, then the top level
knows that the polling results are incomplete. It traverses the list of selfd structures headed by
its seltd structure to find and return the available descriptors.

4. If no descriptors are ready and the select specified a timeout, the kernel posts a timeout for
the requested amount of time. The thread blocks on the st_wait condition variable in its seltd
structure. Normally, a descriptor will become ready and the thread will be notified by
selwakeup(). When the thread is awakened, it traverses the list of selfd structures headed by its
seltd structure and returns the available descriptors. If none of the descriptors become ready
before the timer expires, the thread returns with a timed-out error and an empty list of available
descriptors. If a timeout value is given and a descriptor becomes ready before the specified
timeout period, the time that select spent waiting for I/O to become ready is subtracted from the
time given.

Kqueues and Kevents

The select and poll interfaces are limited because they are unable to handle other potentially
interesting activities in which an application might want to engage such as signals, filesystem
changes, and asynchronous I/O completions. Further, the select and poll system calls do not

scale well with increasing numbers of descriptors. Their inefficiency comes from being stateless.
The kernel does not keep any record of the application’s interest between system calls and must
recalculate it and build up the associated data structures every time that select or poll is called.
In addition, the application must scan the entire list of events that it passed to the kernel to
determine which events occurred.

The kevent interface is provided to mitigate both of these problems. Kevent is a generic
notification interface that allows an application to select from a wide range of event sources, and
be notified of activity on these sources in a scalable and efficient manner. The interface may be
extended to cover future event sources without changing the application interface.

An application registers the events in which it is interested. When one or more of these events
occur, the kernel returns a list containing just the occurring events to the application. Thus, the
kernel need only build the set of event notification structures once and the application is notified
of just those events that have occurred. The cost of the interface is a function of the number of
events that occur rather than the number of events being checked. The savings are most evident
for applications checking for many events that happen only infrequently.

The types of events that can be monitored using the kevent system are shown in Table 7.2. In
addition to the events that can be checked by the select and poll interfaces, kevent can also track
changes to files including being renamed, deleted, or having their attributes updated. It also
subsumes the aio_error and aio_suspend system calls to monitor and wait for an asynchronous
I/O. The process still needs to use aio_return system call to get the I/O completion status and
to free the kernel data structures associated with the I/O once the kevent system call has
notified it that the I/O has completed. It can track the posting of signals to a process and when
the process forks, execs, or exits. It can create and monitor timers and provides event
monitoring defined and triggered by user-level applications.

Table 7.2 Events that may be monitored with kevents

A process uses the kqueue system call to get a descriptor to use as a handle on which to register
the events that it wishes to track. This descriptor is then used to get notification of the registered
events as they occur. Additional events may be added and previously requested events deleted as
the process runs.

Figure 7.4 shows the data structures set up when a kqueue is created. Each event in which an
application registers interest is recorded using a knote. Each event has an identifier such as a
descriptor number for a file or socket descriptor-based event, a process identifier for a
process-based event, a signal number for a signal-based event, or an application-defined
identifier for a timer- or user-based event. Event registration also includes a filter describing the
action of interest such as reading or writing as well as further refinements such as a minimum
read/write size, whether this is a one-time request or should be reported until canceled. The
registration maps the filter to a filter function that will be called each time an event occurs for
that identifier to decide whether it merits being reported.

Figure 7.4 The data structures supporting an event queue.

The kqueue structure links the knotes it is tracking into one of two lists: an array indexed by
descriptor for descriptor-identified events or a table hashed by the identifier for all other types
of events. The knote structure is also linked into a knote-list for the event-generating entity that
it is monitoring.

When an event occurs, the event-generating entity traverses its knote list invoking the filter
function for each knote on the list to let it know that an event has occurred. The filter function
decides if the event merits reporting. For example, a filter concerned with reading will not care
that buffer space has become available and return zero to indicate that it is not interested. But if
enough data has arrived to exceed the specified read threshold, it will return nonzero to indicate
that it should be added to its kqueue pending list.

Time will pass before the application next calls or awakens from a sleep in the kevent system call
to collect any pending events. During this time, the event may no longer be relevant. For
example, the buffering space for which a process has been waiting may have been used up by the
time it goes to collect the event. So, as the kevent system call walks the list of pending events, it
calls the associated filter function to verify that the event is still relevant. If it is still relevant, it
is copied out to the application along with any filter-function-specific information such as
number of bytes available to be read. If it is not relevant, it is dropped from the pending list. By
validating the data immediately before returning it, the kevent system call will never return stale
results. To further ensure valid results, any time that a resource is reclaimed (such as a
descriptor when it is last closed or a process when it exits), any knotes associated with it are
removed from all three lists on which they may reside and are reclaimed.

In Figure 7.4, kqueue A is tracking three events: status of a process identified by its
process-identifier (referenced from the kqueue hash table), data availability of a socket
identified by its descriptor number (referenced from the kqueue descriptor table), and buffer
space availability for the same socket. Kqueue B is tracking buffer space availability on the same
socket as Kqueue A. Data has become available for reading at the socket and a status change has
happened to the process so the two knotes associated with these events are on the pending list
for kqueue A.

Movement of Data Inside the Kernel

Within the kernel, I/O data are described by an array of vectors. Each I/O vector or iovec has
a base address and a length. The I/O vectors are identical to the I/O vectors used by the readv
and writev system calls.

The kernel maintains another structure, called a uio structure, that holds additional
information about the I/O operation. A sample uio structure is shown in Figure 7.5; it contains
the following:

• A pointer to the iovec array

• The number of elements in the iovec array

• The file offset at which the operation should start

• The sum of the lengths of the I/O vectors

• A flag showing whether the source and destination are both within the kernel or whether the
source and destination are split between the user and the kernel

• A flag showing whether the data are being copied from the uio structure to the kernel
(UIO_WRITE) or from the kernel to the uio structure (UIO_READ)

• A pointer to the thread whose data area is described by the uio structure (the pointer is NULL
if the uio structure describes an area within the kernel)

Figure 7.5 An uio structure.

All I/O within the kernel is described with iovec and uio structures. System calls such as read
and write that are not passed an iovec create a uio to describe their arguments; this uio
structure is passed to the lower levels of the kernel to specify the parameters of an I/O operation.

Eventually, the uio structure reaches the part of the kernel responsible for moving the data to or
from the process address space: the filesystem, the network, or a device driver. In general, these
parts of the kernel do not interpret uio structures directly. Instead, they arrange a kernel buffer
to hold the data and then use uiomove() to copy the data to or from the buffer or buffers
described by the uio structure. The uiomove() routine is called with a pointer to a kernel data
area, a data count, and a uio structure. As it moves data, it updates the counters and pointers of
the iovec and uio structures by a corresponding amount. If the kernel buffer is not as large as the
areas described by the uio structure, the uio structure will point to the part of the process
address space just beyond the location completed most recently. Thus, while servicing a request,
the kernel may call uiomove() multiple times, each time giving a pointer to a new kernel buffer
for the next block of data.

Character device drivers that do not copy data from the process generally do not interpret the
uio structure. Instead, there is one low-level kernel routine that arranges a direct transfer to or
from the address space of the process. Here, a separate I/O operation is done for each iovec
element, calling back to the driver with one piece at a time.

7.2 Local Interprocess Communication

The socket interfaces are not the only APIs that provide interprocess communication.
Applications that wish to divide up work on a single host use semaphores, messages queues, and
shared memory to communicate between their processes. Each type of local IPC has different
performance characteristics and provides a different form of communication. The local IPC
mechanisms originally supported in FreeBSD are derived from System V, as described in Bach
[1986]. For this reason, they are often referred to as System V semaphores, mutexes, and shared
memory. While most applications use the socket-based IPC mechanisms, a small but pertinent
subset of applications make use of the System V IPC mechanisms, especially semaphores and
shared memory. For example, X11 uses System V shared-memory segments between the X
server and applications to avoid sending large images (and especially, continuously updated
images) over sockets. PosgreSQL uses System V semaphores for synchronisation. The ipcs
command lists open System V IPC objects and can be used to discover the extent of their use on
a FreeBSD system.

The biggest drawback of the System V IPC is that it introduced a new, flat, number-oriented
object namespace but with filesystem-like permissions. As a result of it being flat, applications
cannot use directories to reserve portions of the namespace safely, and weird hash functions are
used to convert useful string names into possibly colliding numbers. Unlike other IPC objects,
no file descriptor is associated with these objects. Some implementations (notably Linux) store

these objects in special filesystems below /dev. This implementation is better than the System V
approach as it makes jail-like virtualisation possible.

As POSIX added specifications for IPC mechanisms, they were implemented in FreeBSD: shared
memory in FreeBSD 4.3, semaphores in FreeBSD 5.0, and message queues in FreeBSD 7.0. The
POSIX IPC manages to both improve on System V by building it using file descriptors while
simultaneously repeating its mistake of having a flat namespace. POSIX shared-memory objects
and semaphores are seeing increasing use as replacements for System V IPC objects as they
work well with both multi-threaded synchronisation and multi-process synchronisation. As
described in Section 5.8, Capsicum uses a version of the POSIX shared-memory interface to
create a file descriptor associated with an anonymously backed vm_object that can then be
shared using file descriptor passing. Prior to this addition, the only mechanism for sharing
memory was to rendezvous using the filesystem namespace and mmap or to agree on a name to
use in the System V shared-memory namespace.

Every type of IPC must make it possible for independently executing processes to rendezvous
and find the resources they are sharing. This piece of information must be known to all of them
and must be unique enough that no other process could come across the same information by
accident. Historically, UNIX used the filesystem namespace for rendezvous. It has the benefit of
being hierarchical with permissions to provide fine-grained access control. Applications that
wanted to share memory would pick a common file that each would map into its address space.

The System V IPC introduced a new key-based namespace. A key is a long integer that is treated
by the cooperating processes as an opaque piece of data, meaning that they do not attempt to
decipher or attribute any meaning to it. The library routine, ftok(), is used to generate a key
from a pathname. As long as each process uses the same pathname, they are guaranteed to get
the same key.

All of the local System V IPC subsystems were designed and implemented to be used in a similar
way. A summary of all the user-level System V APIs is given in Table 7.3, and an excellent
introduction to using them can be found in Stevens [1999]. Once a process has a key, it uses it to
create or retrieve the relevant object, using a subsystem specific get call, which is similar to a file
open or creat. To create an object, the IPC_CREAT flag is passed as an argument to the get call.
All get calls return an integer to be used in all subsequent local IPC system calls. Just like a file
descriptor, this integer is used to identify the object that the process is manipulating.

Table 7.3 System V local IPC, user-level APIs.

Each System V IPC subsystem has its own way of operating on the underlying object, and these
functions are described in the following sections. All control operations, such as retrieving
statistics or removing a previously created object, are handled by a subsystem-specific ctl
routine.

Semaphores

A semaphore is the smallest atom of IPC available to a set of cooperating processes. Each
semaphore contains a short integer that can be increased or decreased. A process that attempts
to reduce the value of the semaphore below 0 will either be blocked or, if called in a nonblocking
mode, will return immediately with an errno value of EAGAIN. The concept of semaphores and
how they are used in multiprocess programs was originally proposed in Dijkstra & Genuys
[1968].

Unlike the semaphores described in most computer science textbooks, semaphores in FreeBSD
are grouped into arrays so that the code in the kernel can protect the process using them from
causing a deadlock. Deadlocks were discussed in terms of locking within the kernel in Section
4.3 but are discussed here are well.

With System V semaphores, the deadlock occurs between two user-level processes rather than
between kernel threads. A deadlock occurs between two processes, A and B, when they both
attempt to take two semaphores, S1 and S2. If process A acquires S1 and process B acquires S2,
then a deadlock occurs when process A tries to acquire S2 and process B tries to acquire S1
because there is no way for either process to give up the semaphore that the other one needs to
make progress. It is always important when using semaphores that all cooperating processes
acquire and release them in the same order to avoid this situation.

The implementation of semaphores in System V protected against deadlock by forcing the users
of the API to group their semaphores into arrays and to perform semaphore operations as a
sequence of events on the array. If the sequence submitted in the call could cause a deadlock,
then an error was returned. The section on semaphores in Bach [1986] points out that this
complexity should never have been placed in the kernel, but in order to adhere to the previously
defined API, the same complexity exists in FreeBSD as well. At some point in the future, the
kernel should provide a simpler form of semaphores to replace the current implementation.

Creating and attaching to a semaphore is done with the System V semget or the POSIX
sem_open system call. Although semaphores were designed to look like file descriptors, they are
not stored in the file descriptor table. All the semaphores in the system are contained in a single
table in the kernel, whose size and shape are described by several tunable parameters. This table
is protected by a global semaphore lock so that multiple processes are protected from partially
creating entries in it. This lock is only taken when creating or attaching to a semaphore and is
not a bottleneck in the actual use of existing semaphores.

Once a process has created a semaphore, or attached to a preexisting one, it calls the System V
semop system call or the POSIX sem_post and sem_wait system calls to perform operations on
it. The operations on the semaphore are passed to the system call as an array. Each element of
the array includes the semaphore number to operate on (the index into the array returned by the
previous System V semget or the POSIX sem_open call), the operation to perform, and a set of
flags. The operation is a misnomer because it is not a command but simply a number. If the
number is positive, then the corresponding semaphore’s value is increased by that amount. If
the operation is 0 and the semaphore’s value is not 0, then either the process is put to sleep until
the value is 0 or, if the IPC_NOWAIT flag was passed, EAGAIN is returned to the caller. When
the operation is negative, there are several possible outcomes. If the value of the semaphore was
greater than the absolute value of the operation, then the value of the operation is subtracted
from the semaphore and the call returns. If subtracting the absolute value of the operation from
the semaphore would force its value to be less than zero, then the process is put to sleep, unless
the IPC_NOWAIT flag was passed. Here, EAGAIN is returned to the caller.

All of this logic is implemented in the System V semop system call or the POSIX sem_post and
sem_wait system calls. The call first does some rudimentary checks to make sure that it has a
chance of succeeding, including making sure there is enough memory to execute all the
operations in one pass and that the calling process has the proper permissions to access the
semaphore. Each semaphore ID returned to a process by the kernel has its own mutex to protect
against multiple processes modifying the same semaphore at the same time. The routine locks
this mutex and then attempts to perform all the operations passed to it in the array. It walks the
array and attempts to perform each operation in order. There is the potential for this call to

sleep before it completes all its work. If this situation occurs, then the code rolls back all its work
before it goes to sleep. When it reawakens, the routine starts at the beginning of the array and
attempts to perform the operations again. Either the routine will complete all its work, return
with an appropriate error, or go back to sleep. Rolling back all the work is necessary to
guarantee the idempotence of the routine. Either all the work is done or none of it is.

Message Queues

A message queue facilitates the sending and receiving of typed, arbitrary-length messages. The
sending process adds messages at one end of the queue, and the receiving process removes
messages from the other. The queue’s size and other characteristics are controlled by a set of
tunable kernel parameters. Message queues are inherently half duplex, meaning that one
process is always the sender and the other is the receiver, but there are ways to use them as a
form of full duplex communication, as we will see later.

The messages passed between the endpoints contain a type and a data area, as shown in Figure
7.6. This data structure should not be confused with the mbufs that are used by the networking
code (see Section 12.3). MSGMNB is a tunable kernel parameter that defines the size of a
message queue, and therefore the largest possible message that can be sent between two
processes, and is set to 2048 by default.

Figure 7.6 Message data structure.

Message queues can be used to implement either a pure first-in first-out queue, where all
messages are delivered in the order in which they were sent, or a priority queue, where messages
with a certain type can be retrieved ahead of others. This ability is provided by the type field of
the message structure.

When a process sends a message, it invokes the System V msgsnd system call or the POSIX
mq_send system call, which checks all the arguments in the call for correctness and then
attempts to get enough resources to place the message into the queue. If there aren’t enough
resources, and the caller did not pass the IPC_NOWAIT flag, then the caller is put to sleep until
such time as resources are available. The resources come from a pool of memory that is
allocated by the kernel at boot time. The pool is arranged in fixed segments whose length is

defined by MSGSSZ. The memory pool is managed as a large array so the segments can be
located efficiently. Once the kernel has enough resources, it copies the message into the
segments in the array and updates the rest of the data structures related to this queue.

The kernel data structures that control the message queues in the system are protected by a
single lock which is taken and held by both the System V msgsnd and msgrcv system calls or the
POSIX mq_receive and mq_send system calls for the duration of their execution. The use of a
single lock for both routines protects the queue from being read and written simultaneously,
possibly causing data corruption. It is also a performance bottleneck because it means that all
other message queues are blocked when any one of them is being used.

To retrieve a message from the queue, a process calls the System V msgrcv system call or the
POSIX mq_receive system call. If the processes are using the queue as a simple fifo, then the
receiver passes a 0 in the msgtype argument to this call to retrieve the first available message in
the queue. To retrieve the first message in the queue of a particular type, a positive integer is
passed. Processes implement a priority queue by using the type as the priority of the message.
To implement a full duplex channel, each process picks a different type—say, 1 and 2. Messages
of type 1 are from process A, and messages of type 2 are from process B. Process A sends
messages with type 1 and receives messages with type 2, while process B does exactly the
opposite.

After acquiring the message queue mutex, the receive routine finds the correct queue from
which to retrieve data, and if there is an appropriate message, it returns data from the segments
to the caller. If no data are available and the caller specified the IPC_NOWAIT flag, then the call
returns immediately; otherwise, the calling process is put to sleep until there are data to be
returned. When a message is retrieved from a message queue, its data are deallocated after they
have been delivered to the receiving process.

Shared Memory

Shared memory is used when two or more processes need to communicate large amounts of
data between them. Each process stores data in the shared memory just as it would within its
own, per-process, memory. Care must be taken to serialize access to the shared memory so that
processes do not write over each other. Hence, shared memory is often used with semaphores to
synchronize read and write access.

Processes that are using shared memory are really sharing virtual memory (see Chapter 6).
When a process creates a segment of shared memory by calling the System V shmget system call
or the POSIX shm_open system call, the kernel allocates a set of virtual memory pages and

places a pointer to them in the shared memory handle that is then returned to the calling
process. To actually use the shared memory within a process, the System V interface must call
the shmat system call, which attaches the virtual memory pages into the calling process. The
attach routine uses the shared memory handle passed to it as an argument to find the relevant
pages and returns an appropriate virtual address to the caller. Once this call completes, the
process can then access the memory pointed to by the returned address as it would any other
kind of memory. The POSIX interface creates and attaches the memory in its shm_open system
call.

When the process is through using the shared memory, it detaches from it using the System V
shmdt system call or the POSIX shm_unlink system call. This routine does not free the
associated memory, because other processes may be using it, but it removes the virtual memory
mapping from the calling process.

The shared memory subsystem depends on the virtual memory system to do most of the real
work (mapping pages, handling dirty pages, etc.), so its implementation is relatively simple.

7.3 The Virtual-Filesystem Interface

In early UNIX systems, the file entries directly referenced the local filesystem inode. An inode
is a data structure that describes the contents of a file; it is more fully described in Section 9.2.
This approach worked fine when there was a single filesystem implementation. However, with
the advent of multiple filesystem types, the architecture had to be generalized. The new
architecture had to support importing of filesystems from other machines, including those that
were running different operating systems.

One alternative would have been to connect the multiple filesystems into the system as different
file types. However, this approach would have required massive restructuring of the internal
workings of the system, because current directories, references to executables, and several other
interfaces used inodes instead of file entries as their point of reference. Thus, it was easier and
more logical to add a new object-oriented layer to the system below the file entry and above the
inode. This new layer was first implemented by Sun Microsystems, which called it the
virtual-node, or vnode, layer. Interfaces in the system that had referred previously to inodes
were changed to reference generic vnodes. A vnode used by a local filesystem would refer to an
inode. A vnode used by a remote filesystem would refer to a protocol control block that
described the location and naming information necessary to access the remote file.

Contents of a Vnode

The vnode is an extensible object-oriented interface. It contains information that is generically
useful independent of the underlying filesystem object that it represents. The information stored
in a vnode includes the following:

• Flags are used for identifying generic attributes. An example of a generic attribute is a flag to
show that a vnode represents an object that is the root of a filesystem.

• The various reference counts include the number of file entries that are open for reading
and/or writing that reference the vnode, the number of file entries that are open for writing that
reference the vnode, and the number of pages and buffers that are associated with the vnode.

• A pointer to the mount structure describes the filesystem that contains the object represented
by the vnode.

• Various information to perform file read-ahead.

• A reference to the vm_object associated with the vnode.

• A reference to state about special devices, sockets, and fifos.

• A mutex to protect the flags and counters within the vnode.

• A lock-manager lock to protect parts of the vnode that may change while it has an I/O
operation in progress.

• Fields used by the name cache to track the names associated with the vnode.

• A pointer to the set of vnode operations defined for the object. These operations are described
in the next subsection.

• A pointer to private information needed for the underlying object. For the local filesystem, this
pointer will reference an inode; for NFS, it will reference an nfsnode.

• The type of the underlying object (e.g., regular file, directory, character device, etc.) is given.
The type information is not strictly necessary, since a vnode client could always call a vnode
operation to get the type of the underlying object. However, because the type often is needed,
the type of underlying objects does not change, and it takes time to call through the vnode
interface, the object type is cached in the vnode.

• There are clean and dirty buffers associated with the vnode. Each valid buffer in the system is
identified by its associated vnode and the starting offset of its data within the object that the
vnode represents. All the buffers that have been modified but have not yet been written back are
stored on their vnode dirty-buffer list. All buffers that have not been modified or have been
written back since they were last modified are stored on their vnode clean list. Having all the
dirty buffers for a vnode grouped onto a single list makes the cost of doing an fsync system call
to flush all the dirty blocks associated with a file proportional to the amount of dirty data. In
some UNIX systems, the cost is proportional to the smaller of the size of the file or the size of the
buffer pool. The list of clean buffers is used to free buffers when a file is deleted. Since the file
will never be read again, the kernel can immediately cancel any pending I/O on its dirty buffers,
then reclaim all its clean and dirty buffers and place them at the head of the buffer free list,
ready for immediate reuse.

• A count is kept of the number of buffer write operations in progress. To speed the flushing of
dirty data, the kernel does this operation by doing asynchronous writes on all the dirty buffers at
once. For local filesystems, this simultaneous push causes all the buffers to be put into the disk
queue so that they can be sorted into an optimal order to minimize seeking. For remote
filesystems, this simultaneous push causes all the data to be presented to the network at once so
that it can maximize their throughput. System calls that cannot return until the data are on
stable store (such as fsync) can sleep on the count of pending output operations, waiting for the
count to reach zero.

The position of vnodes within the system was shown in Figure 7.1. The vnode itself is connected
into several other structures within the kernel, as shown in Figure 7.7. Each mounted filesystem
within the kernel is represented by a generic mount structure that includes a pointer to a
filesystem-specific control block. All the vnodes associated with a specific mount point are
linked together on a list headed by this generic mount structure. When the filesystem is being
unmounted, the kernel needs to traverse this list to release all the vnodes associated with the
mount point.

Figure 7.7 Vnode linkages. Key: D—dirty buffer; C—clean buffer.

The subset of vnodes that are actively being used are also linked together on a list headed by the
generic mount structure. Thus, when it is doing a sync system call for a filesystem, the kernel
traverses this list of active vnodes to visit just the subset of the filesystem’s vnodes that may
need to have data written to disk.

Also shown in the figure are the lists of clean and dirty buffers associated with each vnode.
Finally, there is a free list that links together all the vnodes in the system that are inactive (not
currently referenced). The free list is used when a filesystem needs to allocate a new vnode so
that the latter can open a new file; see Section 7.4.

Vnode Operations

Vnodes are designed as an object-oriented interface. Thus, the kernel manipulates them by
passing requests to the underlying object through a set of defined operations. Because of the
many varied filesystems that are supported in FreeBSD, the set of operations defined for vnodes
is both large and extensible. Unlike the original Sun Microsystems vnode implementation, the
one in FreeBSD allows dynamic addition of vnode operations either at system boot time or when
a new filesystem is dynamically loaded into the kernel. As part of activating a filesystem, it
registers the set of vnode operations that it is able to support. The kernel then builds a table that
lists the union of all operations supported by any filesystem. From that table, it builds an
operations vector for each filesystem. Supported operations are filled in with the entry point
registered by the filesystem. Filesystems may opt to have unsupported operations filled in with
either a default routine (typically a routine to bypass the operation to the next lower layer; see
Section 7.5) or a routine that returns the characteristic error “operation not supported”
[Heidemann & Popek, 1994].

In 4.3BSD, the local filesystem code provided both the semantics of the hierarchical filesystem
naming and the details of the on-disk storage management. These functions are only loosely
related. To enable experimentation with other disk-storage techniques without having to
reproduce the entire naming semantics, 4.4BSD split the naming and storage code into separate
modules. The vnode-level operations define a set of hierarchical filesystem operations. Below
the naming layer are a separate set of operations defined for storage of variable-size objects
using a flat namespace. About 60 percent of the traditional filesystem code became the
namespace management, and the remaining 40 percent became the code implementing the
on-disk file storage. The 4.4BSD system used this division to support two distinct disk layouts:
the traditional fast filesystem and a log-structured filesystem. Support for the log-structured
filesystem was dropped in FreeBSD due to lack of anyone willing to maintain it but remains as a
primary filesystem in NetBSD. The naming and disk-storage scheme are described in Chapter 8.

Pathname Translation

The translation of a pathname requires a series of interactions between the vnode interface and
the underlying filesystems. The pathname-translation process proceeds as follows:

1. The pathname to be translated is copied in from the user process or, for a remote filesystem
request, is extracted from the network buffer.

2. The starting point of the pathname is determined as either the root directory or the current
directory (see Section 2.9). The vnode for the appropriate directory becomes the lookup
directory used in the next step.

3. The vnode layer calls the filesystem-specific lookup() operation and passes to that operation
the remaining components of the pathname and the current lookup directory. Typically, the
underlying filesystem will search the lookup directory for the next component of the pathname
and will return the resulting vnode (or an error if the name does not exist).

4. If an error is returned, the top level returns the error. If the pathname has been exhausted,
the pathname lookup is done, and the returned vnode is the result of the lookup. If the
pathname has not been exhausted, and the returned vnode is not a directory, then the vnode
layer returns the “not a directory” error. If there are no errors, the top layer checks to see
whether the returned directory is a mount point for another filesystem. If it is, then the lookup
directory becomes the mounted filesystem; otherwise, the lookup directory becomes the vnode
returned by the lower layer. The lookup then iterates with step 3.

Although it may seem inefficient to call through the vnode interface for each pathname
component, doing so usually is necessary. The reason is that the underlying filesystem does not
know which directories are being used as mount points. Since a mount point will redirect the
lookup to a new filesystem, it is important that the current filesystem not proceed past a
mounted directory. Although it might be possible for a local filesystem to be knowledgeable
about which directories are mount points, it is nearly impossible for a server to know which of
the directories within its exported filesystems are being used as mount points by its clients.
Consequently, the conservative approach of traversing only a single pathname component per
lookup() call is used. There are a few instances where a filesystem will know that there are no
further mount points in the remaining path, and will traverse the rest of the pathname. An
example is crossing into a portal, described in Section 7.5.

Exported Filesystem Services

The vnode interface has a set of services that the kernel exports from all the filesystems
supported under the interface. The first of these is the ability to support the update of generic
mount options. These options include the following:

noexec

Do not execute any files on the filesystem. This option is often used when a server exports
binaries for a different architecture that cannot be executed on the server itself. The kernel will

even refuse to execute shell scripts; if a shell script is to be run, its interpreter must be invoked
explicitly.

nosuid

Do not honor the set-user-id or set-group-id flags for any executables on the filesystem. This
option is useful when a filesystem of unknown origin is mounted.

nodev

Do not allow any special devices on the filesystem to be opened. FreeBSD now uses a
special-device filesystem to manage all its special devices and no longer implements special
device nodes in the regular filesystem (see Section 8.1). However, some legacy systems still use
special device nodes, so this option can be used to explicitly ignore their interpretation.

noatime

When reading a file, do not update its access time. This option is useful on filesystems where
there are many files being frequently read and performance is more critical than updating the
file access time (which is rarely ever important).

sync

Request that all I/O to the filesystem be done synchronously.

It is not necessary to unmount and remount the filesystem to change these flags; they may be
changed while a filesystem is mounted. In addition, a filesystem that is mounted read-only can
be upgraded to allow writing. Conversely, a filesystem that allows writing may be downgraded to
read-only provided that no files are open for modification. The system administrator can
forcibly downgrade the filesystem to read-only by requesting that any files open for writing have
their access revoked.

Another service exported from the vnode interface is the ability to get information about a
mounted filesystem. The statfs system call returns a buffer that gives the numbers of used and
free disk blocks and inodes, along with the filesystem mount point, and the device, location, or
program from which the filesystem is mounted. The getfsstat system call returns information
about all the mounted filesystems. This interface avoids the need to track the set of mounted
filesystems outside the kernel, as is done in some other UNIX variants.

7.4 Filesystem-Independent Services

The vnode interface not only supplies an object-oriented interface to the underlying filesystems
but also provides a set of management routines that can be used by the client filesystems. These
facilities are described in this section.

When the final file-entry reference to a file is closed, the usage count on the vnode drops to zero
and the vnode interface calls the inactive() vnode operation. The inactive() call notifies the
underlying filesystem that the file is no longer being used. The filesystem will often use this call
to write dirty data back to the file but will not typically reclaim the memory holding file data.
The filesystem is permitted to cache the file so that the latter can be reactivated quickly (i.e.,
without disk or network I/O) if the file is reopened.

In addition to the inactive() vnode operation being called when the reference count drops to
zero, the vnode is placed on a systemwide free list. Unlike many vendor’s vnode
implementations, which have a fixed number of vnodes allocated to each filesystem type, the
FreeBSD kernel keeps a single systemwide collection of vnodes. When an application opens a
file that does not currently have an in-memory vnode, the client filesystem calls the
getnewvnode() routine to allocate a new vnode. The kernel maintains two lists of free vnodes:
those that have data pages cached in memory and those that do not have any data pages cached
in memory. The preference is to reuse vnodes with no cached pages, since the reuse of a vnode
with cached pages will cause all the cached pages associated with that vnode to lose their
identity. If the vnodes were not classified separately, then an application that walked the
filesystem tree doing stat calls on each file that it encountered would eventually flush all the
vnodes referencing data pages, thus losing the identity of all the cached pages in the kernel. So
when allocating a new vnode, the getnewvnode() routine first checks the front of the free list of
vnodes with no cached pages and only if that list is empty does it select from the front of the list
of vnodes with cached pages.

Having selected a vnode, the getnewvnode() routine then calls the vnode’s reclaim() operation
to notify the filesystem currently using that vnode that it is about to be reused. The reclaim()
operation writes back any dirty data associated with the underlying object, removes the
underlying object from any lists that it is on (such as hash lists used to find it), and frees up any
auxiliary storage that was being used by the object. The vnode is then returned for use by the
new client filesystem.

The benefit of having a single global vnode table is that the kernel memory dedicated to vnodes
is used more efficiently than when several filesystem-specific collections of vnodes are used.
Consider a system that is willing to dedicate memory for 1000 vnodes. If the system supports 10

filesystem types, then each filesystem type will get 100 vnodes. If most of the activity moves to a
single filesystem (e.g., during the compilation of a kernel located in a local filesystem), all the
active files will have to be kept in the 100 vnodes dedicated to that filesystem while the other
900 vnodes sit idle. In a FreeBSD system, all 1000 vnodes could be used for the active filesystem,
allowing a much larger set of files to be cached in memory. If the center of activity moved to
another filesystem (e.g., compiling a program on an NFS mounted filesystem), the vnodes would
migrate from the previously active local filesystem over to the NFS filesystem. Here, too, there
would be a much larger set of cached files than if only 100 vnodes were available using a
partitioned set of vnodes.

The reclaim() operation is a disassociation of the underlying filesystem object from the vnode
itself. This ability, combined with the ability to associate new objects with the vnode, provides
functionality with usefulness that goes far beyond simply allowing vnodes to be moved from one
filesystem to another. By replacing an existing object with an object from the dead filesystem—a
filesystem in which all operations except close fail—the kernel revokes the object. Internally, this
revocation of an object is provided by the vgone() routine.

This revocation service is used for session management, where all references to the controlling
terminal are revoked when the session leader exits. Revocation works as follows: All open
terminal descriptors within the session reference the vnode for the special device representing
the session terminal. When vgone() is called on this vnode, the underlying special device is
detached from the vnode and is replaced with the dead filesystem. Any further operations on the
vnode will result in errors, because the open descriptors no longer reference the terminal.
Eventually, all the processes will exit and will close their descriptors, causing the reference count
to drop to zero. The inactive() routine for the dead filesystem returns the vnode to the front of
the free list for immediate reuse because it will never be possible to get a reference to the vnode
again.

The revocation service supports forcible unmounting of filesystems. If the kernel finds an active
vnode when unmounting a filesystem, it simply calls the vgone() routine to disassociate the
active vnode from the filesystem object. Processes with open files or current directories within
the filesystem find that they have simply vanished, as though they had been removed. It is also
possible to downgrade a mounted filesystem from read–write to read-only. Instead of access
being revoked on every active file within the filesystem, only those files with a nonzero number
of references for writing have their access revoked.

Finally, the ability to revoke objects is exported to processes through the revoke system call.
This system call can be used to ensure controlled access to a device such as a pseudo-terminal
port. First, the ownership of the device is changed to the desired user and the mode is set to

owner-access only. Then the device name is revoked to eliminate any interlopers that already
had it open. Thereafter, only the new owner is able to open the device.

The Name Cache

Name-cache management is another service that is provided by the vnode management routines.
The interface provides a facility to add a name and its corresponding vnode, to lookup a name to
get the corresponding vnode, and to delete a specific name from the cache. In addition to
providing a facility for deleting specific names, the interface also provides an efficient way to
invalidate all names that reference a specific vnode. Each vnode has a list that links together all
their entries in the name cache. When the references to the vnode are to be deleted, each entry
on the list is purged. Each directory vnode also has a second list of all the cache entries for
names that are contained within it. When a directory vnode is to be purged, it must delete all the
name-cache entries on this second list. A vnode’s name-cache entries must be purged each time
it is reused by getnewvnode() or when specifically requested by a client (e.g., when a directory is
being renamed).

The cache-management routines also allow for negative caching. If a name is looked up in a
directory and is not found, that name can be entered in the cache, along with a null pointer for
its corresponding vnode. If the name is later looked up, it will be found in the name table, and
thus the kernel can avoid scanning the entire directory to determine that the name is not there.
If a name is added to a directory, then the name cache must lookup that name and purge it if it
finds a negative entry. Negative caching provides a significant performance improvement
because of path searching in command shells. When executing a command, many shells will
look at each path in turn, searching for the executable. Commonly run executables will be
searched for repeatedly in directories in which they do not exist. Negative caching speeds these
searches.

The name cache does not solve the performance problems for directories with many entries that
are actively having names added and deleted. Each time a name is to be added, the entire
directory must be scanned to ensure that the name does not already exist. Similarly, when a
name is deleted, the directory must be scanned to find the name to be deleted. For a directory
with many entries, these linear scans are slow even if all the directory blocks are in the buffer
cache.

To avoid these costs, directories above a certain size are read into a hashed database in the
kernel memory. Every name in the directory is stored in the database along with its location in
the directory. Any free space in the directory is also noted in the database. When a file is to be
deleted, its name is found in the database, the needed write operation is queued for the directory

block to be updated, and the newly freed space is noted in the database for future use. When a
new entry is to be created, the database is consulted to find out if it already exists. If it does not
exist, a piece of free space of the needed size is allocated in the directory and the needed write
operation is queued for the directory block to be updated. Thus, the database eliminates all
linear scans of the directory.

A fixed-size arena is set aside to hold the directory databases. When a new directory is activated,
its needed space is reclaimed from the least recently used directory’s database. If the rate of
turnover of directory databases is too high, the kernel will consider raising the size of the arena.
Conversely, if other demands on the kernel memory arise and the turnover rate is low, the
kernel will decrease the size of the arena.

Buffer Management

Historically, UNIX systems divided the main memory into two primary pools. The first was the
virtual-memory pool that was used to cache process pages. The second was the buffer pool and
was used to cache filesystem data. The main memory was divided between the two pools when
the system booted and there was no memory migration between the pools once they were
created.

With the addition of the mmap system call, the kernel supported the mapping of files into the
address space of a process. If a file is mapped in with the MAP_SHARED attribute, changes
made to the mapped file are to be written back to the disk and should show up in read calls done
by other processes. Providing these semantics is difficult if there are copies of a file in both the
buffer cache and the virtual-memory cache. Thus, FreeBSD merged the buffer cache and the
virtual-memory cache into a single-page cache.

As described in Chapter 6, virtual memory is divided into a pool of pages holding the contents of
files and a pool of anonymous pages holding the parts of a process that are not backed by a file
such as its stack and heap. Pages backed by a file are identified by their vnode and logical block
number. Rather than rewrite all the filesystems to lookup pages in the virtual-memory pool, a
buffer-cache emulation layer was written. The emulation layer has the same interface as the old
buffer-cache routines but works by looking up the requested file pages in the virtual-memory
cache. When a filesystem requests a block of a file, the emulation layer calls the virtual-memory
system to see if it is in memory. If it is not in memory, the virtual-memory system arranges to
have it read. Normally, the pages in the virtual-memory cache are not mapped into the kernel
address space. However, a filesystem often needs to inspect the blocks that it requests—for
example, if it is a directory or filesystem metadata. Thus, the buffer-cache emulation layer must
not only find the requested block but also allocate some kernel address space and map the

requested block into it. The filesystem then uses the buffer to read, write, or manipulate the data
and, when done, releases the buffer. On release, the buffer may be held briefly but soon is
dissolved by releasing the kernel mapping, dropping the reference count on the virtual-memory
pages and releasing the header.

The virtual-memory system does not have any way to describe blocks that are identified as a
block associated with a disk. A small remnant of the buffer cache remains to hold these disk
blocks that are used to hold filesystem metadata such as superblocks, bitmaps, and inodes.

The internal kernel interface to the buffer-cache emulation layer is simple. The filesystem
allocates and fills buffers by calling the bread() routine. Bread() takes a vnode, a logical block
number, and a size, and returns a pointer to a locked buffer. The details on how a buffer is
created are given in the next subsection. Any other thread that tries to obtain the buffer will be
put to sleep until the buffer is released.

A buffer can be released in one of four ways. If the buffer has not been modified, it can simply be
released through use of brelse(), which checks for any threads that are waiting for it. If any
threads are waiting, they are awakened. Otherwise, the buffer is dissolved by returning its
contents back to the virtual-memory system, releasing its kernel address-space mapping and
releasing the buffer.

If the buffer has been modified, it is called dirty. Dirty buffers must eventually be written back
to their filesystem. Three routines are available based on the urgency with which the data must
be written. In the typical case, bdwrite() is used. Since the buffer may be modified again soon, it
should be marked as dirty but should not be written immediately. After the buffer is marked as
dirty, it is returned to the dirty-buffer list and any threads waiting for it are awakened. The
heuristic is that, if the buffer will be modified again soon, the I/O would be wasted. Because the
buffer is typically held for 20 to 30 seconds before it is written, a thread doing many small writes
will not repeatedly access the disk or network.

If a buffer has been filled completely, then it is unlikely to be written again soon, so it should be
released with bawrite(). The bawrite() routine schedules an I/O on the buffer but allows the
caller to continue running while the output completes.

The final case is bwrite(), which ensures that the write is complete before proceeding. Because
bwrite() can introduce a long latency to the writer, it is used only when a process explicitly
requests the behavior (such as the fsync system call), when the operation is critical to ensure the
consistency of the filesystem after a system crash, or when a stateless remote filesystem protocol
such as NFS is being served. A buffer that is written using bawrite() or bwrite() is placed on the

appropriate output queue. When the output completes, the brelse() routine is called to awaken
any threads that are waiting for it or, if there is no immediate need for it, to dissolve the buffer.

Some buffers, though clean, may be needed again soon. To avoid the overhead of repeatedly
creating and dissolving buffers, the buffer-cache emulation layer provides the bqrelse() routine
to let the filesystem notify it that it expects to use the buffer again soon. The bqrelse() routine
places the buffer on a clean list rather than dissolving it.

Figure 7.8 shows a snapshot of the buffer pool. A buffer with valid contents is contained on
exactly one bufhash hash chain. The kernel uses the hash chains to determine quickly whether a
block is in the buffer pool and, if it is, to locate it. A buffer is removed only when its contents
become invalid or it is reused for different data. Thus, even if the buffer is in use by one thread,
it can still be found by another thread, although it will be locked so that it will not be used until
its contents are consistent.

Figure 7.8 Snapshot of the buffer pool. Key: V—vnode; X—file offset.

In addition to appearing on the hash list, each unlocked buffer appears on exactly one free list.
The first free list is the LOCKED list. Buffers on this list cannot be flushed from the cache. This
list was originally intended to hold superblock data; in FreeBSD, it holds only buffers being
written in background. In a background write, the contents of a dirty buffer are copied to
another anonymous buffer. The anonymous buffer is then written to disk. The original buffer
can continue to be used while the anonymous buffer is being written. Background writes are
used primarily for fast and continuously changing blocks such as those that hold filesystem
allocation bitmaps. If the block holding the bitmap was written normally, it would be locked and

unavailable while it waited on the disk queue to be written. Thus, applications trying to write
files in the area described by the bitmap would be blocked from running while they waited for
the write of the bitmap to finish so that they could update the bitmap. By using background
writes for bitmaps, applications are rarely forced to wait to update a bitmap.

The second list is the DIRTY list. Buffers that have been modified, but not yet written to disk,
are stored on this list. The DIRTY list is managed using a least recently used algorithm. When a
buffer is found on the DIRTY list, it is removed and used. The buffer is then returned to the end
of the DIRTY list. When too many buffers are dirty, the kernel starts the buffer daemon running.
The buffer daemon writes buffers starting from the front of the DIRTY list. Thus, buffers written
repeatedly will continue to migrate to the end of the DIRTY list and are not likely to be
prematurely written or reused for new blocks.

The third free list is the CLEAN list. This list holds blocks that a filesystem is not currently using
but that it expects to use soon. The CLEAN list is also managed using a least recently used
algorithm. If a requested block is found on the CLEAN list, it is returned to the end of the list.

The final list is the list of empty buffers—the EMPTY list. The empty buffers are just headers and
have no memory associated with them. They are held on this list waiting for another mapping
request.

When a new buffer is needed, the kernel first checks to see how much memory is dedicated to
the existing buffers. If the memory in use is below its permissible threshold, a new buffer is
created from the EMPTY list. Otherwise, the oldest buffer is removed from the front of the
CLEAN list. If the CLEAN list is empty, the buffer daemon is awakened to clean up and release a
buffer from the DIRTY list.

Implementation of Buffer Management

Having looked at the functions and algorithms used to manage the buffer pool, we now turn our
attention to the implementation requirements for ensuring the consistency of the data in the
buffer pool. Figure 7.9 shows the support routines that implement the interface for getting
buffers. The primary interface to getting a buffer is through bread(), which is called with a
request for a data block of a specified size for a specified vnode. There is also a related interface,
breadn(), that both gets a requested block and starts read-ahead for additional blocks. Bread()
first calls getblk() to find out whether the data block is available in an existing buffer. If the
block is available in a buffer, getblk() calls bremfree() to take the buffer off whichever free list it
is on and to lock it; bread() can then return the buffer to the caller.

Figure 7.9 Procedural interface to the buffer-allocation system.

If the block is not already in an existing buffer, getblk() calls getnewbuf() to allocate a new
buffer, using the algorithm described in the previous subsection. The new buffer is then passed
to allocbuf(), which is responsible for determining how to constitute the contents of the buffer.

The common case is that the buffer is to contain a logical block of a file. Here, allocbuf() must
request the needed block from the virtual-memory system. If the virtual-memory system does
not already have the needed block, it arranges to get it brought into its page cache. The allocbuf()
routine then allocates an appropriately sized piece of kernel address space and requests the
virtual-memory system to map the needed file block into that address space. The buffer is then
marked filled and returned through getblk() and bread().

The other case is that the buffer is to contain a block of filesystem metadata such as a bitmap or
an inode block that is associated with a disk device rather than a file. Because the virtual
memory does not (currently) have any way to track such blocks, they can be held in memory
only within buffers. Here, allocbuf() must call the kernel malloc() routine to allocate memory to
hold the block. The allocbuf() routine then returns the buffer to getblk() and bread() marked
busy and unfilled. Noticing that the buffer is unfilled, bread() passes the buffer to the strategy()
routine for the underlying filesystem to have the data read in. When the read completes, the
buffer is returned.

To maintain the consistency of the filesystem, the kernel must ensure that a disk block is
mapped into, at most, one buffer. If the same disk block were present in two buffers, and both
buffers were marked dirty, the system would be unable to determine which buffer had the most
current information. Figure 7.10 shows a sample allocation. In the middle of the figure are the
blocks on the disk. Above the disk an old buffer is shown containing a 4096-byte fragment for a
file that presumably has been removed or shortened. The new buffer is going to be used to hold
a 4096-byte fragment for a file that is presumably being created and that will reuse part of the
space previously held by the old file. The kernel maintains the consistency by purging old
buffers when files are shortened or removed. Whenever a file is removed, the kernel traverses
the file’s list of dirty buffers. For each buffer, the kernel cancels its write request and dissolves
the buffer so that the buffer cannot be found in the buffer pool again. For a file being partially

truncated, only the buffers following the truncation point are invalidated. The system can then
allocate the new buffer, knowing that the buffer maps the corresponding disk blocks uniquely.

Figure 7.10 Potentially overlapping allocation of buffers.

7.5 Stackable Filesystems

The early vnode interface was simply an object-oriented interface to an underlying filesystem.
As the demand grew for new filesystem features, it became desirable to find ways of providing
them without having to modify the existing and stable filesystem code. One approach was to
provide a mechanism for stacking several filesystems on top of one another other [Rosenthal,
1990]. The stacking ideas were refined and implemented in the 4.4BSD system [Heidemann &
Popek, 1994]. The implementation of the stacking has been refined in FreeBSD, but the
semantics remain largely unchanged from those found in 4.4BSD. The bottom of a vnode stack
tends to be a disk-based filesystem, whereas the layers used above it typically transform their
arguments and pass on those arguments to a lower layer.

In all UNIX systems, the mount command takes a special device as a source and maps that
device onto a directory mount point in an existing filesystem. When a filesystem is mounted on
a directory, the previous contents of the directory are hidden; only the contents of the root of the
newly mounted filesystem are visible. To most users, the effect of the series of mount commands
done at system startup is the creation of a single seamless filesystem tree.

Stacking also uses the mount command to create new layers. The mount command pushes a
new layer onto a vnode stack; an unmount command removes a layer. Like the mounting of a
filesystem, a vnode stack is visible to all processes running on the system. The mount command
identifies the underlying layer in the stack, creates the new layer, and attaches that layer into the
filesystem namespace. The new layer can be attached to the same place as the old layer (covering
the old layer) or to a different place in the tree (allowing both layers to be visible). An example is
shown in the next subsection.

If layers are attached to different places in the namespace, then the same file will be visible in
multiple places. Access to the file under the name of the new layer’s namespace will go to the
new layer, whereas that under the old layer’s namespace will go to only the old layer.

When a file access (e.g., an open, read, stat, or close) occurs to a vnode in the stack, that vnode
has several options:

• Perform the requested operations and return a result.

• Pass the operation without change to the next-lower vnode on the stack. When the operation
returns from the lower vnode, it may modify the results or simply return them.

• Modify the operands provided with the request and then pass it to the next-lower vnode. When
the operation returns from the lower vnode, it may modify the results, or simply return them.

If an operation is passed to the bottom of the stack without any layer taking action on it, then
the interface will return the error “operation not supported.”

Vnode interfaces released before 4.4BSD implemented vnode operations as indirect function
calls. The requirements that intermediate stack layers bypass operations to lower layers and that
new operations can be added into the system at boot or module load time mean that this
approach is no longer adequate. Filesystems must be able to bypass operations that may not
have been defined at the time that the filesystem was implemented. In addition to passing
through the function, the filesystem layer must also pass through the function parameters,
which are of unknown type and number.

To resolve these two problems in a clean and portable way, the kernel places the vnode
operation name and its arguments into an argument structure. An example access-check call
and its implementation for the UFS filesystem are shown in Figure 7.11. Note that the
vop_access_args structure is normally declared in a header file, but here it is declared at the
function site to simplify the example. The argument structure is passed as a single parameter to
the vnode operation. Thus, all calls on a vnode operation will always have exactly one parameter,
which is the pointer to the argument structure. If the vnode operation is one that is supported by
the filesystem, then it will know what the arguments are and how to interpret them. If it is an
unknown vnode operation, then the generic bypass routine can call the same operation in the
next-lower layer, passing to the operation the same argument structure that it received. In
addition, the first argument of every operation is a pointer to the vnode operation description.
This description provides the information about the operation to a bypass routine, including the
operation’s name and the location of the operation’s parameters.

Figure 7.11 Call to and function header for access vnode operation.

Simple Filesystem Layers

The simplest filesystem layer is nullfs. It makes no transformations on its arguments, simply
passing through all requests that it receives and returning all results that it gets back. Although
it provides no useful functionality if it is simply stacked on top of an existing vnode, nullfs can
provide a loopback filesystem by mounting the filesystem rooted at its source vnode at some
other location in the filesystem tree. The code for nullfs is also an excellent starting point for
designers who want to build their own filesystem layers. Examples that could be built include a
compression layer or an encryption layer.

A sample vnode stack is shown in Figure 7.12. The figure shows a local filesystem on the bottom
of the stack that is being exported from /local via an NFS layer. Clients within the
administrative domain of the server can import the /local filesystem directly because they are
all presumed to use a common mapping of UIDs to user names.

Figure 7.12 Stackable vnodes.

The umapfs filesystem works much like the nullfs filesystem in that it provides a view of the file
tree rooted at the /local filesystem on the /export mount point. In addition to providing a copy
of the /local filesystem at the /export mount point, it transforms the credentials of each
system call made to files within the /export filesystem. The kernel does the transformation
using a mapping that was provided as part of the mount system call that created the umapfs
layer.

The /export filesystem can be exported to clients from an outside administrative domain that
uses different UIDs and GIDs. When an NFS request comes in for the /export filesystem, the
umapfs layer modifies the credential from the foreign client by mapping the UIDs used on the
foreign client to the corresponding UIDs used on the local system. The requested operation with
the modified credential is passed down to the lower layer corresponding to the /local filesystem,
where it is processed identically to a local request. When the result is returned to the mapping
layer, any returned credentials are mapped inversely so that they are converted from the local
UIDs to the outside UIDs, and this result is sent back as the NFS response.

There are three benefits to this approach:

1. There is no cost of mapping imposed on the local clients.

2. There are no changes required to the local filesystem code or the NFS code to support
mapping.

3. Each outside domain can have its own mapping. Domains with simple mappings consume
small amounts of memory and run quickly; domains with large and complex mappings can be
supported without detracting from the performance of simpler environments.

Vnode stacking is an effective approach for adding extensions, such as the umapfs service.

The Union Filesystem

The union filesystem is another example of a middle filesystem layer. Like the nullfs, it does not
store data but just provides a namespace transformation. It is loosely modeled on the work on
the 3-D filesystem [Korn & Krell, 1989], on the Translucent filesystem [Hendricks, 1990], and
on the Automounter [Pendry & Williams, 1994]. The union filesystem takes an existing
filesystem and transparently overlays the latter on another filesystem. Unlike most other
filesystems, a union mount does not cover up the directory on which the filesystem is mounted.
Instead, it shows the logical merger of both directories and allows both directory trees to be
accessible simultaneously [Pendry & McKusick, 1995].

A small example of a union-mount stack is shown in Figure 7.13. Here, the bottom layer of the
stack is the src filesystem that includes the source for the shell program. Being a simple
program, it contains only one source and one header file. The upper layer that has been union
mounted on top of src initially contains just the src directory. When the user changes directory
into shell, a directory of the same name is created in the top layer. Directories in the top layer
corresponding to directories in the lower layer are created only as they are encountered while
the top layer is traversed. If the user were to run a recursive traversal of the tree rooted at the
top of the union-mount location, the result would be a complete tree of directories matching the
underlying filesystem. In our example, the user now types make in the shell directory. The sh
executable is created in the upper layer of the union stack. To the user, a directory listing shows
the sources and executable all apparently together, as shown on the right in Figure 7.13.

Figure 7.13 A union-mounted filesystem. The /usr/src filesystem is on the bottom, and the
/tmp/src filesystem is on the top.

All filesystem layers, except the top one, are treated as though they were read-only. If a file
residing in a lower layer is opened for reading, a descriptor is returned for that file. If a file

residing in a lower layer is opened for writing, the kernel first copies the entire file to the top
layer and then returns a descriptor referencing the copy of the file. The result is that there are
two copies of the file: the original unmodified file in the lower layer and the modified copy of the
file in the upper layer. When the user performs a directory listing, any duplicate names in the
lower layer are suppressed. When a file is opened, a descriptor for the file in the uppermost layer
in which the name appears is returned. Thus, once a file has been copied to the top layer,
instances of the file in lower layers become inaccessible.

The tricky part of the union filesystem is handling the removal of files that reside in a lower
layer. Since the lower layers cannot be modified, the only way to remove a file is to hide it by
creating a whiteout directory entry in the top layer. A whiteout is an entry in a directory that has
no corresponding file; it is distinguished by having an inode number of 1. If the kernel finds a
whiteout entry while searching for a name, the lookup is stopped and the “no such file or
directory” error is returned. Thus, the file with the same name in a lower layer appears to have
been removed. If a file is removed from the top layer, it is necessary to create a whiteout entry
for it only if there is a file with the same name in the lower level that would reappear.

When a process creates a file with the same name as a whiteout entry, the whiteout entry is
replaced with a regular name that references the new file. Because the new file is being created
in the top layer, it will mask out any files with the same name in a lower layer. When a user
performs a directory listing, whiteout entries and the files that they mask usually are not shown.
However, there is an option that causes them to appear.

One feature that has long been missing in UNIX systems is the ability to recover files after they
have been deleted. For the union filesystem, the kernel can implement file recovery trivially by
simply removing the whiteout entry to expose the underlying file. For filesystems that provide
file recovery, users can recover files by using a special option to the remove command. Processes
can recover files by using the undelete system call.

When a directory whose name appears in a lower layer is removed, a whiteout entry is created
just as it would be for a file. However, if the user later attempts to create a directory with the
same name as the previously deleted directory, the union filesystem must treat the new
directory specially to avoid having the previous contents from the lower-layer directory reappear.
When a directory that replaces a whiteout entry is created, the union filesystem sets a flag in the
directory metadata to show that this directory should be treated specially. When a directory scan
is done, the kernel returns information about only the top-level directory; it suppresses the list
of files from the directories of the same name in the lower layers.

The union filesystem can be used for many purposes:

• It allows several different architectures to build from a common source base. The source pool
is NFS mounted onto each of several machines. On each host machine, a local filesystem is
union mounted on top of the imported source tree. As the build proceeds, the objects and
binaries appear in the local filesystem that is layered above the source tree. This approach not
only avoids contaminating the source pool with binaries, but also speeds the compilation
because most of the filesystem traffic is on the local filesystem.

• It allows compilation of sources on read-only media such as CD-ROMs. A local filesystem is
union mounted above the CD-ROM sources. It is then possible to change into directories on the
CD-ROM and to give the appearance of being able to edit and compile in that directory.

• It allows creation of a private source directory. The user creates a source directory in her own
work area and then union mounts the system sources underneath that directory. This feature is
possible because the restrictions on the mount command have been relaxed. If the sysctl
vfs.usermount option has been enabled, any user can do a mount if she owns the directory on
which the mount is being done and she has appropriate access permissions on the device or
directory being mounted (read permission is required for a read-only mount, read–write
permission is required for a read–write mount). Only the user who did the mount or the
superuser can unmount a filesystem.

Other Filesystems

There are several other filesystems included as part of FreeBSD. The portal filesystem mounts a
process onto a directory in the file tree. When a pathname that traverses the location of the
portal is used, the remainder of the path is passed to the process mounted at that point. The
process interprets the path in whatever way it sees fit, then returns a descriptor to the calling
process. This descriptor may be for a socket connected to the portal process. If it is, further
operations on the descriptor will be passed to the portal process for the latter to interpret.
Alternatively, the descriptor may be for a file elsewhere in the filesystem.

Consider a portal process mounted on /dialout used to manage a bank of dialout modems.
When     a   process   wanted     to   connect    to    an   outside   number,   it   would   open
/dialout/15105551212/28800 to specify that it wanted to dial 1-510-555-1212 at 28800 baud.
The portal process would get the final two pathname components. Using the final component, it
would determine that it should find an unused 28800-baud modem. It would use the other
component as the number to which to place the call. It would then write an accounting record
for future billing, and would return the descriptor for the modem to the process.

An interesting use of the portal filesystem is to provide an Internet service directory. For
example,      with   an   Internet     portal   process    mounted   on   /net,    an   open    of
/net/tcp/McKusick.COM/smtp returns a TCP socket descriptor to the calling process that is
connected to the SMTP server on McKusick.COM. Because access is provided through the
normal filesystem, the calling process does not need to be aware of the special functions
necessary to create a TCP socket and to establish a TCP connection [Stevens & Pendry, 1995].

There are several filesystems that are designed to provide a convenient interface to kernel
information. The procfs filesystem is normally mounted at /proc and provides a view of the
running processes in the system. Its primary use is for debugging, but it also provides a
convenient interface for collecting information about the processes in the system. A directory
listing of /proc produces a numeric list of all the processes in the system. The /proc interface is
more fully described in Section 4.9.

The fdesc filesystem is normally mounted on /dev/fd and provides a list of all the active file
descriptors for the currently running process. An example where this is useful is specifying to an
application that it should read input from its standard input. Here, you can use the pathname
/dev/fd/0 instead of having to come up with a special convention, such as using the name “–”
to tell the application to read from its standard input.

The linprocfs emulates a subset of the Linux process filesystem and is normally mounted on
/compat/linux/proc. It provides similar information to that provided by the /proc filesystem,
but in a format expected by Linux binaries.

Finally, there is the cd9660 filesystem. It allows ISO-9660-compliant filesystems, with or
without Rock Ridge extensions, to be mounted. The ISO-9660 filesystem format is most
commonly used on CD-ROMs.

Exercises

7.1 Where are the read and write attributes of an open file descriptor stored?

7.2 Why is the close-on-exec bit located in the per-process descriptor table instead of in the
system file table?

7.3 Why are the file-table entries reference counted?

7.4 What three shortcomings of lock files are addressed by the FreeBSD descriptor-locking
facilities?

7.5 What two problems are raised by mandatory locks?

7.6 Why is the implementation of select split between the descriptor-management code and the
lower-level routines?

7.7 Describe how the process selecting flag is used in the implementation of select.

7.8 The syncer daemon starts as part of system boot. Once every second, it does an fsync on any
vnodes that it finds that have been dirty for 30 seconds. What problem could arise if this
daemon were not run?

7.9 When is a vnode placed on the free list?

7.10 Why must the lookup routine call through the vnode interface once for each component in
a pathname?

7.11 Give three reasons for revoking access to a vnode.

7.12 Why are the buffer headers allocated separately from the memory that holds the contents
of the buffer?

7.13 Asynchronous I/O is provided through the aio_read and aio_write systems calls rather
than through the traditional read and write system calls. What problems arise with providing
asynchronous I/O in the existing read–write interface?

*7.14 Why are there both a CLEAN list and a DIRTY list instead of all buffers being managed on
one list?

*7.15 If a process reads a large file, the blocks of the file will fill the virtual memory cache
completely, flushing out all other contents. All other processes in the system then will have to go
to disk for all their filesystem accesses. Write an algorithm to control the purging of the buffer
cache.

*7.16 Vnode operation parameters are passed between layers in structures. What alternatives
are there to this approach? Explain why your approach is more or less efficient, compared to the
current approach, when there are less than five layers in the stack. Also compare the efficiency
of your solution when there are more than five layers in the stack.

References

Accetta et al., 1986.

M. Accetta, R. Baron, W. Bolosky, D. Golub, R. Rashid, A. Tevanian, & M. Young, “Mach: A New
Kernel Foundation for UNIX Development,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp.
93–113, June 1986.

Bach, 1986.

M. J. Bach, The Design of the UNIX Operating System, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
1986.

Dijkstra & Genuys, 1968.

E. Dijkstra & F. Genuys, editor, “Cooperating Sequential Processes,” in Programming
Languages, pp. 43–112, Academic Press, New York, NY, 1968.

Heidemann & Popek, 1994.

J. S. Heidemann & G. J. Popek, “File-System Development with Stackable Layers,” ACM
Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 58–89, February 1994.

Hendricks, 1990.

D. Hendricks, “A Filesystem for Software Development,” USENIX Association Conference
Proceedings, pp. 333–340, June 1990.

Korn & Krell, 1989.

D. Korn & E. Krell, “The 3-D File System,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp.
147–156, June 1989.

Lemon, 2001.

J. Lemon, “Kqueue: A Generic and Scalable Event Notification Facility,” Proceedings of the
Freenix Track at the 2001 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, pp. 141–154, June 2001.

Pendry & McKusick, 1995.

J. Pendry & M. K. McKusick, “Union Mounts in 4.4BSD-Lite,” USENIX Association Conference
Proceedings, pp. 25–33, January 1995.

Pendry & Williams, 1994.

J. Pendry & N. Williams, “AMD: The 4.4BSD Automounter Reference Manual,” in 4.4BSD
System Manager’s Manual, pp. 13:1–57, O’Reilly & Associates, Inc., Sebastopol, CA, 1994.

Peterson, 1983.

G. Peterson, “Concurrent Reading While Writing,” ACM Transactions on Programming
Languages and Systems, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 46–55, January 1983.

Rosenthal, 1990.

D. Rosenthal, “Evolving the Vnode Interface,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp.
107–118, June 1990.

Stevens, 1999.

R. Stevens, UNIX Network Programming Volume 2, Second Edition, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1999.

Stevens & Pendry, 1995.

R. Stevens & J. Pendry, “Portals in 4.4BSD,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp.
1–10, January 1995.

