                                 Chapter 8. Devices

8.1 Device Overview

This chapter describes the part of the system that interfaces with the hardware as is shown in
the bottom part of Figure 7.1. Historically, the device interface was static and simple. Devices
were discovered as the system was booted and did not change thereafter. Filesystems were built
in a partition of a single disk. When a disk driver received a request from a filesystem to write a
block, it would add the base offset of the partition and perform a bounds check based on
information from its disk label. It would then do the requested I/O and return the result or error
to the filesystem. A typical disk driver could be written in a few hundred lines of code.

As the system has evolved, the complexity of the I/O system has increased with the addition of
new functionality. The new functionality can be broken into three categories:

1. Disk management

2. I/O routing and control

3. Networking

Each of these areas is handled by a new subsystem in FreeBSD.

Disk management consists of organizing the myriad ways that disks can be used to build a
filesystem. A disk may be broken up into several slices, each of which can be used to support a
different operating system. Each of these slices may be further subdivided into partitions that
can be used to support filesystems as they did historically. However, it is also possible to
combine several slices and/or partitions to create a virtual partition on which to build a
filesystem that spans several disks. The virtual partition may concatenate several partitions to
stripe the filesystem across several disks, thus providing a high-bandwidth filesystem, or the
underlying partitions may be put together in a Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disks (RAID) to
provide a higher level of reliability and accessibility than a single disk. Or, the partitions may be
organized into two equal-size groups and mirrored to provide an even higher level of reliability
and accessibility than RAID. The aggregation of physical disk partitions into a virtual partition
in these ways is referred to as volume management.

Rather than building all this functionality into all the filesystems or disk drivers, it has been
abstracted out into the GEOM (geometry) layer. The GEOM layer takes as input the set of disks

available on the system. It is responsible for doing volume management. At a low level, volume
management creates, maintains, and interprets the slice tables and the disk labels defining the
partitions within each slice. At a higher level, GEOM combines the physical disk partitions
through striping, RAID, or mirroring to create the virtual partitions that are exported to the
filesystem layer above. The virtual partition appears to the filesystem as a single large disk. As
the filesystem does I/O within the virtual partition, the GEOM layer determines which disk(s)
are involved and breaks up and dispatches the I/O request to the appropriate physical drives.
The operation of the GEOM layer is described in Section 8.7.

The PC I/O Architecture

Historically, architectures had only one or two I/O busses and types of disk controllers. As
described in the next subsection, a modern PC today can have several types of disks connected
to the machine through five or more different types of interfaces. The complexity of these disk
controllers rivals that of the entire early UNIX operating system. Early controllers could only
handle one disk I/O at a time. Today’s controllers can typically juggle up to 64 simultaneous
requests through a scheme called tagged queueing. A request works its way through the
controller being posted as it is received, scheduled to be done, completed, and reported back to
the requester. I/O may also be cached in the controller to allow future requests to be handled
more quickly. Another task handled by the controller is to provide a replacement with an
alternate good sector for a disk sector with a permanent error.

The PC I/O architecture is shown in Figure 8.1. Far greater detail is available at Arch [2014]. On
the left of the figure is one or more CPUs that have a high-speed interconnect to the system’s
main memory and the graphics memory that drives the system display. Note that the L1 and L2
caches are not shown in this picture because they are considered as part of the CPU. Historically,
the memory and graphics were connected to the CPU via the northbridge bus. Modern Intel and
AMD CPUs have subsumed the roles of the memory controller and the graphics controller. Here,
they have converged with the system-on-chip design of small embedded architectures.

Figure 8.1 The PC I/O architecture. Key: PCH—Peripheral Controller Hub; SATA—Serial
Advanced Technology Attachment; USB—Universal Serial Bus; PCI-E—Peripheral Component
Interconnect Express; APIC—Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller; ACPI—Advanced

Configuration and Power Interface; IPMI—Intelligent Platform Management Interface;
LPC—Low Pin Count interface.

Beneath the CPUs is the Peripheral Controller Hub (PCH) that connects all the I/O busses to the
system. These busses include the following:

• The SATA (Serial Advanced Technology Attachment) bus. SATA has replaced the parallel ATA
bus that was common in earlier PC designs. SATA supports the ability to hot-plug drives and
transfer data at up to 600 Mbyte per second. Devices connected via SATA have a one-to-one
relationship between the device and a port: there is no daisy chaining of devices as was present
in earlier busses such as SCSI. Commercially available systems have at least two and usually
more SATA ports available. Switching from a parallel to a serial bus allowed the size of the
connectors and cables to be shrunk to the point where having one cable per device does not
present any cable routing or space problems even in laptop systems.

• The USB (Universal Serial Bus). The USB provides a high-speed input typically used for
external hard disks, removable flash disks, video cameras, scanners, and printers, as well as
human input devices such as keyboards, mice, and joysticks. USB 2.0 provides speeds up to 48
Mbyte per second, while USB 3.0 provides speeds up to 500 Mbyte per second.

• The PCI (Peripheral Component Interconnect) and PCI-E (Peripheral Component
Interconnect Express) busses. These busses provide a well-designed architecture for high-speed
throughput and automated autoconfiguration for modern I/O cards. The older PCI bus uses a
parallel interface and a simple bus topology, while the newer PCI-E bus uses a star topology and
a serial interface that allows multiple channels to bond together to increase the bandwidth to the
peripheral. These busses also have the advantage of being available on many other computer
architectures besides the PC.

• The APIC (Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller). The APIC maps the device
interrupts to IRQ (Interrupt ReQuest) values for the CPU. Most modern machines use an
IOAPIC (I/O Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller) that provides much finer-grain
control over the device interrupts. All processors since the Pentium Pro (1997) have had an
LAPIC (Local Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller) that works with the IOAPIC to
support distribution of interrupts among the CPUs.

• The Firewire (IEEE 1394) bus. Firewire transfers data at up to 80 Mbyte per second. It is used
by memory-card readers, external disks, and some professional digital cameras. Firewire is
largely being replaced by USB.

• The ACPI (Advanced Configuration and Power Interface). The ACPI is present on all mobile
systems, desktops, and servers. It provides topology and discovery information to the kernel for
system resources like PCI/PCI-E busses and APICs. It controls various components, including
power and sleep buttons, back-light intensity of screens, and cooling fans and status lights. It
also controls power-saving modes for the CPU, chassis, and system peripherals [ACPI, 2013].

• IPMI (Intelligent Platform Management Interface). The IPMI subsystem is provided on many
server-class machines to allow for remote monitoring and control of the system over a network
connection. The network connection may be shared with a network port on the system or a
completely separate network port may be present allowing for complete out-of-band control of
the machine. IPMI provides access to various environmental registers including component
temperatures, fan speeds, and power levels. It may also offer a serial-over-LAN capability where
a virtual serial console is available over the network.

• Support for the AC97 (Audio CODEC) sound standard. This standard allows a single DSP
(Digital Signal Processor) to be used to support both a modem and sound.

• The Low Pin Count (LPC) interface. A specialized combination of general-purpose I/O pins, it
can be used to emulate legacy interfaces. These interfaces include access to floppy disks, serial
ports, and the PS2 keyboard and mouse ports. Most machines connect the keyboard and mouse
through the USB port, but some systems still provide PS2 ports for legacy devices. The
emulation happens transparently in the Basic Input Output System (BIOS) code via the System
Management Interrupt. The result is that the kernel sees what appears to be classic controller.
For example, the kernel might detect a legacy serial port but it is really soft emulation in the
BIOS controlling pins assigned to the serial port on the LPC. The LPC exists as a transition
technology as the last remnants of first-generation PC devices are retired.

The Structure of the FreeBSD Mass Storage I/O Subsystem

There were several disk subsystems in early versions of FreeBSD. The first support for ATA and
SCSI disks came from Mach 2.5 and were present in FreeBSD 1.0. Both of these were highly
device specific. Efforts to replace both resulted in CAM (Common Access Method), introduced
in FreeBSD 3.0, and the new ATA driver, introduced in FreeBSD 4.0. As the ATA effort was
proceeding, the CAM maintainers attempted to have it become a CAM attachment. However, the
strange reservation and locking rules of the ATA register-file model was a poor match for the
CAM implementation, so the ATA implementation, with the exception of the CD-ROM driver,
remained separate until FreeBSD 9.0 when the CAM implementation replaced it.

CAM is an ANSI (American National Standards Institute) standard (X3.232-1996). A revised
and enhanced version of CAM was proposed by the X3T10 group but was never approved [ANSI,
2002]. Although originally used for SCSI, CAM is a way of interfacing host-bus adapter (HBA)
drivers (software-interface-module drivers in CAM terminology), midlayer transport glue, and
peripheral drivers. This layering provides a powerful abstraction that separates the physical bus
protocol from the logical device protocol, making it suitable for many modern I/O systems.
While CAM seems unlikely to ever be approved as a standard, it still provides a useful
framework for implementing a storage subsystem.

The FreeBSD CAM implementation supports SPI (SCSI Parallel Interface), Fibre Channel [ANSI,
2003], UMASS (USB Mass Storage), IEEE 1394 (Firewire), SAS (Serial Attached SCSI), SATA,
and iSCSI (Internet SCSI). It has peripheral drivers for disks (da), cdrom (cd), tapes (sa), tape
changers (ch), processor devices (pt), and enclosure services (ses). Additionally, there is the
target emulator that allows a computer to emulate any of the supported devices and a
pass-through interface that allows user applications to send I/O requests to any CAM-controlled
peripheral. The operation of the CAM layer is described in Section 8.8.

The structure of the FreeBSD Disk I/O subsystem is shown in Figure 8.2. As the figure shows,
disk drives may be attached to the system through many busses.

Figure 8.2 The structure of the FreeBSD disk I/O subsystem.

Fibre Channel was once the fastest and most expensive disk connection technology, employing
fiberoptic or high-speed copper serial links. Such disk systems are usually used on large servers
or when the data must travel farther than just within the case of the computer or to an adjacent
rack. Its use is declining in favor of cheaper iSCSI and SAS.

The more common fast choice is a controller that plugs into the PCI-E bus, such as a SAS
controller, which can typically support 8 to 16 devices directly attached, and hundred of devices
attached via a switched network of bus expanders. SAS disks generally are faster and more
reliable under heavy load than the more consumer-desktop-oriented SATA disks. SAS allows for
transfer speeds up to 1.2 Gbyte per second, twice the speed of the cheapest and most ubiquitous
SATA disks.

Serial interface SATA disks may also be connected through the other busses available on the PC
architecture. These include Firewire and USB. Usually, the disks are connected through an
interface that acts as a bridge from the interface to a PCI bus. The USB and Firewire busses may
also support other types of devices that will be directly connected to their device drivers rather
than be managed by the CAM layer. The iSCSI interface is a way to connect disk drives and disk
enclosures directly to a TCP/IP network. It provides many of the benefits of Fibre Channel but
at a fraction of the cost.

Network device drivers provide another important piece of functionality within the kernel and
are covered in Section 8.5.

Autoconfiguration is the procedure carried out by the system to recognize and enable the
hardware devices present in a system. Historically, autoconfiguration was done just once when
the system was booted. In current machines, particularly portable machines such as laptop
computers, devices routinely come and go while the machine is operating. Thus, the kernel must
be prepared to configure, initialize, and make available hardware when it arrives and to drop
operations with hardware that has departed. FreeBSD uses a device-driver infrastructure called
newbus to manage the devices on the system. Newbus builds a tree rooted at an abstract root0
node and descends in a treelike structure down the various I/O paths and terminates at the
various devices connected to the machine. On a uniprocessor system, the root0 node is
synonymous with the CPU. On a multiprocessor system the root0 node is logically connected to
each of the CPUs. Device autoconfiguration is described in Section 8.9, which gives the details of
configuring devices when they appear and cleaning up after them when they disappear.

Device Naming and Access

Historically, FreeBSD used static device nodes located in /dev to provide access to the hardware
devices on the system. This approach had several problems:

• The device nodes are persistent entities in the filesystem and do not necessarily represent the
hardware that is really connected to and available on the machine.

• When new hardware is added to the kernel, the system administrator needs to create new
device nodes to access the hardware.

• If the hardware is later removed, the device nodes remain even though they are no longer
usable.

• Device nodes require coordination of the major and minor numbering schemes between the
device-driver tables in the kernel and the shell scripts that create them.

FreeBSD 5 replaced the static /dev directory with the DEVFS filesystem that is mounted on
/dev when the kernel is booted. As devices are discovered, either at boot or while the system is
running, their names appear in the /dev filesystem.

When a device disappears or becomes unavailable, its entries in /dev disappear. DEVFS has
several benefits over the old static /dev directory:

• Only devices that are currently available appear in /dev.

• Adding a device to the system causes its device nodes to appear in /dev, obviating the need for
a system administrator to create new device nodes.

• It is no longer necessary to coordinate device major and minor numbers between the kernel
and device-creation scripts or filesystem device nodes.

One benefit of the old static /dev was that device nodes could be given nonstandard names,
access permissions, owners, or groups. To provide the same flexibility, DEVFS has a rule-set
mechanism that allows these changes to be automated in the new /dev implementation. These
rule sets can be put in place when the system is booted and can be created or modified at any
time that the system is running. Each rule provides a pattern to identify the device nodes to be
affected. For each matched device node, it specifies one or more actions that should be taken.
Actions include creating a symbolic link to provide a nonstandard name as well as setting
nonstandard permissions, owner, or group. The rule sets are checked and applied whenever a
new device node is created or destroyed. They may also be checked and applied when explicitly
requested to do so by the system administrator, either manually or through a system-initiated
script.

Zero or more dev_t entries (major and minor numbers) in /dev may be created by the device
drivers each time that a device_t is created as part of the autoconfiguration process. Most device
drivers create a single /dev entry, but network device drivers do not create any entries, whereas
disk devices may create dozens. Additional entries may appear in /dev as the result of cloning

devices. For example, a cloning device such as a pseudo-terminal creates a new device each time
that it is opened.

8.2 I/O Mapping from User to Device

Computers store and retrieve data through supporting peripheral I/O devices. These devices
typically include mass-storage devices, such as disk drives, archival-storage devices, and
network interfaces. Storage devices such as disks are accessed through I/O controllers that
manage the operation of their attached devices according to I/O requests from the CPU.

Many hardware device peculiarities are hidden from the user by high-level kernel facilities, such
as the filesystem and socket interfaces. Other such peculiarities are hidden from the bulk of the
kernel itself by the I/O system. The I/O system consists of buffer-caching systems, general
device-driver code, and drivers for specific hardware devices that must finally address
peculiarities of the specific devices. An overview of the entire kernel is shown in Figure 7.1. The
bottom third of the figure comprises the various I/O systems.

There are three main kinds of I/O in FreeBSD: the character-device interface, the
filesystem, and the socket interface with its related network devices. The character interface
appears in the filesystem namespace and provides unstructured access to the underlying
hardware. The network devices do not appear in the filesystem; they are accessible through the
socket interface. Character devices are described in Section 8.3. The disk devices used by the
filesystems are described in Section 8.4. The fast filesystem is described in Chapter 9; the
Zettabyte filesystem (ZFS) is described in Chapter 10. The network devices used by the socket
interface are described in Section 8.5. Sockets are described in Chapter 12.

A character-device interface comes in two styles that depend on the characteristics of the
underlying hardware device. For some character-oriented hardware devices, such as terminal
multiplexers, the interface is truly character oriented, although higher-level software, such as
the terminal driver, may provide a line-oriented interface to applications. However, for
block-oriented devices such as disks, a character-device interface is an unstructured or raw
interface. For this interface, I/O operations do not go through the filesystem or the page cache;
instead, they are made directly between the device and buffers in the application’s virtual
address space. Consequently, the size of the operations must be a multiple of the underlying
block size required by the device and, on some machines, the application’s I/O buffer must be
aligned on a suitable boundary.

Internal to the system, I/O devices are accessed through a set of entry points provided by each
device’s device driver. A character-device interface uses a cdevsw structure. A cdevsw

structure is created for each device as the device is configured either at the time that the system
is booted or later when the device is attached to the system.

All devices in the system are managed by the DEVFS filesystem. As devices are configured,
entries are created for the device in the /dev filesystem. Each entry in the /dev filesystem has a
direct reference to its corresponding cdevsw entry. When a program accesses a device directly
by calling the open() system call with a path that terminates within the DEVFS filesystem, such
as /dev/cu, the DEVFS filesystem searches for a matching entry in its internal list of devices
and, if it finds a match, calls the the open() routine that is present in the device’s cdevsw. When
opened, most devices allocate new state to handle their new consumer. Devices that can only be
opened by one user will return an error when a second user attempts to call open().

Device Drivers

A device driver is divided into three main sections:

1. Autoconfiguration and initialization routines

2. Routines for servicing I/O requests (the top half)

3. Interrupt service routines (the bottom half)

The autoconfiguration portion of a driver is responsible for probing for a hardware device to
see whether the latter is present and to initialize the device and any associated software state
that is required by the device driver. This portion of the driver is typically called only once,
either when the system is initialized or, for transient devices, when they are connected to the
system. Autoconfiguration is described in Section 8.9.

The section of a driver that services I/O requests is invoked because of system calls or by the
virtual-memory system. This portion of the device driver executes synchronously in the top half
of the kernel and is permitted to block by calling the sleep() routine. We commonly refer to this
body of code as the top half of a device driver.

Interrupt service routines are invoked when the system fields an interrupt from a device.
Consequently, these routines cannot depend on any per-process state. In FreeBSD, an interrupt
has its own thread context, so it can block if it needs to do so. However, the cost of extra thread
switches is sufficiently high that for good performance device drivers should attempt to avoid
blocking. We commonly refer to a device driver’s interrupt service routines as the bottom half
of a device driver.

In addition to these three sections of a device driver, an optional crash-dump routine may be
provided. This routine, if present, is invoked when the system recognizes an unrecoverable error
and wishes to record the contents of physical memory for use in postmortem analysis. Most
device drivers for disk controllers provide a crash-dump routine. The use of the crash-dump
routine is described in Section 15.5.

I/O Queueing

Device drivers typically manage one or more queues of I/O requests in their normal operation.
When an input or output request is received by the top half of the driver, it is recorded in a data
structure that is placed on a per-device queue for processing. When an input or output operation
completes, the device driver receives an interrupt from the controller. The interrupt service
routine removes the appropriate request from the device’s queue, notifies the requester that the
command has completed, and then starts the next request from the queue. The I/O queues are
the primary means of communication between the top and bottom halves of a device driver.

Because I/O queues are shared among asynchronous routines, access to the queues must be
synchronized. Routines in both the top and bottom half of the device driver must acquire the
mutex associated with the queue before manipulating it to avoid corruption from simultaneous
modifications (mutexes are described in Section 4.3). For example, a bottom-half interrupt
might try to remove an entry that had not yet been fully linked in by the top half.
Synchronization among multiple processes starting I/O requests is also serialized through the
mutex associated with the queue.

Interrupt Handling

Interrupts are generated by devices to signal that an operation has completed or that a change in
status has occurred. On receiving a device interrupt, the system schedules the appropriate
device-driver interrupt-service routine with one or more parameters that uniquely identify the
device that requires service. These parameters are needed because device drivers typically
support multiple devices of the same type. If the interrupting device’s identity were not supplied
with each interrupt, the driver would be forced to poll all the potential devices to identify the
device that interrupted.

The system arranges for the unit-number parameter to be passed to the interrupt-service
routine for each device by installing the address of an auxiliary glue routine in the
interrupt-vector table. This glue routine, rather than the actual interrupt service routine, is
invoked to service the interrupt; it takes the following actions:

1. Collects the relevant hardware parameters and places them in the space reserved for them by
the device

2. Updates statistics on device interrupts

3. Schedules the interrupt service thread for the device

4. Clears the interrupt-pending flag in the hardware

5. Returns from the interrupt

Because a glue routine is interposed between the interrupt-vector table and the interrupt-service
routine, special-purpose instructions, which cannot be generated from C, and which are needed
by the hardware to support interrupts, can be kept out of the device driver. This interposition of
a glue routine permits device drivers to be written without assembly language.

8.3 Character Devices

Almost all peripherals on the system, except network interfaces, have a character-device
interface. A character device usually maps the hardware interface into a byte stream, similar to
that of the filesystem. Character devices of this type include terminals (e.g., /dev/ttyu0), line
printers (e.g, /dev/lp0), an interface to physical main memory (/dev/mem), and a bottomless
sink for data and an endless source of end-of-file markers (/dev/null). Some of these character
devices, such as terminal devices, may display special behavior on line boundaries but, in
general, are still treated as byte streams.

Devices such as high-speed graphics interfaces may have their own buffers or may always do I/O
directly into the address space of the user; they, too, are classed as character devices. Some of
these drivers may recognize special types of records and thus be further from the plain
byte-stream model.

The character interface for disks is also called the raw-device interface; it provides an
unstructured interface to the device. Its primary task is to arrange for direct I/O to and from the
device. The disk driver handles the asynchronous nature of I/O by maintaining and ordering an
active queue of pending transfers. Each entry in the queue specifies whether it is for reading or
writing, the main-memory address for the transfer, the device address for the transfer (usually a
disk sector number), and the transfer size (in bytes).

All other restrictions of the underlying hardware are passed through the character interface to
its clients, making character-device interfaces the furthest from the byte-stream model. Thus,

the user process must abide by the sectoring restrictions imposed by the underlying hardware.
For magnetic disks, the file offset and transfer size must be a multiple of the sector size. The
character interface does not copy the user data into a kernel buffer before putting them on an
I/O queue. Instead, it arranges to have the I/O done directly to or from the address space of the
process. The size and alignment of the transfer is limited by the physical device. However, the
transfer size is not restricted by the maximum size of the internal buffers of the system because
these buffers are not used.

The character interface is typically used by only those system-utility programs that have an
intimate knowledge of the data structures on the disk. The character interface also allows
user-level prototyping; for example, the 4.2BSD filesystem implementation was written and
largely tested as a user process that used a raw disk interface before the code was moved into the
kernel.

Character devices are described by entries in the cdevsw structure. The entry points in this
structure (see Table 8.1) are used to support raw access to block-oriented devices such as disks,
as well as normal access to character-oriented devices through the terminal driver. Raw devices
support a subset of the entry points that correspond to those entry points found in
block-oriented devices. The base set of entry points for all device drivers is described in this
section; the additional set of entry points for block-oriented devices is given in Section 8.4.

Table 8.1 Entry points for character and raw device drivers.

Raw Devices and Physical I/O

Most raw devices differ from filesystems only in the way that they do I/O. Whereas filesystems
read and write data to and from kernel buffers, raw devices transfer data to and from user

buffers. Bypassing kernel buffers eliminates the memory-to-memory copy that must be done by
filesystems but also denies applications the benefits of data caching. In addition, for devices that
support both raw and filesystem access, applications must take care to preserve consistency
between data in the kernel buffers and data written directly to the device. The raw device should
be used only when the filesystem is unmounted or mounted read-only. Raw-device access is
used by many filesystem utilities such as the filesystem check program, fsck, and by programs
that read and write backup media such as dump.

Because raw devices bypass kernel buffers, they are responsible for managing their own buffer
structures. Most devices borrow swap buffers to describe their I/O. The read and write routines
use the physio() routine to start a raw I/O operation (see Figure 8.3). The strategy parameter
identifies a block-device strategy routine that starts I/O operations on the device. The buffer is
used by physio() in constructing the request(s) made to the strategy routine. The device,
read–write flag, and uio parameters completely specify the I/O operation that should be done.
The maximum transfer size for the device is checked by physio() to adjust the size of each I/O
transfer before the latter is passed to the strategy routine. This check allows the transfer to be
done in sections according to the maximum transfer size supported by the device.

Figure 8.3 Algorithm for physical I/O.

Raw-device I/O operations request the hardware device to transfer data directly to or from the
data buffer in the user program’s address space described by the uio parameter. Thus, unlike
I/O operations that perform direct memory access (DMA) from buffers in the kernel address
space, raw I/O operations must check that the user’s buffer is accessible by the device and must
lock it into memory for the duration of the transfer.

Character-Oriented Devices

Character-oriented I/O devices are typified by terminal ports, although they also include
printers and other character- or line-oriented devices. These devices are usually accessed
through the terminal driver, described in Section 8.6. The close tie to the terminal driver has
heavily influenced the structure of character device drivers. For example, several entry points in

the cdevsw structure exist for communication between the generic terminal handler and the
terminal-multiplexer hardware drivers.

Entry Points for Character Device Drivers

A device driver for a character device is defined by its entries in a cdevsw structure:

open

Opens the device in preparation for I/O operations. A device’s open entry point will be called for
each open system call on a special-device file or, internally, when a device is prepared for
mounting a filesystem with the mount system call. The open() routine will commonly verify the
integrity of the associated medium. For example, it will verify that the device was identified
during the autoconfiguration phase and, for disk drives, that a medium is present and ready to
accept commands.

close

Closes a device. The close() routine is called after the final client interested in using the device
terminates. These semantics are defined by the higher-level I/O facilities. Disk devices have
nothing to do when a device is closed and thus use a null close() routine. Devices that support
access to only a single client must mark the device as available once again.

read

Reads data from a device. For raw devices, this entry point normally just calls the physio()
routine with device-specific parameters. For terminal-oriented devices, a read request is passed
immediately to the terminal driver. For other devices, a read request requires that the specified
data be copied into the kernel’s address space, typically with the uiomove() routine (see the end
of Section 7.1), and then be passed to the device.

write

Writes data to a device. This entry point is a direct parallel of the read entry point: raw devices
use physio(), terminal-oriented devices call the terminal driver to do this operation, and other
devices handle the request internally.

ioctl

Performs an operation other than a read or write. This entry point originally provided a
mechanism to get and set device parameters for terminal devices; its use has expanded to other
types of devices as well. Historically, ioctl operations have varied widely from device to device.

poll

Checks the device to see whether data are available for reading or space is available for writing
data. The poll entry point is used by the select and poll system calls in checking file descriptors
associated with device special files. For raw devices, a poll operation is meaningless since data
are not buffered. Here, the entry point is set to seltrue(), a routine that returns true for any poll
request.

mmap

Maps a device offset into a memory address. This entry point is called by the virtual-memory
system to convert a logical mapping to a physical address. For example, it converts an offset in
/dev/mem to a kernel address.

kqfilter

Adds the device to the kernel event list for the calling thread. Kernel events are described in
Section 7.1.

8.4 Disk Devices

Disk devices fill a central role in the UNIX kernel and thus have additional features and
capabilities beyond those of the typical character device driver. Historically, UNIX provided two
interfaces to disks. The first was a character-device interface that provided direct access to the
disk in its raw form. This interface is still available in FreeBSD and is described in Section 8.3.
The second was a block-device interface that converted from the user abstraction of a disk as an
array of bytes to the structure imposed by the underlying physical medium. Block devices were
accessible directly through appropriate device special files. Block devices were eliminated in
FreeBSD 5 because they were not needed by any common applications and added considerable
complexity to the kernel.

Entry Points for Disk Device Drivers

Device drivers for disk devices contain all the usual character device entry points described in
Section 8.3. In addition to those entry points there are two entry points that are used only for
disk devices:

strategy

Starts a read or write operation, and return immediately. I/O requests to or from filesystems
located on a device are translated by the system into calls to the block I/O routines bread() and
bwrite(). These block I/O routines in turn call the device’s strategy routine to read or write data
not in the memory cache. Each call to the strategy routine specifies a pointer to a buf structure
containing the parameters for an I/O request. If the request is synchronous, the caller must
sleep (on the address of the buf structure) until I/O completes.

dump

If performing a dump has been configured during system startup, writes all physical memory to
the configured device. Typically, the dump entry point saves the contents of physical memory on
secondary storage into an area used for swapping. To speed the dump and to save space, the
system can be configured to perform a mini-dump that writes only the physical memory in use
by the kernel. The system automatically performs a dump when it detects an unrecoverable
error and is about to crash. The dump is used in postmortem analysis to help find the problem
that caused the system to crash. The dump routine is invoked with context switching and
interrupts disabled; thus, the device driver must poll for device status rather than wait for
interrupts. At least one disk device is expected to support this entry point.

Sorting of Disk I/O Requests

The kernel provides a generic disksort() routine that can be used by all the disk device drivers to
sort I/O requests into a drive’s request queue using an elevator sorting algorithm. This
algorithm sorts requests in a cyclic, ascending, block order, so that requests can be serviced with
minimal one-way scans over the drive. This ordering was originally designed to support the
normal read-ahead requested by the filesystem and also to counteract the filesystem’s random
placement of data on a drive. With the improved placement algorithms in the current filesystem,
the effect of the disksort() routine is less noticeable; disksort() produces the largest effect when
there are multiple simultaneous users of a drive.

The disksort() algorithm is shown in Figure 8.4. A drive’s request queue is made up of two lists
of requests ordered by block number. The first is the active list; the second is the next-pass list.
The request at the front of the active list shows the current position of the drive. If the next-pass
list is not empty, it is made up of requests that lie before the current position. Each new request
is sorted into either the active or the next-pass list, according to the request’s location. When the
heads reach the end of the active list, the next-pass list becomes the active list, an empty
next-pass list is created, and the drive begins servicing the new active list.

Figure 8.4 Algorithm for disksort().

Disk sorting can also be important on machines that have a fast processor and do not sort
requests within the device driver. Here, if a write of several Mbyte is honored in order of
queueing, it can block other processes from accessing the disk while it completes. Sorting
requests provides some scheduling, which more fairly distributes accesses to the disk controller.

Most modern disk controllers accept several concurrent I/O requests. The controller then sorts
these requests to minimize the time needed to service them. If the controller could always
manage all outstanding I/O requests, then there would be no need to have the kernel do any
sorting. However, most controllers can handle only about 15 outstanding requests. Since a busy
system can easily generate bursts of activity that exceed the number that the disk controller can
manage simultaneously, disk sorting by the kernel is still necessary.

Disk Labels

A disk may be broken up into several partitions, each of which may be used for a separate
filesystem or swap area. A disk label contains information about the partition layout and usage
including type of filesystem, swap partition, or unused. For the fast filesystem, the partition
usage contains enough additional information to enable the filesystem check program (fsck) to
locate the alternate superblocks for the filesystem. The disk label also contains any other
driver-specific information.

Having labels on each disk means that partition information can be different for each disk and
that it carries over when the disk is moved from one system to another. It also means that, when

previously unknown types of disks are connected to the system, the system administrator can
use them without changing the disk driver, recompiling, and rebooting the system.

The label is located near the beginning of each drive—usually, in block zero. It must be located
near the beginning of the disk to enable it to be used in the first-level bootstrap. Most
architectures have hardware (or first-level) bootstrap code stored in read-only memory (ROM).
When the machine is powered up or the reset button is pressed, the CPU executes the hardware
bootstrap code from the ROM. The hardware bootstrap code typically reads the first few sectors
on the disk into the main memory, then branches to the address of the first location that it read.
The program stored in these first few sectors is the second-level bootstrap. Having the disk label
stored in the part of the disk read as part of the hardware bootstrap allows the second-level
bootstrap to have the disk-label information. This information gives it the ability to find the root
filesystem and hence the files, such as the kernel, needed to bring up FreeBSD. The size and
location of the second-level bootstrap are dependent on the requirements of the hardware
bootstrap code. Since there is no standard for disk-label formats and the hardware bootstrap
code usually understands only the vendor label, it is usually necessary to support both the
vendor and the FreeBSD disk labels. Here, the vendor label must be placed where the hardware
bootstrap ROM code expects it; the FreeBSD label must be placed out of the way of the vendor
label but within the area that is read in by the hardware bootstrap code so that it will be
available to the second-level bootstrap.

For example, on the PC architecture, the BIOS expects sector 0 of the disk to contain boot code,
a slice table commonly referred to as the Master Boot Record (MBR), and a magic number.
MBR slices can be used to break the disk up into several pieces. The BIOS brings in sector 0 and
verifies the magic number. The sector 0 boot code then searches the MBR table to determine
which slice is marked active. This boot code then brings in the operating-system-specific
bootstrap from the active slice and, if marked bootable, runs it. This operating-system specific
bootstrap includes the disk label described above and the code to interpret it.

The MBR is limited to 32-bit block numbers providing access to only the first 2 Tbyte of the disk,
thus leaving the remainder hidden from the MBR and tricky to use. The MBR is also limited to a
maximum of four partitions on the disk. The replacement for the MBR for the PC architecture is
the globally unique identifier partition table (GPT) label that has 64-bit block numbers
providing access to 8 zettabyte. It also permits up to 128 partitions on the disk.

Booting a disk with a GPT label requires an Extended Firmware Interface (EFI) BIOS. To allow
use of GPT labels on legacy systems without the EFI BIOS, FreeBSD supports a hybrid mode
that contains a compatibility MBR at sector 0 of the disk, and a GPT label at sector 1. This
configuration allows a legacy BIOS to boot the disk via the MBR label. The MBR label references

a boot-loader program that understands the GPT label and can continue the boot process using
the GPT information. Even if the disk is larger than 2 Tbyte, the boot chain is contained at the
front of the disk and is safe from the limits of the MBR. Another advantage of the GPT label is
that its expanded support for partitions makes the BSD disk label redundant. Thus, FreeBSD
systems partitioned with GPT will typically not have a BSD disk label.

8.5 Network Devices

All the networking protocols and facilities of FreeBSD ultimately rest atop some form of
networking device driver. A networking device driver is responsible for taking network data as
packets and transmitting or receiving them on some underlying physical media. The most
common type of network driver in the FreeBSD kernel works with Ethernet hardware [Xerox,
1980]. Unlike most other devices in the kernel, network devices are completely asynchronous.
They receive data whenever it happens to arrive and send data without waiting for any type of
acknowledgment. It is the responsibility of the socket API described in Chapter 12, and the
network protocols described in Chapters 13 and 14 to present a more easily understood model.
The socket API presents applications with a sequenced byte stream and looks more like reading
or writing a local file.

Entry Points for Network Drivers

All network devices are described by a data structure called an ifnet that encapsulates the
running state of the device and exposes most of the functions that the kernel uses to interact
with the underlying hardware. The functions defined for a network device driver are shown in
Table 8.2. Two functions that are not included in the ifnet structure that are essential to the
proper functioning of a network device are the driver’s attach and detach routines. Whether a
network device is discovered at system boot time or dynamically during run time, the first
function that must be called is the driver’s attach routine. The attach routine is responsible for
talking directly to the hardware to set up hardware registers and allocate resources for use by
the driver. The attach routine also fills in the methods of the ifnet structure with the correct
functions for working with the device and thereby hooks the device into the rest of the
networking subsystems so that network protocols and facilities can use the hardware. The
driver’s detach routine is called when a device is turned off or otherwise removed from the
system and is responsible for freeing the resources and destroying the associations created by
the attach routine.

Table 8.2 Functions defined for network drivers.

Configuration and Control

All network device drivers expose a single routine to the kernel that configures and controls the
underlying device. A generic I/O control routine or ioctl is stored in the driver’s ifnet structure
when the device driver is first loaded into the kernel. The driver’s ioctl routine is responsible for
enabling, disabling, and resetting the device. It also turns special device-specific features on and
off at runtime. Each message that can be sent to the device driver is encoded as a macro and is
checked via a switch statement in the driver’s ioctl routine. Table 8.3 lists the most commonly
implemented control messages. Each message is encoded as a socket ioctl and most have both a
set and a get form. The set form, shown here, has an S in the message name, as in
SIOCSIFFLAGS. The get form replaces the S with a G so that SIOCGIFFLAGS retrieves the
current set of flags from the device. User programs and networking subsystems call the driver’s
ioctl routine using a generic function provided for this purpose. Only the kernel calls the
driver-specific ioctl routine directly. The messages that handle multicast addresses, which are
maintained in a device-specific data structure, use ADD and DEL instead of get and set.

Table 8.3 Network driver control messages.

The details of many of the features controlled by the driver’s ioctl routine are device specific, but
their meaning to the kernel is generic enough for us to describe them in general. Each
networking device in the system can be in one of two states, either UP or DOWN. The state of
the device does not reflect whether it is turned on or initialized, but whether it will receive or
transmit packets. A device may be fully initialized and yet not be up. The up and down state of a
device is an administrative control that can be set any time during the life of the kernel, so long
as the device’s hardware has been properly initialized. The SIOCIFFLAGS message is
responsible for setting the device’s administrative state as well as a few other features. These
features include promiscuous mode, where a device can receive all the packets that pass by it on
the network, rather than just the packets that it knows are bound for it. Each device knows
which packets are meant for it because the device’s network layer address is set via the
SIOCSIFADDR message. Many network devices can support different native sizes of packets
called the maximum transmission unit (MTU). For Ethernet, the standard is still 1500
bytes but often can be increased to 9000, 16,384, or 64 Kbyte. The device’s native packet size is
controlled via the SIOCSIFMTU message. The last two messages in the table control different
device-specific features. Earlier network devices could only communicate at a single speed and
over a single low-level medium such as coaxial cable. Modern devices can often operate at
various speeds from 10 Mbit per second up through one or 10 Gbit. Most devices will
automatically set themselves up to communicate at their top speed, but it is possible to change
the speed of the device by using the SIOCSIFMEDIA ioctl. Features unrelated to the medium on
which the network is built, such as support for Virtual LANs (VLANs) and various types of
hardware offloading, where the device takes over part of the work normally done by the kernel’s
networking software, are called capabilities and are controlled through the SIOCSIFCAP ioctl.

Packet Reception

Network data can appear at any time on a network device; there is no need for an application to
have made any sort of request. The data arriving on the device might be a request for a service
that the system is providing, such as a Web or domain name server. When data arrive at a
network device, they are held in memory buffers within the network device until the kernel
transfers them into its own buffers. The device’s memory buffers are often maintained as a ring
as shown in Figure 8.5. The underlying hardware places data in the ring via DMA and the kernel
empties the ring in response to some form of interrupt. Using a ring as the shared data structure
between the kernel and the device provides a buffer between the lower-level hardware and the
kernel executing on the CPU. The ring makes it easier to do work in batches, decreasing the
overhead incurred by the kernel when it retrieves data from the device. Whenever data is
received by the network device, it interrupts the kernel, asking it to retrieve the data that has
been received. Storing the data in a ring allows the device to continue to receive data while the
kernel is simultaneously retrieving data from the ring. If there is more than one packet present
in the receive ring when the kernel services the device interrupt, it can retrieve the data in
batches, reducing the number of expensive interrupts that need to be processed.

Figure 8.5 Packet ring. Owner key: D—owned by the device; K—owned by the kernel.

A receive ring is made up of receive descriptors, each of which contains a pointer to some
memory where the received data resides as well as an ownership bit that describes its validity. In
Figure 8.5, “D” marks buffers owned by the device and “K” marks buffers owned by the kernel.
Specifically, a “K” ownership bit tells the kernel it can read the data out of the memory
associated with the receive descriptor. When the device receives data, it places it into the

memory of the next descriptor that it owns. When the data has all been moved, the device
changes the setting of the ownership bit to “K” to show that the data is now owned by the kernel.
The device can continue to place data in the ring without the aid of the kernel until the ring is
full, that is, all descriptors are owned by the kernel. When data is delivered into the receive ring,
the device will trigger some form of interrupt, signalling the kernel to retrieve the data. The
kernel will then read as many packets as are available in the ring up to some pre-set maximum.
It will pass them into the networking subsystems through whatever function pointer the driver’s
attach routine placed into the if_input entry in the driver’s ifnet structure. Often, the if_input
routine is associated with the type of hardware that the device is supporting such as Ethernet or
Wireless. The kernel returns the descriptors to the device by setting the ownership bit back to
“D” once it has copied the data into its own buffers.

The ring structure is used to buffer the packets between the device and the kernel. A kernel
running on a processor that is faster than the underlying network hardware will be able to keep
the ring nearly empty as it should be able to keep up with the underlying hardware. On a system
with high-speed networking hardware, such as a 10-Gbit Ethernet (Nm 10GbE), the adapter ring
makes it possible for the underlying device to absorb periodic bursts of packets and then have
the kernel read each burst of packets in a single batch.

Packet Transmission

Every ifnet structure contains a queue of data to be transmitted called the interface queue.
Whenever some part of the kernel wants to transmit data on a network device, it enqueues the
data on the device’s interface queue and then calls the if_start() routine stored in the device’s
ifnet structure. The pointer to the if_start() routine was placed in the driver’s ifnet structure by
the attach() routine when the device was first initialized.

Packet transmission is similar to packet reception in that the kernel and the device again share a
ring data structure called the transmit ring. The transmit ring acts as a buffer between the kernel
and the device into which the kernel writes data and from which the device reads it and
transmits it on the underlying hardware. A transmit ring is made up of transmit descriptors that
are nearly identical to receive descriptors. They contain a pointer to memory and an ownership
bit. The only differences between receive and transmit descriptors pertain to statistics and
special device features such as packet timestamping and checksum offloading. During
transmission, the roles of the kernel and the device are reversed, with the kernel writing data
into the transmit ring, changing the state of the ownership bit, and then telling the device that
there is data in the ring to be sent. The driver’s if_start() routine removes the data from the
interface queue and places it into the transmit ring.

8.6 Terminal Handling

Before the advent of bitmapped displays and Web browsers, most users of UNIX systems
interacted with the computer through some type of terminal. Terminals were either
line-oriented teletypes, which meant that the user could only make changes to a single line of
text before submitting it to the system, or they were screen based, with the most commonly
available terminals providing a screen 80 characters wide by 24 lines high. The plethora of
different terminals that could be hooked to a UNIX system meant that the parts of the kernel
that handled interactions with terminals eventually grew to be complex. Users of modern UNIX
systems interact with terminals less than their predecessors but programmers and systems
administrators continue to use some form of terminal-based command-line interface to have
effective and direct control over the system. Terminals also provide the most efficient and
low-overhead method of controlling a system. Bitmapped displays and Web servers require far
more resources from the system than does a simple terminal. In common FreeBSD-embedded
and purpose-built systems such as routers, switches, and storage systems, the ability to interact
with the system via a terminal is a requirement, whereas a Web interface communicating to a
Web server is considered a luxury.

The terminal handling facilities in FreeBSD incorporate three separate subsystems: the tty
driver, serial-device drivers, and the pseudo-terminal driver. The most common type of user
session in FreeBSD uses a pseudo-terminal, provided by the pts driver. The pseudo-terminal
driver provides support for a device pair, termed the master and slave devices. The slave device
provides a process with an interface identical to the one described for terminals in this section.
Anything written on the master device is provided to the slave device as input, and anything
written on the slave device is presented to the master device as input. The driver for the master
device emulates all hardware-support details described in the rest of this section.

Pseudo-terminals are used by xterm, as well as the remote-login program ssh. In a typical use,
xterm opens the master side of a pseudo-terminal and directs the keystrokes from the window
manager to its input while taking its output and drawing the characters in its window. It forks a
process that opens the slave side of the pseudo-terminal and then runs the user’s preferred shell
with the slave set up as the standard input, output, and error. As each keystroke is typed by the
user, it is written into the master side of the pseudo-terminal, where it is processed by the line
discipline and eventually emerges as input to the user’s shell. Output from the shell is written
into the slave side of the pseudo-terminal, where it is processed by the line discipline and
eventually emerges from the master side and is displayed in the xterm window. Each
pseudo-terminal opened by the system appears in the /dev/pts directory of the DEVFS
filesystem.

The pseudo-terminal driver commonly processes data one character at a time using the
character-device interface described in the user-interface subsection later in this section. As
each character is typed at the keyboard or arrives from a user over the network, it is presented
as input to the master side of the pseudo-terminal. The input of characters is independent of
process requests to read user input from the slave side of the pseudo-terminal. Characters are
processed when they are received and are stored until a process requests them, thus allowing
type-ahead. When a pseudo-terminal supports user interaction with the system, terminal
input represents the keystrokes of the user, and terminal output is displayed on the user’s screen.
When we use the term terminal, we are describing a concept that applies to both
pseudo-terminals and hardwired terminal devices.

Terminal-Processing Modes

FreeBSD supports several modes of terminal processing. Much of the time, keyboard input is in
canonical mode (also commonly referred to as cooked mode or line mode), in which input
characters are echoed by the operating system as they are typed by the user but are buffered
internally until a newline character is received. Only after the receipt of a newline character is
the entire line made available to the shell or other process reading from the keyboard. If the
process attempts to read from the keyboard before a complete line is ready, the process will
sleep until a newline character is received, regardless of a partial line already having been
received. The common case where a carriage return behaves like a newline character and causes
the line to be made available to the waiting process is implemented by the operating system and
is configurable by the user or process. In canonical mode, the user may correct typing errors,
deleting the most recently typed character with the erase character, deleting the most recent
word with the word-erase character, or deleting the entire current line with the kill
character. Other special characters generate signals sent to processes associated with the
keyboard; these signals may abort processing or may suspend it. Additional characters start and
stop output, flush output, or prevent special interpretation of the succeeding character. The user
can type several lines of input, up to an implementation-defined limit, without waiting for input
to be read and removed from the input queue. The user can specify the special processing
characters or can selectively disable them.

Editors and programs that communicate with other computers generally run in noncanonical
mode (also commonly referred to as raw mode or character-at-a-time mode). In this
mode, the system makes each typed character available to be read as input as soon as that
character is received. All special-character input processing is disabled, no erase or other
line-editing processing is done, and all characters are passed to the program reading from the
keyboard.

In addition to processing input characters, the terminal interface must do certain processing on
output. Most of the time, this processing is simple: newline characters are converted to a
carriage return plus a line feed. In addition to performing character processing, the terminal
output routines must manage flow control, both with the user (using stop and start characters)
and with the process. Because users absorb output slowly in comparison with computer
peripherals, a program writing to a terminal may produce output much faster than that output
can be handled by the user. When a process has filled the terminal output queue, it will be put to
sleep and will be restarted when enough output has drained.

Most of the character processing done for terminal interfaces is independent of whether it is
associated with a pseudo-terminal or a real hardware device. Therefore, most of this processing
is done by common routines in the tty driver, or terminal handler. A hardware interface is
supported by a specific device driver, which is responsible for receiving and transmitting
characters and for handling some of the synchronization with the process doing output. The
hardware driver is called by the tty driver to do output; in turn, it calls the tty driver with input
characters as they are received. The pseudo-terminal interface acts as a software emulation of an
asynchronous serial interface, making it indistinguishable from real hardware to the rest of the
kernel.

Earlier versions of FreeBSD implemented a flexible abstraction for the handling of terminal
lines, called a line discipline. The line discipline was implemented as a set of routines that were
called through a structure of function pointers, allowing the line discipline to be specialized for
different types of devices. After hardware-based terminals became obsolete, there was no longer
a need to have a flexible line-discipline system, since the only terminals that remain are virtual
(i.e., xterm) and they all share a common control language. The integration of the new terminal
layer in FreeBSD 8 removed all but the original terminal line discipline that handles interactive
character processing. To maintain internal-interface compatibility, the line discipline routines
remain and are called from within the tty driver and the various serial device drivers that are a
part of FreeBSD.

The terminal line-discipline routines translate between the lower-layer hardware devices and
the abstract implementation of the terminal. The main functions provided by the line discipline
are listed in Table 8.4. Like all device drivers, a terminal driver is divided into the top half,
which runs synchronously when called to process a system call, and the bottom half, which runs
asynchronously when characters are presented to it from a pseudo-terminal or hardware device.
The line discipline provides routines that perform common terminal processing for both the top
and bottom halves of a terminal driver.

Table 8.4 Entry points for the TTY line discipline.

All the devices that can be placed beneath the tty device support the normal set of character
device-driver entry points specified by the character-device switch. When a new serial device is
attached to the system, it calls the tty_alloc() routine to hook a new ttydevsw structure into the
system. Several of the system calls (read, write, and ioctl) immediately transfer control to the
line discipline when called. The standard terminal-polling routine ttypoll() usually is used as the
device driver poll entry in the character-device switch. The open and close routines are similar;
the line-discipline open entry is called when a line first enters a discipline. Similarly, the
discipline close() routine is called to exit from a discipline. All these routines are called from
above in response to a corresponding system call.

The remaining line-discipline entries are called by the bottom half of the device driver to report
input or status changes detected at interrupt time. The ttydisc_rint (receiver interrupt) entry is
called with each character received on a line. The corresponding entry for outputting characters
is the ttydisc_getc routine, which is called by the output routine to fetch characters from the line
discipline to output. Transitions in modem-control lines may be detected by the hardware driver.
Here, the ttydisc_modem routine is called passing the new state.

User Interface

The terminal line discipline is derived from a discipline that was present in System V, as
modified by the POSIX standard, and then was modified further to provide reasonable
compatibility with previous 4.2BSD line disciplines. The base structure used to describe
terminal state in System V was the termio structure. The base structure used by POSIX and by
FreeBSD is the termios structure.

The standard programmatic interface for control of the terminal line discipline is the ioctl
system call. This call sets and gets values for special processing characters and modes, sets and
gets hardware serial line parameters, and performs other control operations. Most ioctl
operations require one argument in addition to a file descriptor and the command; the
argument is the address of an integer or structure from which the system gets parameters or
into which information is placed. Because the POSIX Working Group thought that the ioctl
system call was difficult and undesirable to specify—because of its use of arguments that varied
in size, in type, and in whether they were being read or written—the group members chose to
introduce new interfaces for each of the ioctl calls that they believed were necessary for
application portability. Each of these calls is named with a tc prefix. In the FreeBSD system,
each of these calls is translated (possibly after preprocessing) into an ioctl call.

The following set of ioctl commands apply specifically to the standard terminal line discipline.
This list is not exhaustive, although it presents all the commands that are used commonly.

TIOCGETA
TIOCSETA

Gets (sets) the termios parameters for this line, including line speed, behavioral parameters, and
special characters such as erase and kill characters.

TIOCSETAW

Sets the termios parameters for this line after waiting for the output buffer to drain (but without
discarding any characters from the input buffer).

TIOCSETAF

Sets the termios parameters for this line after waiting for the output buffer to drain and
discarding any characters from the input buffer.

TIOCFLUSH

Discards all characters from the input and output buffers.

TIOCDRAIN

Waits for the output buffer to drain.

TIOCEXCL
TIOCNXCL

Gets (releases) exclusive use of the line.

TIOCCBRK
TIOCSBRK

Clears (sets) the terminal hardware BREAK condition for the line.

TIOCGPGRP
TIOCSPGRP

Gets (sets) the process group associated with this terminal (see the next subsection).

TIOCOUTQ

Returns the number of characters in the terminal’s output buffer.

TIOCSTI

Enters characters into the terminal’s input buffer as though they were typed by the user.

TIOCNOTTY

Disassociates the current controlling terminal from the process (see the next subsection).

TIOCSCTTY

Makes the terminal the controlling terminal for the process (see the next subsection).

TIOCSTART
TIOCSTOP

Starts (stops) output on the terminal.

TIOCGWINSZ
TIOCSWINSZ

Gets (sets) the terminal or window size for the terminal line; the window size includes width and
height in characters and (optionally, on graphical displays) in pixels.

Process Groups, Sessions, and Terminal Control

The process-control (job-control) facilities, described in Section 4.8, depend on the terminal I/O
system to control access to the terminal. Each job (a process group that is manipulated as a
single entity) is known by a process-group ID.

Each terminal structure contains a pointer to an associated session. When a process creates a
new session, that session has no associated terminal. To acquire an associated terminal, the
session leader must make an ioctl system call using a file descriptor associated with the terminal
and specifying the TIOCSCTTY flag. When the ioctl succeeds, the session leader is known as the
controlling process. In addition, each terminal structure contains the process group ID of
the foreground process group. When a session leader acquires an associated terminal, the
terminal process group is set to the process group of the session leader. The terminal process
group may be changed by making an ioctl system call using a file descriptor associated with the
terminal and specifying the TIOCSPGRP flag. Any process group in the session is permitted to
become the foreground process group for the terminal.

Signals that are generated by characters typed at the terminal are sent to all the processes in the
terminal’s foreground process group. By default, some of those signals cause the process group
to stop. The shell creates jobs as process groups, setting the process group ID to be the PID of
the first process in the process group. Each time it places a new job in the foreground, the shell
sets the terminal process group to the new process group. Thus, the terminal process group is
the identifier for the process group that is currently in control of the terminal—that is, for the
process group running in the foreground. Other process groups may run in the background. If a
background process attempts to read from the terminal, its process group is sent another signal,
which stops the process group. Optionally, background processes that attempt terminal output
may be stopped as well. These rules for control of input and output operations apply to only
those operations on the controlling terminal.

When a user disconnects from a terminal—for example, when a network connection is lost—the
session leader of the session associated with the terminal is sent a SIGHUP signal. If the session
leader exits, the controlling terminal is revoked, and that invalidates any open file descriptors in
the system for the terminal. This revocation ensures that processes holding file descriptors for a
terminal cannot access the terminal after the terminal is acquired by another user. The
revocation operates at the vnode layer. It is possible for a process to have a read or write
sleeping for some reason—for example, it was in a background process group. Since such a
process would have already resolved the file descriptor through the vnode layer, a single read or
write by the sleeping process could complete after the revoke system call. To avoid this security

problem, the system checks a terminal generation number when a process wakes up from
sleeping on a terminal and, if the number has changed, restarts the read or write system call.

Terminal Operations

We now examine the operation of the pseudo-terminal device driver. Each time that the master
side of a previously unused pseudo-terminal device is opened, by using the sys_posix_openpt()
routine, the pseudo-terminal driver’s alloc routine is called. The alloc routine initializes the tty
structure, associating the set of function pointers that are part of the pts driver’s ttydevsw
structure with the underlying terminal device. Once the pseudo-terminal has been allocated, all
other operations proceed through the device filesystem, where the terminal device driver’s
routines are called. The ttydev_open() routine is called to open the device that backs the
pseudo-terminal, and it is the open routine that sets up the line discipline by calling the
ttydisc_open() routine. The tty driver is sufficiently abstract that it can handle devices that are
implemented in hardware as well as the pseudo-terminal, which is implemented purely in
software.

Terminal Output (Upper Half)

After a terminal has been opened, a write on the resulting file descriptor produces output to be
transmitted. Writes to the pseudo-terminal result in calls to the ptsdev_write() routine with a
file pointer, a uio structure describing the data to be written, and a flag specifying whether the
I/O is nonblocking. The tty structure is contained in the file structure passed into the write
routine. The line discipline routines are called directly from the ptsdev_write() routine to send
the data.

The main routine that handles the output of characters is the ttydev_write() routine. It is
responsible for copying data into the kernel from the user process and for placing the translated
data onto the pseudo-terminal’s output queue. The ttydev_write() routine first checks whether
the current process is allowed to write to the terminal at this time. The user may set a tty option
to allow only the foreground process to do output. If this option is set, and if the terminal line is
the controlling terminal for the process, then the process should do output immediately only if it
is in the foreground process group (i.e., if the process groups of the process and of the terminal
are the same). If the process is not in the foreground process group, and a SIGTTOU signal
would cause the process to be suspended, a SIGTTOU signal is sent to the process group of the
process. Here, the write will be attempted again when the user moves the process group to the
foreground. If the process is in the foreground process group, or a SIGTTOU signal would not
suspend the process, the write proceeds as usual.

When ttydev_write() has confirmed that the write is permitted, it enters a loop that copies the
data to be written into the kernel, checks for any output translation that is required, and places
the data on the output queue for the terminal. It prevents the queue from becoming overfull by
blocking if the queue fills before all characters have been processed. The limit on the queue size,
the high watermark, is dependent on the output line speed; for pseudo-terminals, the line
speed is set to the maximum baud rate so that they will get the maximum high watermark of
several thousand characters. The low watermark is set to about half of the high watermark.
When forced to wait for output to drain before proceeding, ttydisc_write() sets a flag in the tty
structure state, TF_HIWAT_OUT, to request that it be awakened when the queue drops below
the low watermark.

Once errors, permissions, and flow control have been checked, ttydisc_getc() copies the user’s
data into a local buffer in chunks of 256 characters at most, using uiomove(). (A value of 256 is
used because the buffer is stored on the stack and so it cannot be large.) When the terminal
driver is configured in noncanonical mode, no per-character translations are done, and the
entire buffer is processed at once. In canonical mode, the terminal driver locates groups of
characters requiring no translation by scanning through the output string, looking up each
character in turn in a table that marks characters that might need translation (e.g., newline), or
characters that need expansion (e.g., tabs). Each group of characters that requires no special
processing is placed into the output queue using memcpy(). Trailing special characters are
output with ttydisc_reprint().

The ttydisc_write() routine handles the translation of special characters by first searching the
output for characters that might need post processing. Regular characters are then output and
the special characters are handled through a postprocessing routine. The following translations
may be done, depending on the terminal mode:

• Tabs may be expanded to spaces.

• Newlines may be replaced with a carriage return plus a line feed.

As soon as data are placed on the output queue of a terminal, its device driver is awakened to let
it know that it can start output. Unless output is already in progress or has been suspended by
receipt of a stop character, a wakeup will be sent to the thread associated with the device. For a
pseudo-terminal, the wakeup is sent to a thread sleeping on the master side and, if not already
running, awakens it so that it can consume the data. For a hardware terminal, the wakeup is
sent to the thread associated with the device that begins sending the characters out of the serial
line. Once all the data have been processed and have been placed into the output queue,
ttydisc_write() returns an indication that the write completed successfully.

Terminal Output (Lower Half)

Characters are removed from the output queue either by the thread running on the master side
of the pseudo-terminal or by the hardware device driver. Whenever the number of characters on
the output queue drops below the low watermark, the output routine checks to see if the
TS_SO_OLOWAT flag is set to show that a thread is waiting for space in the output queue and
should be awakened. In addition, selwakeup() is called, and if a thread is recorded in t_wsel as
selecting for output, that thread is notified. The output continues until the output queue is
empty.

Terminal Input

Unlike output, terminal input is not started by a system call but instead arrives asynchronously
when the terminal line receives characters from a remote login session or locally from the
keyboard. Thus, the input processing in the terminal system occurs mostly at interrupt time.

When a character arrives over the network from a remote login session, the locally running
remote-login daemon writes it into the master side of the pseudo-terminal. The master side of
the pseudo-terminal will pass the character as input to the terminal line discipline for the
receiving terminal through the latter’s ttydisc_rint entry. For locally attached hardware such as
a keyboard, the input character will be passed by the device driver directly to the receiving tty
device driver input entry. In either case, the input character is passed as an integer. The bottom
8 bits of the integer are the actual character. Characters received from locally connected
hardware may have hardware-detected parity errors, break characters, or framing errors. Such
errors are shown by setting flags in the upper bits of the integer.

The interpretation of terminal input is done in the ttydisc_rint routine. When a break condition
is detected (a longer-than-normal character with only 0 bits), it is ignored, or an interrupt
character or a null is passed to the process, depending on the terminal mode. Input characters
are echoed if desired. In noncanonical mode, characters are placed into the raw input queue
without interpretation. Otherwise, most of the work done by the ttydisc_rint() routine is to
check for characters with special meanings and to take the requested actions. Other characters
are placed into the raw queue. In canonical mode, if the received character is a carriage return or
another character that causes the current line to be made available to the program reading the
terminal, the contents of the raw queue are added to the canonicalized queue and any processes
waiting for input or selecting for input on the device are awakened. In noncanonical mode, any
process selecting for input on the device or sleeping on the raw queue awaiting input for a read

are awakened. If the terminal has been set for signal-driven I/O using fcntl and the FASYNC flag,
a SIGIO signal is sent to the process group controlling the terminal.

Eventually, a read call is made on the file descriptor for the terminal device. Like all calls to read
from a character-special device, this one results in a call to the device driver’s read routine with
a device pointer, a uio structure describing the data to be read, and a flag specifying whether the
I/O is nonblocking. Terminal device drivers use the device pointer to locate the tty structure for
the device and then call the line discipline ttydisc_read entry to process the system call.

The ttydisc_read routine first checks to see whether the process is part of the session and the
process group currently associated with the terminal. If the process is a member of the session
currently associated with the terminal, if any, and is a member of the current process group, the
read proceeds. Otherwise, if a SIGTTIN would suspend the process, a SIGTTIN is sent to that
process group. Here, the read will be attempted again when the user moves the process group to
the foreground. Otherwise, an error is returned. Finally, ttydisc_read() checks for data in the
appropriate queue (the canonical queue in canonical mode, the raw queue in noncanonical
mode). If no data are present, ttydisc_read() returns the error EAGAIN if the terminal is using
nonblocking I/O; otherwise, it sleeps on the address of the raw queue. When ttydisc_read() is
awakened, it restarts processing from the beginning because the terminal state or process group
might have changed while it was asleep.

When characters are present in the queue for which ttydisc_read() is waiting, they are removed
from the queue one at a time with ttydisc_getc() and are copied out to the user’s buffer. In
canonical mode, certain characters receive special processing as they are removed from the
queue: The delayed-suspension character causes the current process group to be stopped with
signal SIGTSTP, and the end-of-file character terminates the read without being passed back to
the user program. If there was no previous character, the end-of-file character results in the read
returning zero characters, and that is interpreted by user programs as indicating end-of-file.
However, most special processing of input characters is done when the character is entered into
the queue. For example, translating carriage returns to newlines based on the ICRNL flag must
be done when the character is first received because the newline character wakes up waiting
processes in canonical mode. In noncanonical mode, the characters are not examined as they
are processed.

Characters are processed and returned to the user until the character count in the uio structure
reaches zero, the queue is exhausted, or, if in canonical mode, a line terminator is reached.
When the read call returns, the returned character count will be the amount by which the
requested count was decremented as characters were processed.

After the read completes, if terminal output was blocked by a stop character being sent because
the queue was filling up, and the queue is now less than 20 percent full, a start character
(normally XON, control-Q) is sent.

Closing of Terminal Devices

When the final reference to a terminal device is closed, or the revoke system call is made on the
device, the device close() routine is called. The kernel checks to make sure that there are no open
references to the terminal before calling the line discipline’s close() routine and then cleaning up
all the state associated with the terminal. The line-discipline close entry, ttydisc_close(), flushes
any pending output. Finally, the device close routine frees the queues that were associated with
the device, clears any knotes associated with the terminal, and wakes up any processes that were
waiting on the terminal.

8.7 The GEOM Layer

The GEOM layer provides a modular transformation framework for disk-I/O requests. This
framework supports an infrastructure in which classes can do nearly arbitrary transformations
on disk-I/O requests on their path from the upper kernel to the device drivers and back. GEOM
can support both automatic data-directed configuration and manual, or script-directed,
configuration.

Transformations in GEOM include the following:

• Simple base and bounds calculations needed for disk partitioning

• Aggregation of disks to provide a RAID, mirrored, or stripped logical volume

• A cryptographically protected logical volume

• Collection of I/O statistics

• I/O optimization such as disk sorting

• Journaled I/O transactions

Unlike many of its predecessors, GEOM is both extensible and topologically agnostic.

Terminology and Topology Rules

GEOM is object oriented and consequently borrows much context and semantics from the
object-oriented terminology. A transformation is the concept of a particular way to modify I/O
requests. Examples include partitioning a disk, mirroring two or more disks, and operating
several disks together in a RAID.

A class implements one particular transformation. Examples of classes are a master boot record
(MBR) disk partition, a BSD disk label, a RAID array, a transaction journal, or encryption.

An instance of a class is called a geom. In a typical FreeBSD system, there will be one geom of
class MBR for each disk. The MBR subdivides a disk into as many as four pieces. There will also
be one geom of class BSD for each slice with a BSD disk label.

A provider is the front gate at which a geom offers service. A typical provider is a logical disk, for
example, /dev/da0s1. All providers have three main properties: name, media size, and sector
size.

A consumer is the back end through which a geom connects to another geom provider and
through which I/O requests are sent. For example, an MBR label will typically be a consumer of
a disk and a provider of disk slices.

The topological relationship between these entities are as follows:

• A class has zero or more geom instances.

• A geom is derived from exactly one class.

• A geom has zero or more consumers.

• A geom has zero or more providers.

• A consumer can be attached to only one provider.

• A provider can have multiple consumers attached.

• The GEOM structure may not have loops; it must be an acyclic directed graph. From an
object-oriented perspective GEOM implements a system of single inheritance because a
consumer can only be attached to one provider.

All geoms have a rank number assigned that detects and prevents loops in the acyclic directed
graph. This rank number is assigned as follows:

• A geom with no attached consumers has a rank of one.

• A geom with attached consumers has a rank one higher than the highest rank of the geoms of
the providers to which its consumers are attached.

Figure 8.6 shows a sample GEOM configuration. At the bottom is a geom that communicates
with the CAM layer and produces the da0 disk. It has two consumers. On the right is the DEVFS
filesystem that exports the complete disk image as /dev/da0. On the left is stacked an MBR
geom that interprets the MBR label found in the first sector of the disk to produce the two slices
da0s1 and da0s2. Both of these slices have DEVFS consumers that export them as /dev/da0s1
and /dev/da0s2. The first of these two slices has a second consumer, a BSD label geom, that
interprets the BSD label found near the beginning of the slice. The BSD label subdivides the slice
into as many as eight (possibly overlapping) partitions, da0s1a through da0s1h. All the defined
partitions have DEVFS consumers that export them as /dev/da0s1a through /dev/da0s1h.
When one of these partitions is mounted, the filesystem that has mounted it also becomes a
consumer of that partition.

Figure 8.6 A sample GEOM configuration.

Changing Topology

The basic operations are attach, which attaches a consumer to a provider, and detach, which
breaks the bond. Several more complex operations are available to simplify automatic
configuration.

Tasting is a process that happens whenever a new class or new provider is created. It provides
the class a chance to automatically configure an instance on providers that it recognizes as its
own. A typical example is the MBR disk-partition class that will look for the MBR label in the
first sector and, if found and valid, will instantiate a geom to multiplex according to the contents
of the MBR.

Exactly what a class does to recognize if it should accept the offered provider is not defined by
GEOM, but the sensible set of options are:

• Examine specific data structures on the disk.

• Examine properties like sector size or media size for the provider.

• Examine the rank number of the provider’s geom.

• Examine the method name of the provider’s geom.

A new class will be offered to all existing providers and a new provider will be offered to all
classes.

Configure is the process where the administrator issues instructions for a particular class to
instantiate itself. For example, a BSD label module can be specified with a level of override
forcing a BSD disk-label geom to attach to a provider that was not found palatable during the
taste operation. A configure operation is typically needed when first labelling a disk.

Orphaning is the process by which a provider is removed while it potentially is still being used.
When a geom orphans a provider, all future I/O requests will bounce on the provider with an
error code set by the geom. All consumers attached to the provider will receive notification
about the orphaning and are expected to act appropriately. A geom that came into existence as a
result of a normal taste operation should self-destruct unless it has a way to keep functioning
without the orphaned provider. Single-point-of-operation geoms, like those interpreting a disk
label, should self-destruct. Geoms with redundant points of operation, such as those supporting
a RAID or a mirror, will be able to continue as long as they do not lose quorum.

An orphaned provider may not result in an immediate change in the topology. Any attached
consumers are still attached. Any opened paths are still open. Any outstanding I/O requests are
still outstanding. A typical scenario is:

• A device driver detects a disk has departed and orphans the provider for it.

• The geoms on top of the disk receive the orphaning event and orphan all their providers.
Providers that are not in use will typically self-destruct immediately. This process continues in a
recursive fashion until all relevant pieces of the tree have responded to the event.

• Eventually the traversal stops when it reaches the device geom at the top of the tree. The geom
will refuse to accept any new requests by returning an error. It will sleep until all outstanding
I/O requests have been returned (usually as errors). It will then explicitly close, detach, and
destroy its geom.

• When all the geoms above the provider have disappeared, the provider will detach and destroy
its geom. This process percolates all the way down through the tree until the cleanup is
complete.

While this approach seems byzantine, it does provide the maximum flexibility and robustness in
handling disappearing devices. Ensuring that the tree does not unravel until all the outstanding
I/O requests have returned guarantees that no applications will be left hanging because a piece
of hardware has disappeared.

Spoiling is a special case of orphaning used to protect against stale metadata. It is probably
easiest to understand spoiling by going through an example. Consider the configuration shown
in Figure 8.6 that has disk da0 above which is an MBR geom that provides da0s1 and da0s2. On
top of da0s1, a BSD geom provides da0s1a through da0s1h. Both the MBR and BSD geoms have
autoconfigured based on data structures on the disk media. Now consider the case where da0 is
opened for writing and the MBR is modified or overwritten. The MBR geom now would be
operating on stale metadata unless some notification system can inform it otherwise. To avoid
stale metadata, the opening of da0 for writing causes all attached consumers to be notified,
resulting in the eventual self-destruction of the MBR and BSD geoms. When da0 is closed, it will
be offered for tasting again, and if the data structures for MBR and BSD are still there, new
geoms will instantiate themselves.

To avoid the havoc of changing a disk label for an active filesystem, changing the size of open
geoms can be done only with their cooperation. If any of the paths through the MBR or BSD
geoms were open (for example, as a mounted filesystem), they would have propagated an
exclusive-open flag downward, rendering it impossible to open da0 for writing. Conversely, the
exclusive-open flag requested when opening da0 to rewrite the MBR would render it impossible
to open a path through the MBR geom until da0 is closed. Spoiling only happens when the write
count goes from zero to nonzero, and the tasting only happens when the write count goes from
nonzero to zero.

Insert is an operation that allows a new geom to be instantiated between an existing consumer
and provider. Delete is an operation that allows a geom to be removed from between an existing
consumer and provider. These capabilities can be used to move an active filesystem. For
example, as shown in Figure 8.7, we could insert a mirror module into the GEOM stack pictured
in Figure 8.6. The mirror operates on da0s1 and da1s1 between the BSD label consumer and its
MBR label provider da0s1. The mirror is initially configured with da0s1 as its only copy and
consequently is transparent to the I/O requests on the path. Next, we ask it to mirror da0s1 to
da1s1. When the mirror copy is complete, we drop the mirror copy on da0s1. Finally, we delete
the mirror geom from the path instructing the BSD label consumer to consume from da1s1. The
result is that we moved a mounted filesystem from one disk to another while it was being used.

Figure 8.7 Using a mirror module to copy an active filesystem.

Operation

The GEOM system needs to be able to operate in a multiprocessor kernel. The usual method for
ensuring proper operation is to use mutex locks on all the data structures. Because of the large
size and complexity of the code and data structures implementing the GEOM classes, prior to
FreeBSD 10 GEOM used a single-threading approach rather than traditional mutex locking to
ensure data structure consistency. This mode of operation continues to be available using two
threads to operate its stack: a g_down thread to process requests moving from the consumers at
the top to the providers at the bottom, and a g_up thread to process requests moving from the
providers at the bottom to the consumers at the top. Requests entering the GEOM layer at the
top are queued awaiting the g_down thread. The g_down thread pops each request from the
queue, moves it down through the stack, and out through the provider. Similarly, results coming

back from the providers are queued awaiting the g_up thread. The g_up thread pops each
request from the queue, moves it up through the stack, and sends it back out to the consumer.
Because there is only ever a single thread running up and down in the stack, the only locking
that is needed is on the few data structures that coordinate between the upward and downward
paths. There are two rules required to make this single-thread method work effectively:

1. A geom can never sleep. If a geom ever puts the g_up or g_down thread to sleep, the entire
I/O system would grind to a halt until the geom reawakens. The GEOM framework checks that
its worker threads never sleep, panicking if they attempt to do so.

2. No geom can compute excessively. If a geom computes excessively, pending requests or
results will be unacceptably delayed. There are some geoms, such as the one that provides
cryptographic protection for filesystems, that are compute intensive. These compute-intensive
geoms have to provide their own threads. When the g_up or g_down thread enters a
compute-intensive geom, it will simply enqueue the request, schedule the geom’s own worker
thread, and proceeded on to process the next request in its queue. When scheduled, the
compute-intensive geom’s thread will do the needed work and then enqueue the result for the
g_up or g_down thread to finish pushing the request through the stack.

While a queued model of processing is flexible, it does give up performance to provide that
flexibility. Each enqueue and dequeue operation requires processor resources, and the queues
themselves need to be protected by locks so that two threads cannot update the queue data
structure at the same time. To mitigate the bottleneck of a single thread in the I/O path, and to
reduce the context switch overhead of switching to and from the g_up and g_down threads,
FreeBSD 10 added a direct dispatch mode to GEOM. Each GEOM class has two flags that it can
set, G_DIRECT_UP and G_DIRECT_DOWN, to indicate that I/O can pass through the class via
direct dispatch in the indicated direction. To accept direct-dispatch, a module must add locking
to protect its data structures so that the module can run concurrent threads. When direct
dispatch is used, the thread making the request calls directly into the module rather than
queueing its request to be run by the g_down or g_up thread. All I/O requests into the GEOM
layer are checked to see if they can be delivered directly to the underlying class. Direct calls are
made to any module that is marked as accepting direct dispatch in the direction of the I/O.
Direct calls are also made for any I/O that is of zero effective length, meaning that it has no data
but there is some command to the underlying class. An I/O request that does not meet these
requirements is queued for the class to process later, using the g_down and g_up threads.

The set of commands that may be passed through the GEOM stack are read, write, and delete.
The read and write commands have the expected semantics. Delete specifies that a certain range
of data is no longer used and that it can be erased or freed. Technologies like flash-adaptation

layers can arrange to erase the relevant blocks so that they are ready to be reassigned, and
cryptographic devices may fill random bits into the range to reduce the amount of data available
for attack. A delete request has no assurance that the data really will be erased or made
unavailable unless guaranteed by specific geoms in the graph. If a secure-delete semantic is
required, a geom that converts a delete request into a sequence of write requests should be
pushed.

Topological Flexibility

GEOM is both extensible and topologically agnostic. The extensibility of GEOM makes it easy to
write a new class of transformation. In the last few years several new classes have been written,
including:

• gcache that provides a kernel-memory cache of backing storage such as a disk.

• geli that encrypts data sent to a backing store and decrypts data retrieved from a backing store.
For example, providing an encrypted filesystem is simply a matter of stacking a geli class on top
of a disk class.

• gjournal that does block-level journaling of data sent to a backing store. All writes get logged
and are later replayed if the system crashes before they are made to the backing store. Thus, it
can provide journaling for any filesystem without needing to know anything about the
filesystem’s structure.

• gsched that provides alternate scheduling policies for a backing store.

• gvirstor that sets up a virtual storage device of an arbitrarily large size. The gvirstor class
allows users to overcommit on storage (free filesystem space). The concept is also known as
“thin provisioning” in virtualization environments. The gvirstor class is implemented on the
level of physical storage devices.

In a departure from many previous volume managers, GEOM is topologically agnostic. Most
volume-management implementations have strict notions of how classes can fit together, but
often only a single fixed hierarchy is provided. Figure 8.8 shows a typical hierarchy. It requires
that the disks first be divided into partitions, and then the partitions can be grouped into
mirrors, which are exported as volumes.

Figure 8.8 Fixed class hierarchy.

With fixed hierarchies, it is impossible to express intent efficiently. In the fixed hierarchy of
Figure 8.8, it is impossible to mirror two physical disks and then partition the mirror into slices
as is done in Figure 8.9. Instead, one is forced to make slices on the physical volumes and then
create mirrors for each of the corresponding slices, resulting in a more complex configuration.
Being topologically agnostic means that different orderings of classes are treated no differently
than existing orderings. GEOM does not care in which order things are done. The only
restriction is that cycles in the graph are not allowed.

Figure 8.9 Flexible class hierarchy.

8.8 The CAM Layer

To reduce the complexity of the individual disk drivers, much of the complexity of handling a
modern controller has been abstracted into a set of routines that provide a Common Access
Method (CAM) layer that sits between the GEOM and the device-driver layers. The CAM layer
handles the device-independent tasks of resource allocation and command routing. These tasks
include the tracking of requests and notifications between the controller and its clients. They

also include the routing of requests across the many I/O busses to get the request to the correct
controller.

The CAM layer leaves to the device driver the device-specific operations such as the setup and
teardown of the DMA maps needed to do the I/O. CAM also allows device drivers to manage I/O
timeouts and initial bus error-recovery measures. Some device drivers can become complex. For
example, the Fibre Channel device driver has much code to handle operations, such as
asynchronous topology changes as drives are removed and attached. A driver responds to a CAM
request by converting the virtual address to store the data to the appropriate physical address. It
then marshals the device-independent parameters like I/O request, physical address to store the
data, and transfer length into a firmware-specific format, and then executes the command.
When the I/O completes, the driver returns the results to the CAM layer.

In addition to disks, the CAM layer manages any other storage device that might be connected to
the system such as tape and removable flash memory drives. For other character devices such as
keyboard and mice, CAM will not be involved.

The CAM subsystem provides a uniform and modular system for the implementation of drivers
to control various devices and to use different host adapters through host-adapter drivers. The
CAM system is made up of three layers:

1. The CAM peripheral layer that provides open, close, strategy, attach, and detach operations
for the supported devices. CAM-supported devices include: direct access (da) SCSI disk drives,
ATA and SATA (sa) disk drives, cdrom (cd) CD-ROM drives, sequential access (sa) tape drives,
and changer (ch) juke-boxes. Each peripheral driver builds an I/O command specific to the
protocol for its devices, and then passes that command to the transport layer for execution. The
driver also interprets the results of the I/O commands and takes corrective actions for errors.
CAM starts by building a protocol-specific I/O command using a CAM control block (CCB)
tailored either to SCSI or ATA devices.

The CCB contains a command descriptor block containing the command to be sent to the device.
For example, the SCSI command “READ_10, block_offset, count” gets back a status of success
or various error codes. If there is an error, the drive may also include sense data to give more
information about the cause of the error.

2. The CAM Transport (XPT) layer schedules and dispatches I/O commands, acting as a switch
between the myriad of peripheral device instances and the host bus adapters to which they
belong. It also assists the device drivers with error recovery by allowing I/O to be frozen and and
unfrozen at a device or subsystem level. For example, a disk device might be able to handle 64
commands, and the controller it is attached to might be able to handle 256 commands, but when

more than 4 disks are attached to the controller, scheduling and arbitration needs to be done in
the transport layer.

3. The CAM software interface module or host bus adapter interface layer provides bus routing
to devices. Its job is to allocate a path to the requested device, send a CCB action request to the
device, and then collect notification of the I/O completion from the device. It is also responsible
for identifying errors that have happened at the protocol and bus layers, and notifying the
transport and peripheral layers that it is done with error recovery actions.

The operation of the CAM layer is most easily understood by tracing an I/O request through it.

The Path of a SCSI I/O Request Through the CAM Subsystem

The path of a SCSI request through the CAM I/O subsystem is shown in Figure 8.10. In the
FreeBSD framework, the filesystem sees a single contiguous disk. I/O requests are based on
block numbers within this idealized disk. In Figure 8.10, the filesystem determines a set of
blocks on which it wants to perform I/O, and it passes this request down to the GEOM layer by
calling the strategy() routine.

Figure 8.10 The path of a SCSI I/O request through the CAM subsystem.

The GEOM layer takes the request and determines the disk to which the request should be sent.
In this example, the request is on a da SCSI disk. When a request spans several disks, the GEOM
layer breaks up the original request into a set of separate I/O requests for each of the disks on
which the original request resides. Each of the new requests is passed down to the CAM layer by
calling the appropriate strategy() routine for the associated disk (the dastrategy() routine in
Figure 8.10).

The CAM dastrategy() routine gets the request and calls bioq_disksort(), which puts the
request on the disk queue of the specified SCSI disk. The dastrategy() routine finishes by calling
the xpt_schedule() function.

The xpt_schedule() function allocates and constructs a CCB to describe the operation that needs
to be done. If the disk supports tagged queueing, an unused tag is allocated, if it is available. If
tagged queueing is not supported or a tag is not available, the request is left on the queue of
requests pending for the disk. If the disk is ready to accept a new command, the xpt_schedule()
routine calls the drive start routine set up for it (dastart() in this example).

The dastart() routine takes the first request off the disk’s queue and begins to service it using
the CCB that was constructed by dastrategy(). Because the command is destined for a SCSI disk,
dastart() needs to build a SCSI READ_10 command based on the information in the CCB. The
resulting SCSI command that includes a READ_10 header, a pointer to the virtual address that
references the data to be transferred, and a transfer length is placed in the CCB and given the
type XPT_SCSI_IO. The dastart() routine then calls the xpt_action() routine to determine the
bus and controller (adapter) to which the command should be sent.

The xpt_action() routine returns a pointer to a cam_path structure that describes the controller
to be used and has a pointer to the controller’s action routine. In this example, we are using the
Adaptec SCSI controller whose action routine is mpssas_action(). The xpt_action() routine
queues the CCB with its cam_path and schedules it to be processed.

The request is processed by calling the controller-specific action routine, mpssas_action(). The
mpssas_action() routine gets the CCB and converts its generic SCSI command into a
hardware-specific SCSI control block (SCB) to handle the command. The SCB is filled out from
information in the CCB. It is also filled out with any hardware-specific information and a DMA
request descriptor is set up. The SCB is then passed to the driver firmware to be executed.
Having completed its task, the CAM layer returns to the caller of dastrategy().

The controller fulfills the request and uses DMAs to transfer the data to or from the location
given in the SCB. When done, a completion interrupt arrives from the controller. The interrupt
causes the mps_complete_command() routine to be run. The mps_complete_command()
routine updates the CCB associated with the completed SCB from information in the SCB
(command completion status or sense information if there was an error). It then frees the
previously allocated DMA resources and the completed SCB, and passes the completed CCB
back to the CAM layer by calling xpt_done().

The xpt_done() routine inserts the associated CCB into the completion notification queue and
posts a software interrupt request for camisr(), the CAM interrupt service routine. When

camisr() runs, camisr_runqueue() removes the CCB from the completion notification queue
and calls the specified completion function, which maps to dadone() in this example.

The dadone() routine will call the biodone() routine, which notifies the GEOM layer that one of
its I/O requests has finished. The GEOM layer aggregates all the separate disk I/O requests
together. When the last I/O operation finishes, it updates the original I/O request passed to it by
the filesystem to reflect the result (either successful completion or details on any errors that
occurred). The filesystem is then notified of the final result by calling the biowait() routine.

ATA Disks

Like SCSI disks, support for SATA and ATA drives has been abstracted into a module that is part
of the CAM layer referred to as the ATA module. The ATA module handles the
device-independent tasks of the tracking requests and notifications between the controller and
its clients.

The handling of ATA I/O requests by the CAM layer is similar to that described for SCSI disks.
Device-specific operations are left to the device driver. The device driver responds to a request
for an ATA disk by marshaling the device-independent parameters in the CCB. It converts the
type of the I/O request, the virtual address to store the data, and the transfer length into a
firmware-specific format, and then executes the command. When the I/O completes, the driver
places the results back in the CCB similar to the way it is done by the SCSI driver.

The ATA driver start routine handles TRIM commands that improve the efficiency of solid-state
disks (SSDs). While SSDs use the same hardware interconnect as spinning magnetic disks, the
way they operate internally is different. One difference is that an SSD must erase a block before
it can be rewritten. It also must carefully manage the erasing and rewriting of its flash memory
blocks so that the blocks are used evenly. The TRIM command is a part of the ATA specification
that allow a filesystem to inform an SSD that a block or set of blocks are no longer in use and
may be erased. The ATA driver maintains a separate queue of requests to trim data from a
device, and these requests are executed at the beginning of its adastart() routine so that space is
freed before the process of writing new data begins. TRIM is also available to SAS solid state
disks via the da driver.

8.9 Device Configuration

Autoconfiguration is the procedure carried out by the system to recognize and enable the
hardware devices present in a system. Autoconfiguration works by systematically probing the
possible I/O busses on the machine. For each I/O bus that is found, each type of device attached

to it is interpreted and, depending on this type, the necessary actions are taken to initialize and
configure the device.

The first FreeBSD implementation of autoconfiguration was derived from the original 4.2BSD
code with the addition of many special-case hacks. The 4.4BSD release introduced a new, more
machine-independent configuration system that was considered for FreeBSD but was ultimately
rejected in favor of the newbus scheme, which first appeared in FreeBSD 3.0 to support the
Alpha architecture. It was brought over to the PC platform for FreeBSD 4.0. Newbus included
machine-independent routines and data structures for use by machine-dependent layers, and
provided a framework for dynamic allocation of data structures for each device.

A key design goal of the newbus system was to expose a stable application binary interface (ABI)
to driver writers. A stable ABI is especially important for externally or vendor-maintained
loadable kernel modules because their source code is often not available to recompile if the
interface is changed.

To help achieve ABI stability, the device and devclass structures are hidden from the rest of the
kernel with a simple function-call-based API to access their contents. If the structures were
passed to the device driver directly, any change to the structure would require that all the
drivers to which it is passed be recompiled. Changes to these data structures do not require a
recompilation of all the drivers. Only the access functions to the data structures need to be
recompiled.

Some hardware devices, such as the interface to the console terminal, are required for system
operation. Other devices, however, may not be needed and their inclusion in the system may
needlessly waste system resources. Devices that might be present in different numbers, at
different addresses, or in different combinations are difficult to configure in advance. However,
the system must support them if they are present and must fail gracefully if they are not present.
To address these problems, FreeBSD supports two configuration procedures. The first is a static
configuration procedure that is performed when a bootable system image is created. The second
is a dynamic loading capability that allows kernel drivers and modules to be added to a running
system as needed. Thus, the statically configured kernel can be small with just enough capability
to get the system up and running. Once running, additional functionality can be added as
needed.

Allowing code to be loaded dynamically into the kernel raises many security problems. Code
running outside the kernel is limited in the damage that it can do because it does not run in
privileged mode and cannot directly access the hardware. The kernel runs with full privilege and
access to the hardware. If the kernel loads a module containing malicious code, it can inflict
wide-ranging damage within the system. Kernels can be loaded across the network from a

central server. If the kernel allows dynamic loading of modules, they could also come across the
network, so there are numerous added points for malfeasance.

An important consideration in deciding whether to enable dynamic loading of kernel modules is
to develop a scheme to verify the source of and lack of corruption in any code before that code is
permitted to be loaded and used. A group of vendors have formed the Trusted Computing Group
(TCG) to specify a hardware module called a Trusted Platform Module (TPM) that keeps a
running SHA-1 hash of the software installed on the system to detect the loading of bad
programs or modules. It is implemented as a microcontroller-based device similar to a smart
card that is attached to the motherboard [TCG, 2003]. Other groups are doing work to limit the
potential harm of kernel modules by running them with page protections that limit their access
to the rest of the kernel [Chiueh et al., 2004]. The drawback to disabling dynamic loading is that
any hardware that is not included in the kernel configuration file will be unavailable for use.

The initial kernel configuration is done by the /usr/sbin/config program. A configuration file
is created by the system administrator that contains a list of drivers and kernel options.
Historically, the configuration file defined both the set of hardware devices that might be
present on a machine and the location where each device might be found. Since FreeBSD 10,
hardware devices have been discovered dynamically as the various bus drivers probe and attach.
The location of legacy devices for non-plug-and-play (non-self-identifying) busses are given in a
/boot/device.hints file that is loaded with the kernel. The other use for hints is to hardwire a
unit number to a location. Currently only CAM can hardwire unit numbers, although hard
wiring could be implemented for any bus. The configuration procedure generates many files that
define the initial kernel configuration. These files control the kernel compilation.

The autoconfiguration phase is done first during system initialization to identify the set of
devices that are present on a machine. In general, autoconfiguration recurses through a tree of
device interconnections, such as busses and controllers to which other devices attach. For
example, a system might be configured with two SCSI host adapters (controllers) and four disk
drives that are connected in any of the configurations shown in Figure 8.11. Autoconfiguration
works in one of two ways at each level in the tree:

1. Identifying each possible location at which a device might be present and checking to see
what type of device (if any) is there

2. Probing for devices at each of the possible locations where the device might be attached

Figure 8.11 Alternative drive configurations.

The first approach of identifying predefined locations for devices is needed for older busses like
ISA that were not designed to support autoconfiguration and are still present in some embedded
systems boards such as those built around the ARM, MIPS, and PPC architectures. The second
mechanism of probing for devices can be used only when a fixed set of locations is possible and
when devices at those locations are self-identifying, such as devices connected to a SATA, SCSI,
or PCI bus. Devices that can be probed dynamically implement a probe routine that is called
during the first phase of the autoconfiguration process.

Devices that are recognized during the probing phase of the autoconfiguration process are
attached and made available for use. The attach function for a device initializes and allocates
resources for the device. The attach function for a bus or controller must probe for devices that
might be attached at that location. If the attach function fails, the hardware was found but is
nonfunctional, which results in a console message being printed. Devices that are present but
not recognized may be configured once the system is running and has loaded other kernel
modules. The attach function for busses is allowed to reserve resources for devices that are
detected on the bus but for which no device driver is currently loaded in the system.

This scheme permits device drivers to allocate system resources for only those devices that are
present in a running system. It allows the physical device topology to be changed without
requiring the system load image to be regenerated. It also prevents crashes resulting from
attempts to access a nonexistent device. In the remainder of this section, we consider the

autoconfiguration facilities from the perspective of the device-driver writer. We examine the
device-driver support required to identify hardware devices that are present on a machine and
the steps needed to attach a device once its presence has been noted.

Device Identification

To participate in autoconfiguration, a device driver must register the set of functions shown in
Table 8.5. Devices are an abstract concept in FreeBSD. In addition to the traditional disks, tapes,
network interfaces, keyboards, terminal lines, and so on, FreeBSD will have devices that operate
all the pieces that make up the I/O infrastructure such as the SCSI bus controller, the bridge
controller to the PCI bus, and the bridge controller to the ISA bus. The top-level device is the
root of the I/O system and is referred to as the root. On a uniprocessor system, the root logically
resides at the I/O pins of the CPU. On a multiprocessor system, the root is logically connected to
the I/O pins of each of the CPUs. The root0 device is handcrafted at boot time for each
architecture supported by FreeBSD.

Table 8.5 Functions defined for autoconfiguration.

Autoconfiguration begins with a request to the root0 bus to configure all its children. When a
bus is asked to configure its children, it calls the device_identify() routine of each of its possible
device drivers. The result is a set of children that have been added to the bus either by the bus
itself or by the device_identify() routines of one of its drivers. Next, the device_probe() routine
of each of the children is called. The device_probe() routine that bids the highest for the device
will then have its device_attach() routine called. The result is a set of devices corresponding to
each of the busses that are directly accessible to root0. Each of these new devices is then given
the opportunity to probe for or identify devices below them. The identification process continues
until the topology of the I/O system has been determined.

Modern busses can directly identify the things that are connected to them. Older busses such as
ISA use the device_identify() routine to bring in devices that are found only because of hints.

As an example of the device hierarchy, the device controlling the PCI bus may probe for a disk
controller, which in turn will probe for possible targets that might be attached, such as disk
drives. The autoconfiguration mechanism provides much flexibility, allowing a controller to
determine the appropriate way in which to probe for additional devices attached to the
controller.

As autoconfiguration proceeds, a device-driver device_probe() routine is called for each device
that is found. The system passes to the device_probe() routine a description of the device’s
location and possibly other details such as I/O register location, memory location, and interrupt
vectors. The device_probe() routine usually just checks to see if it recognizes the hardware.

It is possible that there is more than one driver that can operate a device. Each matching driver
returns a priority that shows how well it matches the hardware. Success codes, shown in Table
8.6, are values less than or equal to zero, with the highest (least negative) value representing the
best match. Failure codes are represented by positive values using the usual kernel error codes.

Table 8.6 Return codes for device_probe routine.

If a driver returns a success code that is less than zero, it must not assume that it will be the
same driver whose device_attach() routine will be called. In particular, it must not assume that
any values stored in the device local-storage area will be available for its device_attach() routine.
Any resources allocated during the probe must be released and reallocated if its device_attach()
routine is called. By returning a success code of zero, a driver can assume that it will be the one
attached. However, well-written drivers will not have their device_attach() routine use the
device local-storage area because they may, one day, have their return value downgraded to a

value less than zero. Typically, the resources used by a device are identified by the bus (parent
device), and it is the bus that prints them out when the devices are probing.

Once the device_probe() routine has had the opportunity to identify the device and select the
most appropriate driver to operate it, the selected driver’s device_attach() routine is called.
Attaching a device is separated from probing so that drivers can bid for devices. Probe and
attach are also separate so that drivers can separate out the identification part of the
configuration from the attaching part. Most device drivers use the device_attach() routine to
initialize the hardware device and any software state. The device_attach() routine is also
responsible for either creating the dev_t entries (for disks and character devices) or for network
devices, registering the device with the networking system.

Devices that represent pieces of hardware such as a SATA controller will respond to verify that
the device is present and to set or at least identify the device’s interrupt vector. For disk devices,
the device_attach() routine may make the drive available to higher levels of the kernel such as
GEOM. GEOM will let its classes taste the disk drive to identify its geometry and possibly
initialize the partition table that defines the placement of filesystems on the drive.

Autoconfiguration Data Structures

The autoconfiguration system in FreeBSD includes machine-independent data structures and
support routines. The data structures allow machine- and bus-dependent information to be
stored in a general way and allow the autoconfiguration process to be driven by the
configuration data, rather than by compiled-in rules. The /usr/sbin/config program
constructs many of the tables from information in the kernel-configuration file and from a
machine-description file. The /usr/sbin/config program is thus data-driven as well and
contains no machine-dependent code.

Figure 8.12 shows the data structures used by autoconfiguration. The basic building block is the
device structure. Each piece of the I/O hierarchy will have its own device structure. The name
and description fields identify the piece of hardware represented by the device structure. In
Figure 8.12, the name of the device is pci1. Device names are globally unique. There can be only
one pci1 device in the system. Knowing its name is enough to find it, unlike filesystems where
there can be many files with the same name in different paths. This namespace is related by
convention to the namespace that /dev entries have, but such a relationship is not required.

Figure 8.12 Autoconfiguration data structures for pci1.

Each device is a member of a device class represented by a devclass structure that has two
important roles. The first role of the devclass structure is to keep track of a list of drivers for
devices in that class. Devices referenced from a dev-class do not have to use the same driver.
Each device structure references its best matching driver from the list available for the devclass.
The list of candidate drivers is traversed, allowing every driver to probe each device that is
identified as a member of the class. The best matching driver will be attached to the device. For
example, the pci devclass contains a list of drivers suitable for probing against devices that may
be plugged into a PCI bus. In Figure 8.12, there are drivers to match pcm (sound cards) and
atapci (PCI-based ATA-disk controllers).

The second role of the devclass structure is to manage the mapping from a user-friendly device
name such as pci1 to its device structure. The name field in the devclass structure contains the
root of a family of names—in this example, pci. The number following the root of the name—1 in
this example—indexes into the array of pointers to device structures contained in the devclass.
The name in the referenced device structure is the full name, pci1.

When a device structure first comes into existence, it will follow these steps:

1. The parent device typically determines the existence of a new child device by doing a bus scan.
The new device is created as a child of the parent. In Figure 8.12, the autoconfiguration code
would begin a scan of pci1 and discover an ATA disk controller.

2. The parent device starts a probe-and-attach sequence for the new child device. The probe
iterates through drivers in the parent device’s devclass until a driver is found that claims the
device (i.e., the probe succeeds). The device structure sets its driver field to point at the selected
driver structure and increments the reference count in the selected driver. In Figure 8.12, the
atapci driver matches the ATA disk controller, atadisk.

3. Once a usable driver is found, the new device is registered with the devclass of the same name
as the driver. The registration is done by allocating the next available unit number and setting a
pointer from the corresponding entry in the devclass’s array of device-structure pointers back to
the device. In Figure 8.12, the atapci driver was matched, so the device would be bound to the
atapci devclass. The resulting device configuration is shown in Figure 8.13. The key observation
is that two different devclasses are involved in this three-step process.

Figure 8.13 Autoconfiguration data structures for atapci0.

The hierarchy of device structures is shown in Figure 8.14. Each device structure has a parent
pointer and a list of children. In Figure 8.14, the pci device that manages the PCI bus is shown at
the top and has as its only child the atapci device that operates ATA disks on the PCI bus. The

atapci device has the pci device as its parent and has two children, one for each of the ATA disks
that are attached. The devices representing the two drives have the atapci device as their parent.
Because they are leaf nodes, they have no children.

Figure 8.14 Sample hierarchy of device structures.

To get a better idea of the I/O hierarchy, an annotated copy of the output of the
/usr/sbin/devinfo program from the first author’s test machine is shown in Figure 8.15. The
output has been trimmed down from its original 250 lines to show just the branch from the root
of the tree to the system’s two ATA disks. The tree starts at root0, representing the I/O pins on
the CPU. That leads to the high-speed bus that connects to the memory and the root0 (for
example, northbridge) interconnect to the I/O bus. One of these busses is the pcib0 (for example,
south-bridge) connection to the PCI bus. The PCI bus is managed by the pci0 device, which as
you can see from the figure, has many drivers available for the myriad of devices that may be
connected to it. In this example, the one device that we show is the atapci0 device representing
the PCI-based ATA disk controller. The final two devices shown in Figure 8.15 are atadisk0 and
atadisk1 that manage the operation of the drives themselves.

Figure 8.15 Sample configuration output.

Resource Management

As part of configuring and operating devices, the autoconfiguration code needs to manage
hardware resources such as interrupt-request lines, I/O ports, and device memory. To aid
device-driver writers in this task, FreeBSD provides a framework for managing these resources.
To participate in bus-resource management, a bus device driver must register the set of
functions shown in Table 8.7. Low-level devices such as those that operate individual disk drives
do not have the global knowledge of resource utilization needed to allocate scarce systemwide
resources such as interrupt-request lines. They may register a generic bypass routine for
resources that they do not have the needed information to allocate. When called, the bypass
routine simply calls the corresponding routine registered by their parent. The result is that the
request will work its way up the device tree until it reaches a high-enough level that it can be
resolved.

Table 8.7 Functions defined for device resource allocation.

Often a high-level node in the tree will not have enough information to know how much of a
resource to allocate. Thus, it will reserve a range of resources, leaving it to the lower-level nodes
to allocate and activate the specific resources that they need from the reservation made by the
higher-level node.

The actual management of the allocated resources is handled by the kernel resource manager
that was described in Section 6.3. The usual allocate and free routines have been expanded to
allow different levels in the tree to manage different parts of these two functions. Thus,
allocation breaks into three steps:

1. Setting the range for the resource

2. Initial allocation of the resource

3. Activating the resource

Similarly, resource freeing is done in three steps:

1. Deactivating the resource

2. Releasing ownership of the resource to the parent bus

3. Freeing it

It is common for a high-level part of the tree to allocate a resource and then have a low-level
driver activate and use the resource that it allocated. Some busses reserve space for their
children that do not have drivers associated with them. Having the allocation and freeing broken
up into three steps gives maximum flexibility in partitioning the allocation and freeing
processes.

The bus_driver_added(), bus_add_child(), and bus_child_detached() functions allow the
device to be aware of changes in the I/O hardware so that it can respond appropriately. The
bus_driver_added() function is called by the system when a new driver is loaded. The driver is
added to some devclass, and then all current devices in that devclass have bus_driver_added()
called to allow them to possibly match any unclaimed devices using the new driver. The
bus_add_child() function is used during the identify phase of configuring some busses. It allows
a bus device to create and initialize a new child device (for example, setting values for instance
variables). The bus_child_detached() function is called by a driver when it decides that its
hardware is no longer present (for example, a cardbus card is removed). It calls
bus_child_detached() on its parent to allow it to do a detach of the child.

The bus_probe_nomatch() routine gives the device a last-ditch possibility to take some action
after autoconfiguration has failed. It may try to find a generic driver that can run the device in a
degraded mode, or it may simply turn the device off. If it is unable to find a driver that can run
the device, it notifies the devd daemon, a user-level process started when the system is booted.
The devd daemon uses a table to locate and load the proper driver. The loading of kernel
modules is described in Section 15.4.

The bus_read_ivar() and bus_write_ivar() routines manage a bus-specific set of instance
variables of a child device. The intention is that each different type of bus defines a set of
appropriate instance variables such as ports and interrupt-request lines for the ISA bus.

8.10 Device Virtualization

Most virtualization systems support full virtualization in which guest operating systems use
conventional bare-metal interfaces directly, including CPU, virtual memory, and timers, as well

as drivers for off-the-shelf network-interface cards (NICs) and storage devices. Full
virtualization allows guests to operate entirely unaware of the virtualized environment: a
substantial simplification.

Full virtualization incurs performance overhead because of the costs of intercepting and
emulating processor and I/O operations not permitted outside the CPU’s supervisor ring.
Bare-metal device drivers necessarily make assumptions about memory use that, while suitable
for DMA-enabled devices on the PCI bus, make it difficult for virtualization systems to use
OS-like virtual-memory optimizations such as moving memory pages between virtual machines
to avoid data copying (page flipping). Finally, lack of virtualization awareness limits the
opportunity for multiple virtual machines operating on the same physical hardware to exploit
that locality for performance gain—for example, by forcing communication to take place using
TCP/IP over emulated network interfaces rather than using shared memory.

In contrast, paravirtualization makes guest operating systems explicitly aware of virtualization,
improving performance and integration at the cost of requiring software adaptation. For
example, the bhyve hypervisor integrated with the FreeBSD kernel supports paravirtualized
network and storage devices via the Virtio interface. Virtio is used with full-machine emulators
such as Qemu. FreeBSD supports not only paravirtualized devices on the stand-alone Xen
hypervisor, but also paravirtualized CPU features such as interprocessor interrupts and
inter-virtual-machine communication.

With paravirtualization, host and guest environments (or for Xen, pairs of guest domains)
implement a split device-driver model in which device-driver back ends implement device
simulations for host-OSo physical devices that serve paravirtualization-aware device-driver
front ends in the guest operating system. The back and front ends communicate via well-defined
protocols reminiscent of communications between conventional device drivers and real physical
devices, but with design choices more suited to virtualized environments.

Interaction with the Hypervisor

Explicit awareness of virtualization offers both performance and functionality benefits. Just as
user processes make system calls to invoke operating-system kernel services, kernels themselves
invoke hypercalls to request services from the hypervisor or virtualization framework. Using
hypervisor features directly provides immediate benefits to the guest OS: support for hardware
without native virtualization features (e.g., earlier X86 CPUs); performance improvements
through batching of operations such as page-table updates; general system-performance
improvements through scheduling features such as a yield hypercall; and avoidance of expensive

emulation of peripheral devices such as NICs and storage devices where more appropriate
performance optimizations can be made for virtualized environments.

Some hypervisors, such as FreeBSD’s bhyve, are embedded within existing operating-system
kernels. Here, paravirtualization support is primarily focused on improving device-driver
performance. Stand-alone hypervisors, such as Xen, offer richer inter-virtual-machine
communications interfaces reminiscent of operating-system IPC primitives. This approach
explicitly allows virtual machines both to provide services to, and to consume services offered by,
other virtual machines; paravirtualized device drivers are just one such service.

Hypercalls provide basic synchronous communication between a virtual machine and a
hypervisor. However, the bulk of paravirtualized device-driver communication occurs via shared
memory rings either between guest and host (e.g., in bhyve), or between multiple guests (e.g.,
under Xen). As with shared-memory interprocess communication on conventional OS kernels,
avoiding copies via the hypervisor leads to big performance gains for bulk data transfer. Shared
memory is configured using hypercalls, which are also used for event notification on the ring. In
principle, entering the hypervisor can be entirely avoided in the steady state if a pair of
communicating virtual machines, or host and guest, are running concurrently on different CPUs;
they can likewise avoid (or suppress) signalling and rely on independently occurring context
switches. In practice, communication protocols between device-driver front and back ends in
Xen utilize dynamic page mappings that require hypercalls, and Virtio communication between
front and back ends is often synchronous within a kernel-scheduled thread, even if requested
operations can be processed asynchronously.

Paravirtualization models vary in the semantics that they offer. For example, Virtio has been
designed assuming direct access to guest memory from the host, more reminiscent of kernel
access to user processes. As a result, communication rings can reference buffers that do not have
strong page alignment. In contrast, Xen’s paravirtualized interfaces are designed to support
back-end drivers operating in another domain. Thus, shared memory pages referenced by
communication rings must be explicitly configured by pairs of guests using hypercalls.

Virtio

Virtio provides a simple, hypervisor-neutral, and performant interface for paravirtualized device
drivers [Russell, 2008]. First introduced in Linux for use with both guest- and kernel-based
virtual machines (KVMs), Virtio is now used across a range of virtualization systems, including
FreeBSD’s bhyve hypervisor. Virtio defines several interfaces and mechanisms: a virtual-ring
primitive used for bulk communication and a PCI-based model for device enumeration and

feature negotiation. It also defines conventions for paravirtualized terminal access, memory
ballooning, entropy provision, network interfaces, block storage, and the SCSI HBA driver.

Virtio is designed for virtualization systems in which back-end device implementations are able
to read and write guest operating-system memory directly. Direct memory access is possible
when a hypervisor implements virtualized devices itself, or when the host shares an address
space (typically a UNIX process) with the virtual-machine guest. For example, bhyve combines
an in-kernel hypervisor with a userspace process implementing configuration, memory
management, and device emulation. The bhyve user process donates memory pages to the guest
while retaining direct memory access to them. This assumption of address-space sharing
facilitates copy avoidance: shared communication rings between the front and back ends can
refer to memory allocated and managed “as normal” in the guest kernel. As a result, bhyve’s user
process can do scatter-gather I/O directly from guest buffer-cache and socket-buffer memory
when emulating a device. Less tight address-space integration, as with Xen, incurs overhead as
it requires either more data copying or dynamic mapping of pages containing buffers.

The host exposes access to devices via a virtual PCI bus in the guest. The lowest-level front-end
driver in the guest, vtpci, implements a bus to which other paravirtualized front-end drivers
attach. Virtio devices are discovered via PCI enumeration, with each device offered to potential
drivers to probe and attach. Table 8.8 lists the vtpci bus implemented interfaces described in
virtio_bus_if.m. Front-end device drivers can use these interfaces to probe for matching
back-end instances, negotiate supported feature sets with the back-end, configure
communication queues to the back end, and subscribe to event notification to be delivered via
emulated interrupts. Table 8.9 lists the optional interfaces described in virtio_if.m. Device
drivers can optionally implement these interfaces to receive callbacks on successful
device-driver attach and to be notified of back-end configuration changes (e.g., changes in
virtual block-device size originating in the back end).

Table 8.8 Virtio bus services exported to Virtio device drivers.

Table 8.9 Interfaces exposed by Virtio device drivers to the Virtio bus.

Virtio’s core communications primitive is the virtual queue, or virtqueue, that allows front- and
back-end implementations to exchange chained buffers via a shared-memory communications
ring. Each ring is described by a vring structure that points to an array of descriptor entries and
two indexed control rings used to transfer ownership of buffers between endpoints. The key data
structures for virtqueues are illustrated in Figure 8.16.

Figure 8.16 Virtio virtqueue data structures. The ring[] elements in the vring_avail are
descriptor-chain indices, whereas ring[] elements in vring_used are arrays of vring_used_elem
structures.

Descriptor entries describe scatter-gather buffers in guest memory, that will typically carry
requests and either data the front end would like to write/transmit, or space in which the back
end should store read/received data. The descriptor array consists of a set of vring_desc entries,
each of which contains a guest-physical address, length, flags indicating read/write status, and
the next field that points to the optional next entry in a scatter-gather list; chains are terminated
by a descriptor without the VRING_DESC_F_NEXT flag set. A typical chain’s first entry points
to a command header, with later entries pointing to buffered data or buffer space.

The available ring, described by vring_avail, allows the front end to pass chained buffers to the
back end (e.g., to request that a filled buffer be written to disk, or request that a buffer be filled
with a read from disk). The used ring, described by vring_used, allows the back end to return
ownership of chains to the front end once it has been used (e.g., to acknowledge that the disk
write is complete, or filled with data from a disk read). The vring_used_elem structure contains
a length reporting the size of data copied from the back end, whereas the lengths in the
descriptor array describe the space that is available. Notice that if supported by the device type,
back-end drivers are able to return used buffer chains in a different order from that in which

they were made available. Reordering is appropriate for the block-storage back end, for example,
where reordering I/O operations using elevator sorting can improve performance without
harming semantics.

The idx fields in both rings are incremented each time a new chained buffer has been
successfully made available or used. The guest and host may be executing on different CPUs.
Careful use of memory barriers following updates to the descriptor-ring and used-element
entries is required to ensure that changes to these entries are visible to all CPUs before the
changes to the idx fields become visible [Harris & Fraser, 2007]. Once an update has taken place,
the host or guest can optionally notify the other party, either via a virtual PCI write in the
paravirtualized driver, or via an interrupt to the guest kernel, that will propagate the interrupt to
the device driver. Batching of requests is a key performance optimization. During steady-state
processing, front and back-end implementations can avoid overhead by switching from
per-packet notifications to polled operation.

Table 8.10 lists the Virtio device drivers implemented by FreeBSD, which include virtual
network and block devices, an entropy source (that is injected into the guest kernel’s
random-number generator), the SCSI HBA driver front end, and the balloon driver. The balloon
driver allows the host to request that the guest identify memory pages that are no longer in use
and can be “returned” to the hypervisor to assist with memory pressure elsewhere in the system.
In the event that these pages are required by the guest again in the future, touching the pages
will restore them—albeit in a re-zeroed state. The balloon driver helps the host avoid swapping
guest pages, which can lead to poor performance as competing host and guest virtual memory
systems identify unused pages and swap them causing thrashing.

Table 8.10 Virtio device IDs and drivers.

Individual paravirtualized device drivers closely resemble traditional device drivers,
implementing kernel interfaces such as disks (see Section 8.4) and ifnet (see Section 8.5).
Device communications occur via virtqueues rather than programmed I/O or DMA descriptor
rings. The Virtio block-storage front end utilizes a single ring to push storage requests to the
back end; in contrast, the network front end uses pairs of rings, one for receive and the other for
transmit, for each virtual NIC queue. Virtio’s feature negotiation support has proven especially
important for network device drivers. Feature negotiation allows Virtio to determine the
availability of features such as checksum offload, TCP-segmentation offload (TSO), large-receive
offload (LRO), and multiqueue.

On the other side of virtual queues, back-end implementations are responsible for mapping
virtual devices into underlying OS services. Virtual block devices are often mapped into
filesystem images embedded on ordinary files; sometimes, however, they are passed through to
underlying OS-exposed block devices such as partitions on SCSI disks. Read and write requests
are submitted to the host kernel via normal I/O system calls—often using the preadv and
pwritev variants that can accept scatter-gather arguments drawn from the host memory
mappings of chained buffers, avoiding additional copying in the back end.

Network devices require more complexity. They are most frequently handled by associating a
virtual interface in the host (e.g., an if_tun or if_tap interface) with back-end driver instances.
Providing access to link-layer bridging, IP-layer routing, and optionally, network-address
translation via the host network stack allows the host’s network interfaces to be shared. Virtual
network interfaces often allow communication between guests running on the same host. Where
low-level network access is not available to the back-end implementation (e.g., for security
reasons), it may be desirable to proxy network-layer traffic from the guest via sockets in the host
network stack, requiring substantially more implementation complexity.

Xen

The Xen hypervisor takes a fundamentally different perspective on virtualization than do
OS-centered approaches such as bhyve. The hypervisor is a stand-alone piece of software akin to
a microkernel rather than a module integrated with a conventional kernel, with implications for
the guest-OS device drivers [Barham et al., 2003; Chisnall, 2007]. Whereas Virtio focused on
providing efficient paravirtualized device support optimized for shared memory access between
host and guest, Xen implements an overt service model between a set of virtual machines,
known as domains, running over a common hypervisor.

The first domain running over Xen, domain 0, bootstraps the system, creates and manages user
domains, and provides services to those domains. The hypervisor has direct support for only a

few CPU-oriented hardware devices (such as local APICs). Device drivers for storage controllers,
network interface cards, and other more complex devices run in domain 0, which is granted
direct hardware access. Domain 0 can then forward requests received from front-end device
drivers to their physical counterparts. It can also support greater resource sharing in back-end
drivers by mapping virtual disks into images stored in a filesystem on a physical device or by
bridging a virtual network interface into a virtual switch connected to both other user domains
and physical devices.

Although placing back-end drivers in domain 0 is common, the model is flexible: any guest can
provide back-end services to another. This flexibility allows what is known as domain 0
disaggregation, the decomposition of a single privileged domain 0 into several driver domains to
reduce both privileges and attack surfaces available to less trustworthy guests—not dissimilar to
the reasons given for compartmentalization using Capsicum in Chapter 5. This decomposition is
facilitated by the increasing prevalence of I/O Memory Management Units (IOMMUs),
described later in this section, that allow safe delegation, or pass-through, of physical devices
(such as PCI-connected storage controllers or network interfaces) to guests. Although FreeBSD
10 is not able to operate as the boot-time domain 0, it can implement device-driver back ends,
including exporting ZFS-backed storage, allowing it to act as a driver domain and as a simple
consumer guest. Future releases are slated to include support for operating as domain 0, made
easier by the advent of hardware-assisted virtualization combined with increasingly mature
paravirtualization support.

Among the services offered to user domains by domain 0 is XenStore, a rendezvous service for
inter-guest communication, and a set of back-end drivers for network interfaces and block
storage. Guests use XenStore to enumerate back-and front-end device configurations during
boot, and to offer and look up grant table references, which instantiate shared memory between
domains, and event channels, which deliver inter-domain signalling. Together, these facilities
discover virtual devices and configure and implement communication rings between front-and
back-end drivers, similar to Virtio’s virtqueues.

Different combinations of processors and operating systems require different levels of guest-OS
adaptation for Xen. At one extreme, earlier Intel and AMD processors do not have fully
virtualizable instruction sets, requiring guest operating systems to use Xen in fully
paravirtualized (PV) mode. In effect, the FreeBSD PV kernel is its own X86-like platform target
with a customized virtual memory subsystem and other substantial kernel changes. The guest
kernel runs in ring 1 rather than 0 (which is occupied by Xen itself), and hypercalls are
substituted for unvirtualizable privileged instructions. A PV kernel must use explicit hypercalls
to do operations such as:

• Access a low-level console;

• Implement lazy floating-point unit (FPU) context switching;

• Implement unvirtualizable descriptor-update instructions;

• Request page-table changes and trigger TLB flushes;

• Receive interrupt-like event notifications from timers and I/O devices; and

• Send Inter-Processor Interrupts (IPIs) required for multi-processor operation.

At the other extreme, pure Hardware Virtual Machine (HVM) mode relies on more recently
introduced Intel Virtualization Technology (VT) and AMD Virtualization (AMD-V) CPU features
such as nested page tables that allow kernels to execute a range of privileged operations despite
running under a hypervisor. Combined with emulations of conventional hardware devices
borrowed from Qemu, HVM mode allows entirely unmodified guest operating systems to run
over Xen.

In practice, however, the preferred configuration for FreeBSD over Xen combines aspects of
both approaches: the kernel uses hardware-supported extended page tables to avoid a modified
virtual-memory subsystem, while also using paravirtualized device drivers and other hypervisor
features to improve performance. Table 8.11 shows a subset of Xen hypercalls, some used only in
PV mode, others used in both PV and HVM modes. Hypercalls continue to be used for the
following types of operations even in HVM mode:

• Scheduler and timer operations, such as the set_singleshot_timer virtual CPU (VCPU)
hypercall, which schedules an upcall after a suitable interval;

• Mapping page grants delegating memory from other domains; and

• Loading binaries into new virtual machines.

Table 8.11 Xen hypercalls used in PV and HVM modes.

For the remainder of this section, we will be concerned primarily with how FreeBSD uses
paravirtualized features when operating over Xen HVM. Xen discovery and initialization begins
early in the X86 boot in xen_hvm_init():

1. The cpuid instruction detects whether Xen is present. If so, the kernel will be configured to
use paravirtualized features.

2. The hypercall region, a memory page holding code that invokes hypercalls, is allocated from
kernel   memory    and   initialized   with   the help   of   the hypervisor using    emulated
write-model-specific-register (wrmsr) instructions. Xen will select the hypercall implementation
most suitable for the current CPU architecture; Intel VT will use vmcall, and AMD-V will use
vmmcall.

3. The xen_version hypercall queries available Xen features; used for PV mode, and by
paravirtualized drivers that may run on PV or HVM systems, to determine whether the
distinction between guest physical page numbers and machine page numbers is visible to the
guest. On HVM, nested page tables mask this distinction.

4. The cpu_ops operation vector is updated so that Xen versions of CPU initialization, CPU
resume, and IPI support are used rather than the default X86 versions.

5. The memory_op hypercall is invoked to set up the Xen shared_info page, a read-write page
shared with the hypervisor itself. The page holds event-channel masks, per-CPU information,
and time-keeping information such as skew and rate adjustment information to convert a
timestamp-counter (TSC) value to wall-clock time.

6. The hvm_op hypercall is invoked to set up an explicit event-channel callback, used to notify
the guest of events on communication rings in a way similar to normal interrupt delivery.

7. An emulated I/O instruction triggers Xen to disable emulations of conventional devices used
with full-machine virtualization. Only paravirtualized drivers will attach, improving
performance and preventing confusion caused by duplicate attachments of the same block or
network devices.

8. Finally, each virtual CPU invokes the vcpu_op hypercall to register its per-CPU vcpu_info
structure, which contains the CPU’s event-channel, architectural, and time state.

These initialization steps may be re-run following virtual-machine suspend/resume or
migration, as the guest may find changes in CPU and Xen features and configuration. For
example, communication rings to device-driver back ends must be reestablished, as they will
now be hosted by different domains, requiring shared memory and event channels to be
rediscovered.

Whereas Virtio provided an emulated PCI bus that regular bus drivers could enumerate, Xen
provides guest configuration data explicitly via XenStore, a filesystem-like hierarchical
key-value database holding system configuration information published by domain 0. XenStore
contains named subtrees for each live domain including configuration information such as its
UUID, target physical memory usage used by the balloon, an enumeration of front-end and
back-end devices to configure (along with grant-table and event-channel state required to
communicate with corresponding drivers in other domains), and per-device configuration
information (e.g., whether an instance of the netfront driver supports TCP Segmentation
Offload (TSO)). XenStore is implemented by the xenstore front-end device driver, whose back
end is accessed via shared-memory rings and event channels that, of necessity, cannot be
bootstrapped using XenStore. Instead, XenStore resources are configured using the shared_info
page initialized by the hypervisor during early boot.

XenStore information on device topology and configuration, sometimes referred to as XenBus,
populates two synthetic-Newbus busses in the guest: xenbus_back and xenbus_front, that
respectively attach back-end and front-end device drivers within the guest. XenBus provides
several abstractions to paravirtualized drivers, such as convenient wrappers that can be used by
front-end drivers to delegate access to shared-memory rings to back-end drivers in other

domains. These busses are rooted in the xenpci driver in FreeBSD 10. The driver is named
xenpci because it is visible in PCI-bus enumeration in the guest, and is able to own and handle
PCI-like interrupts and own memory resources. Use of Xen’s event-channel mechanism is
preferred over the use of emulated interrupts, so in FreeBSD 11 this driver is replaced by a new
root for Xen-provided paravirtualized devices, xenpv. This change eliminates the last remnants
of PCI-emulation reliance in HVM configurations.

A full list of paravirtualized device drivers can be found in Table 8.12. Where device drivers are
configured using XenBus, their back ends declare an explicit “type” allowing driver front ends to
discover it. Three low-level paravirtualized drivers are configured without help from XenBus
and are attached unconditionally to nexus or xenpci:

1. The console device driver supports low-level I/O via a virtual console (used only for PV
guests).

2. The control driver services management messages from domain 0, such as requests to
shutdown or reboot.

3. The timer driver implements FreeBSD’s internal event timer mechanism using Xen’s timer
and event-channel primitives instead of using an emulated local APIC.

Table 8.12 Xen paravirtualized device drivers.

As with Virtio, communication between device-driver front and back ends is done using a
common ring-buffer implementation. In Xen, however, these ring buffers represent
communication between guests rather than the hierarchical host-guest relationship found with
in-OS hypervisors such as bhyve. Ring buffers are layered over two hypervisor primitives:
shared memory configured using grant tables that authorize access to selected memory pages in
one domain by another, and event channels that provide an interrupt-like wakeup mechanism.
Rings pass requests and responses that may themselves contain further grants referencing pages
to be mapped into the remote domain. Alternatively, data will be copied into the rings, or copied
by the hypervisor, to avoid the overhead of page-table manipulation and TLB flushes.

Xen grant tables are the mechanism by which memory pages may be shared with, transferred to,
or received from a second domain. Each domain has its own grant table stored as an array of
grant-table entries in memory shared with the hypervisor, as shown in Figure 8.17. Each entry
describes one “grant”: authorization to share or transfer a page owned by the domain, or a
request to receive a page from another domain. The table is allocated by the guest kernel,
initialized, and then shared with the hypervisor via the memory_op hypercall during boot.

Figure 8.17 Xen grant-table entries control and track memory sharing between domains.

Each grant-table entry describes a single grant operation. Entries sharing or transferring a page
to another domain specify the physical page number in the source domain, and the remote
domain identifier to which the page will be sent. Entries authorizing receipt of a page will
identify the remote domain, a local page which will be replaced with the transferred page and a
grant-table reference. Grant-table references are simply integer indexes into a source domain’s
grant table, and may be sent to other domains as data via requests and responses in
communication rings. Grant-table entries also contain a flags field that the domain uses to
select the operation to perform and whether the grant or mapping should be read-only.
Grant-table entry flags also allow the hypervisor to export status bits indicating whether the
page is currently mapped in a remote domain (here its grant status cannot be changed, as Xen
does not support revocation while the page is in use), and to confirm that a page has been
accepted for transfer by the remote domain. Table 8.13 shows the possible flag values.

Table 8.13 Xen grant-table entry operations, domain flags, and hypervisor flags.

Domains must use an explicit hypercall, grant_table_op, to notify the hyper-visor of one or
more grant-table entries authorizing receipt of grants from a remote domain. In contrast,
sharing a page with or transferring a page to a remote domain does not use an explicit call as the
hypervisor can look up the grant-table entry in the sender’s memory using the grant reference
when a mapping request occurs in the recipient. Xen does not support revocation of shared
pages while they are mapped by the remote domain; instead, the sender must wait for the
GTF_reading and GTF_writing flags to be cleared by the hypervisor, at which time
GTF_permit_access can be cleared. Atomic operations and memory barriers safely expose
writes to the grant table between guest and hypervisor.

Device-driver front ends allocate and share memory with back ends, rather than vice versa. This
approach minimizes modification to front-end memory allocation which is helpful for less
virtualization-aware guest operating systems, and also helps avoid data copies. Front-end
drivers will rely on XenBus’s xenbus_grant_ring () function to share locally allocated rings with
back-end drivers that will communicate references to the back end via XenStore. Grant
references embedded in requests and responses sent via these rings share and transfer pages
containing buffers (e.g., network packets and disk blocks). These grants and references will be
managed       directly    using      interfaces         defined   in   gnttab.c,      such     as
gnttab_grant_foreign_access_ref(), which grants a remote domain shared access to a page,
gnttab_end_foreign_access_ref(), which cancels a grant of a shared page with a remote
domain, and gnttab_grant_foreign_transfer_ref(), which accepts transfer of a page from a
remote domain.

Grant tables, with the help of XenStore, allow shared memory to be configured between
device-driver front and back ends. Event management is required to construct higher-level
communication primitives, such as blocking rings for requests and responses. In Xen, event
management is done via event channels that allow interrupt-like callbacks to be triggered within

a domain by the hypervisor (for physical- and virtual-device interrupts) and other domains (for
split device drivers and other interdomain communication). This mechanism implements
Inter-Processor Interrupts (IPIs) between VCPUs within a single domain, used by FreeBSD for
interprocessor synchronization.

Domains enumerate event channels using event ports, integers associated with bits in a
per-guest global bitmask stored in the domain’s shared_info structure. The size of the bitmask
limits the number of unique event sources from which a domain can receive notifications; for
32-bit domains, the mask is 1024-bit; for 64-bit guests, 4096 bits. These limits can be avoided
through use of the new FIFO event channel facility in more recent Xen versions, but this is not
yet supported by FreeBSD. When an event channel fires, the bit corresponding to its event port
in the bitmask will be set to 1; if the bit transitions from 0 to 1, then an upcall will be delivered,
subject to a per-VCPU flag in the vcpu_info structure allowing interrupts to be disabled for that
virtual CPU.

The upcall is delivered in the style of a traditional software interrupt; FreeBSD handles this code
in xen_intr.c that routes interrupts via intr_execute_handlers(). After the event-channel bit
has been set, further upcall invocation is suppressed until the bit has been cleared by the guest.
Event ports are allocated and bound to particular event sources using event_channel_op
hypercall operations:

• bind_pirq returns an event port allowing domain 0 to receive interrupts from underlying
physical devices.

• bind_virq returns an event port for per-domain virtual devices, such as timers.

• bind_ipi returns an event port allowing a domain to deliver an IPI to another VCPU in the
same domain.

• alloc_unbound and bind_interdomain allow a pair of cooperating domains to allocate and
bind a pair of event ports, establishing a two-way interdomain event channel for a variety of
purposes including ring buffer events.

Domains can deliver events on interdomain event channels using the send operation, and close
no-longer-required event ports using the close operation. Domains can also bind an event port
to a particular VCPU using the bind_vcpu operation. These functions are configurable enough
to expose them up the xen_intr stack as though event channels were a Programmable
Interrupt Controller (PIC), thus allowing the device-driver stack to remain oblivious to the
implementation details. As with grant-table references, event-port numbers can be shared

between domains as integers embedded in messages, and distributed using XenStore to
configure virtual interrupts linking both halves of split device drivers.

Using grant-table entries and event channels, domains are able to implement ring buffers
suitable for carrying requests and responses between device driver front ends and back ends. As
with Virtio rings, Xen communication rings consist of a ring buffer allowing one party to send
requests to, and receive responses from, another party. Unlike Virtio rings, request and
response messages are embedded in the ring directly, with the option of referring to shared
pages or event channels via grant-table references and event-port numbers. An event channel
associated with each ring allows a recipient to receive an upcall when the ring transitions from
empty to non-empty, and a sender to receive an upcall when the ring transitions from full to
non-full. Macros defined in ring.h differentiate domain-private versions of request and
response head and tail indices from versions in shared memory, allowing multiple requests or
responses to be inserted before an event is delivered to amortize event-delivery costs.

As with Virtio’s virtual block device, Xen’s blkback and blkfront use a single ring to carry
requests and responses between the device-driver front and back ends. The front end
temporarily delegates read-only pages to the back end to provide data to write to the virtual
device, and writable pages into which data can be read from the virtual device. The block-device
back end in FreeBSD is able to direct I/O to any underlying block device in the driver domain,
including raw-disk devices and ZFS volumes.

Also similar to Virtio’s virtual network-interface device, Xen’s netback and netfront use a pair
of rings to implement transmit and receive rings for virtual network interfaces. The back end
exposes the other end of the virtual interface as a if_xnb device in the driver domain, which can
then be bridged to conventional Ethernet using the FreeBSD if_bridge driver. Techniques
originally developed for physical-network-interface performance optimization such as checksum
offloading, TCP Segmentation Offload, and Large Receive Offload apply equally well to virtual
network interfaces, and are typically utilized to mitigate domain-switching costs.

Device Pass-Through

Another increasingly common approach is delegation of physical device access to virtual
machines, rather than virtualizing devices. This approach requires hardware support,
implemented using IOMMUs that virtualize the address space seen by DMA engines on
peripherals in the same manner that the CPU’s memory-management unit (MMU) virtualizes
memory access for the processor. This approach safely delegates access to I/O ports and DMA
descriptor rings to guest virtual machines. For example, for suitably virtualization-aware

network interface cards, this approach delegates specific descriptor rings to the guest allowing
direct Ethernet access with few performance overheads.

Device delegation offers different configuration and performance tradeoffs: for example, it is
unsuitable if the host operating system instance wishes to impose fine-grained policies on
network access, use virtual disks rather than physical ones, or if communication is to be between
virtual machines rather than to remote systems. When a device must be shared by multiple
virtual machines, the IOMMU alone is insufficient: the device itself must be aware of multiple
virtual machines and be able to impose OS-originated policy on their interactions. For example,
a virtualization-aware NIC would allow the host or domain 0 operating system instance an
opportunity to control NIC-side rules for distributing packets to specific receive rings, and
limiting packets that can be sent on specific transmit rings; individual guest virtual machines
will then be able to interact directly with the NIC using those rings without trapping to the
hypervisor or host operating system.

Exercises

8.1 Describe the differences between the PCI and USB busses.

8.2 Why was the /dev filesystem added to FreeBSD 5?

8.3 Give an example of a network interface that is useful without an underlying hardware
device.

8.4 Give two reasons why the addresses of a network interface are not in the network-interface
data structure.

8.5 Describe two tasks performed by a network-interface output routine.

8.6 Why is the identity of the network interface on which each message is received passed
upward with the message?

8.7 Name the two devices that make up a pseudo-terminal. Explain the role of each of these
pieces.

8.8 What are the two modes of terminal input? Which mode is most commonly in use when
users converse with an interactive screen editor?

8.9 Explain why there are two character queues for dealing with terminal input. Describe the
use of each.

8.10 What signal is sent to what process associated with a terminal if a network connection
breaks in the middle of a session?

8.11 Name the three layers between the filesystem and the disk. Briefly describe the purpose of
each layer.

8.12 Give an example of a GEOM provider and a GEOM consumer.

8.13 What happens if two GEOM consumers try to operate at the same time?

8.14 Draw a sequence of pictures showing what happens to the GEOM configuration in Figure
8.6 when the disk becomes unavailable.

8.15 Name the three layers within CAM. Briefly describe the service that each of these layers
provides.

8.16 Can the CAM layer handle the setup and tear down of the DMA maps for one of its device
drivers? Why or why not?

8.17 What is the purpose of the /usr/sbin/config program?

8.18 Give two reasons why it is unsafe to allow a kernel to load code dynamically.

8.19 Why are device probing and attaching done as two separate steps?

8.20 Describe the purpose of the device structure.

8.21 Run the /usr/sbin/devinfo program on a FreeBSD machine and identify the hardware
associated with each of the leaf nodes.

8.22 Name the three steps used for resource allocation and freeing. Why are these functions
broken into three separate steps?

**8.23 All devices are currently attached once in a depth-first search. But some devices may
offer services needed by devices higher up the tree. Describe devices that fall into this class and
give a plan to build a multipass-attach approach into newbus to handle them.

References

ACPI, 2013.

ACPI,   Advanced       Configuration   and   Power      Interface   Specification,   available   from
http://www.acpi.info/, November 2013.

ANSI, 2002.

ANSI, “Common Access Method draft standard,” X3T10, available from http://www.t10.org,
January 2002.

ANSI, 2003.

ANSI, “Fibre Channel draft standard,” T11, available from http://www.t11.org, January 2003.

Arch, 2014.

Arch,                  PC               Architecture,                  available                 from
http://www.intel.com/design/chipsets/865PE/pix/865PE_schematic.gif,                              and
http://www.just2good.co.uk/chipset.php, March 2014.

Barham et al., 2003.

P. Barham, B. Dragovic, K. Fraser, S. Hand, T. Harris, A. Ho, R. Neugebauer, I. Pratt, & A.
Warfield, “Xen and the Art of Virtualization,” Proceedings of the Nineteenth ACM Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles, pp. 164–177, October 2003.

Chisnall, 2007.

D. Chisnall, The Definitive Guide to the Xen Hypervisor, Prentice Hall Press, Upper Saddle
River, NJ, 2007.

Chiueh et al., 2004.

T. Chiueh, P. Pardhan, & G. Venkitachalam, Intra-Address Space Protection Using
Segmentation Hardware,         available from    http://www.ecsl.cs.sunysb.edu/palladium.html,
March 2004.

Harris & Fraser, 2007.

T. Harris & K. Fraser, “Concurrent Programming Without Locks,” ACM Transactions on
Computer Systems, vol. 25, no. 2, Association for Computing Machinery, May 2007.

Russell, 2008.

R. Russell, “Virtio: Towards a De-facto Standard for Virtual I/O Devices,” ACM SIGOPS
Operating Systems Review, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 95–103, September 2008.

TCG, 2003.

TCG,   Trusted   Computing     Group   TPM     Specification   Version   1.2,   available   from
http://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/, October 2003.

Xerox, 1980.

Xerox, “The Ethernet, a Local Area Network: Data Link Layer and Physical Layer Specification,”
X3T51/80-50, Xerox Corporation, Stamford, CT, October 1980.

