                       Chapter 9. The Fast Filesystem

9.1 Hierarchical Filesystem Management

The operations defined for local filesystems are divided into two parts. Common to all local
filesystems are hierarchical naming, locking, quotas, attribute management, and protection.
These features, which are independent of how data are stored, are provided by the UFS code
described in the first seven sections of this chapter. The other part of the local filesystem, the
filestore, is concerned with the organization and management of the data on the storage media.
Storage is managed by the datastore filesystem operations that are provided by the FFS code
described in the final two sections of this chapter. We use the acronym UFS when referring to
the fast filesystem in this book.

The vnode operations defined for performing hierarchical filesystem operations are shown in
Table 9.1. The most complex of these operations is that for performing a lookup. The
filesystem-independent part of the lookup is described in Section 7.4. The algorithm used to
lookup a pathname component in a directory is described in Section 9.3.

Table 9.1 Hierarchical filesystem operations.

There are five operators for creating names. The operator used depends on the type of object
being created. The create operator creates regular files and also is used by the networking code
to create AF_LOCAL domain sockets. The link operator creates additional names for existing
objects. The symlink operator creates a symbolic link (see Section 9.3 for a discussion of
symbolic links). The mknod operator creates character special devices (for compatibility with
other UNIX systems that still use them); it is also used to create fifos. The mkdir operator
creates directories.

There are three operators for changing or deleting existing names. The rename operator deletes
a name for an object in one location and creates a new name for the object in another location.
The implementation of this operator is complex when the kernel is dealing with the movement
of a directory from one part of the filesystem tree to another. The remove operator removes a
name. If the removed name is the final reference to the object, the space associated with the
underlying object is reclaimed. The remove operator operates on all object types except
directories; they are removed using the rmdir operator.

Three operators are supplied for object attributes. The kernel retrieves attributes from an object
using the getattr operator and stores them using the setattr operator. Access checks for a given
user are provided by the access operator.

Five operators are provided for interpreting objects. The open and close operators have only
peripheral use for regular files, but when they are used on special devices, they notify the
appropriate device driver of device activation or shutdown. The readdir operator converts the
filesystem-specific format of a directory to the standard list of directory entries expected by an
application. Note that the interpretation of the contents of a directory is provided by the
hierarchical filesystem-management layer; the filestore code considers a directory as just
another object holding data. The readlink operator returns the contents of a symbolic link. As
with directories, the filestore code considers a symbolic link as just another object holding data.
The mmap operator prepares an object to be mapped into the address space of a process.

Three operators are provided to allow process control over objects. The poll operator allows a
process to find out whether an object is ready to be read or written. The ioctl operator passes
control requests to a special device. The advlock operator allows a process to acquire or release
an advisory lock on an object. None of these operators modifies the object in the filestore. They
are simply using the object for naming or directing the desired operation.

There are four operations for management of the objects. The inactive and reclaim operators
were described in Section 7.3. The lock and unlock operators allow the callers of the vnode
interface to provide hints to the code that implements operations on the underlying objects.
Stateless filesystems such as NFS ignore these hints. Stateful filesystems, however, can use hints
to avoid doing extra work. For example, an open system call requesting that a new file be created
requires two steps. First, a lookup call is done to see if the file already exists. Before the lookup is
started, a lock request is made on the directory being searched. While scanning through the
directory checking for the name, the lookup code also identifies a location within the directory
that contains enough space to hold the new name. If the lookup returns successfully (meaning
that the name does not already exist), the open code verifies that the user has permission to
create the file. If the caller is not eligible to create the new file, then they are expected to call

unlock to release the lock that they acquired during the lookup. Otherwise, the create operation
is called. If the filesystem is stateful and has been able to lock the directory, then it can simply
create the name in the previously identified space because it knows that no other processes will
have had access to the directory. Once the name is created, an unlock request is made on the
directory. If the filesystem is stateless, then it cannot lock the directory, so the create operator
must rescan the directory to find space and to verify that the name has not been created since
the lookup.

9.2 Structure of an Inode

To allow files to be allocated concurrently and to provide random access within files, FreeBSD
uses the concept of an index node, or inode. The inode contains information about the contents
of the file, as shown in Figure 9.1. This information includes the following:

• The type and access mode for the file

• The file’s owner and group-access identifiers

• The time that the file was created, when it was most recently read and written, and when its
inode was most recently updated by the system

• The size of the file in bytes

• The number of physical blocks used by the file (including blocks used to hold indirect pointers
and extended attributes)

• The number of directory entries that reference the file

• The kernel and user-setable flags that describe characteristics of the file

• The generation number of the file (a randomly selected number assigned to the inode each
time that the latter is allocated to a new file; the generation number is used by NFS to detect
references to deleted files)

• The block size of the data blocks referenced by the inode (typically the same as, but sometimes
larger than, the filesystem block size)

• The size of the extended attribute information

Figure 9.1 The structure of an inode.

Notably missing in the inode is the filename. Filenames are maintained in directories rather
than in inodes because a file may have many names, or links, and the name of a file can be large
(up to 255 bytes in length). Directories are described in Section 9.3.

To create a new name for a file, the system increments the count of the number of names
referring to that inode. Then the new name is entered in a directory, along with the number of
the inode. Conversely, when a name is deleted, the entry is deleted from a directory, and the
name count for the inode is then decremented. When the name count reaches zero, the system
deallocates the inode by putting all the inode’s blocks back on a list of free blocks.

The inode also contains an array of pointers to the blocks in the file. The system can convert
from a logical block number to a physical sector number by indexing into the array using the

logical block number. A null array entry shows that no block has been allocated and will cause a
block of zeros to be returned on a read. On a write of such an entry, a new block is allocated, the
array entry is updated with the new block number, and the data are written to the disk.

Inodes are fixed in size, and most files are small, so the array of pointers must be small for
efficient use of space. The first 12 array entries are allocated in the inode itself. For typical
filesystems, this implementation allows the first 384 Kbyte of data to be located directly via a
simple indexed lookup.

For somewhat larger files, Figure 9.1 shows that the inode contains a single indirect pointer that
points to a single indirect block of pointers to data blocks. To find the 100th logical block of
a file, the system first fetches the block identified by the indirect pointer and then indexes into
the 88th block (100 minus 12 direct pointers) and fetches that data block.

For files that are bigger than a few Mbyte, the single indirect block is eventually exhausted;
these files must resort to using a double indirect block, which is a pointer to a block of
pointers to pointers to data blocks. For files of multiple Tbyte, the system uses a triple
indirect block, which contains three levels of pointers before reaching the data block.

Although indirect blocks appear to increase the number of disk accesses required to get a block
of data, the overhead of the transfer is typically much lower. In Section 7.4, we discuss the
management of the cache that holds recently used disk blocks. The first time that a block of
indirect pointers is needed, it is brought into the cache. Further accesses to the indirect pointers
find the block already resident in memory; thus, they require only a single disk access to get the
data.

Changes to the Inode Format

Traditionally, the FreeBSD fast filesystem (which we shall refer to in this book as UFS1)
[McKusick et al., 1984] and its derivatives have used 32-bit pointers to reference the blocks used
by a file on the disk. The UFS1 filesystem was designed in the early 1980s when the largest disks
were 330 Mbyte. There was debate at the time whether it was worth squandering 32 bits per
block pointer rather than using the 24-bit block pointers of the filesystem that it replaced.
Luckily, the futurist view prevailed, and the design used 32-bit block pointers. Over the 20 years
since it has been deployed, storage systems have grown to hold over a Pbyte of data. Depending
on the block size configuration, the 32-bit block pointers of UFS1 run out of space in the 1 to 4
Tbyte range. While some stopgap measures can be used to extend the maximum-size storage
systems supported by UFS1, by 2002 it became clear the only long-term solution was to use

64-bit block pointers. Thus, we decided to build a new filesystem, UFS2, that would use 64-bit
block pointers.

We considered the alternatives between trying to make incremental changes to the existing
UFS1 filesystem versus importing another existing filesystem such as XFS [Sweeney et al., 1996],
or ReiserFS [Reiser, 2001]. We also considered writing a new filesystem from scratch so that we
could take advantage of recent filesystem research and experience. We chose to extend the UFS1
filesystem because this approach allowed us to reuse most of the existing UFS1 code base. The
benefits of this decision were that UFS2 was developed and deployed quickly, it became stable
and reliable rapidly, and the same code base could be used to support both UFS1 and UFS2
filesystem formats. Over 90 percent of the code base is shared, so bug fixes and feature or
performance enhancements usually apply to both filesystem formats.

The on-disk inodes used by UFS1 are 128 bytes in size and have only two unused 32-bit fields. It
would not be possible to convert to 64-bit block pointers without reducing the number of direct
block pointers from 12 to 5. Doing so would dramatically increase the amount of wasted space,
since only direct block pointers can reference fragments, so the only alternative is to increase the
size of the on-disk inode to 256 bytes.

Once one is committed to changing to a new on-disk format for the inodes, it is possible to
include other inode-related changes that were not possible within the constraints of the old
inodes. While it was tempting to throw in everything that has ever been suggested over the last
20 years, we felt that it was best to limit the addition of new capabilities to those that were likely
to have a clear benefit. Every new addition adds complexity that has a cost both in
maintainability and performance. Obscure or little-used features may add conditional checks in
frequently executed code paths such as read and write, slowing down the overall performance of
the filesystem even if they are not used.

Extended Attributes

A major addition in UFS2 is support for extended attributes. Extended attributes are a piece of
auxiliary data storage associated with an inode that can be used to store auxiliary data that is
separate from the contents of the file. The idea is similar to the concept of data forks used in the
Apple filesystem [Apple, 2003]. By integrating the extended attributes into the inode, it is
possible to provide the same integrity guarantees as are made for the contents of the file.
Specifically, the successful completion of an fsync system call ensures that the file data, the
extended attributes, and all names and paths leading to the names of the file are in stable store.

The current implementation has space in the inode to store up to two blocks of extended
attributes. The new UFS2 inode format had room for up to five additional 64-bit pointers. Thus,
the number of extended attribute blocks could have been between one to five blocks. We chose
to allocate two blocks to the extended attributes and to leave the other three as spares for future
use. By having two, all the code had to be prepared to deal with an array of pointers, so if the
number is expanded into the remaining spares in the future, the existing implementation will
work without changes to the source code. By saving three spares, we provided a reasonable
amount of space for future needs. And if the decision to allow only two blocks proves to be too
little space, one or more of the spares can be used to expand the size of the extended attributes
in the future. If vastly more extended attribute space is needed, a spare could be used as an
indirect pointer to extended attribute data blocks.

Figure 9.2 shows the format used for the extended attributes. The first field of the header of each
attribute is its length. Applications that do not understand the namespace or name can simply
skip over the unknown attribute by adding the length to their current position to get to the next
attribute. Thus, many different applications can share the usage of the extended attribute space,
even if they do not understand each other’s data types.

Figure 9.2 Format of extended attributes. The header of each attribute has a 4-byte length,
1-byte namespace class, 1-byte content pad length, 1-byte name length, and name. The name is
padded so that the contents start on an 8-byte boundary. The contents are padded to the size
shown by the “content pad length” field. The size of the contents can be calculated by
subtracting from the length the size of the header (including the name) and the content pad
length.

The first of two initial uses for extended attributes is to support an access control list,
generally referred to as an ACL. An ACL replaces the group permissions for a file with a more
specific list of the users that are permitted to access the files. The ACL also includes a list of the
permissions that each user is granted. These permissions include the traditional read, write, and
execute permissions along with other properties such as the right to rename or delete the file
[Rhodes, 2014].

Earlier implementations of ACLs were done with a single auxiliary file per filesystem that was
indexed by the inode number and had a small fixed-size area to store the ACL permissions. The
small size was intended to keep the size of the auxiliary file reasonable, since it had to have

space for every possible inode in the filesystem. There were two problems with this
implementation. The fixed size of the space per inode to store the ACL information meant that it
was not possible to give access to long lists of users. The second problem was that it was difficult
to commit changes atomically to the ACL list for a file, since an update required that both the
file inode and the ACL file be written to have the update take effect [Watson, 2000].

Both problems with the auxiliary file implementation of ACLs are fixed by storing the ACL
information directly in the extended-attribute data area of the inode. Because of the large size of
the extended attribute data area (a minimum of 8 Kbyte and typically 64 Kbyte), long lists of
ACL information can be easily stored. Space used to store extended attribute information is
proportional to the number of inodes with extended attributes and the size of the ACL lists that
they use. Atomic update of the information is much easier, since writing the inode will update
the inode attributes and the set of data that the inode references including the extended
attributes in one disk operation. While it would be possible to update the old auxiliary file on
every fsync system call done on the filesystem, the cost of doing so would be prohibitive. Here,
the kernel knows if the extended attribute data block for an inode is dirty and can write just that
data block during an fsync call on the inode.

The second use for extended attributes is for data labeling. Data labels provide permissions for a
mandatory access control (MAC) framework enforced by the kernel. As described in
Section 5.10, the kernel’s MAC framework permits dynamically introduced system-security
modules to modify system security functionality. This framework can be used to support a
variety of new security services, including traditional labelled mandatory access control models.
The framework provides a series of entry points that are called by code supporting various
kernel services, especially with respect to access control points and object creation. The
framework then calls out to security modules to offer them the opportunity to modify security
behavior at those MAC entry points. Thus, the filesystem does not codify how the labels are used
or enforced. It simply stores the labels associated with the inode and produces them when a
security module needs to query them to do a permission check [Watson, 2001; Watson et al.,
2003].

We considered storing symbolic links in the extended attribute area but chose not to do so for
four reasons:

1. Most symbolic links fit within the 120 bytes normally used to store the direct and indirect
pointers, and thus do not need a disk block to be allocated to hold them.

2. If the symbolic link is large enough to require storage in a disk block, the time to access an
extended storage block is the same as the time to access a regular data block.

3. Since symbolic links rarely have any extended attributes, there would be no savings in storage,
since a filesystem fragment would be needed whether it was stored in a regular data block or in
an extended storage block.

4. If the symbolic link were stored in an extended storage block, it would take more time to
traverse down the attribute list to find it.

New Filesystem Capabilities

Several other improvements were made when the enlarged inode format was created. We
decided to get an early jump on the year 2038 problem when the 32-bit time fields overflow
(specifically, Tue Jan 19 03:14:08 2038 GMT, which could be a really ugly way to usher in the
first author’s 84th birthday). We expanded the time fields (which hold seconds-since-1970) for
access, modification, and inodemodification times from 32 bits to 64 bits. At plus or minus 136
billion years, this expansion should carry us from well before the universe was created until long
after our sun has burned itself out. We left the nanoseconds fields for these times at 32 bits
because we did not feel that added resolution was going to be useful in the foreseeable future.
We considered expanding the time to only 48 bits. We chose to go to 64 bits, since 64 bits is a
native size that can be easily manipulated with existing and likely future architectures. Using 48
bits would have required an extra unpacking or packing step each time the field was read or
written. Also, going to 64 bits ensures enough bits for all likely measured time so it will not have
to be enlarged.

We also added a new time field (also 64 bits) to hold the birth time (also commonly called the
creation time) of the file. The birth time is set when the inode is first allocated and is not
changed thereafter. It has been added to the structure returned by the stat system call so that
applications can determine its value and so that archiving programs such as dump, tar, and
pax can save this value along with the other file times. The birth time was added to a previously
spare field in the stat system-call structure so that the size of the structure did not change. Thus,
old versions of programs that use the stat call continue to work.

To date, only the dump program has been changed to save the birth-time value. This new
version of dump, which can dump both UFS1 and UFS2 filesystems, creates a new dump format
that is not readable by older versions of restore. The updated version of restore can identify
and restore from both old and new dump formats. The birth times are only available and setable
from the new dump format.

The utimes system call sets the access and modification times of a file to a specified set of values.
It is used primarily by archive retrieval programs to set a newly extracted file’s times back to

those associated with the file’s times in the archive. With the addition of birth time, we added a
new system call that allows the setting of access, modification, and birth times. However, we
realized that many existing applications will not be changed to use the new utimes system call.
The result will be that the files that they retrieved from archives will have a newer birth time
than access or modification times.

To provide a sensible birth time for applications that are unaware of the birth-time attribute, we
changed the semantics of the utimes system call so that if the birth time was newer than the
value of the modification time that it was setting, it would set the birth time to the same time as
the modification time. An application that is aware of the birth-time attribute can set both the
birth time and the modification time by doing two calls to utimes. First, it calls utimes with a
modification time equal to the saved birth time, and then it calls utimes a second time with a
modification time equal to the (presumably newer) saved modification time. For filesystems that
do not store birth times, the second call will overwrite the first call resulting in the same values
for access and modification times as they would have previously received. For filesystems that
support birth time, it will be properly set. Most happily for the application writers, they will not
have to compile the name of utimes conditionally for BSD and non-BSD systems. They just write
their applications to call the standard interface twice knowing that all supported times will be
set correctly on all systems and filesystems. Applications that value speed of execution over
portability can use the new version of the utimes system call that allows all time values to be set
with one call.

File Flags

FreeBSD has two system calls, chflags and fchflags, that set the 32-bit user-flags word in the
inode. The flags are included in the stat structure so that they can be inspected.

The owner of the file or the superuser can set the low 16 bits. Currently, there are flags defined
to mark a file as append-only, immutable, and not needing to be dumped. An immutable file
may not be changed, moved, or deleted. An append-only file is immutable, except data may be
appended to it. The user append-only and immutable flags may be changed by the owner of the
file or the superuser.

Only the superuser can set the high 16 bits. Currently, there are flags defined to mark a file as
append-only and immutable. Once set, the append-only and immutable flags in the top 16 bits
cannot be cleared when the system is secure.

The kernel runs with four different levels of security. Any superuser process can raise the
security level, but only the init process can lower that level (the init program is described in
Section 15.4). Security levels are defined as follows:

–1. Permanently insecure mode: Always run system in level 0 mode (must be compiled into the
kernel).

0. Insecure mode: Immutable and append-only flags may be turned off. All devices can be read
or written, subject to their permissions.

1. Secure mode: The superuser-settable immutable and append-only flags cannot be cleared;
disks for mounted filesystems and kernel memory (/dev/mem and /dev/kmem) are
read-only.

2. Highly secure mode: This mode is the same as secure mode, except that disks are always
read-only whether mounted or not. This level precludes even a superuser process from
tampering with filesystems by unmounting them, but it also inhibits formatting of new
filesystems.

Normally, the system runs with level 0 security while in single-user mode, and with level 1
security while in multiuser mode. If level 2 security is desired while the system is running in
multiuser mode, it should be set in the /etc/rc startup script (the /etc/rc script is described in
Section 15.4).

Files marked immutable by the superuser cannot be changed except by someone with physical
access to either the machine or the system console. Files marked immutable include those that
are frequently the subject of attack by intruders (e.g., login and su). The append-only flag is
typically used for critical system logs. If an intruder breaks in, he will be unable to cover his
tracks. Although simple in concept, these two features improve the security of a system
dramatically. However, there are some serious limitations to this security model:

• Immutable files can only be updated when system is single-user.

• Append-only files can only be rotated when system is single-user.

• Direct hardware access is restricted.

The biggest limitation is that all startup activities must be protected. The reason for this
limitation is that a kernel always has some bug that can be exploited to cause it to crash and
reboot. During the reboot process, it is running in insecure mode; thus, if an exploit script can

be injected anywhere during the time that the system is starting up, the system can be
compromised. The set of startup activities includes:

• Startup scripts and their containing directories

• All binaries executed during startup

• All libraries used during startup

• Many configuration files used during startup

Finding and locking down all these files and directories is very difficult and if even one is missed,
it is possible to break into the system.

One change in the UFS2 inode format was to split the flags field into two separate 32-bit fields:
one for flags that can be set by applications (as in UFS1) and a new field for flags maintained
strictly by the kernel. An example of a kernel flag is the SNAPSHOT flag used to label a file as
being a snapshot. Another kernel-only flag is OPAQUE, which is used by the union filesystem to
mark a directory that should not make the layers below it visible. By moving these kernel flags
from the high 16 bits of the user-flags field into a separate kernel-flags field, they will not be
accidentally set or cleared by a naive or malicious application.

Dynamic Inodes

A common complaint about the UFS1 filesystem is that it preallocates all its inodes at the time
that the filesystem is created. For filesystems with millions of files, the initialization of the
filesystem can take several hours. Additionally, the filesystem creation program, newfs, had to
assume that every filesystem would be filled with many small files and allocate a lot more inodes
than were likely to ever be used. If a UFS1 filesystem uses up all its inodes, the only way to get
more is to dump, rebuild, and restore the filesystem. The UFS2 filesystem resolves these
problems by dynamically allocating its inodes. The usual implementation of dynamically
allocated inodes requires a separate filesystem data structure (typically referred to as the inode
file) that tracks the current set of inodes. The management and maintenance of this extra data
structure adds overhead and complexity and often degrades performance.

To avoid these costs, UFS2 preallocates a range of inode numbers and a set of blocks for each
cylinder group (cylinder groups are described in Section 9.10). Initially, each cylinder group has
two blocks of inodes allocated (a typical block holds 128 inodes). When the blocks fill up, the
next block of inodes in the set is allocated and initialized. The set of blocks that may be allocated

to inodes is held as part of the free-space reserve until all other space in the filesystem is
allocated. Only then can it be used for file data.

In theory, a filesystem could fill, using up all the blocks set aside for inodes. Later, after large
files have been removed and many small files created to replace them, the filesystem might find
itself unable to allocate the needed inodes because all the space set aside for inodes was still in
use. Here, it would be necessary to reallocate existing files to move them to new locations
outside the inode area. Such code has not been written as we do not expect that this condition
will arise in practice, since the free-space reserve used on most filesystems (8 percent) exceeds
the amount of space needed for inodes (typically less than 6 percent). On these systems, only a
process running with root privileges would ever be able to allocate the inode blocks. Should the
code prove necessary in real use, it can be written at that time. Until it is written, filesystems
hitting this condition will return an “out of inodes” error on attempts to create new files.

A side benefit of dynamically allocating inodes is that the time it takes to create a new filesystem
in UFS2 is about 1 percent of the time that it takes in UFS1. A filesystem that would take one
hour to build in a UFS1 format can be built in under a minute in the UFS2 format. While
filesystem creations are not a common operation, having them build quickly does matter to the
system administrators that have to do such tasks with some regularity.

The cost of dynamically allocating inodes is one extra disk write for every 128 new inodes that
are created. Although this cost is low compared to the other costs of creating 128 new files, some
systems administrators might want to preallocate more than the minimal number of inodes. If
such a demand arises, it would be trivial to add a flag to the newfs program to preallocate
additional inodes at the time that the filesystem is created.

Inode Management

Most of the activity in the local filesystem revolves around inodes. As described in Section 7.4,
the kernel keeps a list of active and recently accessed vnodes. The decisions regarding how many
and which files should be cached are made by the vnode layer based on information about
activity across all filesystems. Each local filesystem will have a subset of the system vnodes to
manage. Each uses an inode supplemented with some additional information to identify and
locate the set of files for which it is responsible. Figure 9.3 shows the location of the inodes
within the system.

Figure 9.3 Layout of kernel tables.

Reviewing the material in Section 7.1, each process has a process open-file table that has
slots for up to a system-imposed limit of file descriptors; this table is maintained as part of the
process state. When a user process opens a file (or socket), an unused slot is located in the
process’s open-file table; the small integer file descriptor that is returned on a successful open is
an index value into this table.

The per-process file-table entry points to a system open-file entry, which contains information
about the underlying file or socket represented by the descriptor. For files, the file table points to
the vnode representing the open file. For the local filesystem, the vnode references an inode. It is
the inode that identifies the file itself.

The first step in opening a file is to find the file’s associated inode. The lookup request is given to
the filesystem associated with the directory currently being searched. When the local filesystem
finds the name in the directory, it gets the inode number of the associated file. First, the
filesystem searches its collection of inodes to see whether the requested inode is already in
memory. To avoid performing a linear scan of all its entries, the system keeps a set of hash
chains with each entry keyed by inode number and filesystem identifier; see Figure 9.4. If the
inode is not in the table, such as the first time a file is opened, the filesystem must request a new
vnode. When a new vnode is allocated to the local filesystem, a new structure to hold the inode
is allocated.

Figure 9.4 Structure of the inode table.

The next step is to locate the disk block containing the inode and to read that block into a buffer
in system memory. When the disk I/O completes, the inode is copied from the disk buffer into
the newly allocated inode entry. In addition to the information contained in the disk portion of
the inode, the inode table itself maintains supplemental information while the inode is in
memory. This information includes the hash chains described previously, as well as flags
showing the inode’s status, reference counts on its use, and information to manage locks. The
information also contains pointers to other kernel data structures of frequent interest, such as
the superblock for the filesystem containing the inode.

When the last reference to a file is closed, the local filesystem is notified that the file has become
inactive. When it is inactivated, the inode times will be updated, and the inode may be written to
disk. However, it remains on the hash list so that it can be found if it is reopened. After being
inactive for a period determined by the vnode layer, based on demand for vnodes in all the
filesystems, the vnode will be reclaimed. When a vnode for a local file is reclaimed, the inode is
removed from the previous filesystem’s hash chain and, if the inode is dirty, its contents are
written back to disk. The space for the inode is then deallocated, so that the vnode will be ready
for use by a new filesystem client.

9.3 Naming

Filesystems contain files, most of which contain ordinary data. Certain files are distinguished as
directories and contain pointers to files that may themselves be directories. This hierarchy of
directories and files is organized into a tree structure; Figure 9.5 shows a small filesystem tree.
Each of the circles in the figure represents an inode with its corresponding inode number inside.
Each of the arrows represents a name in a directory. For example, inode 4 is the /usr directory
with entry ., that points to itself, and entry .., that points to its parent, inode 2, the root of the
filesystem. It also contains the name bin, which references directory inode 7, and the name foo,
which references file inode 6.

Figure 9.5 A small filesystem tree.

Directories

Directories are allocated in units called chunks; Figure 9.6 shows a typical directory chunk. The
size of a chunk is chosen such that each allocation can be transferred to disk in a single
operation. The ability to change a directory in a single operation makes directory updates atomic.
Chunks are broken up into variable-length directory entries to allow filenames to be of nearly
arbitrary length. No directory entry can span multiple chunks. The first four fields of a directory
entry are of fixed length and contain the following:

1. The inode number, an index into a table of on-disk inode structures; the selected entry
describes the file (inodes were described in Section 9.2)

2. The size of the entry in bytes

3. The type of the entry

4. The length of the filename contained in the entry in bytes

Figure 9.6 Format of directory chunks.

The remainder of an entry is of variable length and contains a null-terminated filename padded
to a 4-byte boundary. The maximum length of a filename in a directory is 255 characters.

The filesystem records free space in a directory by having entries accumulate the free space in
their size fields. Thus, some directory entries are larger than required to hold the entry name
plus fixed-length fields. Space allocated to a directory should always be accounted for
completely by the total of the sizes of the directory’s entries. When an entry is deleted from a
directory, the system coalesces the entry’s space into the previous entry in the same directory
chunk by increasing the size of the previous entry by the size of the deleted entry. If the first
entry of a directory chunk is free, then the pointer to the entry’s inode is set to zero to show that
the entry is unallocated.

When creating a new directory entry, the kernel must scan the entire directory to ensure that the
name does not already exist. While doing this scan, it also checks each directory block to see if it
has enough space in which to put the new entry. The space need not be contiguous. The kernel
will compact the valid entries within a directory block to coalesce several small unused spaces
into a single space that is big enough to hold the new entry. The first block that has enough
space is used. The kernel will neither compact space across directory blocks nor create an entry
that spans two directory blocks as it always wants to be able to do directory updates by writing a
single directory block. If no space is found when scanning the directory, a new block is allocated
at the end of the directory.

Applications obtain chunks of directories from the kernel by using the getdirentries system call.
For the local filesystem, the on-disk format of directories is identical to that expected by the
application, so the chunks are returned uninterpreted. When directories are read over the
network or from non-BSD filesystems, such as Apple’s HFS, the getdirentries system call has to
convert the on-disk representation of the directory to that described.

Normally, programs want to read directories one entry at a time. This interface is provided by
the directory-access routines. The opendir() function returns a structure pointer that is used by
readdir() to get chunks of directories using getdirentries; readdir() returns the next entry from
the chunk on each call. The closedir() function deallocates space allocated by opendir() and
closes the directory. In addition, there is the rewinddir() function to reset the read position to
the beginning, the telldir() function that returns a structure describing the current directory
position, and the seekdir() function that returns to a position previously obtained with telldir().

The UFS1 filesystem uses 32-bit inode numbers. While it is tempting to increase these inode
numbers to 64 bits in UFS2, doing so would require that the directory format be changed. There
is much code that works directly on directory entries. Changing directory formats would entail
creating many more filesystemspecific functions that would increase the complexity and
maintainability issues with the code. Furthermore, the current APIs for referencing directory
entries use 32-bit inode numbers. As a result, even if the underlying filesystem supported 64-bit
inode numbers, they could not currently be made visible to user applications. In the short term,
applications are not running into the 4-billion-files-perfilesystem limit that 32-bit inode
numbers impose. If we assume that the growth rate in the number of files per filesystem over
the last 20 years will continue at the same rate, we estimate that the 32-bit inode number should
be enough for another 10 to 20 years. However, the limit will be reached before the 64-bit block
limit of UFS2 is reached, so the UFS2 filesystem has reserved a flag in the superblock to show
that it is a filesystem with 64-bit inode numbers. When the time comes to begin using 64-bit
inode numbers, the flag can be turned on and the new directory format can be used. Kernels that
predate the introduction of 64-bit inode numbers check this flag and will know that they cannot
mount such filesystems.

Finding of Names in Directories

A common request to the filesystem is to look up a specific name in a directory. The kernel
usually does the lookup by starting at the beginning of the directory and going through it,
comparing each entry in turn. First, the length of the sought-after name is compared with the
length of the name being checked. If the lengths are identical, a string comparison of the name
being sought and the directory entry is made. If they match, the search is complete; if they fail,
either in the length or in the string comparison, the search continues with the next entry.

Whenever a name is found, its name and containing directory are entered into the systemwide
name cache described in Section 7.4. Whenever a search is unsuccessful, an entry is made in the
cache showing that the name does not exist in the particular directory. Before starting a
directory scan, the kernel looks for the name in the cache. If either a positive or negative entry is
found, the directory scan can be avoided.

Another common operation is to look up all the entries in a directory. For example, many
programs do a stat system call on each name in a directory in the order that the names appear in
the directory. To improve performance for these programs, the kernel maintains the directory
offset of the last successful lookup for each directory. Each time that a lookup is done in that
directory, the search is started from the offset at which the previous name was found (instead of
from the beginning of the directory). For programs that step sequentially through a directory
with n files, search time decreases from Order(n2) to Order(n).

One quick benchmark that demonstrates the maximum effectiveness of the cache is running the
ls –l command on a directory containing 600 files. On a system that retains the most recent
directory offset, the amount of system time for this test is reduced by 85 percent. Unfortunately,
the maximum effectiveness is much greater than the average effectiveness. Although the cache is
90 percent effective when hit, it is applicable to only about 25 percent of the names being looked
up. Despite the amount of time spent in the lookup routine itself decreasing substantially, the
improvement is diminished because more time is spent in the routines that that routine calls.
Each cache miss causes a directory to be accessed twice—once to search from the middle to the
end and once to search from the beginning to the middle.

These caches provide good directory lookup performance but are ineffective for large directories
that have a high rate of entry creation and deletion. Each time a new directory entry is created,
the kernel must scan the entire directory to ensure that the entry does not already exist. When
an existing entry is deleted, the kernel must scan the directory to find the entry to be removed.
For directories with many entries, these linear scans are time consuming.

The approach to solving this problem is to introduce dynamic directory hashing that retrofits a
directory indexing system to UFS [Dowse & Malone, 2002]. To avoid repeated linear searches of
large directories, the dynamic directory hashing builds a hash table of directory entries on the
fly when the directory is first accessed. This table avoids directory scans on later lookups,
creates, and deletes. Unlike filesystems originally designed with large directories in mind, these
indices are not saved on disk and so the system is backward compatible. The drawback is that
the indices need to be built the first time that a large directory is encountered after each system
reboot. The effect of the dynamic directory hashing is that large directories in UFS cause
minimal performance problems.

When we built UFS2, we contemplated solving the large directory update problem by changing
to a more complex directory structure such as one that uses B-trees. This technique is used in
many modern filesystems such as XFS [Sweeney et al., 1996], JFS [Best, 2000], ReiserFS
[Reiser, 2001], and in later versions of Ext2 [Phillips, 2001]. We decided not to make the change
at the time that UFS2 was first implemented for two reasons. First, we had limited time and
resources, and we wanted to get something working and stable that could be used in the time
frame of FreeBSD 5. By keeping the same directory format, we were able to reuse all the
directory code from UFS1, did not have to change numerous filesystem utilities to understand
and maintain a new directory format, and were able to produce a stable and reliable filesystem
in the time frame available to us. Second, we felt that we could retain the existing directory
structure because of the dynamic directory hashing that was added to FreeBSD.

Borrowing the technique used by the Ext2 filesystem, a flag was also added to show that an
on-disk indexing structure is supported for directories [Phillips, 2001]. This flag is
unconditionally turned off by the existing implementation of UFS. In the future, if an
implementation of an on-disk directory-indexing structure is added, the implementations that
support it will not turn the flag off. Index-supporting kernels will maintain the indices and leave
the flag on. If an old non-index-supporting kernel is run, it will turn off the flag so that when the
filesystem is once again run under a new kernel, the new kernel will discover that the indexing
flag has been turned off and will know that the indices may be out of date and have to be rebuilt
before being used. The only constraint on an implementation of the indices is that they have to
be an auxiliary data structure that references the old linear directory format.

Pathname Translation

We are now ready to describe how the filesystem looks up a pathname. The small filesystem
introduced in Figure 9.5 is expanded to show its internal structure in Figure 9.7. Each of the files
in Figure 9.5 is shown expanded into its constituent inode and data blocks. As an example of
how these data structures work, consider how the system finds the file /usr/bin/vi. It must
first search the root directory of the filesystem to find the directory usr. It first finds the inode
that describes the root directory. By convention, inode 2 is always reserved for the root directory
of a filesystem; therefore, the system finds and brings inode 2 into memory. This inode shows
where the data blocks are for the root directory. These data blocks must also be brought into
memory so that they can be searched for the entry for usr. Having found the entry for usr, the
system knows that the contents of usr are described by inode 4. Returning once again to the
disk, the system fetches inode 4 to find where the data blocks for usr are located. Searching
these blocks, it finds the entry for bin. The bin entry points to inode 7. Next, the system brings
in inode 7 and its associated data blocks from the disk to search for the entry for vi. Having
found that vi is described by inode 9, the system can fetch this inode and the blocks that contain

the vi binary. The first time after booting that this lookup is done, many I/O operations will be
done. Thereafter, the various filesystem caches will ensure that these I/O operations will not
need to be repeated.

Figure 9.7 Internal structure of a small filesystem.

Links

As shown in Figure 9.8, each file has a single inode, but multiple directory entries in the same
filesystem may reference that inode (i.e., the inode may have multiple names). Each directory
entry creates a hard link of a filename to the inode that describes the file’s contents. The link
concept is fundamental; inodes do not reside in directories but exist separately and are
referenced by links. When all the links to an inode are removed, the inode is deallocated. If one
link to a file is removed and the filename is recreated with new contents, the other links will
continue to point to the old inode. Figure 9.8 shows two different directory entries, foo and bar,
that reference the same file; thus, the inode for the file shows a reference count of 2.

Figure 9.8 Hard links to a file.

The system also supports a symbolic link, or soft link. A symbolic link is implemented as a
file that contains a pathname. When the system encounters a symbolic link while looking up a
component of a pathname, the contents of the symbolic link are prepended to the rest of the
pathname; the lookup continues with the resulting pathname. If a symbolic link contains an
absolute pathname, that absolute pathname is used. Otherwise, the contents of the symbolic link
are evaluated relative to the location of the link in the file hierarchy (not relative to the current
working directory of the calling process).

A symbolic link is illustrated in Figure 9.9. Here, there is a hard link, foo, that points to the file.
The other reference, bar, points to a different inode whose contents are a pathname of the
referenced file. When a process opens bar, the system interprets the contents of the symbolic

link as a pathname to find the file the link references. Symbolic links are treated like data files by
the system, rather than as part of the filesystem structure; thus, they can point at directories or
files on other filesystems. If a filename is removed and replaced, any symbolic links that point to
it will access the new file. Finally, if the filename is not replaced, the symbolic link will point at
nothing, and any attempt to access it will return an error.

Figure 9.9 Symbolic link to a file.

When open is applied to a symbolic link, it returns a file descriptor for the file pointed to, not for
the link itself. Otherwise, it would be necessary to use indirection to access the file pointed
to—and that file, rather than the link, is what is usually wanted. For the same reason, most other
system calls that take pathname arguments also follow symbolic links. Sometimes, it is useful to
be able to detect a symbolic link when traversing a filesystem or when making an archive tape.
In this situation, the lstat system call is available to get the status of a symbolic link, instead of
the object at which that link points.

A symbolic link has several advantages over a hard link. Since a symbolic link is maintained as a
pathname, it can refer to a directory or to a file on a different filesystem. So that loops in the
filesystem hierarchy are prevented, unprivileged users are not permitted to create hard links
(other than . and ..) that refer to a directory. The design of hard links prevents them from
referring to files on a different filesystem.

There are several interesting implications of symbolic links. Consider a process that has
/usr/keith as its current working directory and does cd src, where src is a symbolic link to

directory /usr/src. If the process then does a cd .., the current working directory for the
process will be in /usr instead of in /usr/keith, as it would have been if src were a normal
directory instead of a symbolic link. The kernel could be changed to keep track of the symbolic
links that a process has traversed and to interpret .. differently if the directory has been reached
through a symbolic link. There are two problems with this implementation. First, the kernel
would have to maintain a potentially unbounded amount of information. Second, no program
could depend on being able to use .., since it could not be sure how the name would be
interpreted.

Many shells keep track of symbolic-link traversals. When users change directory through .. from
a directory that was entered through a symbolic link, the shell returns them to the directory
from which they came. Although the shell might have to maintain an unbounded amount of
information, the worst that will happen is that the shell will run out of memory. Having the shell
fail will affect only the user silly enough to traverse endlessly through symbolic links. Tracking
of symbolic links affects only change-directory commands in the shell; programs can continue to
depend on .. to reference its true parent. Thus, tracking symbolic links outside the kernel in a
shell is reasonable.

Since symbolic links may cause loops in the filesystem, the kernel prevents looping by allowing
at most eight symbolic link traversals in a single pathname translation. If the limit is reached,
the kernel produces an error (ELOOP).

9.4 Quotas

Resource sharing always has been a design goal for the BSD system. By default, any single user
can allocate all the available space in the filesystem. In certain environments, uncontrolled use
of disk space is unacceptable. Consequently, FreeBSD includes a quota mechanism to restrict
the amount of filesystem resources that a user or members of a group can obtain. The quota
mechanism sets limits on both the number of files and the number of disk blocks that a user or
members of a group may allocate. Quotas can be set separately for each user and group on each
filesystem.

Quotas support both hard and soft limits. When a process exceeds its soft limit, a warning is
printed on the user’s terminal; the offending process is not prevented from allocating space
unless it exceeds its hard limit. The idea is that users should stay below their soft limit between
login sessions but may use more resources while they are active. If a user fails to correct the
problem for longer than a grace period, the soft limit starts to be enforced as the hard limit. The
grace period is set by the system administrator and is 7 days by default. These quotas are

derived from a larger resource-limit package that was developed at the University of Melbourne
in Australia by Robert Elz [Elz, 1984].

Quotas connect into the system primarily as an adjunct to the allocation routines. When a new
block is requested from the allocation routines, the request is first validated by the quota system
with the following steps:

1. If there is a user quota associated with the file, the quota system consults the quota associated
with the owner of the file. If the owner has reached or exceeded their limit, the request is denied.

2. If there is a group quota associated with the file, the quota system consults the quota
associated with the group of the file. If the group has reached or exceeded its limit, the request is
denied.

3. If the quota tests pass, the request is permitted and is added to the usage statistics for the file.

When either a user or group quota would be exceeded, the allocator returns a failure as though
the filesystem were full. The kernel propagates this error up to the process doing the write
system call.

Quotas are assigned to a filesystem after it has been mounted. A system call associates a file
containing the quotas with the mounted filesystem. By convention, the file with user quotas is
named quota.user, and the file with group quotas is named quota.group. These files typically
reside either in the root of the mounted filesystem or in the /var/quotas directory. For each
quota to be imposed, the system opens the appropriate quota file and holds a reference to it in
the mount-table entry associated with the mounted filesystem. Figure 9.10 shows the
mount-table reference. Here, the root filesystem has a quota on users but has none on groups.
The /usr filesystem has quotas imposed on both users and groups. As quotas for different users
or groups are needed, they are taken from the appropriate quota file.

Figure 9.10 References to quota files.

Quota files are maintained as an array of quota records indexed by user or group identifiers;
Figure 9.11 shows a typical record in a user quota file. To find the quota for user identifier i, the
system seeks to the offset i × sizeof(quota structure) in the quota file and reads the quota
structure at that offset. Each quota structure contains the limits imposed on the user for the
associated filesystem. These limits include the hard and soft limits on the number of blocks and
inodes that the user may have, the number of blocks and inodes that the user currently has
allocated, and the time that the soft limit should start being enforced as the hard limit. The
group quota file works in the same way, except that it is indexed by group identifier.

Figure 9.11 Contents of a quota record.

Active quotas are held in system memory in a data structure known as a dquot entry; Figure 9.12
shows two typical entries. In addition to the quota limits and usage extracted from the quota file,
the dquot entry maintains information about the quota while the quota is in use. This
information includes fields to allow fast access and identification. Quotas are checked by the

chkdq() routine. Since quotas may have to be updated on every write to a file, chkdq() must be
able to find and manipulate them quickly. Thus, the task of finding the dquot structure
associated with a file is done when the file is first opened for writing. When an access check is
done to check for writing, the system checks to see whether there is either a user or a group
quota associated with the file. If one or more quotas exist, the inode is set up to hold a reference
to the appropriate dquot structures for as long as the inode is resident. The chkdq() routine can
determine that a file has a quota simply by checking whether the dquot pointer is nonnull; if it is,
all the necessary information can be accessed directly. If a user or a group has multiple files
open on the same filesystem, all inodes describing those files point to the same dquot entry.
Thus, the number of blocks allocated to a particular user or a group can always be known easily
and consistently.

Figure 9.12 Dquot entries.

The number of dquot entries in the system can grow large. To avoid performing a linear scan of
all the dquot entries, the system keeps a set of hash chains keyed on the filesystem and on the
user or group identifier. Even with hundreds of dquot entries, the kernel needs to inspect only
about five entries to determine whether a requested dquot entry is memory resident. If the
dquot entry is not resident, such as the first time a file is opened for writing, the system must
reallocate a dquot entry and read in the quota from disk. The dquot entry is reallocated from the
least recently used dquot entry. So that it can find the oldest dquot entry quickly, the system

keeps unused dquot entries linked together in an LRU chain. When the reference count on a
dquot structure drops to zero, the system puts that dquot onto the end of the LRU chain. The
dquot structure is not removed from its hash chain, so if the structure is needed again soon, it
can still be located. Only when a dquot structure is recycled with a new quota record is it
removed and relinked into the hash chain. The dquot entry on the front of the LRU chain yields
the least recently used dquot entry. Frequently used dquot entries are reclaimed from the
middle of the LRU chain and are relinked at the end after use.

The hashing structure allows dquot structures to be found quickly. However, it does not solve
the problem of how to discover that a user has no quota on a particular filesystem. If a user has
no quota, a lookup for the quota will fail. The cost of going to disk and reading the quota file to
discover that the user has no quota imposed would be prohibitive. To avoid doing this work each
time that a new file is accessed for writing, the system maintains nonquota dquot entries. When
an inode owned by a user or group that does not already have a dquot entry is first accessed, a
dummy dquot entry is created that has infinite values filled in for the quota limits. When the
chkdq() routine encounters such an entry, it will update the usage fields but will not impose any
limits. When the user later writes other files, the same dquot entry will be found, thus avoiding
additional access to the on-disk quota file. Ensuring that a file will always have a dquot entry
improves the performance of writing data, since chkdq() can assume that the dquot pointer is
always valid, rather than having to check the pointer before every use.

Quotas are written back to the disk when they fall out of the cache, whenever the filesystem does
a sync, or when the filesystem is unmounted. If the system crashes, leaving the quotas in an
inconsistent state, the system administrator must run the quotacheck program to rebuild the
usage information in the quota files.

9.5 File Locking

Locks may be placed on any arbitrary range of bytes within a file. These semantics are supported
in FreeBSD by a list of locks, each of which describes a lock of a specified byte range. An
example of a file containing several range locks is shown in Figure 9.13. The list of currently held
or active locks appears across the top of the figure, headed by the i_lockf field in the inode, and
linked together through the lf_next field of the lock structures. Each lock structure identifies the
type of the lock (exclusive or shared), the byte range over which the lock applies, and the
identity of the lock holder. A lock may be identified either by a pointer to a process entry or by a
pointer to a file entry. A process pointer is used for POSIX-style range locks; a file-entry pointer
is used for BSD-style whole file locks. The examples in this section show the identity as a pointer
to a process entry. In this example, there are three active locks: an exclusive lock held by process

1 on bytes 1 to 3, a shared lock held by process 2 on bytes 7 to 12, and a shared lock held by
process 3 on bytes 7 to 14.

Figure 9.13 A set of range locks on a file.

In addition to the active locks, there are other processes that are sleeping, waiting to get a lock
applied. Pending locks are headed by the lf_block field of the active lock that prevents them
from being applied. If there are multiple pending locks, they are linked through their lf_block
fields. New lock requests are placed at the end of the list; thus, processes tend to be granted
locks in the order that they requested the locks. Each pending lock uses its lf_next field to
identify the active lock that currently blocks it. In the example in Figure 9.13, the first active lock
has two other locks pending. There is also a pending request for the range 9 to 12 that is
currently linked onto the second active entry. It could equally well have been linked onto the
third active entry, since the third entry also blocks it. When an active lock is released, all
pending entries for that lock are awakened, so they can retry their request. If the second active
lock were released, the result would be that its currently pending request would move over to
the blocked list for the last active entry.

A problem that must be handled by the locking implementation is the detection of potential
deadlocks. To see how deadlock is detected, consider the addition of the lock request by process
2 outlined in the dashed box in Figure 9.13. Since the request is blocked by an active lock,
process 2 must sleep, waiting for the active lock on range 1 to 3 to clear. We follow the lf_next
pointer from the requesting lock (the one in the dashed box), to identify the active lock for the
1-to-3 range as being held by process 1. The wait channel for process 1 shows that process 1 is
sleeping, waiting for a lock to clear, and identifies the pending lock structure as the pending lock
(range 9 to 12) hanging off the lf_block field of the second active lock (range 7 to 12). We follow
the lf_next field of this pending lock structure (range 9 to 12) to the second active lock (range 7
to 12) that is held by the lock requester, process 2. Thus, the lock request is denied, as it would
lead to a deadlock between processes 1 and 2. This algorithm works on cycles of locks and
processes of arbitrary size. Performance is reasonable provided there are fewer than 50
processes contending for locks within the same range of a file.

As we note, the pending request for the range 9 to 12 could equally well have been hung off the
third active lock for the range 7 to 14. Had it been, the request for adding the lock in the dashed
box would have succeeded, since the third active lock is held by process 3 rather than by process
2. If the next lock request on this file were to release the third active lock, then deadlock
detection would occur when process 1’s pending lock got shifted to the second active lock (range
7 to 12). The difference is that process 1, instead of process 2, would get the deadlock error.

When a new lock request is made, it must first be checked to see whether it is blocked by
existing locks held by other processes. If it is not blocked by other processes, it must then be
checked to see whether it overlaps any existing locks already held by the process making the
request. There are five possible overlap cases that must be considered; these possibilities are
shown in Figure 9.14. The assumption in the figure is that the new request is of a type different
from that of the existing lock (i.e., an exclusive request against a shared lock, or vice versa). If
the existing lock and the request are of the same type, the analysis is a bit simpler. The five cases
are as follows:

1. The new request exactly overlaps the existing lock. The new request replaces the existing lock.
If the new request downgrades from exclusive to shared, all requests pending on the old lock are
awakened.

2. The new request is a subset of the existing lock. The existing lock is broken into three pieces
(two if the new lock begins at the beginning or ends at the end of the existing lock). If the type of
the new request differs from that of the existing lock, all requests pending on the old lock are
awakened, so they can be reassigned to the correct new piece, blocked on a lock held by some
other process, or granted.

3. The new request is a superset of an existing lock. The new request replaces the existing lock.
If the new request downgrades from exclusive to shared, all requests pending on the old lock are
awakened.

4. The new request extends past the end of an existing lock. The existing lock is shortened, and
its overlapped piece is replaced by the new request. All requests pending on the existing lock are
awakened, so they can be reassigned to the correct new piece, blocked on a lock held by some
other process, or granted.

5. The new request extends into the beginning of an existing lock. The existing lock is shortened,
and its overlapped piece is replaced by the new request. All requests pending on the existing lock
are awakened, so they can be reassigned to the correct new piece, blocked on a lock held by
some other process, or granted.

Figure 9.14 Five types of overlap considered by the kernel when a range lock is added.

In addition to the five basic types of overlap outlined, a request may span several existing locks.
Specifically, a new request may be composed of zero or one of type 4, zero or more of type 3, and
zero or one of type 5.

To understand how the overlap is handled, we can consider the example shown in Figure 9.15.
This figure shows a file that has all its active range locks held by process 1, plus a pending lock
for process 2.

Figure 9.15 Locks before addition of exclusive-lock request by process 1 on range 3..13.

Now consider a request by process 1 for an exclusive lock on the range 3 to 13. This request does
not conflict with any active locks (because all the active locks are already held by process 1). The
request does overlap all three active locks, so the three active locks represent a type 4, type 3,
and type 5 overlap, respectively. The result of processing the lock request is shown in Figure 9.16.
The first and third active locks are trimmed back to the edge of the new request, and the second
lock is replaced entirely. The request that had been held pending on the first lock is awakened. It
is no longer blocked by the first lock but is blocked by the newly installed lock, so it now hangs
off the blocked list for the second lock. The first and second locks could have been merged
because they are of the same type and are held by the same process. However, the current
implementation makes no effort to do such merges because range locks are normally released
over the same range that they were created. If the merge were done, it would probably have to
be split again when the release was requested.

Figure 9.16 Locks after addition of exclusive-lock request by process 1 on range 3..13.

Lock-removal requests are simpler than addition requests; they need only to consider existing
locks held by the requesting process. Figure 9.17 shows the five possible ways that a removal
request can overlap the locks of the requesting process. They include:

1. The unlock request exactly overlaps an existing lock. The existing lock is deleted, and any lock
requests that were pending on that lock are awakened.

2. The unlock request is a subset of an existing lock. The existing lock is broken into two pieces
(one if the unlock request begins at the beginning or ends at the end of the existing lock). Any
locks that were pending on that lock are awakened so that they can be reassigned to the correct
new piece, blocked on a lock held by some other process, or granted.

3. The unlock request is a superset of an existing lock. The existing lock is deleted, and any locks
that were pending on that lock are awakened.

4. The unlock request extends past the end of an existing lock. The end of the existing lock is
shortened. Any locks that were pending on that lock are awakened so that they can be
reassigned to the shorter lock, blocked on a lock held by some other process, or granted.

5. The unlock request extends into the beginning of an existing lock. The beginning of the
existing lock is shortened. Any locks that were pending on that lock are awakened so that they
can be reassigned to the shorter lock, blocked on a lock held by some other process, or granted.

Figure 9.17 Five types of overlap considered by the kernel when a range lock is deleted.

In addition to the five basic types of overlap outlined, an unlock request may span several
existing locks. Specifically, a new request may be composed of zero or one of type 4, zero or
more of type 3, and zero or one of type 5.

9.6 Soft Updates

In filesystems, metadata (e.g., directories, inodes, and free block maps) gives structure to raw
storage capacity. Metadata provides pointers and descriptions for linking multiple disk sectors
into files and identifying those files. To be useful for persistent storage, a filesystem must
maintain the integrity of its metadata in the face of unpredictable system crashes, such as power
interruptions and operating system failures. Because such crashes usually result in the loss of all
information in volatile main memory, the information in nonvolatile storage (i.e., disk) must
always be consistent enough to reconstruct deterministically a coherent filesystem state.
Specifically, the on-disk image of the filesystem must have no dangling pointers to uninitialized
space, no ambiguous resource ownership caused by multiple pointers, and no unreferenced live
resources. Maintaining these invariants generally requires sequencing (or atomic grouping) of
updates to small on-disk metadata objects.

Traditionally, the UFS filesystem used synchronous writes to properly sequence stable storage
changes. For example, creating a file involves first allocating and initializing a new inode and
then filling in a new directory entry to point to it. With the synchronous write approach, the
filesystem forces an application that creates a file to wait for the disk write that initializes the
on-disk inode. As a result, filesystem operations like file creation and deletion proceed at disk
speeds rather than processor/memory speeds [McVoy & Kleiman, 1991; Ousterhout, 1990;
Seltzer et al., 1993]. Since disk access times are long compared to the speeds of other computer
components, synchronous writes reduce system performance.

The metadata update problem can also be addressed with other mechanisms. For example, one
can eliminate the need to keep the on-disk state consistent by using NVRAM technologies, such
as an uninterruptible power supply or Flash RAM [Moran et al., 1990; Wu & Zwaenepoel, 1994].
Filesystem operations can proceed as soon as the block to be written is copied into the stable
store, and updates can propagate to disk in any order and whenever it is convenient. If the
system fails, unfinished disk operations can be completed from the stable store when the system
is rebooted.

Another approach is to group each set of dependent updates as an atomic operation with some
form of write-ahead logging [Chutani et al., 1992; Hagmann, 1987] or shadow-paging
[Chamberlin & Astrahan, 1981; Rosenblum & Ousterhout, 1992; Stonebraker, 1987]. These
approaches augment the on-disk state with a log of filesystem updates on a separate disk or in
stable store. Filesystem operations can then proceed as soon as the operation to be done is
written into the log. If the system fails, unfinished filesystem operations can be completed from
the log when the system is rebooted. Many modern filesystems successfully use write-ahead
logging to improve performance compared to the synchronous write approach.

In Ganger & Patt [1994], an alternative approach called soft updates was proposed and
evaluated in the context of a research prototype. Following a successful evaluation, a production
version of soft updates was written for FreeBSD. With soft updates, the filesystem uses delayed
writes (i.e., write-back caching) for meta-data changes, tracks dependencies between updates,
and enforces these dependencies at write-back time. Because most metadata blocks contain
many pointers, cyclic dependencies occur frequently when dependencies are recorded only at
the block level. Therefore, soft updates track dependencies on a per-pointer basis, which allows
blocks to be written in any order. Any still-dependent updates in a metadata block are rolled
back before the block is written and rolled forward afterwards. Thus, dependency cycles are
eliminated as an issue. With soft updates, applications always see the most current copies of
metadata blocks, and the disk always sees copies that are consistent with its other contents.

Update Dependencies in the Filesystem

Several important filesystem operations consist of a series of related modifications to separate
metadata structures. To ensure recoverability in the presence of unpredictable failures, the
modifications often must be propagated to stable storage in a specific order. For example, when
creating a new file, the filesystem allocates an inode, initializes it, and constructs a directory
entry that points to it. If the system goes down after the new directory entry has been written to
disk but before the initialized inode is written, consistency may be compromised since the
contents of the on-disk inode are unknown. To ensure metadata consistency, the initialized
inode must reach stable storage before the new directory entry. We refer to this requirement as

an update dependency because safely writing the directory entry depends on first writing the
inode. The ordering constraints map onto three simple rules:

1. Never point to a structure before it has been initialized (e.g., an inode must be initialized
before a directory entry references it).

2. Never reuse a resource before nullifying all previous pointers to it (e.g., an inode’s pointer to a
data block must be nullified before that disk block may be reallocated for a new inode).

3. Never reset the old pointer to a live resource before the new pointer has been set (e.g., when
renaming a file, do not remove the old name for an inode until after the new name has been
written).

There are eight filesystem activities that require update ordering to ensure postcrash
recoverability: file creation, file removal, directory creation, directory removal, file/directory
rename, block allocation, indirect block manipulation, and free map management.

The two main resources managed by the filesystem are inodes and data blocks. Two bitmaps are
used to maintain allocation information about these resources. For each inode in the filesystem,
the inode bitmap has a bit that is set if the inode is in use and cleared if it is free. For each block
in the filesystem, the data block bitmap has a bit that is set if the block is free and cleared if it is
in use. Each filesystem is broken down into fixed-size pieces called cylinder groups (described
more fully in Section 9.10). Each cylinder group has a cylinder-group block that contains the
bitmaps for the inodes and data blocks residing within that cylinder group. For a large
filesystem, this organization allows just those subpieces of the filesystem bitmap that are
actively being used to be brought into the kernel memory. Each of these active cylinder-group
blocks is stored in a separate I/O buffer and can be written to disk independently of the other
cylinder-group blocks.

When a file is created, three metadata structures located in separate blocks are modified. The
first is a new inode, which is initialized with its type field set to the new file type, its link count
set to one to show that it is live (i.e., referenced by some directory entry), its permission fields
set as specified, and all other fields set to default values. The second is the inode bitmap, which
is modified to show that the inode has been allocated. The third is a new directory entry, which
is filled in with the new name and a pointer to the new inode. To ensure that the bitmaps always
reflect all allocated resources, the bitmap must be written to disk before the inode or directory
entry. Because the inode is in an unknown state until after it has been initialized on the disk,
rule #1 specifies that there is an update dependency requiring that the relevant inode be written
before the relevant directory entry. Although not strictly necessary, most BSD fast filesystem
implementations also immediately write the directory block before the system call creating the

file returns. This second synchronous write ensures that the filename is on stable storage if the
application later does an fsync system call. If the second synchronous write were not done, then
the fsync call would have to be able to find all the unwritten directory blocks containing a name
for the file and write them to disk. A similar update dependency between an inode and a new
directory entry exists when the new directory entry adds a second name for the inode (a.k.a. a
hard link), since the addition of the second name requires the filesystem to increment the link
count in the inode and write the inode to disk before the entry may appear in the directory.

When a file is deleted, a directory block, an inode block, and one or more cylinder group
bitmaps are modified. In the directory block, the relevant directory entry is “removed” by
reclaiming its space or by nullifying the inode pointer. In the inode block, the relevant inode’s
type field, link count, and block pointers are zeroed out. The deleted file’s blocks and inode are
then added to the appropriate free block/inode maps. Rule #2 specifies that there are update
dependencies between the directory entry and the inode and between the inode and any
modified free map bits. To keep the link count conservatively high (and reduce complexity in
practice), the update dependency between a directory entry and inode also exists when
removing one of multiple names (hard links) for a file.

Creation and removal of directories is largely as just described for regular files. However, the ..
entry is a link from the child directory to the parent, which adds additional update dependencies.
Specifically, during creation, the parent’s link count must be incremented on disk before the
new directory’s .. pointer is written. Likewise, during removal, the parent’s link count must be
decremented after the removed directory’s .. pointer is nullified. (Note that this nullification is
implicit in deleting the child directory’s pointer to the corresponding directory block.)

When a new block is allocated, its bitmap location is updated to reflect that it is in use and the
block’s contents are initialized with newly written data or zeros. In addition, a pointer to the new
block is added to an inode or indirect block. To ensure that the on-disk bitmap always reflects
allocated resources, the bitmap must be written to disk before the pointer. Also, because the
contents of the newly allocated disk location are unknown, rule #1 specifies an update
dependency between the new block and the pointer to it. Because enforcing this update
dependency with synchronous writes can reduce data creation throughput by a factor of two
[Ganger & Patt, 1994], many implementations ignore it for regular data blocks. This
implementation decision reduces integrity and security, since newly allocated blocks generally
contain previously deleted file data. Soft updates allow all block allocations to be protected in
this way with near-zero performance reduction.

Manipulation of indirect blocks does not introduce fundamentally different update
dependencies, but they do merit separate discussion. Allocation, both of indirect blocks and of

blocks pointed to by indirect blocks, is as just discussed. File deletion, and specifically
deallocation, is more interesting for indirect blocks. Because the inode reference is the only way
to identify indirect blocks and blocks connected to them (directly or indirectly), nullifying the
inode’s pointer to an indirect block is enough to eliminate all recoverable pointers to said blocks.
Once the pointer is nullified on disk, all its blocks can be freed. The exception to this rule is
when a file is partially truncated. Here, the pointer from the inode to the indirect block remains.
Some of the indirect block pointers will be zeroed and and their corresponding blocks freed
while the rest of the pointers are left intact.

When a file is being renamed, two directory entries are affected. A new entry (with the new
name) is created and set to point to the relevant inode, and the old entry is removed. Rule #3
states that the new entry should be written to disk before the old entry is removed to avoid
having the file unreferenced on reboot. If link counts are being kept conservatively, rename
involves at least four disk updates in sequence: one to increment the inode’s link count, one to
add the new directory entry, one to remove the old directory entry, and one to decrement the
link count. If the new name already existed, then the addition of the new directory entry also
acts as the first step of file removal as discussed above. Interestingly, rename is the one POSIX
file operation that should have an atomic update to multiple user-visible metadata structures to
provide ideal semantics. POSIX does not require said semantics and most implementations,
including FreeBSD, cannot provide it.

On an active filesystem, the bitmaps change constantly. Thus, the copy of the bitmaps in the
kernel memory often differs from the copy that is stored on the disk. If the system halts without
writing out the incore state of the bitmaps, some of the recently allocated inodes and data blocks
may not be reflected in the out-of-date copies of the bitmaps on the disk. As a result, the
filesystem check program, fsck, must be run over all the inodes in the filesystem to ascertain
which inodes and blocks are in use and bring the bitmaps up to date [McKusick & Kowalski,
1994]. An added benefit of soft updates is that they track the writing of the bitmaps to disk and
use this information to ensure that no newly allocated inodes or pointers to newly allocated data
blocks will be written to disk until after the bitmap that references them has been written to disk.
This guarantee ensures that there will never be an allocated inode or data block that is not
marked in the on-disk bitmap. This guarantee, together with the other guarantees made by the
soft update code, means that it is no longer necessary to run fsck after a system crash.

The next 12 subsections describe the soft-updates data structures and their use in enforcing the
update dependencies just described. The structures and algorithms described eliminate all
synchronous write operations from the filesystem except for the partial truncation of a file and
the fsync system call, which explicitly requires that all the state of a file be committed to disk
before the system call returns.

The key attribute of soft updates is dependency tracking at the level of individual changes within
cached blocks. Thus, for a block containing 128 inodes, the system can maintain up to 128
dependency structures with one for each inode in the buffer. Similarly, for a buffer containing a
directory block containing 50 names, the system can maintain up to 50 dependency structures
with one for each name in the directory. With this level of detailed dependency information,
circular dependencies between blocks are not problematic. For example, when the system
wishes to write a buffer containing inodes, those inodes that can be safely written can go to the
disk. Any inodes that cannot yet be safely written are temporarily rolled back to their safe values
while the disk write proceeds. After the disk write completes, such inodes are rolled forward to
their current values. Because the buffer is locked throughout the time that the contents are
rolled back, the disk write is being done, and the contents are rolled forward, any processes
wishing to use the buffer will be blocked from accessing it until it has been returned to its
correct state.

Dependency Structures

The soft-updates implementation uses a variety of data structures to track pending update
dependencies among filesystem structures. Table 9.2 lists the dependency structures used in the
BSD soft-updates implementation, their main functions, and the types of blocks with which they
can be associated. These dependency structures are allocated and associated with blocks as
various file operations are completed. They are connected to the incore blocks with which they
are associated by a pointer in the corresponding buffer header. Two common aspects of all listed
dependency structures are the worklist structure and the states used to track the progress of a
dependency.

Table 9.2 Soft updates and dependency tracking.

The worklist structure is really just a common header included as the first item in each
dependency structure. It contains a set of linkage pointers and a type field to show the type of
structure in which it is embedded. The worklist structure allows several different types of
dependency structures to be linked together into a single list. The soft-updates code can traverse
one of these heterogeneous lists, using the type field to determine which kind of dependency
structure it has encountered, and take the appropriate action with each.

The typical use for the worklist structure is to link together a set of dependencies associated
with a buffer. Each buffer in the system has a pointer to a worklist added to it. Any
dependencies associated with that buffer are linked onto its worklist. After the buffer has been
locked and just before the buffer is to be written, the I/O system passes the buffer to the
soft-updates code to let it know that a disk write is about to be started. The soft-updates code
then traverses the list of dependencies associated with the buffer and does any needed rollback
operations. After the disk write completes but before the buffer is unlocked, the I/O system calls
the soft-updates code to let it know that a write has completed. The soft-updates code then
traverses the list of dependencies associated with the buffer, does any needed roll-forward
operations, and deallocates any dependencies that are fulfilled by the data in the buffer having
been written to disk.

Another important list maintained by the soft-updates code is the tasklist that contains
background tasks for the work daemon. Dependency structures are generally added to the
tasklist during the disk-write completion routine, describing tasks that have become safe given
the disk update but which may need to block for locks or I/O and therefore cannot be completed

during the interrupt handler. Once per second, the syncer daemon (in its dual role as the
soft-updates work daemon) wakes up and calls into the soft-updates code to process any items
on the tasklist. The work done for a dependency structure on this list is type-dependent. For
example, for a freeblks structure, the listed blocks are marked free in the block bitmaps. For a
dirrem structure, the associated inode’s link count is decremented, possibly triggering file
deletion.

Most dependency structures have a set of flags that describe the state of completion of the
corresponding dependency. Dirty cache blocks can be written to the disk at any time. When the
I/O system hands the buffer to the soft-updates code (before and after a disk write), the states of
the associated dependency structures determine what actions are taken. Although the specific
meanings vary from structure to structure, the three main flags and their general meanings are:

ATTACHED

The ATTACHED flag shows that the buffer with which the dependency structure is associated is
not currently being written. When a disk write is started for a buffer with a dependency that
must be rolled back, the ATTACHED flag is cleared in the dependency structure to show that it
has been rolled back in the buffer. When the disk write completes, updates described by
dependency structures that have the ATTACHED flag cleared are rolled forward, and the
ATTACHED flag is set. Thus, a dependency structure can never be deleted while its ATTACHED
flag is cleared, since the information needed to do the roll-forward operation would then be lost.

DEPCOMPLETE

The DEPCOMPLETE flag shows that all associated dependencies have been completed. When a
disk write is started, the update described by a dependency structure is rolled back if the
DEPCOMPLETE flag is clear. For example, in a dependency structure that is associated with
newly allocated inodes or data blocks, the DEPCOMPLETE flag is set when the corresponding
bitmap has been written to disk.

COMPLETE

The COMPLETE flag shows that the update being tracked has been committed to the disk. For
some dependencies, updates will be rolled back during disk writes when the COMPLETE flag is
clear. For example, for a newly allocated data block, the COMPLETE flag is set when the
contents of the block have been written to disk.

In general, the flags are set as disk writes complete, and a dependency structure can be
deallocated only when its ATTACHED, DEPCOMPLETE, and COMPLETE flags are all set.
Consider the example of a newly allocated data block that will be tracked by an allocdirect

structure. The ATTACHED flag will initially be set when the allocation occurs. The
DEPCOMPLETE flag will be set after the bitmap allocating that new block is written. The
COMPLETE flag will be set after the contents of the new block are written. If the inode claiming
the newly allocated block is written before both the DEPCOMPLETE and COMPLETE flags are
set, the ATTACHED flag will be cleared while the block pointer in the inode is rolled back to zero,
the inode is written, and the block pointer in the inode is rolled forward to the new block
number. Where different, the specific meanings of these flags in the various dependency
structures are described in the subsections that follow.

Bitmap Dependency Tracking

Bitmap updates are tracked by the bmsafemap structure shown in Figure 9.18. Each buffer
containing a cylinder-group block will have its own bmsafemap structure. As with every
dependency structure, the first entry in the bmsafemap structure is a worklist structure. Each
time an inode, direct block, or indirect block is allocated from the cylinder group, a dependency
structure is created for that resource and linked onto the appropriate bmsafemap list. Each
newly allocated inode will be represented by an inodedep structure linked to the bmsafemap
inodedep head list. Each newly allocated block directly referenced by an inode will be
represented by an allocdirect structure linked to the bmsafemap allocdirect head list. Each
newly allocated block referenced by an indirect block will be represented by an allocindir
structure linked to the bmsafemap allocindir head list. Because of the code’s organization, there
is a small window between the time a block is first allocated and the time at which its use is
known. During this period of time, it is described by a newblk structure linked to the
bmsafemap new blk head list. After the kernel chooses to write the cylinder-group block, the
soft-updates code will be notified when the write has completed. At that time, the code traverses
the inode, direct block, indirect block, and new block lists, setting the DEPCOMPLETE flag in
each dependency structure and removing said dependency structure from its dependency list.
Having cleared all its dependency lists, the bmsafemap structure can be deallocated. There are
multiple lists as it is slightly faster and more type-safe to have lists of specific types.

Figure 9.18 Bitmap update dependencies.

Inode Dependency Tracking

Inode updates are tracked by the inodedep structure shown in Figure 9.19. The worklist and
state fields are as described for dependency structures in general. The filesystem ptr and inode
number fields identify the inode in question. When an inode is newly allocated, its inodedep is
attached to the inodedep head list of a bmsafemap structure. Here, deps list chains additional
new inodedep structures and dep bp points to the cylinder-group block that contains the
corresponding bitmap. Other inodedep fields are explained in later subsections.

Figure 9.19 Inode update dependencies.

Before detailing the rest of the dependencies associated with an inode, we need to discuss the
steps involved in updating an inode on disk as pictured in Figure 9.20.

1. The kernel calls the vnode operation, VOP_UPDATE, which requests that the disk-resident
part of an inode (referred to as a dinode) be copied from its in-memory vnode structure to the
appropriate disk buffer. This disk buffer holds the contents of an entire disk block, which is
usually big enough to include 128 dinodes. Some dependencies are fulfilled only when the inode
has been written to disk. These dependencies need dependency structures to track the progress

of   the   writing   of   the   inode.   Therefore,     during   step    1,   a   soft update   routine,
softdep_update_inodeblock(), is called to move allocdirect structures from the incore update
list to the buffer update list and to move freefile, freeblks, freefrag, diradd, and mkdir
structures (described below) from the inode wait list to the buffer wait list.

2. The kernel calls the vnode operation, VOP_STRATEGY, that prepares to write the buffer
containing the dinode, pointed to by bp in Figure 9.20. A soft-updates routine,
softdep_disk_io_initiation(),        identifies       inodedep          dependencies      and      calls
initiate_write_inodeblock() to do rollbacks as necessary.

3. Output completes on the buffer referred to by bp and the I/O system calls a routine,
biodone(), to notify any waiting processes that the write has finished. The biodone() routine
then calls a soft-updates routine, softdep_disk_write_complete(), that identifies inodedep
dependencies and calls handle_written_inodeblock() to revert rollbacks and clear any
dependencies on the buffer wait and buffer update lists.

Figure 9.20 Inode update steps.

Direct-Block Dependency Tracking

Figure 9.21 illustrates the dependency structures involved in allocation of direct blocks. Recall
that the key dependencies are that, before the on-disk inode points to a newly allocated block,
both the corresponding bitmap block and the new block itself must be written to the disk. The
order in which the two dependencies complete is not important. The figure introduces the
allocdirect structure that tracks blocks directly referenced by the inode. The three recently
allocated logical blocks (1, 2, and 3) shown are each in a different state. For logical block 1, the
bitmap block dependency is complete (as shown by the DEPCOMPLETE flag being set), but the

block itself has not yet been written (as shown by the COMPLETE flag being cleared). For logical
block 2, both dependencies are complete. For logical block 3, neither dependency is complete, so
the corresponding allocdirect structure is attached to a bmsafemap allocdirect head list (recall
that this list is traversed to set DEPCOMPLETE flags after bitmap blocks are written). The
COMPLETE flag for logical blocks 1 and 3 will be set when their initialized data blocks are
written to disk. The figure also shows that logical block 1 existed at a time that VOP_UPDATE
was called, which is why its allocdirect structure resides on the inodedep buffer update list.
Logical blocks 2 and 3 were created after the most recent call to VOP_UPDATE and thus their
structures reside on the inodedep incore update list.

Figure 9.21 Direct block allocation dependencies.

For files that grow in small steps, a direct block pointer may first point to a fragment that is later
promoted to a larger fragment and eventually to a full-size block. When a fragment is replaced

by a larger fragment or a full-size block, it must be released back to the filesystem. However, it
cannot be released until the new fragment or block has had its bitmap entry and contents
written and the inode claiming the new fragment or block has been written to the disk. The
fragment to be released is described by a freefrag structure (not shown). The freefrag structure
is held on the freefrag list of the allocdirect for the block that will replace it until the new block
has had its bitmap entry and contents written. The freefrag structure is then moved to the inode
wait list of the inodedep associated with its allocdirect structure, where it migrates to the buffer
wait list when VOP_UPDATE is called. The freefrag structure eventually is added to the tasklist
after the buffer holding the inode block has been written to disk. When the tasklist is serviced,
the fragment listed in the freefrag structure is returned to the free-block bitmap.

Indirect-Block Dependency Tracking

Figure 9.22 shows the dependency structures involved in allocation of indirect blocks that
includes the same dependencies as with direct blocks. This figure introduces two new
dependency structures. A separate allocindir structure tracks each individual block pointer in an
indirect block. The indirdep structure manages all the allocindir dependencies associated with
an indirect block. The figure shows a file that recently allocated logical blocks 14 and 15 (the
third and fourth entries, at offsets 16 and 24, in the first indirect block). The allocation bitmaps
have been written for logical block 14 (as shown by its DEPCOMPLETE flag being set), but not
for block 15. Thus, the bmsafemap structure tracks the allocindir structure for logical block 15.
The contents of logical block 15 have been written to disk (as shown by its COMPLETE flag
being set), but not those of block 14. The COMPLETE flag will be set in 14’s allocindir structure
once the block is written. The list of allocindir structures tracked by an indirdep structure can
be long (e.g., up to 4096 entries for 32-Kbyte indirect blocks). To avoid traversing lengthy
dependency structure lists in the I/O routines, an indirdep structure maintains a second version
of the indirect block: the saved data ptr always points to the buffer’s up-to-date copy and the
safe copy ptr points to a version that includes only the subset of pointers that can be safely
written to disk (and NULL for the others). The up-to-date copy is used for all filesystem
operations and the copy with the subset of pointers that can be safely written to disk is used for
disk writes. When the allocindir head list becomes empty, the saved data ptr and safe copy ptr
point to identical blocks and the indirdep structure (and the safe copy) can be deallocated.

Figure 9.22 Indirect block allocation dependencies.

Dependency Tracking for New Indirect Blocks

Figure 9.23 shows the structures associated with a file that recently expanded into its
single-level indirect block. Specifically, this expansion involves inodedep and indirdep
structures to manage dependency structures for the inode and indirect block, an allocdirect
structure to track the dependencies associated with the indirect block’s allocation, and an
allocindir structure to track the dependencies associated with a newly allocated block pointed to
by the indirect block. These structures are used as described in the previous three subsections.
Neither the indirect block nor the data block that it references have had their bitmaps set, so

they do not have their DEPCOMPLETE flag set and are tracked by a bmsafemap structure. The
bitmap entry for the inode has been written, so the inodedep structure has its DEPCOMPLETE
flag set. The use of the buffer update head list by the inodedep structure shows that the incore
inode has been copied into its buffer by a call to VOP_UPDATE. Neither of the dependent
pointers (from the inode to the indirect block and from the indirect block to the data block) can
be safely included in disk writes yet, since the corresponding COMPLETE and DEPCOMPLETE
flags are not set. Only after the bitmaps and the contents have been written will all the flags be
set and the dependencies complete.

Figure 9.23 Dependencies for a file expanding into an indirect block.

New Directory-Entry Dependency Tracking

Figure 9.24 shows the dependency structures for a directory that has two new entries, foo and
bar. This figure introduces two new dependency structures. A separate diradd structure tracks
each individual directory entry in a directory block. The pagedep structure manages all the
diradd dependencies associated with a directory block. For each new file, there is an inodedep
structure and a diradd structure. Both files’ inodes have had their bitmaps written to disk, as
shown by the DEPCOMPLETE flags being set in their inodedep structures. The inode for foo
has been updated with VOP_UPDATE but has not yet been written to disk, as shown by the
COMPLETE flag on its inodedep structure not being set and by its diradd structure still being
linked onto its buffer wait list. Until the inode is written to disk with its increased link count,
the directory entry may not appear on disk. If the directory page is written, the soft-updates
code will roll back the creation of the new directory entry for foo by setting its inode number to
zero. After the disk write completes, the rollback is reversed by restoring the correct inode
number for foo.

Figure 9.24 Dependencies associated with adding new directory entries.

The inode for bar has been written to disk, as shown by the COMPLETE flag being set in its
inodedep and diradd structures. When the inode write completed, the diradd structure for bar
was moved from the inodedep buffer wait list to the inodedep pending ops list. The diradd also
moved from the pagedep diradd list to the pagedep pending ops list. Since the inode has been
written, it is safe to allow the directory entry to be written to disk. The diradd entries remain on
the inodedep and pagedep pending ops list until the new directory entry is written to disk.
When the entry is written, the diradd structure is freed. One reason to maintain the pending ops
list is so that when an fsync system call is done on a file, the kernel is able to ensure that both
the file’s contents and directory reference(s) are written to disk. The kernel ensures that the
reference(s) are written by performing a lookup to see if there is an inodedep for the inode that
is the target of the fsync. If it finds an inodedep, it checks to see if it has any diradd
dependencies on either its pending ops or buffer wait lists. If it finds any diradd structures, it

follows the pointers to their associated pagedep structures and flushes out the directory inode
associated with that pagedep. This backtracking recurses on the directory inodedep.

New Directory Dependency Tracking

Figure 9.25 shows the two additional dependency structures involved with creating a new
directory. For a regular file, the directory entry can be committed as soon as the newly
referenced inode has been written to disk with its increased link count. When a new directory is
created, there are two additional dependencies: writing the directory data block containing the .
and .. entries (MKDIR_BODY) and writing the parent inode with the increased link count for ..
(MKDIR_PARENT). These additional dependencies are tracked by two mkdir structures linked
to the associated diradd structure. The soft-updates design dictates that any given dependency
will correspond to a single buffer at any given point in time. Thus, two structures are used to
track the action of the two different buffers. When each completes, it clears its associated flag in
the diradd structure. The MKDIR_PARENT is linked to the inodedep structure for the parent
directory. When that directory inode is written, the link count will be updated on disk. The
MKDIR_BODY is linked to the buffer that contains the initial contents of the new directory.
When that buffer is written, the entries for . and .. will be on disk. The last mkdir to complete
sets the DEPCOMPLETE flag in the diradd structure so that the diradd structure knows that
these extra dependencies have been completed. Once these extra dependencies have been
completed, the handling of the directory diradd proceeds exactly as it would for a regular file.

Figure 9.25 Dependencies associated with adding a new directory.

All mkdir structures in the system are linked together on a list. This list is needed so that a
diradd can find its associated mkdir structures and deallocate them if it is prematurely freed
(e.g., if a mkdir system call is immediately followed by a rmdir system call of the same
directory). Here, the deallocation of a diradd structure must traverse the list to find the
associated mkdir structures that reference it. The deletion would be faster if the diradd
structure were simply augmented to have two pointers that referenced the associated mkdir
structures. However, these extra pointers would double the size of the diradd structure to speed
an infrequent operation.

Directory-Entry Removal-Dependency Tracking

Figure 9.26 shows the dependency structures involved with the removal of a directory entry.
This figure introduces one new dependency structure, the dirrem structure, and a new use for
the pagedep structure. A separate dirrem structure tracks each individual directory entry to be
removed in a directory block. In addition to previously described uses, pagedep structures
associated with a directory block manage all dirrem structures associated with the block. After
the directory block is written to disk, the dirrem request is added to the work daemon’s tasklist
list. For file deletions, the work daemon will decrement the inode’s link count by one. For
directory deletions, the work daemon will decrement the inode’s link count by two, truncate its
size to zero, and decrement the parent directory’s link count by one. If the inode’s link count
drops to zero, the resource reclamation activities described in the “file and directory inode
reclamation” section are started.

Figure 9.26 Dependencies associated with removing a directory entry.

File Truncation

When a file is truncated to zero length without soft updates enabled, the block pointers in its
inode are saved in a temporary list, the pointers in the inode are zeroed, and the inode is
synchronously written to disk. When the inode write completes, the list of its formerly claimed
blocks is added to the free-block bitmap. With soft updates, the block pointers in the inode
being truncated are copied into a freeblks structure, the pointers in the inode are zeroed, and
the inode is marked dirty. The freeblks structure is added to the inode wait list, and it migrates
to the buffer wait list when VOP_UPDATE is called. The freeblks structure is eventually added

to the tasklist after the buffer holding the inode block has been written to disk. When the
tasklist is serviced, the blocks listed in the freeblks structure are returned to the free-block
bitmap.

File and Directory Inode Reclamation

When the link count on a file or directory drops to zero, its inode is zeroed to show that it is no
longer in use. When running without soft updates, the zeroed inode is synchronously written to
disk, and the inode is marked as free in the bitmap. With soft updates, information about the
inode to be freed is saved in a freefile structure. The freefile structure is added to the inode wait
list, and it migrates to the buffer wait list when VOP_UPDATE is called. The freefile structure
eventually is added to the tasklist after the buffer holding the inode block has been written to
disk. When the tasklist is serviced, the inode listed in the freefile structure is returned to the free
inode map.

Directory-Entry Renaming Dependency Tracking

Figure 9.27 shows the structures involved in renaming a file. The dependencies follow the same
series of steps as those for adding a new file entry, with two variations. First, when a rollback of
an entry is needed because its inode has not yet been written to disk, the entry must be set back
to the previous inode number rather than to zero. The previous inode number is stored in a
dirrem structure. The DIRCHG flag is set in the diradd structure so that the rollback code
knows to use the old inode number stored in the dirrem structure. The second variation is that,
after the modified directory entry is written to disk, the dirrem structure is added to the work
daemon’s tasklist list so that the link count of the old inode will be decremented as described in
the earlier section on “Directory-Entry Removal-Dependency Tracking.”

Figure 9.27 Dependencies associated with renaming a directory entry.

Fsync Requirements for Soft Updates

The fsync system call requests that the specified file be written to stable storage and that the
system call not return until all its associated writes have completed. The task of completing an
fsync requires more than simply writing all the file’s dirty data blocks to disk. It also requires
that any unwritten directory entries that reference the file also be written, as well as any
unwritten directories between the file and the root of the filesystem. Simply getting the data
blocks to disk can be a major task. First, the system must check to see if the bitmap for the inode
has been written, finding the bitmap and writing it if necessary. It must then check for, find, and
write the bitmaps for any new blocks in the file. Next, any unwritten data blocks must go to disk.
Following the data blocks, any first-level indirect blocks that have newly allocated blocks in
them are written, followed by any double indirect blocks, then triple indirect blocks. Finally, the

inode can be written that will ensure that the contents of the file are on stable store. Ensuring
that all names for the file are also on stable store requires data structures that can determine
whether there are any uncommitted names and, if so, in which directories they occur. For each
directory containing an uncommitted name, the soft-updates code must go through the same set
of flush operations that it has just done on the file itself.

The addition of extended attribute data to the inode required that the soft-updates code be
extended so that it could ensure the integrity of these new data blocks. As with the file data
blocks, soft updates ensure that the extended data blocks and the bitmaps, which show that they
are in use, are written to disk before they are claimed by the inode. Soft updates also ensure that
any updated extended attribute data are committed to disk as part of an fsync of the file.

Although the fsync system call must ultimately be done synchronously, this requirement does
not mean that the flushing operations must each be done synchronously. Instead, whole sets of
bitmaps or data blocks are pushed into the disk queue, and the soft-updates code then waits for
all the writes to complete. This approach is more efficient because it allows the disk subsystem
to sort all the write requests into the most efficient order for writing. Still, the fsync part of the
soft-updates code generates most of the remaining synchronous writes in the filesystem.

Another issue related to fsync is unmounting of filesystems. Doing an unmount requires
finding and flushing all the dirty files that are associated with the filesystem. Flushing the files
may lead to the generation of background activity, such as removing files whose reference count
drops to zero as a result of their nullified directory entries being written. Thus, the system must
be able to find all background activity requests and process them. Even on a quiescent filesystem,
several iterations of file flushes followed by background activity may be required. FreeBSD
allows for the forcible unmount of a filesystem, which may take place while the filesystem is
actively in use. The ability to suspend operations cleanly on an active filesystem is described in
Section 9.7.

File-Removal Requirements for Soft Updates

For correct operation, a directory’s .. entry should not be removed until after the directory is
persistently unlinked. Correcting this dependency ordering in the soft-updates code introduced
a delay of up to 2 minutes between the time a directory is unlinked and the time that it is really
deallocated (when the .. entry is removed). Until the directory’s .. entry is really removed, the
link count on its parent will not be decremented. Thus, when a user removes one or more
directories, the link count of their former parent still reflects that they are present for several
minutes. This delayed link count decrement not only causes some questions from users, but also
causes some applications to break. For example, the rmdir system call will not remove a

directory that has a link count over two. This restriction means that a directory that recently had
directories removed from it cannot be removed until its former directories have been fully
deleted.

To fix these link-count problems, the soft-updates implementation augments the inode nlink
field with a new field called effnlink. The nlink field is still stored as part of the on-disk metadata
and reflects the true link count of the inode. The effnlink field is maintained only in kernel
memory and reflects the final value that the nlink field will reach once all its outstanding
operations are completed. All interactions with user applications report the value of the effnlink
field, which results in the illusion that everything has happened immediately.

When a file is removed on a filesystem running with soft updates, the removal appears to
happen quickly, but the process of removing the file and returning its blocks to the free list may
take up to several minutes. Before UFS2, the space held by the file did not show up in the
filesystem statistics until the removal of the file had been completed. Thus, applications that
clean up disk space such as the news expiration program would often vastly overshoot their goal.
They work by removing files and then checking to see if enough free space has showed up.
Because of the time lag in having the free space recorded, they would remove far too many files.
To resolve problems of this sort, the soft-updates code now maintains a counter that keeps track
of the amount of space that is held by the files that the soft-updates code is in the process of
removing. This counter of pending space is added to the actual amount of free space as reported
by the kernel (and thus by utilities like df). The result of this change is that free space appears
immediately after the unlink system call returns or the rm utility finishes.

The second and related change to soft updates has to do with avoiding false out-of-space errors.
When running with soft updates on a nearly full filesystem with high turnover rate (for example,
when installing a whole new set of binaries on a root partition), the filesystem can return a
filesystem full error even though it reports that it has plenty of free space. The filesystem full
message happens because soft updates have not managed to free the space from the old binaries
in time for it to be available for the new binaries.

The initial attempt to correct this problem was to have the process that wished to allocate space
simply wait for the free space to show up. The problem with this approach is that it often had to
wait for up to a minute. In addition to making the application seem intolerably slow, it usually
held a locked vnode that could cause other applications to get blocked waiting for it to become
available (often referred to as a lock race to the root of the filesystem). Although the condition
would clear in a minute or two, users often assumed that their system had hung and would
reboot.

To remedy this problem, the solution devised for UFS2 is to co-opt the process that would
otherwise be blocked and put it to work helping soft updates process the files to be freed. The
more processes trying to allocate space, the more help that is available to soft updates and the
faster free blocks begin to appear. Usually, enough space shows up in under 1 second that the
processes can return to their original task and complete. The effect of this change is that soft
updates can now be used on small, nearly full filesystems with high turnover.

Although the common case for deallocation is for all data in a file to be deleted, the truncate
system call allows applications to delete only part of a file. This semantic creates slightly more
complicated update dependencies, including the need to have deallocation dependencies for
indirect blocks and the need to consider partially deleted data blocks. Because it is so
uncommon, the soft-updates implementation does not optimize this case; the conventional
synchronous write approach is used instead.

One concern with soft updates is the amount of memory consumed by the dependency
structures. In daily operation, we have found that the additional dynamic memory load placed
on the kernel memory allocation area is about equal to the amount of memory used by vnodes
plus inodes. For each 1000 vnodes in the system, the additional peak memory load from soft
updates is about 300 Kbyte. The one exception to this guideline occurs when large directory
trees are removed. Here, the filesystem code can get arbitrarily far ahead of the on-disk state,
causing the amount of memory dedicated to dependency structures to grow without bound. The
soft-update code was modified to monitor the memory load for this case and not allow it to grow
past a tunable upper bound. When the bound is reached, new dependency structures can only be
created at the rate at which old ones are retired. The effect of this limit is to slow down the rate
of removal to the rate at which the disk updates can be done. While this restriction slows the
rate at which soft updates can normally remove files, it is still considerably faster than the
traditional synchronous-write filesystem. In steady-state, the soft-update remove algorithm
requires about one disk write for each 10 files removed, whereas the traditional filesystem
requires at least two writes for every file removed.

Soft-Updates Requirements for fsck

As with the dual tracking of the true and effective link count, the changes needed to fsck
became    evident   through    operational    experience.   In   a   non-soft-updates    filesystem
implementation, file removal happens within a few milliseconds. Thus, there is a short period of
time between the directory entry being removed and the inode being deallocated. If the system
crashes during a bulk tree removal operation, there are usually no inodes lacking references
from directory entries, though in rare instances there may be one or two. By contrast, in a
system running with soft updates, many seconds may elapse between the time when the

directory entry is deleted and the inode is deallocated. If the system crashes during a bulk tree
removal operation, there are usually tens to hundreds of inodes lacking references from
directory entries. Historically, fsck placed any unreferenced inodes into the lost+found
directory. This action is reasonable if the filesystem has been damaged because of disk failure
that results in the loss of one or more directories. However, it results in the incorrect action of
stuffing the lost+found directory full of partially deleted files when running with soft updates.
Thus, the fsck program was modified to check that a filesystem is running with soft updates and
clear out, rather than save, unreferenced inodes (unless fsck has determined that unexpected
damage has occurred to the filesystem, in which case the files are saved in lost+found).

A peripheral benefit of soft updates is that fsck can trust the allocation information in the
bitmaps. Thus, it only needs to check the subset of inodes in the filesystem that the bitmaps
show are in use. Although some of the inodes marked “in use” may be free, none of those
marked “free” will ever be in use.

9.7 Filesystem Snapshots

A filesystem snapshot is a frozen image of a filesystem at a given instant in time. Snapshots
support several important features: the ability to provide backups of the filesystem at several
times during the day, the ability to do reliable dumps of live filesystems, and (most important
for soft updates) the ability to run a filesystem check program on an active system to reclaim lost
blocks and inodes.

Creating a Filesystem Snapshot

Implementing snapshots has proven to be straightforward. Taking a snapshot entails the
following steps:

1. A snapshot file is created to track later changes to the filesystem; a snapshot file is shown in
Figure 9.28. This snapshot file is initialized to the size of the filesystem’s partition, and its file
block pointers are marked as zero, which means “not copied.” A few strategic blocks are
allocated, such as those holding copies of the superblock and cylinder-group maps.

Figure 9.28 Structure of a snapshot file.

2. A preliminary pass is made over each of the cylinder groups to copy it to its preallocated
backing block. Additionally, the block bitmap in each cylinder group is scanned to determine
which blocks are free. For each free block that is found, the corresponding location in the
snapshot file is marked with a distinguished block number (1) to show that the block is “not
used.” There is no need to copy those unused blocks if they are later allocated and written.

3. The filesystem is marked as “wanting to suspend.” In this state, processes that wish to invoke
system calls that will modify the filesystem are blocked from running, while processes that are
already in progress on such system calls are permitted to finish them. These actions are enforced
by inserting a gate at the top of every system call that can write to a filesystem. The set of gated
system calls includes write, open (when creating or truncating), fhopen (when creating or
truncating), mknod, mkfifo, link, symlink, unlink, chflags, fchflags, chmod, lchmod, fchmod,
chown, lchown, fchown, utimes, lutimes, futimes, truncate, ftruncate, rename, mkdir, rmdir,
fsync, sync, unmount, undelete, quotactl, revoke, and extattrctl. In addition, gates must be
added to pageout, ktrace, local-domain socket creation, and core dump creation. The gate tracks
activity within a system call for each mounted filesystem. A gate has two purposes. The first is to
suspend processes that want to enter the gated system call during periods when the filesystem
that the process wants to modify is suspended. The second is to keep track of the number of
processes that are running inside the gated system call for each mounted filesystem. When a
process enters a gated system call, a counter in the mount structure for the filesystem that it
wants to modify is incremented. When the process exits a gated system call, the counter is
decremented.

4. The filesystem’s status is changed from “wanting to suspend” to “fully suspended.” This status
change is done by allowing all system calls currently writing to the filesystem being suspended
to finish. The transition to “fully suspended” is complete when the count of processes within
gated system calls drops to zero.

5. The filesystem is synchronized to disk as if it were about to be unmounted.

6. Any cylinder groups that were modified after they were copied in step 2 are recopied to their
preallocated backing block. Additionally, the block bitmap in each recopied cylinder group is
rescanned to determine which blocks were changed. Newly allocated blocks are marked as “not
copied,” and newly freed blocks are marked as “not used.” The details on how these modified
cylinder groups are identified is described at the end of this subsection. The amount of space
initially claimed by a snapshot is small, usually less than a tenth of one percent.

7. With the snapshot file in place, activity on the filesystem resumes. Any processes that were
blocked at a gate are awakened and allowed to proceed with their system call.

8. Blocks claimed by any snapshots that existed at the time that the current snapshot was taken
are expunged from the new snapshot for reasons described in the next subsection.

During steps 3 through 6, all write activity on the filesystem is suspended. Steps 3 and 4
complete in at most a few milliseconds. The time for step 5 is a function of the number of dirty
pages in the kernel. It is bounded by the amount of memory that is dedicated to storing file
pages. It is typically less than a second and is independent of the size of the filesystem. Typically,
step 6 needs to recopy only a few cylinder groups, so it also completes in less than a second.

The splitting of the bitmap copies between steps 2 and 6 is the way that we avoid having the
suspend time be a function of the size of the filesystem. By making the primary copy pass while
the filesystem is still active, and then having only a few cylinder groups in need of recopying
after it has been suspended, we keep the suspend time down to a small and usually
filesystem-size-independent time.

The details of the two-pass algorithm are as follows. Before starting the copy and scan of all the
cylinder groups, the snapshot code allocates a “progress” bitmap whose size is equal to the
number of cylinder groups in the filesystem. The purpose of the “progress” bitmap is to keep
track of which cylinder groups have been scanned. Initially, all the bits in the “progress” map are
cleared. The first pass is completed in step 2 before the filesystem is suspended. In this first pass,
all the cylinder groups are scanned. When the cylinder group is read, its corresponding bit is set
in the “progress” bitmap. The cylinder group is then copied, and its block map is consulted to
update the snapshot file as described in step 2. Since the filesystem is still active, filesystem

blocks may be allocated and freed while the cylinder groups are being scanned. Each time a
cylinder group is updated because of a block being allocated or freed, its corresponding bit in the
“progress” bitmap is cleared. Once this first pass over the cylinder groups is completed, the
filesystem is “suspended.”

Step 6 now becomes the second pass of the algorithm. The second pass need only identify and
update the snapshot for any cylinder groups that were modified after it handled them in the first
pass. The changed cylinder groups are identified by scanning the “progress” bitmap and
rescanning any cylinder groups whose bits are zero. Although every bitmap would have to be
reprocessed in the worst case, in practice only a few bitmaps need to be recopied and checked.

Maintaining a Filesystem Snapshot

Each time an existing block in the filesystem is modified, the filesystem checks whether that
block was in use at the time that the snapshot was taken (i.e., it is not marked “not used”). If so,
and if it has not already been copied (i.e., it is still marked “not copied”), a new block is allocated
from among the “not used” blocks and placed in the snapshot file to replace the “not copied”
entry. The previous contents of the block are copied to the newly allocated snapshot file block,
and the write to the original is then allowed to proceed. Whenever a file is removed, the
snapshot code inspects each of the blocks being freed and claims any that were in use at the time
of the snapshot. Those blocks marked “not used” are returned to the free list.

When a snapshot file is read, reads of blocks marked “not copied” return the contents of the
corresponding block in the filesystem. Reads of blocks that have been copied return the contents
in the copied block (e.g., the contents that were stored at that location in the filesystem at the
time that the snapshot was taken). Writes to snapshot files are not permitted. When a snapshot
file is no longer needed, it can be removed in the same way as any other file; its blocks are
simply returned to the free list, and its inode is zeroed and returned to the free inode list.

Snapshots may live across reboots. When a snapshot file is created, the inode number of the
snapshot file is recorded in the superblock. When a filesystem is mounted, the snapshot list is
traversed and all the listed snapshots are activated. The only limit on the number of snapshots
that may exist in a filesystem is the size of the array in the superblock that holds the list of
snapshots. Currently, this array can hold up to 20 snapshots.

Multiple snapshot files can exist concurrently. As just described, earlier snapshot files would
appear in later snapshots. If an earlier snapshot is removed, a later snapshot would claim its
blocks rather than allowing them to be returned to the free list. This semantic means that it
would be impossible to free any space on the filesystem except by removing the newest snapshot.

To avoid this problem, the snapshot code goes through and expunges all earlier snapshots by
changing its view of them to being zero-length files. With this technique, the freeing of an earlier
snapshot releases the space held by that snapshot.

When a block is overwritten, all snapshots are given an opportunity to copy the block. A copy of
the block is made for each snapshot in which the block resides. Overwrites typically occur only
for inode and directory blocks. File data usually are not overwritten. Instead, a file will be
truncated and then reallocated as it is rewritten. Thus, the slow and I/O intensive block copying
is infrequent.

Deleted blocks are handled differently. The list of snapshots is consulted. When a snapshot is
found in which the block is active (“not copied”), the deleted block is claimed by that snapshot.
The traversal of the snapshot list is then terminated. Other snapshots for which the block is
active are left with an entry of “not copied” for that block. The result is that when they access
that location, they will still reference the deleted block. Since snapshots may not be modified,
the block will not change. Since the block is claimed by a snapshot, it will not be allocated to
another use. If the snapshot claiming the deleted block is deleted, the remaining snapshots will
be given the opportunity to claim the block. Only when none of the remaining snapshots wants
to claim the block (i.e., it is marked “not used” in all of them) will it be returned to the freelist.

Large Filesystem Snapshots

Creating and using a snapshot requires random access to the snapshot file. The creation of a
snapshot requires the inspection and copying of all the cylinder-group maps. Once in operation,
every write operation to the filesystem must check whether the block being written needs to be
copied. The information on whether a blocks needs to be copied is contained in the snapshot file
metadata (its indirect blocks). Ideally, this metadata would be resident in the kernel memory
throughout the lifetime of the snapshot. In FreeBSD, the entire physical memory on the
machine can be used to cache file data pages if the memory is not needed for other purposes.
Unfortunately, data pages associated with disks can only be cached in pages mapped into the
kernel’s physical memory. On a 32-bit architecture, only about 10 Mbyte of kernel memory is
dedicated to such purposes. Even on 64-bit architectures, only about 100 Mbyte of kernel
memory is dedicated to such purposes. If we allow up to half of this space to be used for any
single snapshot, the largest snapshot whose metadata that we can hold in memory is 11 Gbyte or
110 Gbyte. Without help, such a tiny cache would be hopeless in trying to support a
multiterabyte snapshot.

In an effort to support multiterabyte snapshots with the tiny metadata cache available, it is
necessary to observe the access patterns on typical filesystems. The snapshot is only consulted

for files that are being written. The filesystem is organized around cylinder groups that map
small contiguous areas of the disk (see Section 9.9). Within a directory, the filesystem tries to
allocate all the inodes and files in the same cylinder group. When moving between directories,
different cylinder groups are usually inspected. Thus, the widely random behavior occurs from
movement between cylinder groups. Once file-writing activity settles down into a cylinder group,
only a small amount of snapshot metadata needs to be consulted. That metadata will easily fit in
even the tiny kernel metadata cache, so the need is to find a way to avoid thrashing the cache
when moving between cylinder groups.

The technique used to avoid thrashing when moving between cylinder groups is to build a
look-aside table of all the blocks that were copied while the snapshot was made. This table lists
the blocks associated with all the snapshot metadata blocks, the cylinder-group maps, the
superblock, and blocks that contain active inodes. When a copy-on-write fault occurs for a block,
the first step is to consult this table. If the block is found in the table, then no further searching
needs to be done in any of the snapshots. If the block is not found, then the metadata of each
active snapshot on the filesystem must be consulted to see if a copy is needed. This table lookup
saves time because it not only avoids faulting in metadata for widely scattered blocks, but it also
avoids the need to consult potentially many snapshots.

Another problem with snapshots on large filesystems is that they aggravate existing deadlock
problems. When there are multiple snapshots associated with a filesystem, they are kept in a list
ordered from oldest to youngest. When a copy-on-write fault occurs, the list is traversed, letting
each snapshot decide if it needs to copy the block that is about to be written. Originally, each
snapshot inode had its own lock. A deadlock could occur between two processes, each trying to
do a write. Consider the example in Figure 9.29. It shows a filesystem with two snapshots: snap1
and snap2. Process A holds snapshot 1 locked, and process B holds snapshot 2 locked. Both
snap1 and snap2 have decided that they need to allocate a new block in which to hold a copy of
the block being written by the process that holds them locked. The writing of the new block in
snapshot 1 will cause the kernel running in the context of process A to scan the list of snapshots
that will get blocked at snapshot 2 because it is held locked by process B. Meanwhile, the writing
of the new block in snapshot 2 will cause the kernel running in the context of process B to scan
the list of snapshots that will get blocked at snapshot 1 because it is held locked by process A.

Figure 9.29 Snapshot deadlock scenario.

The resolution to the deadlock problem is to allocate a single lock that is used for all the
snapshots on a filesystem. When a new snapshot is created, the kernel checks whether there are
any other snapshots on the filesystem. If there are, the per-file lock associated with the new
snapshot inode is released and replaced with the lock used for the other snapshots. With only a
single lock, the access to the snapshots as a whole is serialized. Thus, in Figure 9.29, process B
will hold the lock for all the snapshots and will be able to make the necessary checks and
updates while process A will be held waiting. Once process B completes its scan, process A will
be able to get access to all the snapshots and will be able to run successfully to completion.
Because of the added serialization of the snapshot lookups, the look-aside table described earlier
is important to ensure reasonable performance of snapshots. In gathering statistics on our
running systems, we found that the look-aside table resolves nearly half of the snapshot
copy-on-write lookups. Thus, we found that the look-aside table keeps the contention for the
snapshot lock to a reasonable level.

Background fsck

Traditionally, after an unclean system shutdown, the filesystem check program, fsck, has had to
be run over all the inodes in a filesystem to ascertain which inodes and blocks are in use and to
correct the bitmaps. This check is a painfully slow process that can delay the restart of a big
server for an hour or more. The current implementation of soft updates guarantees the
consistency of all filesystem resources, including the inode and block bitmaps. With soft updates,
the only inconsistency that can arise in the filesystem (barring software bugs and media failures)
is that some unreferenced blocks may not appear in the bitmaps and some inodes may have to
have overly high link counts reduced. Thus, it is completely safe to begin using the filesystem
after a crash without first running fsck. However, some filesystem space may be lost after each
crash. Thus, there is value in having a version of fsck that can run in the background on an
active filesystem to find and recover any lost blocks and adjust inodes with overly high link
counts. A special case of the overly high link count is one that should be zero. Such an inode will
be freed as part of reducing its link count to zero. This garbage collection task is less difficult
than it might at first appear, since this version of fsck only needs to identify resources that are
not in use and cannot be allocated or accessed by the running system.

With the addition of snapshots, the task becomes simple, requiring only minor modifications to
the standard fsck. When run in background cleanup mode, fsck starts by taking a snapshot of
the filesystem to be checked. Fsck then runs over the snapshot filesystem image doing its usual
calculations just as in its normal operation. The only other change comes at the end of its run,
when it wants to write out the updated versions of the bitmaps. Here, the modified fsck takes

the set of blocks that it finds were in use at the time of the snapshot and removes this set from
the set marked as in use at the time of the snapshot—the difference is the set of lost blocks. It
also constructs the list of inodes whose counts need to be adjusted. Fsck then calls a new system
call to notify the filesystem of the identified lost blocks so that it can replace them in its bitmaps.
It also gives the set of inodes whose link counts need to be adjusted; those inodes whose link
count is reduced to zero are truncated to zero length and freed. When fsck completes, it releases
its snapshot. The complete details of how background fsck is implemented can be found in
McKusick [2002; 2003].

User-Visible Snapshots

Snapshots may be taken at any time. When taken every few hours during the day, they allow
users to retrieve a file that they wrote several hours earlier and later deleted or overwrote by
mistake. Snapshots are much more convenient to use than dump tapes and can be created much
more frequently.

The snapshot described above creates a frozen image of a filesystem partition. To make that
snapshot accessible to users through a traditional filesystem interface, the system administrator
uses the vnode driver, vnd. The vnd driver takes a file as input and produces a character-device
interface to access it. The vnd character device can then be used as the input device for a
standard mount command, allowing the snapshot to appear as a replica of the frozen filesystem
at whatever location in the namespace that the system administrator chooses to mount it.

Live Dumps

Once filesystem snapshots are available, it becomes possible to dump live filesystems safely.
When dump notices that it is being asked to dump a mounted filesystem, it can simply take a
snapshot of the filesystem and dump the snapshot instead of dumping the live filesystem. When
dump completes, it releases the snapshot.

9.8 Journaled Soft Updates

This section describes the work to add “journaling lite” to soft updates and its incorporation into
the FreeBSD fast filesystem. Because soft updates prevent most inconsistencies, the journal
need only track those inconsistencies that soft updates fail to address. Specifically, the journal
contains the information needed to recover the block and inode resources that have been freed
but whose freed status failed to make it to disk before a system failure. After a crash, a variant of
the venerable fsck program runs through the journal to identify and free the lost resources.

Only if an inconsistency between the log and filesystem is detected is it necessary to run the
whole-filesystem fsck. The journal is tiny, 16 Mbyte is usually enough, independent of
filesystem size. Although journal processing needs to be done before restarting, the processing
time is typically just a few seconds and, in the worst case, a minute. It is not necessary to build a
new filesystem to use soft-updates journaling. The addition or deletion of soft-updates
journaling to existing FreeBSD fast filesystems is done using the tunefs program.

Background and Introduction

The soft-updates dependency-tracking system was adopted by FreeBSD in 1998 as an
alternative to the popular journaled-filesystem technique and is described in Section 9.6. While
the runtime performance and consistency guarantees of soft updates are comparable to
journaled filesystems [Seltzer et al., 2000], it relies on an expensive and time-consuming
background filesystem recovery operation after a crash as is described in Section 9.7. This
section outlines a method for eliminating an expensive background or foreground
whole-filesystem check operation by using a small journal that logs the only two inconsistencies
possible in soft updates. The first is allocated but unreferenced blocks; the second is incorrectly
high link counts. Incorrectly high link counts include unreferenced inodes that were being
deleted and files that were unlinked but open [Ganger et al., 2000]. This journal allows a
journal-analysis program to complete recovery in just a few seconds independent of filesystem
size.

Compatibility with Other Implementations

Journaling is enabled via tunefs and only requires a few spare superblock fields and 16 Mbyte
of free blocks for the journal. These minimal requirements make it easily enabled on existing
FreeBSD filesystems. The journal’s filesystem blocks are placed in an inode named .sujournal
in the root of the filesystem and filesystem flags are set such that older nonjournaling kernels
will trigger a full filesystem check when mounting a previously journaled volume. When
mounting a journaled filesystem, older kernels clear a flag that shows that journaling is being
done so that when the filesystem is next encountered by a kernel that does journaling, it will
know that that the journal is invalid and will ensure that the filesystem is consistent and clear
the journal before resuming use of the filesystem.

Journal Format

The journal is kept as a circular log of segments containing records that describe metadata
operations. If the journal fills, the filesystem must complete enough operations to expire journal
entries before allowing new operations. In practice, the journal almost never fills.

Each journal segment contains a unique sequence number and a timestamp that identifies the
filesystem mount instance so old segments can be discarded during journal processing. Journal
entries are aggregated into segments to minimize the number of writes to the journal. Each
segment contains the last valid sequence number at the time it was written to allow fsck to
recover the head and tail by scanning the entire journal. Segments are variably sized as some
multiple of the disk block size and are written atomically to avoid read/modify/write cycles in
running filesystems.

The journal analysis has been incorporated into the fsck program. This incorporation into the
existing fsck program has several benefits. The existing startup scripts already call fsck to see if
it needs to be run in the foreground or background. For filesystems running with journaled soft
updates, fsck can request to run in the foreground and do the needed journaled operations
before the filesystem is brought online. If the journal fails for some reason, it can instead report
that a full fsck needs to be run as the traditional fallback. Thus, this new functionality can be
introduced without any change to the way that system administrators start up their systems.
Finally, the invoking of fsck means that after the journal has been processed, it is possible for
debugging purposes to fall through and run a complete check of the filesystem to ensure that the
journal is working properly.

The journal entry size is 32 bytes, providing a dense representation allowing for 128 entries per
4-Kbyte sector. The journal is created in a single area of the filesystem in as contiguous an
allocation as is available. We considered spreading it out across cylinder groups to optimize
locality for writes but it ended up being so small that this approach was not practical and would
make scanning the entire journal during cleanup too slow.

The journal blocks are claimed by a named immutable inode. This approach allows user-level
access to the journal for debugging and statistics-gathering purposes as well as providing
backwards compatibility with older kernels that do not support journaling. We have found that a
journal size of 16 Mbyte is enough in even the most tortuous and worst-case benchmarks. A
16-Mbyte journal can cover over 500,000 namespace operations or 16 Gbyte of outstanding
allocations (assuming a standard 32-Kbyte block size).

Modifications That Require Journaling

This subsection describes the operations that must be journaled so that the information needed
to clean up the filesystem is available to fsck.

Increased Link Count

A link count may be increased through a hard link or file creation. The link count is temporarily
increased during a rename. Here, the operation is the same. The inode number, parent inode
number, directory offset, and initial link count are all recorded in the journal. Soft updates
guarantee that the inode link count will be increased and stable on disk before any directory
write. The journal write must occur before the inode write that updates the link count and
before the bitmap write that allocates the inode if it is newly allocated.

Decreased Link Count

The inode link count is decreased through unlink or rename. The inode number, parent inode,
directory offset, and initial link count are all recorded in the journal. The deleted directory entry
is guaranteed to be written before the link is adjusted down. As with increasing the link count,
the journal write must happen before all other writes.

Unlink While Referenced

Unlinked yet referenced files pose a problem for journaled filesystems. In UNIX, an inode’s
storage is not reclaimed until after the final name is removed and the last reference is closed.
Simply leaving the journal entry valid while waiting for applications to close their dangling
references is untenable as it will easily exhaust journal space. A solution that scales to the total
number of inodes in the filesystem is required. At least two approaches are possible: a
replication of the inode allocation bitmap, or a linked list of inodes to be freed. We have chosen
to use the linked-list approach.

In the linked-list case, which is employed by several filesystems (xfs, ext4, etc.), the superblock
contains the inode number that serves as the head of a singly linked list of inodes to be freed,
with each inode storing a pointer to the next inode on the list. The advantage of this approach is
that at recovery time, fsck need only examine a single pointer in the superblock that will already
be in memory. The disadvantage is that the kernel must keep an in-memory doubly linked list so
that it can rapidly remove an inode once it is unreferenced. This approach ingrains a
filesystem-wide lock in the design and incurs nonlocal writes when maintaining the list. In
practice, we have found that unreferenced inodes occur rarely enough that this approach is not a
bottleneck.

Removal from the list may be done lazily but must be completed before any re-use of the inode.
Additions to the list must be stable before reclaiming journal space for the final unlink but
otherwise may be delayed long enough to avoid needing the write at all if the file is quickly
closed. Addition and removal involve only a single write to update the preceding pointer to the
following inode.

Change of Directory Offset

Any time a directory compaction moves an entry, a journal entry must be created that describes
the old and new locations of the entry. The kernel does not know at the time of the move
whether a remove will follow it, so currently all offset changes are journaled. Without this
information, fsck would be unable to disambiguate multiple revisions of the same directory
block.

Block Allocation and Free

When performing either block allocation or free, whether it is a fragment, indirect block,
directory block, direct block, or extended attributes, the record is the same. The inode number
of the file and the offset of the block within the file are recorded using negative offsets for
indirect blocks and extents. Additionally, the disk block address and number of fragments are
included in the journal record. The journal entry must be written to disk before any allocation or
free.

When freeing an indirect block, only the root of the indirect block tree is logged. Thus, for
truncation we need a maximum of 15 journal entries, 12 for direct blocks and 3 for indirect
blocks. These 15 journal entries allow us to free a large amount of space with a minimum of
journaling overhead. During recovery, fsck will follow indirect blocks and free any descendants
including other indirect blocks. For this algorithm to work, the contents of the indirect block
must remain valid until the journal record is free so that user data is not confused with indirect
block pointers.

Additional Requirements of Journaling

Some operations that had not previously required tracking under soft updates need to be
tracked when journaling is introduced. This subsection describes these new requirements.

Cylinder-Group Rollbacks

Soft updates previously did not require any rollbacks of cylinder groups as they were always the
first or last write in a group of changes. When a block or inode has been allocated but its journal

record has not yet been written to disk, it is not safe to write the updated bitmaps and associated
allocation information. The routines that write blocks with bmsafemap dependencies now
rollback any allocations with unwritten journal operations.

Inode Rollbacks

The inode link count must be rolled back to the link count as it existed before any unwritten
journal entries. Allowing it to grow beyond this count would not cause filesystem corruption but
it would prohibit the journal recovery from adjusting the link count properly. Soft updates
already prevent the link count from decreasing before the directory entry is removed as a
premature decrement could cause filesystem corruption.

When an unlinked file has been closed, its inode cannot be returned to the inode freelist until its
zeroed-out block pointers have been written to disk so that its blocks can be freed and it has
been removed from the on-disk list of unlinked files. The unlinked-file inode is not completely
removed from the list of unlinked files until the next pointer of the inode that precedes it on the
list has been updated on disk to point to the inode that follows it on the list. If the unlinked-file
inode is the first inode on the list of unlinked files, then it is not completely removed from the
list of unlinked files until the head-of-unlinked-files pointer in the superblock has been updated
on disk to point to the inode that follows it on the list.

Reclaiming Journal Space

To reclaim journal space from previously written records, the kernel must know that the
operation the journal record describes is stable on disk. This requirement means that when a
new file is created, the journal record cannot be freed until writes are completed for a cylinder
group bitmap, an inode, a directory block, a directory inode, and possibly some number of
indirect blocks. When a new block is allocated, the journal record cannot be freed until writes
are completed for the new block pointer in the inode or indirect block, the cylinder group
bitmap, and the block itself. Block pointers within indirect blocks are not stable until all parent
indirect blocks are fully reachable on disk via the inode indirect block pointers. To simplify
fulfillment of these requirements, the dependencies that describe these operations carry
pointers to the oldest segment structure in the journal containing journal entries that describe
outstanding operations.

Some operations may be described by multiple entries. For example, when making a new
directory, its addition creates three new names. Each of these names is associated with a
reference count on the inode to which the name refers. When one of these dependencies is
satisfied, it may pass its journal entry reference to another dependency if another operation on
which the journal entry depends is not yet complete. If the operation is complete, the final

reference on the journal record is released. When all references to journal records in a journal
segment are released, its space is reclaimed and the oldest valid segment sequence number is
adjusted. We can only release the oldest free journal segment, since the journal is treated as a
circular queue.

Handling a Full Journal

If the journal ever becomes full, we must prevent any new journal entries from being created
until more space becomes available from the retirement of the oldest valid entries. An effective
way to stop the creation of new journal records is to suspend the filesystem using the
mechanism in place for taking snapshots. Once suspended, existing operations on the filesystem
are permitted to complete, but new operations that wish to modify the filesystem are put to
sleep until the suspension is lifted.

We do a check for journal space before each operation that will change a link count or allocate a
block. If we find that the journal is approaching a full condition, we suspend the filesystem and
expedite the progress on the soft-updates work-list processing to speed the rate at which journal
entries are retired. As the operation that did the check has already started, it is permitted to
finish, but future operations are blocked. Thus, operations must be suspended while there is still
enough journal space to complete operations already in progress. When enough journal entries
have been freed, the filesystem suspension is lifted and normal operations resume.

In practice, we had to create a minimal-size journal (4 Mbyte) and run scripts designed to create
huge numbers of link-count changes, block allocations, and block frees to trigger the journal-full
condition. Even under these tests, the filesystem suspensions were infrequent and brief, lasting
under a second.

The Recovery Process

This subsection describes the use of the journal by fsck to clean up the filesystem after a crash.

Scanning the Journal

To perform recovery, the fsck program must first scan the journal from start to end to discover
the oldest valid sequence number. We contemplated keeping journal head and tail pointers,
however, that would require extra writes to the superblock area. Because the journal is small,
the extra time spent scanning it to identify the head and tail of the valid journal seemed a
reasonable tradeoff to reduce the run-time cost of maintaining the journal head and tail pointers.
As a result, the fsck program must discover the first segment containing a still-valid sequence
number and work from there. Journal records are then resolved in order. Journal records are

marked with a timestamp that must match the filesystem mount time as well as a CRC to protect
the validity of the contents.

Adjusting Link Counts

For each journal record recording a link increase, fsck needs to examine the directory at the
offset provided and see whether the directory entry for the recorded inode number exists on disk.
If it does not exist, but the inode link count was increased, then the recorded link count needs to
be decremented.

For each journal record recording a link decrease, fsck needs to examine the directory at the
offset provided and see whether the directory entry for the recorded inode number exists on disk.
If it has been deleted on disk, but the inode link count has not been decremented, then the
recorded link count needs to be decremented.

Compaction of directory offsets for entries that are being tracked complicates the link
adjustment scheme presented above. Since directory blocks are not written synchronously, fsck
must look up each directory entry in all its possible locations.

When an inode is added and removed from a directory multiple times, fsck is not able to assess
the link count correctly given the algorithm presented above. The chosen solution is to
preprocess the journal and link all entries related to the same inode together. In this way, all
operations not known to be committed to the disk can be examined concurrently to determine
how many links should exist relative to the known stable count that existed before the first
journal entry. Duplicate records that occur when an inode is added and deleted multiple times at
the same offset are discarded, resulting in a coherent count.

Updating the Allocated Inode Map

Once the link counts have been adjusted, fsck must free any inodes whose link count has fallen
to zero. In addition, fsck must free any inodes that were unlinked but still in use at the time that
the system crashed. The head of the list of unreferenced inode is in the superblock as described
earlier in this section. The fsck program must traverse this list of unlinked inodes and free
them.

The first step in freeing an inode is to add all its blocks to the list of blocks that need to be freed.
Next, the inode needs to be zeroed to show that it is not in use. Finally, the inode bitmap in its
cylinder group must be updated to reflect that the inode is available and all the appropriate
filesystem statistics updated to reflect the inode’s availability.

Updating the Allocated Block Map

Once the journal has been scanned, it provides a list of blocks that were intended to be freed.
The journal entry lists the inode from which the block was to be freed. For recovery, fsck
processes each free record by checking to see if the block is still claimed by its associated inode.
If it finds that the block is no longer claimed, it is freed.

For each block that is freed, either by the deallocation of an inode or through the identification
process described above, the block bitmap in its cylinder group must be updated to reflect that it
is available and all the appropriate filesystem statistics updated to reflect its availability. When a
fragment is freed, the fragment availability statistics must also be updated.

Performance

Journaling adds extra running time and memory allocations to the traditional soft-updates
requirements as well as additional I/O operations to write the journal. The overhead of the extra
running time and memory allocations was immeasurable in the benchmarks that we ran. The
extra I/O was mostly evident in the increased delay for individual operations to complete.
Operation completion time is usually only evident to an application when it does an fsync
system call that causes it to wait for the file to reach the disk. Otherwise, the extra I/O to the
journal only becomes evident in benchmarks that are limited by the filesystem’s I/O bandwidth
before journaling is enabled. In summary, a system running with journaled soft updates will
never run faster than one running soft updates without journaling. So, systems with small
filesystems such as an embedded system will usually want to run soft updates without
journaling and take the time to run fsck after system crashes.

The primary purpose of the journaling project was to eliminate long filesystem check times. A
40 Tbyte volume may take an entire day and a considerable amount of memory to check. We
have run several scenarios to understand and validate the recovery time.

A typical operation for developers is to run a parallel buildworld. Crash recovery from this case
demonstrates time to recover from moderate write workload. A 250 Gbyte disk was filled to 80
percent with copies of the FreeBSD source tree. One copy was selected at random and an 8-way
buildworld proceeded for 10 minutes before the box was reset. Recovery from the journal took
0.9 seconds. An additional run with traditional fsck was used to verify the safe recovery of the
filesystem. The fsck took about 27 minutes, or 1800 times as long.

A testing volunteer with a 92-percent full 11 Tbyte volume spanning 14 drives on a 3ware RAID
controller generated hundreds of megabytes of dirty data by writing random length files in
parallel before resetting the machine. The resulting recovery operation took less than one
minute to complete. A normal fsck run takes about 10 hours on this filesystem.

Future Work

This subsection describes some areas we have not yet explored that may give further
performance improvements to our implementation.

Rollback of Directory Deletions

Doing a rollback of a directory addition is easy. The new directory entry has its inode number set
to zero to show that it is not really allocated. However, rollback of directory deletions is much
more difficult as the space may have been claimed by a new allocation. There are times when
being able to roll back a directory deletion would be convenient. For example, when a file is
renamed, a directory rollback could be used to prevent the removal of an old name before a new
name reaches the disk. Here, we have considered using a distinguished inode number that the
filesystem would recognize internally as being in use, but which would not be returned to the
user application. However, at present we cannot rollback deletes, which requires any delete
journaling to be written to disk before the writing of affected directory blocks.

Truncate and Weaker Guarantees

As a potential optimization, the truncate system call instead may choose to record the intended
file size and operate more lazily, relying on the log to recover any partially completed operations
correctly. This approach also allows us to perform partial truncations asynchronously. Further,
the journal allows for the weakening of other soft dependency guarantees although we have not
yet fully explored these reduced guarantees and do not know if they provide any real benefit.

Tracking File-Removal Dependencies

This subsection gives a short example describing the dependencies that track the removal of a
file when using journaled soft updates. These five ordering constraints must be maintained:

1. The journal must record the location in the directory that has the name to be deleted and the
inode number associated with the name.

2. The filename in the on-disk copy of the directory must be deleted.

3. The journal must record the blocks to be deleted. The inode describing the file must be
deallocated by zeroing out its on-disk dinode. The writing of the journal entry must precede the
writing of the zeroed-out on-disk inode.

4. The blocks formerly referenced by the inode for the file must be released to the free-space
bitmap, and the inode must be released to the free-inode bitmap.

5. The journal must record the successful completion of the removal.

These five constraints are maintained by soft updates as follows:

1. The buffer containing the journal entry with the name and inode number to be deleted adds a
dependency structure to start the file deletion.

2. Some time in the next 30 seconds after step 1, the kernel will decide to write the journal
buffer. When notified that the journal entry has been written, the block of the directory
containing the name to be deleted is read into a kernel buffer. The entry is deleted by changing
the entry that precedes it to point to the entry that follows it (see Section 9.3). Before releasing
the buffer, a set of dependencies must be constructed, as shown in Figure 9.26. If this deletion is
the first dependency for the directory block, it needs to have a pagedep structure allocated that
is linked onto the dependency list for the buffer. Next, a dirrem structure is allocated that
records the inode number of the entry being deleted. The dirrem structure is linked onto the
dirrem list of the pagedep structure for the directory block. The buffer is then marked dirty and
it is unlocked and released.

3. Some time in the next 30 seconds after step 2, the kernel will decide to write the dirty
directory buffer. When the write completes, the pagedep associated with the buffer is passed to
soft updates for processing. One processing step is to handle each of the dirrem entries. Each
dirrem entry causes the inode formerly referenced by the directory to have its reference count
decremented by one. If the reference count drops to zero (meaning that the last name for the file
was removed), then the inode must be deallocated and freed. Before zeroing out the contents of
the on-disk dinode, its list of allocated blocks must be saved in a freeblks structure and
information needed to free the inode must be saved in a freefile structure. A journal entry
containing the freeblks and freefile information must be added to the journal buffer. The block
of the filesystem containing the dinode to be freed is read into a kernel buffer, as shown in
Figure 9.20. The part of the buffer containing the dinode is zeroed out. If the deallocation is the
first dependency for the dinode, it must have an inodedep structure allocated that is linked onto
the dependency list for the buffer. The freeblks and freefile structures are linked onto the buffer
wait list of the inodedep structure. A reference to the journal entry is also added to the inodedep.
The buffer is then marked dirty and it is unlocked and released. The dirrem structure is freed as
is the pagedep structure if it is no longer tracking any dependencies.

4. Some time in the next 30 seconds after step 3, the kernel will decide to write the buffer
containing the zeroed-out dinode. If the buffer containing the journal dependency has not yet

been written, the zeroed-out dinode is replaced with its original contents and the write is
allowed to proceed. When the write completes, the zeroed-out dinode is put back into the buffer
and the buffer marked as still dirty (needing to be written). When a write on the buffer finds that
the journal entry has been written, the write of the zeroed-out dinode is allowed to proceed.
When the write completes, the inodedep associated with the buffer is passed to soft updates for
processing. One processing step is to handle each of the buffer wait entries. The handling of the
freeblks entry causes all its listed blocks to be marked free in the appropriate cylinder-group
bitmaps. The handling of the freefile entry causes the deleted inode to be marked free in the
appropriate cylinder-group bitmap. The freeblks and freefile structures are freed as is the
inodedep structure if it is no longer tracking any dependencies. A journal dependency is added
to the buffer containing the bitmaps.

5. Some time in the next 30 seconds, the kernel will decide to write the buffer containing the
bitmaps. When the write completes, the journal dependency is processed that writes an entry to
the journal to show that the block and inode release has been completed.

The file has now been completely removed and ceases to be tracked by soft updates.

9.9 The Local Filestore

The next two sections of this chapter describe the organization and management of data on
storage media. Historically, FreeBSD provided three different filestore managers: the traditional
Berkeley Fast Filesystem (FFS), the Log-Structured Filesystem, and the Memory-Based
Filesystem. These storage managers shared the same code for all the filesystem naming
semantics and differed only in the management of their data on storage media. The
Log-Structured Filesystem file-store manager has been replaced by ZFS described in Chapter 10.
The Memory-Based Filesystem filestore manager has been replaced by an implementation
optimized for operating in virtual memory.

Overview of the Filestore

The FFS filestore was designed at a time when file caches were small and thus files needed to be
read from the disk often. It is willing to do extra disk seeks while writing to place files likely to
be accessed together in the same general location on the disk. This approach minimizes disk
seeks needed to read these files. By contrast, ZFS was designed at a time when file caches were
large and thus most file reads would not need to access the disk. Hence, ZFS optimizes its write
speed by grouping blocks in the order in which they are written. ZFS is willing to accept more
disk seeks to read files on the rare occasions when they are not in the cache.

The operations defined for doing the datastore filesystem operations are shown in Table 9.3.
These operators are fewer and semantically simpler than are those used for managing the
namespace.

Table 9.3 Datastore filesystem operations.

There are two operators for allocating and freeing objects. The valloc operator creates a new
object. The identity of the object is a number returned by the operator. The mapping of this
number to a name is the responsibility of the name-space code. An object is freed by the vfree
operator. The object to be freed is identified by only its number.

The attributes of an object are changed by the update operator. This layer performs no
interpretation of these attributes; they are simply fixed-size auxiliary data stored outside the
main data area of the object. They are typically file attributes, such as the owner, group,
permissions, and so on. Note that the extended attribute space is updated using the read and
write interface as that interface is already prepared to read and write arbitrary length data to
and from user-level processes.

There are five operators for manipulating existing objects. The vget operator retrieves an
existing object from the filestore. The object is identified by its number and must have been
created previously by valloc. The read operator copies data from an object to a location
described by a uio structure. The blkatoff operator is similar to the read operator, except that
the blkatoff operator simply returns a pointer to a kernel memory buffer with the requested data
instead of copying the data. This operator is designed to increase the efficiency of operations
where the namespace code interprets the contents of an object (i.e., directories) instead of just
returning the contents to a user process. The write operator copies data to an object from a
location described by a uio structure. The fsync operator requests that all data associated with
the object be moved to stable storage (usually by writing them all to disk). There is no need for
an analog of blkatoff for writing, as the kernel can simply modify a buffer that it received from
blkatoff, mark that buffer as dirty, and then perform an fsync operation to have the buffer
written back.

The final datastore operation is truncate. This operation changes the amount of space
associated with an object. Historically, it could be used only to decrease the size of an object. In
FreeBSD, it can be used both to increase and decrease the size of an object. When the size of a
file is increased, a hole in the file is created. Usually, no additional disk space is allocated; the
only change is to update the inode to reflect the larger file size. When read, holes are treated by
the system as zero-valued bytes.

Each disk drive has one or more subdivisions, or partitions. Each such partition can contain
only one filestore, and a filestore never spans multiple partitions. While a filesystem may use
multiple disk partitions to perform striping or RAID, the aggregation and management of the
parts that make up the filesystem are managed by a lower-level driver in the kernel. The
filesystem code always has the view of operating on a single contiguous partition.

The filestore is responsible for the management of the space within its disk partition. Within
that space, its responsibility is the creation, storage, retrieval, and removal of files. It operates in
a flat namespace. When asked to create a new file, it allocates an inode for that file and returns
the assigned number. The naming, access control, locking, and attribute manipulation for the
file are all handled by the hierarchical filesystem-management layer above the filestore.

The filestore also handles the allocation of new blocks to files as the latter grow. Simple
filesystem implementations, such as those used by early microcomputer systems, allocate files
contiguously, one after the next, until the files reach the end of the disk. As files are removed,
holes occur. To reuse the freed space, the system must compact the disk to move all the free
space to the end. Files can be created only one at a time; for the size of a file other than the final
one on the disk to be increased, the file must be copied to the end and then expanded.

As we saw in Section 9.2, each file in a filestore is described by an inode; the locations of its data
blocks are given by the block pointers in its inode. Although the filestore may cluster the blocks
of a file to improve I/O performance, the inode can reference blocks scattered anywhere
throughout the partition. Thus, multiple files can be written simultaneously and all the disk
space can be used without the need for compaction.

The filestore implementation converts from the user abstraction of a file as an array of bytes to
the structure imposed by the underlying physical medium. Consider a typical medium of a
magnetic disk with fixed-size sectoring. Although the user may wish to write a single byte to a
file, the disk supports reading and writing only in multiples of sectors. Here, the system must
read in the sector containing the byte to be modified, replace the affected byte, and write the
sector back to the disk. This operation—converting random access to an array of bytes to reads
and writes of disk sectors—is called block I/O.

First, the system breaks the user’s request into a set of operations to be done on logical blocks
of the file. Logical blocks describe block-size pieces of a file. The system calculates the logical
blocks by dividing the array of bytes into filestore-size pieces. Thus, if a filestore’s block size is
32,768 bytes, then logical block 0 would contain bytes 0 to 32,767, logical block 1 would contain
bytes 32,768 to 65,535, and so on.

The data in each logical block are stored in a physical block on the disk. A physical block is
the location on the disk to which the system maps a logical block. A physical disk block is
constructed from one or more contiguous sectors. For a disk with 4096-byte sectors, a
32,768-byte filestore block would be built up from 8 contiguous sectors. Although the contents
of a logical block are contiguous on disk, the logical blocks of the file do not need to be laid out
contiguously. The data structure used by the system to convert from logical blocks to physical
blocks is described in Section 9.2.

User I/O to a File

Although the user may wish to write a single byte to a file, the disk hardware can read and write
only in multiples of sectors. Hence, the system must arrange to read in the sector containing the
byte to be modified, to replace the affected byte, and to write back the sector to the disk.

Processes may read data in sizes smaller than a disk block. The first time that a small read is
required from a particular disk block, the block will be transferred from the disk into a kernel
buffer. Later reads of parts of the same block then require only copying from the kernel buffer to
the memory of the user process. Multiple small writes are treated similarly. A buffer is allocated
from the cache when the first write to a disk block is made, and later writes to part of the same
block are then likely to require only copying into the kernel buffer and no disk I/O.

In addition to providing the abstraction of arbitrary alignment of reads and writes, the block
buffer cache reduces the number of disk I/O transfers required by filesystem accesses. Because
system-parameter files, commands, and directories are read repeatedly, their data blocks are
usually in the buffer cache when they are needed. Thus, the kernel does not need to read them
from the disk every time that they are requested.

Figure 9.30 shows the flow of information and work required to access a file on the disk. The
abstraction shown to the user is an array of bytes. These bytes are collectively described by a file
descriptor that refers to some location in the array. The user can request a write operation on
the file by presenting the system with a pointer to a buffer and with a request for some number
of bytes to be written. As Figure 9.30 shows, the requested data do not need to be aligned with
the beginning or end of a logical block. Further, the size of the request is not constrained to a

single logical block. In the example shown, the user has requested data to be written to parts of
logical blocks 1 and 2. Since the disk can transfer data only in multiples of sectors, the filestore
must first arrange to read in the data for any part of the block that is to be left unchanged. The
system must arrange an intermediate staging area for the transfer. This staging is done through
one or more system buffers, described in Section 7.4.

Figure 9.30 The block I/O system.

In our example, the user wishes to modify data in logical blocks 1 and 2. The operation iterates
over five steps:

1. Allocate a buffer.

2. Determine the location of the corresponding physical block on the disk.

3. Request the disk controller to read the contents of the physical block into the system buffer
and wait for the transfer to complete.

4. Do a memory-to-memory copy from the beginning of the user’s I/O buffer to the appropriate
portion of the system buffer.

5. Write the block to the disk and continue without waiting for the transfer to complete.

If the user’s request is incomplete, the process is repeated with the next logical block of the file.
In our example, the system fetches logical block 2 of the file and is able to complete the user’s
request. Had an entire block been written, the system could have skipped step 3 and have simply
written the data to the disk without first reading in the old contents. This incremental filling of
the write request is transparent to the user’s process because that process is blocked from
running during the entire procedure. The filling is transparent to other processes; because the
inode is locked during the process, any attempted access by any other process will be blocked
until the write has completed.

If the system crashes while data for a particular block are in the cache but have not yet been
written to disk, the filesystem on the disk will be incorrect and those data will be lost. The
consistency of critical filesystem data is maintained using the techniques described in Section
9.6, but it is still possible to lose recently written application data. So that lost data are
minimized, writes for dirty buffer blocks are forced, at most, 30 seconds after they are written.
There is also a system call, fsync, that a process can use to force all dirty blocks of a single file to
be written to disk immediately; this synchronization is useful for ensuring database consistency
or before removing an editor backup file.

9.10 The Berkeley Fast Filesystem

A traditional UNIX filesystem is described by its superblock, which contains the basic
parameters of the filesystem. These parameters include the number of data blocks in the
filesystem, a count of the maximum number of files, and a pointer to the free list, which is a list
of all the free blocks in the filesystem.

A 150-Mbyte traditional UNIX filesystem consists of 4 Mbyte of inodes followed by 146 Mbyte of
data. That organization segregates the inode information from the data; thus, accessing a file
normally incurs a long seek from the file’s inode to its data. Files in a single directory typically
are not allocated consecutive slots in the 4 Mbyte of inodes, causing many nonconsecutive disk
blocks to be read when many inodes in a single directory are accessed.

The allocation of data blocks to files also is suboptimal. The traditional filesystem
implementation uses a 512-byte physical block size. However, the next sequential data block
often is not on the same cylinder, so seeks between 512-byte data transfers are required

frequently. This combination of small block size and scattered placement severely limits
filesystem throughput.

The first work on the UNIX filesystem at Berkeley attempted to improve both the reliability and
the throughput of the filesystem. The developers improved reliability by staging modifications to
critical filesystem information so that the modifications could be either completed or repaired
cleanly by a program after a crash [McKusick & Kowalski, 1994]. Doubling the block size of the
filesystem improved the performance of the 4.0BSD filesystem by a factor of more than two
when compared with the 3BSD filesystem. This doubling caused each disk transfer to access
twice as many data blocks and eliminated the need for indirect blocks for many files. In the
remainder of this section, we shall refer to the filesystem with these changes as the 3BSD
filesystem.

The performance improvement in the 3BSD filesystem gave a strong indication that increasing
the block size was a good method for improving throughput. Although the throughput had
doubled, the 3BSD filesystem was still using only about 4 percent of the maximum disk
throughput. The main problem was that the order of blocks on the free list quickly became
scrambled as files were created and removed. Eventually, the free-list order became entirely
random, causing files to have their blocks allocated randomly over the disk. This randomness
forced a seek before every block access. Although the 3BSD filesystem provided transfer rates of
up to 175 Kbyte per second when it was first created, the scrambling of the free list caused this
rate to deteriorate to an average of 30 Kbyte per second after a few weeks of moderate use.
There was no way of restoring the performance of a 3BSD filesystem except to recreate the
system.

Organization of the Berkeley Fast Filesystem

The first version of the current BSD filesystem appeared in 4.2BSD [McKusick et al., 1984]. This
version is still in use today as UFS1. In the FreeBSD filesystem organization (as in the 3BSD
filesystem organization), each disk drive contains one or more filesystems. A FreeBSD filesystem
is described by its superblock, located at the beginning of the filesystem’s disk partition. Because
the superblock contains critical data, it is replicated to protect against catastrophic loss. This
replication is done when the filesystem is created. Since most of the superblock data do not
change, the copies do not need to be referenced unless a disk failure causes the default
superblock to be corrupted. The data in the superblock that does change include a few flags and
some summary information that can easily be recreated if an alternative superblock has to be
used.

To allow support for filesystem fragments as small as a single 512-byte disk sector, the minimum
size of a filesystem block is 4096 bytes. The block size can be any power of 2 greater than or
equal to 4096. The block size is recorded in the filesystem’s superblock, so it is possible for
filesystems with different block sizes to be accessed simultaneously on the same system. The
block size must be selected at the time that the filesystem is created; it cannot be changed
subsequently without the filesystem being rebuilt.

The BSD filesystem organization divides a disk partition into one or more areas, each of which is
called a cylinder group. Historically, a cylinder group comprised one or more consecutive
cylinders on a disk. Although FreeBSD still uses the same data structure to describe cylinder
groups, the practical definition of them has changed. When the filesystem was first designed, it
could get an accurate view of the disk geometry including the cylinder and track boundaries and
could accurately compute the rotational location of every sector. Modern disks hide this
information, providing fictitious numbers of blocks per track, tracks per cylinder, and cylinders
per disk. Indeed, in modern RAID arrays, the “disk” that is presented to the filesystem may
really be composed from a collection of disks in the RAID array. While some research has been
done to figure out the true geometry of a disk [Griffin et al., 2002; Lumb et al., 2002; Schindler
et al., 2002], the complexity of using such information effectively is high. Modern disks have
greater numbers of sectors per track on the outer part of the disk than the inner part, which
makes calculating the rotational position of any given sector complex. So when the design for
UFS2 was drawn up, we decided to get rid of all the rotational layout code found in UFS1 and
simply assume that laying out files with numerically close block numbers (sequential being
viewed as optimal) would give the best performance. Thus, the cylinder-group structure is
retained in UFS2, but it is used only as a convenient way to manage logically close groups of
blocks. The rotational layout code had been disabled in UFS1 since the late 1980s, so as part of
the code base cleanup it was removed entirely.

Each cylinder group must fit into a single filesystem block. When creating a new filesystem, the
newfs utility calculates the maximum number of blocks that can be packed into a
cylinder-group map based on the filesystem block size. It then allocates the minimum number of
cylinder groups needed to describe the filesystem. A filesystem with 32-Kbyte blocks typically
has 1.4 cylinder groups per Gbyte.

Each cylinder group contains bookkeeping information that includes a redundant copy of the
superblock, space for inodes, a bitmap describing available blocks in the cylinder group, and
summary information describing the usage of data blocks within the cylinder group. The bitmap
of available blocks in the cylinder group replaces the traditional filesystem’s free list. For each
cylinder group in UFS1, a static number of inodes is allocated at filesystem-creation time. The
default policy is to allocate one inode per four filesystem fragments, with the expectation that

this amount will be far more than will ever be needed. For each cylinder group in UFS2, the
default is to reserve bitmap space to describe one inode per two filesystem fragments. In either
type of filesystem, the default may be changed only at the time that the filesystem is created.

The rationale for using cylinder groups is to create clusters of inodes that are spread over the
disk close to the blocks that they reference, instead of them all being located at the beginning of
the disk. The filesystem attempts to allocate file blocks close to the inodes that describe them to
avoid long seeks between getting the inode and getting its associated data. Also, when the inodes
are spread out, there is less chance of losing all of them in a single disk failure.

Although we decided to come up with a new on-disk inode format for UFS2, we chose not to
change the format of the superblock, the cylinder group maps, or the directories. Additional
information needed for the UFS2 superblock and cylinder groups is stored in spare fields of the
UFS1 superblock and cylinder groups. Maintaining the same format for these data structures
allows a single code base to be used for both UFS1 and UFS2. Because the only difference
between the two filesystems is in the format of their inodes, code can dereference pointers to
superblocks, cylinder groups, and directory entries without need to check what type of
filesystem is being accessed. To minimize conditional checking of code that references inodes,
the on-disk inode is converted to a common incore format when the inode is first read in from
the disk and converted back to its on-disk format when it is written back. The effect of this
decision is that there are only nine out of several hundred routines that are specific to UFS1
versus UFS2. The benefit of having a single code base for both filesystems is that it dramatically
reduces the maintenance cost. Outside the nine filesystem format-specific functions, fixing a bug
in the code fixes it for both filesystem types. A common code base also meant that as the
multiprocessing support was added, it only needed to be done once for the UFS family of
filesystems.

Boot Blocks

The UFS1 filesystem reserved an 8-Kbyte space at the beginning of the filesystem in which to
put a boot block. While this space seemed huge compared to the 1-Kbyte boot block that it
replaced, over time it has become increasingly difficult to cram the needed boot code into this
space. Consequently, we decided to revisit the boot-block size in UFS2.

The boot code has a list of locations to check for boot blocks. A boot block can be defined to start
at any 8-Kbyte boundary. We set up an initial list with four possible boot-block sizes: none, 8
Kbyte, 64 Kbyte, and 256 Kbyte. Each of these locations was selected for a particular purpose.
Filesystems other than the root filesystem do not need to be bootable, so they can use a
boot-block size of zero. Also, filesystems on tiny media that need every block that they can get,

such as flash-based disks, can use a zero-size boot block. For architectures with simple boot
blocks, the traditional UFS1 8-Kbyte boot block can be used. More typically, the 64-Kbyte boot
block is used (for example, on the PC architecture with its need to support booting from a
myriad of busses and disk drivers).

We added the 256-Kbyte boot block in case some future architecture or application needs to set
aside a particularly large boot area. This space reservation is not strictly necessary, since new
sizes can be added to the list at any time, but it can take a long time before the updated list is
propagated to all the boot programs and loaders out on the existing systems. By adding the
option for a huge boot area now, we can ensure it will be readily available should it be needed on
short notice in the future.

An unexpected side effect of using a 64-Kbyte boot block for UFS2 is that if the partition had
previously had a UFS1 filesystem on it, the superblock for the former UFS1 filesystem may not
be overwritten. If an old version of fsck that does not first look for a UFS2 filesystem is run and
finds the UFS1 superblock, it can incorrectly try to rebuild the UFS1 filesystem, destroying the
UFS2 filesystem in the process. So when building UFS2 filesystems, the newfs utility looks for
old UFS1 superblocks and zeros them out.

Optimization of Storage Utilization

Data are laid out such that large blocks can be transferred in a single disk operation, greatly
increasing filesystem throughput. A file in the new filesystem might be composed of 32,768-byte
data blocks, as compared to the 1024-byte blocks of the 3BSD filesystem; disk accesses would
thus transfer up to 32 times as much information per disk transaction. In large files, several
blocks can be allocated consecutively, so even larger data transfers are possible before a seek is
required.

The main problem with larger blocks is that most BSD filesystems contain primarily small files.
A uniformly large block size will waste space. For large blocks to be used without significant
waste, small files must be stored more efficiently. To increase space efficiency, the filesystem
allows the division of a single filesystem block into one or more fragments. The fragment size
is specified at the time that the filesystem is created; each filesystem block optionally can be
broken into two, four, or eight fragments, each of which is addressable. The lower bound on the
fragment size is constrained by the disk-sector size, which is typically 4096 byte. The block map
associated with each cylinder group records the space available in a cylinder group in fragments;
to determine whether a block is available, the system examines aligned fragments. Figure 9.31
shows a piece of a block map from a filesystem with 16,384-byte blocks and 4096-byte
fragments, hereinafter referred to as a 16,384/4096 filesystem.

Figure 9.31 Example of the layout of blocks and fragments in a 16,384/4096 filesystem. Each
bit in the map records the status of a fragment; a “-” means that the fragment is in use, whereas
a “1” means that the fragment is available for allocation. In this example, fragments 0 through 5,
10, and 11 are in use, whereas fragments 6 through 9 and 12 through 15 are free. Fragments of
adjacent blocks cannot be used as a full block, even if they are large enough. In this example,
fragments 6 through 9 cannot be allocated as a full block; only fragments 12 through 15 can be
coalesced into a full block.

On a 16,384/4096 filesystem, a file is represented by zero or more 16,384-byte blocks of data,
possibly including a single fragmented block. If the system must fragment a block to obtain
space for a few data, it makes the remaining fragments of the block available for allocation to
other files. As an example, consider a 44,000-byte file stored on a 16,384/4096 filesystem. This
file would use two full-size blocks and one three-fragment portion of another block. If no block
with three aligned fragments were available at the time that the file was created, a full-size block
would be split, yielding the necessary fragments and a single unused fragment. This remaining
fragment could be allocated to another file as needed.

Reading and Writing to a File

Having opened a file, a process can do reads or writes on it. The procedural path through the
kernel is shown in Figure 9.32. If a read is requested, it is channeled through the ffs_read()
routine. The ffs_read() routine is responsible for converting the read into one or more reads of
logical file blocks. A logical block request is then handed off to ufs_bmap(). The ufs_bmap()
routine is responsible for converting a logical block number to a physical block number by
interpreting the direct and indirect block pointers in an inode. The ffs_read() routine requests
the block I/O system to return a buffer filled with the contents of the disk block. If two or more
logically sequential blocks are read from a file, the process is assumed to be reading the file
sequentially. Here, ufs_bmap() returns two values: first, the disk address of the requested block
and then the number of contiguous blocks that follow that block on disk. The requested block
and the number of contiguous blocks that follow it are passed to the cluster() routine. If the file
is being accessed sequentially, the cluster() routine will do a single large I/O on the entire range
of sequential blocks. If the file is not being accessed sequentially (as determined by a seek to a
different part of the file preceding the read), only the requested block or a subset of the cluster
will be read. If the file has had a long series of sequential reads, or if the number of contiguous
blocks is small, the system will issue one or more requests for read-ahead blocks in anticipation

that the process will soon want those blocks. The details of block clustering are described at the
end of this section.

Figure 9.32 Procedural interface to reading and writing.

Each time that a process does a write system call, the system checks to see whether the size of
the file has increased. A process may overwrite data in the middle of an existing file—in which
case space would usually have been allocated already (unless the file contains a hole in that
location). If the file must be extended, the request is rounded up to the next fragment size, and
only that much space is allocated (see “Allocation Mechanisms” later in this section for the
details of space allocation). The write system call is channeled through the ffs_write() routine.
The ffs_write() routine is responsible for converting the write into one or more writes of logical
file blocks. A logical block request is then handed off to ffs_balloc(). The ffs_balloc() routine is
responsible for interpreting the direct and indirect block pointers in an inode to find the location
for the associated physical block pointer. If a disk block does not already exist, the ffs_alloc()
routine is called to request a new block of the appropriate size. After calling chkdq() to ensure
that the user has not exceeded his quota, the block is allocated, and the address of the new block
is stored in the inode or indirect block. The address of the new or already-existing block is
returned, and ffs_write() allocates a buffer to hold the contents of the block. The user’s data are
copied into the returned buffer, and the buffer is marked as dirty. If the buffer has been filled
completely, it is passed to the cluster() routine. When a maximum-size cluster has been
accumulated, a noncontiguous block is allocated, or a seek is done to another part of the file, and

the accumulated blocks are grouped together into a single I/O operation that is queued to be
written to the disk. If the buffer has not been filled completely, it is not considered immediately
for writing. Instead, the buffer is held in the expectation that the process will soon want to add
more data to it. It is not released until it is needed for some other block—that is, until it has
reached the head of the free list or until a user process does an fsync system call. When a file
acquires its first dirty block, it is placed on a 30-second timer queue. If it still has dirty blocks
when the timer expires, all its dirty buffers are written. If it subsequently is written again, it will
be returned to the 30-second timer queue.

Repeated small write requests may expand the file one fragment at a time. The problem with
expanding a file one fragment at a time is that data may be copied many times as a fragmented
block expands to a full block. Fragment reallocation can be minimized if the user process writes
a full block at a time, except for a partial block at the end of the file. Since filesystems with
different block sizes may reside on the same system, the filesystem interface provides
application programs with the optimal size for a read or write. This facility is used by the
standard I/O library that many application programs use and by certain system utilities, such as
archivers and loaders, that do their own I/O management. To avoid excessive copying for slowly
growing files, the filesystem allows only direct blocks of files to refer to fragments.

If the layout policies (described at the end of this section) are to be effective, a filesystem cannot
be kept completely full. A parameter, termed the free-space reserve, gives the minimum
percentage of filesystem blocks that should be kept free. If the number of free blocks drops
below this level, only the superuser is allowed to allocate blocks. This parameter can be changed
any time that the filesystem is unmounted. When the number of free blocks approaches zero,
the filesystem throughput tends to be cut in half because the filesystem is unable to localize
blocks in a file. If a filesystem’s throughput drops because of overfilling, it can be restored by
removal of files until the amount of free space once again reaches the minimum acceptable level.
Users can restore locality to get faster access rates for files created during periods of little free
space by copying the file to a new one and removing the original one when enough space is
available.

Layout Policies

Each filesystem is parameterized so that it can be adapted to the characteristics of the
application environment in which it is being used. These parameters are summarized in Table
9.4. In most situations, the default parameters work well, but in an environment with only a few
large files or an environment with just a few huge directories, the performance can be enhanced
by adjusting the layout parameters accordingly.

Table 9.4 Important parameters maintained by the filesystem.

The filesystem layout policies are divided into two distinct parts. At the top level are global
policies that use summary information to make decisions regarding the placement of new inodes
and data blocks. These routines are responsible for deciding the placement of new directories
and files. They also build contiguous block layouts and decide when to force a long seek to a new
cylinder group because there is insufficient space left in the current cylinder group to do
reasonable layouts.

Below the global-policy routines are the local-allocation routines. These routines use a locally
optimal scheme to lay out data blocks. The local-allocation routines are responsible for
managing the allocation bitmaps and ensuring that resources are not double allocated. Thus, the
policy layer does not have to worry about requesting an already allocated block. If the
implementation layer finds that a requested block is already allocated, it simply scans through
the map to find the closest available free block. The result of this separation is that once the
implementation layer is working properly, filesystem designers are free to try out whatever
hair-brained policy ideas that they want without fear of corrupting the filesystem. The
implementation layer for FFS was written and debugged in 1982 and has not been changed since.
Further refinements to the filesystem have been done at the policy layer. Separating policy from
implementation is an important design principle when designing software systems, especially
when they are mission-critical systems. The policy layer allows new ideas to be implemented
and tested quickly. Once validated, those ideas can be deployed without danger of
compromising the integrity of the system.

Two methods for improving filesystem performance are to increase the locality of reference to
minimize seek latency [Trivedi, 1980] and to improve the layout of data to make larger transfers
possible [Nevalainen & Vesterinen, 1977]. The global layout policies try to improve performance
by clustering related information. They cannot attempt to localize all data references but must
instead try to spread unrelated data among different cylinder groups. If too much localization is
attempted, the local cylinder group may run out of space, forcing further related data to be
scattered to nonlocal cylinder groups. Taken to an extreme, total localization can result in a

single huge cluster of data resembling the 3BSD filesystem. The global policies try to balance the
two conflicting goals of localizing data that are concurrently accessed while spreading out
unrelated data.

One allocatable resource is inodes. Inodes of files in the same directory frequently are accessed
together. For example, the list-directory command, ls, may access the inode for each file in a
directory. The inode layout policy tries to place all the inodes of files in a directory in the same
cylinder group. To ensure that files are distributed throughout the filesystem, the system uses a
different policy to allocate directory inodes. When a directory is being created in the root of the
filesystem, it is placed in a cylinder group with a greater-than-average number of free blocks and
inodes, and with the smallest number of directories. The intent of this policy is to allow inode
clustering to succeed most of the time. When a directory is created lower in the tree, it is placed
in a cylinder group with a greater-than-average number of free blocks and inodes near its parent
directory. The intent of this policy is to reduce the distance tree-walking applications must seek
as they move from directory to directory in a depth-first search while still allowing inode
clustering to succeed most of the time.

The filesystem allocates inodes within a cylinder group using a first-free strategy. Although this
method allocates the inodes randomly within a cylinder group, it keeps the allocation down to
the smallest number of inode blocks possible. Even when all the possible inodes in a cylinder
group are allocated, they can be accessed with 10 to 20 disk transfers. This allocation strategy
puts a small and constant upper bound on the number of disk transfers required to access the
inodes for all the files in a directory. In contrast, the 3BSD filesystem typically requires one disk
transfer to fetch the inode for each file in a directory.

The other major resource is the data blocks. Data blocks for a file typically are accessed together.
The policy routines try to place data blocks for a file in the same cylinder group, preferably laid
out contiguously. The problem with allocating all the data blocks in the same cylinder group is
that large files quickly use up the available space, forcing a spillover to other areas. Further,
using all the space also causes future allocations for any file in the cylinder group to spill to
other areas. Ideally, none of the cylinder groups should ever become completely full. The
heuristic chosen is to redirect block allocation to a different cylinder group after every few
Mbyte of allocation. The spillover points are intended to force block allocation to be redirected
when any file has used about 25 percent of the data blocks in a cylinder group. In day-to-day use,
the heuristics appear to work well in minimizing the number of completely filled cylinder groups.
Although this heuristic appears to benefit small files at the expense of larger files, it really aids
both file sizes. The small files are helped because there are nearly always blocks available in the
cylinder group for them to use. The large files benefit because they are able to use the
contiguous space available in the cylinder group and then to move on, leaving behind the blocks

scattered around the cylinder group. Although these scattered blocks are fine for small files that
need only a block or two, they slow down big files that are best stored on a single, large group of
blocks that can be read in a few disk revolutions.

The newly chosen cylinder group for block allocation is the next cylinder group that has a
greater-than-average number of free blocks left. Although big files tend to be spread out over the
disk, several Mbyte of data typically are accessible before a seek to a new cylinder group is
necessary. Thus, the time to do one long seek is small compared to the time spent in the new
cylinder group doing the I/O.

In an effort to speed random access to files and to speed the checking of metadata by fsck, the
filesystem holds the first 4 percent of the data blocks in each cylinder group for the use of
metadata. The policy routines preferentially place metadata in the metadata area and everything
else in the blocks that follow the metadata area. The size of the metadata area does not need to
be precisely calculated as it is used just as a hint of where to place the metadata by the policy
routines. If the metadata area fills up, then the metadata can be placed in the regular-blocks
area, and if the regular-blocks area fills up, then the regular blocks can be placed in the
metadata area. This decision happens on a cylinder group by cylinder group basis, so some
cylinder groups can overflow their metadata area while others do not overflow it. The policy is to
place all metadata in the same cylinder group as their inode. Spreading the metadata across
cylinder groups generally results in reduced filesystem performance.

The one exception to the metadata placement policy is for the first indirect block of the file. The
policy is to place the first (single) indirect block inline with the file data (e.g., it tries to lay out
the first 12 direct blocks contiguously, followed immediately by the indirect block, followed
immediately by the data blocks referenced from the indirect block). Putting the first indirect
block inline with the data rather than in the metadata area is to avoid two extra seeks when
reading it. These two extra seeks would noticeably slow down access to a file that uses only the
first few blocks referenced from its indirect block.

Only the second and third level indirects, along with the indirects that they reference, are
allocated in the metadata area. The nearly contiguous allocation of this metadata close to the
inode that references them noticeably improves the random access time to the file as well as
speeding up the running time of fsck. Also, the disk track cache is often filled with much of a
file’s metadata when the second-level indirect block is read, thus often speeding up even the
sequential reading time for the file.

In addition to putting indirect blocks in the metadata area, it is also helpful to put the blocks
holding the contents of directories there, too. Putting the contents of directories in the metadata
area gives a speedup to directory tree traversal since the data is a short seek away from where

the directory inode was read and may already be in the disk’s track cache from other directory
reads done in its cylinder group.

Allocation Mechanisms

The global-policy routines call local-allocation routines with requests for specific blocks. The
local-allocation routines will always allocate the requested block if it is free; otherwise, they will
allocate a free block of the requested size that is closest to the requested block. If the global
layout policies had complete information, they could always request unused blocks and the
allocation routines would be reduced to simple bookkeeping. However, maintaining complete
information is costly; thus, the global layout policy uses heuristics based on the partial
information that is available.

If a requested block is not available, the local allocator uses a three-level allocation strategy:

1. Use the next available block closest to the requested block in the same cylinder group.

2. If the cylinder group is full, quadratically hash the cylinder-group number to choose another
cylinder group in which to look for a free block. Quadratic hash is used because of its speed in
finding unused slots in nearly full hash tables [Knuth, 1975]. Filesystems that are parameterized
to maintain at least 8 percent free space rarely need to use this strategy. Filesystems used
without free space typically have so few free blocks available that almost any allocation is
random; the most important characteristic of the strategy used under such conditions is that it
be fast.

3. Apply an exhaustive search to all cylinder groups. This search is necessary because the
quadratic rehash may not check all cylinder groups.

The task of managing block and fragment allocation is done by ffs_balloc(). If the file is being
written and a block pointer is zero or points to a fragment that is too small to hold the additional
data, ffs_balloc() calls the allocation routines to obtain a new block. If the file needs to be
extended, one of two conditions exists:

1. The file contains no fragmented blocks (and the final block in the file contains insufficient
space to hold the new data). If space exists in a block already allocated, the space is filled with
new data. If the remainder of the new data consists of more than a full block, a full block is
allocated and the first full block of new data are written there. This process is repeated until less
than a full block of new data remains. If the remaining new data to be written will fit in less than
a full block, a block with the necessary number of fragments is located; otherwise, a full block is
located. The remaining new data are written into the located space. However, to avoid excessive

copying for slowly growing files, the filesystem allows only direct blocks of files to refer to
fragments.

2. The file contains one or more fragments (and the fragments contain insufficient space to hold
the new data). If the size of the new data plus the size of the data already in the fragments
exceeds the size of a full block, a new block is allocated. The contents of the fragments are copied
to the beginning of the block and the remainder of the block is filled with new data. The process
then continues as in step 1. Otherwise, a set of fragments big enough to hold the data is located;
if enough of the rest of the current block is free, the filesystem can avoid a copy by using that
block. The contents of the existing fragments, appended with the new data, are written into the
allocated space.

The ffs_balloc() routine is also responsible for allocating blocks to hold indirect pointers. It
must also deal with the special case in which a process seeks past the end of a file and begins
writing. Because of the constraint that only the final block of a file may be a fragment,
ffs_balloc() must first ensure that any previous fragment has been upgraded to a full-size block.

On completing a successful allocation, the allocation routines return the block or fragment
number to be used; ffs_balloc() then updates the appropriate block pointer in the inode. Having
allocated a block, the system is ready to allocate a buffer to hold the block’s contents so that the
block can be written to disk.

The procedural description of the allocation process is shown in Figure 9.33. Ffs_balloc() is the
routine responsible for determining when a new block must be allocated. It first calls the
layout-policy routine ffs_blkpref() to select the most desirable block based on the preference
from the global-policy routines that were described earlier in this section. If a fragment has
already been allocated and needs to be extended, ffs_balloc() calls ffs_realloccg(). If nothing
has been allocated yet, ffs_balloc() calls ffs_alloc().

Figure 9.33 Procedural interface to block allocation.

Ffs_realloccg() first tries to extend the current fragment in place. Consider the sample block of
an allocation map with two fragments allocated from it, shown in Figure 9.34. The first fragment
can be extended from a size 2 fragment to a size 3 or a size 4 fragment, since the two adjacent
fragments are unused. The second fragment cannot be extended, as it occupies the end of the
block, and fragments are not allowed to span blocks. If ffs_realloccg() is able to expand the
current fragment in place, the map is updated appropriately and it returns. If the fragment
cannot be extended, ffs_realloccg() calls the ffs_alloc() routine to get a new fragment. The old
fragment is copied to the beginning of the new fragment, and the old fragment is freed.

Figure 9.34 Sample block with two allocated fragments.

The bookkeeping tasks of allocation are handled by ffs_alloc(). It first verifies that a block is
available in the desired cylinder group by checking the filesystem summary information. If the
summary information shows that the cylinder group is full, ffs_alloc() quadratically rehashes
through the summary information looking for a cylinder group with free space. Having found a
cylinder group with space, ffs_alloc() calls either the fragment-allocation routine or the
block-allocation routine to acquire a fragment or block.

The block-allocation routine is given a preferred block. If that block is available, it is returned. If
the block is unavailable, the allocation routine tries to find another block in the same cylinder
group that is close to the requested block. It looks for an available block by scanning forward
through the free-block map, starting from the requested location until it finds an available block.

The fragment-allocation routine is given a preferred fragment. If that fragment is available, it is
returned. If the requested fragment is not available, and the filesystem is configured to optimize
for space utilization, the filesystem uses a best-fit strategy for fragment allocation. The
fragment-allocation routine checks the cylinder-group summary information, starting with the
entry for the desired size, and scanning larger sizes until an available fragment is found. If there
are no fragments of the appropriate size or larger, then a full-size block is allocated and is
broken up.

If a fragment of an appropriate size is listed in the fragment summary, then the allocation
routine expects to find it in the allocation map. To speed up the process of scanning the
potentially large allocation map, the filesystem uses a table-driven algorithm. Each byte in the
map is treated as an index into a fragment-descriptor table. Each entry in the

fragment-descriptor table describes the fragments that are free for that corresponding map
entry. Thus, by doing a logical AND with the bit corresponding to the desired fragment size, the
allocator can determine quickly whether the desired fragment is contained within a given
allocation-map entry. As an example, consider the entry from an allocation map for the
32,768/4096 filesystem shown in Figure 9.35. The map entry shown has already been
fragmented, with a single fragment allocated at the beginning and a size 2 fragment allocated in
the middle. Remaining unused is another size 2 fragment and a size 3 fragment. Thus, if we look
up entry 115 in the fragment table, we find the entry shown in Figure 9.36. If we were looking for
a size 3 fragment, we would inspect the third bit and find that we had been successful; if we were
looking for a size 4 fragment, we would inspect the fourth bit and find that we needed to
continue. The C code that implements this algorithm is as follows:

for (i = 0; i < MAPSIZE; i++)
  if (fragtbl[allocmap[i]] & (1 << (size - 1)))
     break;

Figure 9.35 Map entry for a 32,768/4096 filesystem.

Figure 9.36 Fragment-table entry for entry 115.

Using a best-fit policy has the benefit of minimizing disk fragmentation; however, it has the
undesirable property of maximizing the number of fragment-to-fragment copies that must be
made when a process writes a file in many small pieces. To avoid this behavior, the system can
configure filesystems to optimize for time rather than for space. The first time that a process
does a small write on a filesystem configured for time optimization, it is allocated a best-fit
fragment. On the second small write, however, a full-size block is allocated, with the unused
portion being freed. Later small writes are able to extend the fragment in place, rather than
requiring additional copy operations. Under certain circumstances, this policy can cause the
disk to become heavily fragmented. The system tracks this condition and automatically reverts
to optimizing for space if the percentage of fragmentation reaches one-half of the minimum
free-space limit.

Block Clustering

Most machines running FreeBSD do not have separate I/O processors. The main CPU must take
an interrupt after each disk I/O operation; if there is more disk I/O to be done, it must select the
next buffer to be transferred and must start the operation on that buffer. Before the advent of
track-caching controllers, the filesystem obtained its highest throughput by leaving a gap after
each block to allow time for the next I/O operation to be scheduled. If the blocks were laid out
without a gap, the throughput would suffer because the disk would have to rotate nearly an
entire revolution to pick up the start of the next block.

Track-caching controllers have a large buffer in the controller that continues to accumulate the
data coming in from the disk even after the requested data have been received. If the next
request is for the immediately following block, the controller will already have most of the block
in its buffer, so it will not have to wait a revolution to pick up the block. Thus, for the purposes
of reading, it is possible to nearly double the throughput of the filesystem by laying out the files
contiguously rather than leaving gaps after each block.

Unfortunately, the track cache is less useful for writing. Because the kernel does not provide the
next data block until the previous one completes, there is still a delay during which the
controller does not have the data to write, and it ends up waiting a revolution to get back to the
beginning of the next block. One solution to this problem is to have the controller give its
completion interrupt after it has copied the data into its cache, but before it has finished writing
them. This early interrupt gives the CPU time to request the next I/O before the previous one
completes, thus providing a continuous stream of data to write to the disk.

This approach has one seriously negative side effect. When the I/O completion interrupt is
delivered, the kernel expects the data to be on stable store. Filesystem integrity and user
applications using the fsync system call depend on these semantics. These semantics will be
violated if the power fails after the I/O completion interrupt but before the data are written to
disk. Some vendors eliminate this problem by using nonvolatile memory for the controller cache
and providing microcode restart after power fail to determine which operations need to be
completed. Because this option is expensive, few controllers provide this functionality.

Newer disks resolve this problem with a technique called tag queueing. With tag queueing,
each request passed to the disk driver is assigned a unique numeric tag. Most disk controllers
supporting tag queueing will accept at least 16 pending I/O requests. After each request is
finished, the tag of the completed request is returned as part of the completion interrupt. If
several contiguous blocks are presented to the disk controller, it can begin work on the next one
while the tag for the previous one is being returned. Thus, tag queueing allows applications to be

accurately notified when their data has reached stable store without incurring the penalty of lost
disk revolutions when writing contiguous blocks.

One approach to dealing with disks that report completion before the data are on stable store is
the Coerced Cache Eviction Project in which the disk cache is forcibly flushed at each ordering
point to maintain consistency in its journaling filesystem [Rajimwale et al., 2011]. Another
approach is the No-Order File System in which the filesystem is redesigned to provide crash
consistency without ordering writes by employing a technique called backpointer-based
consistency [Chidambaram et al., 2012].

To maximize throughput on systems without tag queueing or nonvolatile controller memory, the
FreeBSD system implements I/O clustering. Clustering helps improve performance on all
systems by reducing the number of I/O requests through the aggregation of many small requests
into a smaller number of big ones. Clustering was first done by Santa Cruz Operations [Peacock,
1988] and Sun Microsystems [McVoy & Kleiman, 1991]; the idea was later adapted to 4.4BSD
and thus to FreeBSD [Seltzer et al., 1993]. As a file is being written, the allocation routines try to
allocate up to maxcontig (typically 256 Kbyte) of data in contiguous disk blocks. Instead of the
buffers holding these blocks being written as they are filled, their output is delayed. The cluster
is completed when the limit of maxcontig of data is reached, the file is closed, or the cluster
cannot grow because the next sequential block on the disk is already in use by another file. If the
cluster size is limited by a previous allocation to another file, the filesystem is notified and is
given the opportunity to find a larger set of contiguous blocks into which the cluster may be
placed. If the reallocation is successful, the cluster continues to grow. When the cluster is
complete, the buffers making up the cluster of blocks are aggregated and passed to the disk
controller as a single I/O request. The data can then be streamed out to the disk in a single
uninterrupted transfer.

A similar scheme is used for reading. If the ffs_read() discovers that a file is being read
sequentially, it inspects the number of contiguous blocks returned by ufs_bmap() to look for
clusters of contiguously allocated blocks. It then allocates a set of buffers big enough to hold the
contiguous set of blocks and passes them to the disk controller as a single I/O request. The I/O
can then be done in one operation. Although read clustering is not needed when track-caching
controllers are available, it reduces the interrupt load from systems that have them, and it
speeds low-cost systems that do not have them.

For clustering to be effective, the filesystem must be able to allocate large clusters of contiguous
blocks to files. If the filesystem always tried to begin allocation for a file at the beginning of a
large set of contiguous blocks, it would soon use up its contiguous space. Instead, it uses an
algorithm similar to that used for the management of fragments. Initially, file blocks are

allocated via the standard algorithm described in the previous two subsections. Reallocation is
invoked when the standard algorithm does not result in a contiguous allocation. The
reallocation code searches a cluster map that summarizes the available clusters of blocks in the
cylinder group. It allocates the first free cluster that is large enough to hold the file and then
moves the file to this contiguous space. This process continues until the current allocation has
grown to a size equal to the maximum permissible I/O operation (maxcontig). At that point, the
I/O is done and the process of allocating space begins again.

Unlike fragment reallocation, block reallocation to different clusters of blocks does not require
extra I/O or memory-to-memory copying. The data to be written are held in delayed write
buffers. Within that buffer is the disk location to which the data are to be written. When the
block cluster is relocated, it takes little time to walk the list of buffers in the cluster and to
change the disk addresses to which they are to be written. When the I/O occurs, the final
destination has been selected and will not change.

To speed the operation of finding clusters of blocks, the filesystem maintains a cluster map with
1 bit per block (in addition to the map with 1 bit per fragment). It also has summary information
showing how many sets of blocks there are for each possible cluster size. The summary
information allows it to avoid looking for cluster sizes that do not exist. The cluster map is used
because it is faster to scan than is the much larger fragment bitmap. The size of the map is
important because the map must be scanned bit by bit. Unlike fragments, clusters of blocks are
not constrained to be aligned within the map. Thus, the table-lookup optimization done for
fragments cannot be used for lookup of clusters.

The filesystem relies on the allocation of contiguous blocks to achieve high levels of performance.
The fragmentation of free space may increase with time or with filesystem utilization. This
fragmentation can degrade performance as the filesystem ages. The effects of utilization and
aging were measured on over 50 filesystems at Harvard University. The measured filesystems
ranged in age, since initial creation, from one to three years. The fragmentation of free space on
most of the measured filesystems caused performance to degrade no more than 10 percent from
that of a newly created empty filesystem. The most severe degradation measured was 30 percent
on a highly active filesystem that had many small files and was used to spool USENET news
[Seltzer et al., 1995].

Extent-Based Allocation

With the addition of dynamic block reallocation in the early 1990s [Seltzer & Smith, 1996], the
UFS1 filesystem has had the ability to allocate most files contiguously on the disk. The metadata
describing a large file consist of indirect blocks with long runs of sequential block numbers, as

shown in Figure 9.37(a). For quick access while a file is active, the kernel tries to keep all a file’s
metadata in memory. With UFS2, the space required to hold the metadata for a file is doubled as
every block pointer grows from 32 bits to 64 bits. To provide a more compact representation,
many filesystems use an extent-based representation. A typical extent-based representation uses
pairs of block numbers and lengths. Figure 9.37(b) represents the same set of block numbers as
Figure 9.37(a) in an extent-based format. If the file can be laid out nearly contiguously, this
representation provides a compact description. However, randomly or slowly written files can
end up with many noncontiguous block allocations, which will produce a representation that
requires more space than the one used by UFS1. This representation also has the drawback that
it can require much computation to perform random-access to the file, since the block number
needs to be computed by adding up the sizes starting from the beginning of the file until the
desired seek offset is reached.

Figure 9.37 Alternative file metadata representations.

To gain most of the efficiencies of extents without the random access inefficiencies, UFS2 has
added a field to the inode that will allow that inode to use a larger block size. Small, slowly
growing, or sparse files set this value to the regular filesystem block size and represent their data
in the traditional way shown in Figure 9.37(a). However, when the filesystem detects a large,
dense file, it can set this inode-block-size field to a value 2 to 16 times the filesystem block size.
Figure 9.37(c) represents the same set of block numbers as Figure 9.37(a), with the
inode-block-size field set to 4 times the filesystem block size. Each block pointer references a
piece of disk storage that is four times larger, which reduces the metadata storage requirement
by 75 percent. Since every block pointer other than possibly the last one references an equal-size
block, computation of random access offsets is just as fast as in the traditional metadata
representation. Unlike the traditional extent-based representation that can double the metadata
space requirement for certain datasets, this representation will always result in less space
dedicated to metadata.

The drawback to this approach is that once a file has committed to using a larger block size, it
can only use blocks of that size. If the filesystem runs out of big blocks, then the file can no
longer grow, and either the application will get an “out-of-space” error or the filesystem has to
recreate the metadata with the standard filesystem block size. The current plan is to write the
code to recreate the metadata. While recreating the metadata usually will cause a long pause, we
expect that condition to be rare and not a noticeable problem in real use.

Exercises

9.1 What are the seven classes of operations handled by the hierarchical file-system?

9.2 What is the purpose of the inode data structure?

9.3 How does the system select an inode for replacement when a new inode must be brought in
from disk?

9.4 Why are directory entries not allowed to span chunks?

9.5 Describe the steps involved in looking up a pathname component.

9.6 Why are hard links not permitted to span filesystems?

9.7 Describe how the interpretation of a symbolic link containing an absolute pathname is
different from that of a symbolic link containing a relative pathname.

9.8 Explain why unprivileged users are not permitted to make hard links to directories but are
permitted to make symbolic links to directories.

9.9 How can hard links be used to gain access to files that could not be accessed if a symbolic
link were used instead?

9.10 How does the system recognize loops caused by symbolic links? Suggest an alternative
scheme for doing loop detection.

9.11 How do quotas differ from the file-size resource limits described in Section 5.12?

9.12 How does the kernel determine whether a file has an associated quota?

9.13 Draw a picture showing the effect of processing an exclusive-lock request by process 1 on
bytes 7 to 10 to the lock list shown in Figure 9.15. Which of the overlap cases of Figure 9.14 apply
to this example?

9.14 In the absence of soft updates, which three FFS operations must be done synchronously to
ensure that the filesystem can always be recovered deterministically after a crash (barring
unrecoverable hardware errors)?

9.15 What are the guarantees made by the fsync system call?

9.16 Name the five ordering constraints that must be maintained when a file is removed.
Describe how soft updates maintains this ordering.

9.17 Give three uses for a filesystem snapshot.

9.18 Describe the eight steps needed to take a filesystem snapshot.

9.19 What are the three states that a block may have in a snapshot? Describe the actions taken
by a snapshot for each of these states when a write occurs. Describe the actions taken by a
snapshot for each of these states when a block is released.

9.20 What are the four classes of operations handled by the datastore filesystem?

9.21 Under what circumstances can a write request avoid reading a block from the disk?

9.22 What is the difference between a logical block and a physical block? Why is this distinction
important?

9.23 Give two reasons why increasing the basic block size in the old filesystem from 512 bytes to
1024 bytes more than doubled the system’s throughput.

9.24 How many blocks and fragments are allocated to a 31,200-byte file on a FFS with
4096-byte blocks and 1024-byte fragments? How many blocks and fragments are allocated to
this file on a FFS with 4096-byte blocks and 512-byte fragments? Also, answer these two
questions assuming that an inode has only 6 direct block pointers instead of 12.

9.25 Explain why the FFS maintains a 5 to 10 percent reserve of free space. What problems
would arise if the free-space reserve were set to zero?

9.26 What is a quadratic hash? Describe for what it is used in the FFS, and why it is used for
that purpose.

9.27 Why are the allocation policies for inodes different from those for data blocks?

9.28 Under what circumstances does block clustering provide benefits that cannot be obtained
with a disk-track cache?

*9.29 Give an example where the file-locking implementation is unable to detect a potential
deadlock.

*9.30 What problems would arise if files had to be allocated in a single contiguous piece of the
disk? Consider the problems created by multiple processes, random access, and files with holes.

**9.31 Design a system that allows the security level of the system to be lowered while the
system is still running in multiuser mode.

**9.32 Inodes could be allocated dynamically as part of a directory entry. Instead, the inode
allocation region is reserved when the filesystem is created. Why is the latter approach used?

References

Apple, 2003.

Apple, Mac OS X Essentials, Chapter 9 Filesystem, Section 12 Resource Forks, available from
http://developer.apple.com/techpubs/macosx/Essentials/SystemOverview/FileSystem/chapter
_9_section_12.html, 2003.

Best, 2000.

S.             Best,            JFS             overview,              available             from
http://www-128.ibm.com/developerworks/library/l-jfs.html, January 2000.

Chamberlin & Astrahan, 1981.

D. Chamberlin & M. Astrahan, “A History and Evaluation of System R,” Communications of the
ACM, vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 632–646, October 1981.

Chidambaram et al., 2012.

V. Chidambaram, T. Sharma, A. Arpaci-Dusseau, & R. Arpaci-Dusseau, “Consistency Without
Ordering,” Proceedings of the Tenth USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies,
available from http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~vijayc/nofs.htm, February 2012.

Chutani et al., 1992.

S. Chutani, O. Anderson, M. Kazar, W. Mason, & R. Sidebotham, “The Episode File System,”
USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 43–59, January 1992.

Dowse & Malone, 2002.

I. Dowse & D. Malone, “Recent Filesystem Optimizations on FreeBSD,” Proceedings of the
Freenix Track at the 2002 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, pp. 245–258, June 2002.

Elz, 1984.

K. R. Elz, “Resource Controls, Privileges, and Other MUSH,” USENIX Association Conference
Proceedings, pp. 183–191, June 1984.

Ganger et al., 2000.

G. Ganger, M. K. McKusick, C. Soules, & Y. Patt, “Soft Updates: A Solution to the Metadata
Update Problem in File Systems,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 18, no. 2, pp.
127–153, May 2000.

Ganger & Patt, 1994.

G. Ganger & Y. Patt, “Metadata Update Performance in File Systems,” USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation, pp. 49–60, November 1994.

Griffin et al., 2002.

J. L. Griffin, J. Schindler, S. W. Schlosser, J. S. Bucy, & G. R. Ganger, “Timing-Accurate Storage
Emulation,” Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies, pp.
75–88, January 2002.

Hagmann, 1987.

R. Hagmann, “Reimplementing the Cedar File System Using Logging and Group Commit,” ACM
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, pp. 155–162, November 1987.

Knuth, 1975.

D. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 3—Sorting and Searching, pp. 506–549,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1975.

Lumb et al., 2002.

C. R. Lumb, J. Schindler, & G. R. Ganger, “Freeblock Scheduling Outside of Disk Firmware,”
Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies, pp. 275–288,
January 2002.

McKusick, 2002.

M. K. McKusick, “Running fsck in the Background,” Proceedings of the BSDCon 2002
Conference, pp. 55–64, February 2002.

McKusick, 2003.

M. K. McKusick, “Enhancements to the Fast Filesystem to Support Multi-terabyte Storage
Systems,” Proceedings of the BSDCon 2003 Conference, pp. 79–90, September 2003.

McKusick et al., 1984.

M. K. McKusick, W. N. Joy, S. J. Leffler, & R. S. Fabry, “A Fast File System for UNIX,” ACM
Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 181–197, Association for Computing
Machinery, August 1984.

McKusick & Kowalski, 1994.

M. K. McKusick & T. J. Kowalski, “fsck: The UNIX File System Check Program,” in 4.4BSD
System Manager’s Manual, pp. 3:1–21, O’Reilly & Associates, Inc., Sebastopol, CA, 1994.

McVoy & Kleiman, 1991.

L. McVoy & S. Kleiman, “Extent-Like Performance from a UNIX File System,” USENIX
Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 33–44, January 1991.

Moran et al., 1990.

J. Moran, R. Sandberg, D. Coleman, J. Kepecs, & B. Lyon, “Breaking Through the NFS
Performance Barrier,” Proceedings of the Spring 1990 European UNIX Users Group
Conference, pp. 199–206, April 1990.

Nevalainen & Vesterinen, 1977.

O. Nevalainen & M. Vesterinen, “Determining Blocking Factors for Sequential Files by Heuristic
Methods,” The Computer Journal, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 245–247, August 1977.

Ousterhout, 1990.

J. Ousterhout, “Why Aren’t Operating Systems Getting Faster as Fast as Hardware?,” Summer
USENIX Conference, pp. 247–256, June 1990.

Peacock, 1988.

J. Peacock, “The Counterpoint Fast File System,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings,
pp. 243–249, January 1988.

Phillips, 2001.

D. Phillips, “A Directory Index for Ext2,” Proceedings of the USENIX Fifth Annual Linux
Showcase and Conference, November 2001.

Rajimwale et al., 2011.

A. Rajimwale, V. Chidambaram, D. Ramamurthi, A. Arpaci-Dusseau, & R. Arpaci-Dusseau,
“Coerced Cache Eviction and Discreet-Mode Journaling: Dealing with Misbehaving Disks,”
Proceedings of 41st Annual International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks,
available from http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~vijayc/cce.htm, June 2011.

Reiser, 2001.

H. Reiser, The Reiser File System, available from http://www.namesys.com/res_whol.shtml,
January 2001.

Rhodes, 2014.

T. Rhodes, FreeBSD Handbook, Chapter 3, Section 3.3 File System Access Control Lists,
available from http://www.FreeBSD.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/fs-acl.html,
March 2014.

Rosenblum & Ousterhout, 1992.

M. Rosenblum & J. Ousterhout, “The Design and Implementation of a Log-Structured File
System,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 26–52, Association for
Computing Machinery, February 1992.

Schindler et al., 2002.

J. Schindler, J. L. Griffin, C. R. Lumb, & G. R. Ganger, “Track-Aligned Extents: Matching Access
Patterns to Disk Drive Characteristics,” Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on File and
Storage Technologies, pp. 259–274, January 2002.

Seltzer et al., 1993.

M. Seltzer, K. Bostic, M. K. McKusick, & C. Staelin, “An Implementation of a Log-Structured File
System for UNIX,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 307–326, January 1993.

Seltzer et al., 2000.

M. Seltzer, G. Ganger, M. K. McKusick, K. Smith, C. Soules, & C. Stein, “Journaling versus Soft
Updates: Asynchronous Meta-data Protection in File Systems,” Proceedings of the San Diego
USENIX Conference, pp. 71–84, June 2000.

Seltzer & Smith, 1996.

M. Seltzer & K. Smith, “A Comparison of FFS Disk Allocation Algorithms,” Winter USENIX
Conference, pp. 15–25, January 1996.

Seltzer et al., 1995.

M. Seltzer, K. Smith, H. Balakrishnan, J. Chang, S. McMains, & V. Padmanabhan, “File System
Logging Versus Clustering: A Performance Comparison,” USENIX Association Conference
Proceedings, pp. 249–264, January 1995.

Stonebraker, 1987.

M. Stonebraker, “The Design of the POSTGRES Storage System,” Very Large DataBase
Conference, pp. 289–300, September 1987.

Sweeney et al., 1996.

A. Sweeney, D. Doucette, W. Hu, C. Anderson, M. Nishimoto, & G. Peck, “Scalability in the XFS
File System,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–14, January 1996.

Trivedi, 1980.

K. Trivedi, “Optimal Selection of CPU Speed, Device Capabilities, and File Assignments,”
Journal of the ACM, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 457–473, July 1980.

Watson, 2000.

R. Watson, “Introducing Supporting Infrastructure for Trusted Operating System Support in
FreeBSD,” Proceedings of the BSDCon 2000 Conference, September 2000.

Watson, 2001.

R. Watson, “TrustedBSD: Adding Trusted Operating-System Features to FreeBSD,” Proceedings
of the Freenix Track at the 2001 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, pp. 15–28, June 2001.

Watson et al., 2003.

R. Watson, W. Morrison, C. Vance, & B. Feldman, “The TrustedBSD MAC Framework:
Extensible Kernel Access Control for FreeBSD 5.0,” Proceedings of the Freenix Track at the
2003 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, pp. 285–296, June 2003.

Wu & Zwaenepoel, 1994.

M. Wu & W. Zwaenepoel, “eNVy: A Non-Volatile, Main Memory Storage System,” International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems
(ASPLOS), pp. 86–97, October 1994.

