                 Chapter 10. The Zettabyte Filesystem

10.1 Introduction

The Zettabyte filesystem is generally referred to as simply ZFS [Bonwick et al., 2003]. It is in a
class of filesystems that never overwrite existing data. A benefit of never overwriting is that
snapshots (read-only) and clones (writable) are easy and cheap. Many of them can be created
with no performance hit.

ZFS has the property that the on-disk filesystem state is never inconsistent. Filesystem changes
are accumulated in memory. Periodically, all the changes are gathered up and written to disk.
When all the changes are on stable storage, ZFS makes a checkpoint of the new filesystem state.
The checkpoint is made by doing a single write to update the uberblock to reference the new
filesystem state (the uberblock is analogous to the superblock of a UFS filesystem). Thus, a ZFS
filesystem moves from one consistent state to the next without ever passing through an
inconsistent state.

ZFS takes advantage of the abundant processor power available with current multi-core CPUs.
Because they are much faster than storage, ZFS can afford to checksum everything. The
checksums are used to detect:

• Bit rot on disks

• Phantom writes

• Misdirected reads and writes

• DMA parity errors

• Bugs in disk drivers and disk firmware

• Accidental overwrite of disk data

• Verification of reconstructed data (e.g., if you have a 3-way mirror, and one disk dies,
nonchecksumming systems would just choose a “good” disk at random from which to read the
data). ZFS reads the data and then verifies the checksum, so if a “good” disk has a few bad
blocks, it can read from the other good disk instead. Data verification can also be used with
RAIDZ when it has multiple levels of redundancy.

ZFS allows the use of inexpensive mechanical disks. Because of the redundancy available with
RAIDZ and the error detection provided by checksums, ZFS can quickly and easily recover from
disk failure.

Unlike the rest of FreeBSD, which is broken into many layers, ZFS is written as one big
monolithic piece. The modules that make up ZFS along with the piece of FreeBSD that they
most closely resemble is shown in Table 10.1. Figure 10.1 compares the layers of UFS and ZFS.
The traditional FreeBSD layering is:

• Filesystem namespace management: UFS layer

• Cache management: virtual memory page-cache layer

• Filesystem storage organization: FFS layer

• Volume management: GEOM layer

Figure 10.1 Comparison of UFS and ZFS layering.

Table 10.1 ZFS modules.

ZFS subsumes all these layers:

• Filesystem namespace management: the ZFS POSIX Layer (ZPL) and ZFS Attribute Processor
(ZAP) have a role similar to the UFS layer.

• Filesystem storage management: the Data Management Unit (DMU) and ZFS Intent Log (ZIL)
have a role like the FFS layer. The Dataset and Snapshot Layer (DSL) manages snapshots as
does the FFS layer. However, these two modules of ZFS provide much additional functionality
that has no analog in the other FreeBSD filesystems. As described in the next section, these
modules operate in the Meta-Object Set (MOS) layer that is separate from the filesystem layers
rather than being a part of the filesystem.

• Volume management: The Storage Pool Allocator (SPA) module manages block placement.
The ZFS I/O (ZIO) module orchestrates I/O. The Virtual Device (VDEV) module aggregates
disks into RAIDZ groups. ZFS also provides ZFS volumes (ZVOLs) that appear as traditional
fixed-size disk partitions, much like the role of the GEOM layer.

• Cache management: The Adaptive Replacement Cache (ARC) has a role similar to that of the
virtual memory page cache. The Level 2 Adaptive Replacement Cache (L2ARC) has a role
similar to that of the virtual memory swap area and acts as a slower-access backing store for the
memory-based ARC cache.

The result of this monolithic design is that ZFS has many features that include:

• Massive scale supporting petabyte-size storage pools with data structures that allow scalability
to zettabytes.

• POSIX filesystems with features similar to UFS that include support for NFSv4 and Server
Message Block (SMB) remote filesystem functionality such as selectable case insensitivity,
unicode normalization, ACLs, and special flags needed for anti-virus support.

• ZVOLs that can be shared over iSCSI.

• Support for millions of snapshots and clones.

• Selective data compression and deduplication.

• Data integrity from checksums and data redundancy.

• A variable block size.

• Architecture-independent on-disk format.

• Pooled storage shared among filesystems.

• Disk-level redundancy through mirroring and single, double, and triple parity RAID.

• Support for a hybrid storage pool by using fast devices such as solid-state disks (SSDs) to cache
reads and nonvolatile memory (NVRAM) to accelerate synchronous writes.

• Intelligent prefetch with multiple streams per file and autodetected stride patterns.

• Space management that includes several types of quotas and reservations.

• A simple administrative model that has the filesystem as the administrative control point with
delegated administration and integration between mountpoints and NFS shares.

• Fast remote replication and backups.

• Availability on many platforms including FreeBSD, Linux, Mac OS/X, and Illumos.

• Stability derived from its use in production by the world’s biggest companies since 2006.

10.2 ZFS Organization

Figure 10.2 shows the relationship of the ZFS modules. The remainder of this chapter explains
the interactions of these modules.

Figure 10.2 ZFS module layering. See Table 10.1 for acronyms.

Traditional filesystems like UFS each manage their own set of disk blocks that are stored at a
range of offsets on a single device. Each filesystem is given a fixed-size set of blocks when it is
first created and the size of that set does not change. When a filesystem runs out of blocks, it
cannot borrow blocks from another filesystem. If a filesystem has an excess of blocks, it cannot
make them available to another filesystem.

ZFS removes the space-management role from the traditional filesystem model. It creates a pool
of space that is then handed out as needed to the set of filesystems using the pool. The DSL and
SPA modules implementing the Meta-Object Set (MOS) layer shown in Table 10.1 and Figure
10.3 manage the pool of space and make it available to the filesystem modules of the object-set
layer. Thus, space in the pool can move between filesystems as needed. The arrows in Figure
10.3 represent a single block pointer, while the triangles represent indirect blocks mapping a
potentially large set of blocks.

Figure 10.3 ZFS organization.

At the top is the uberblock that points to a data structure that describes an array of meta-objects.
These meta-objects include filesystems, snapshots, clones, ZVOLs, and the space map describing
the allocated and free blocks in the pool. Creating a new snapshot or filesystem requires
allocating a new metadata object, a task that is about as difficult as creating a new file in a
filesystem. When a filesystem needs to allocate space, its request is handled by the SPA module
that finds an available block of the requested size in the space map. When the filesystem (and all
its clones and snapshots) no longer need the block, it is returned to the pool. In general, the
blocks of the pool are shared among all the filesystems that the pool contains. For
administrative reasons, it is possible both to limit the maximum amount of space that a
filesystem can use and to ensure that some minimum amount of space is reserved for a
filesystem to use.

Each object set in the MOS, such as a filesystem, references a data structure that describes its
array of objects. These objects include the usual things found in a filesystem such as directories,
files, symbolic links, etc. Each of these filesystem objects then references an array of blocks that
contain the object’s data.

The allocation, expansion, and eventual freeing of the contents of all these objects is managed by
the DMU module. The tree-structured POSIX-semantic directory structure is managed by the
ZPL module. The ZAP module stores a keyto-value hashtable in an on-disk object. Its original
use was for directory entries (each directory is implemented as a ZAP object). Its use later was
expanded to store object attributes and many other types of metadata in other parts of ZFS.
Finally, the ZIL module ensures that changes are not lost between filesystem checkpoints.

ZFS Dnode

ZFS stores the metadata for a file in a dnode that is analogous to the inode of UFS. Like that
inode used in UFS, a dnode describes an object that may change in size from tiny to huge. The
dnode is managed by the DMU. One use for dnodes is to describe filesystem objects such as files,
directories, etc. When used for this purpose, the dnode is embedded with a znode that is
managed by the ZPL and contains the metadata required to support POSIX semantics. Unlike
the inode, dnodes also describe objects in the MOS layer such as the objects that represent
filesystems, snapshots, clones, ZVOLs, space maps, property lists, and dead-block lists (referred
to as deadlists).

Just as with inodes, the ability to describe objects of greatly different sizes is done by using
indirect blocks. Unlike inodes, each dnode uses a fixed number of levels of indirect blocks. For
objects smaller than 128 Kbyte, the dnode uses a single, direct-block pointer that references a
block of the appropriate size. Thus, a 12-Kbyte object would be referenced by a single pointer to
a 12-Kbyte block. When the object grows to a size bigger than 128 Kbyte, the direct-block pointer
is replaced by a pointer to a 16-Kbyte single indirect block. The indirect block then has pointers
to the data blocks that hold the object.

As described later in this subsection, the size of ZFS block pointers are 128 bytes. Thus, each
16-Kbyte indirect block can hold 128 pointers. By default, each indirect-block pointer references
a 128-Kbyte block, though a filesystem may be configured to reference smaller blocks if that is
sensible for the application running on that filesystem. For example, if the primary application
running on the filesystem is a database that reads and writes widely separated 4-Kbyte records,
the filesystem can be configured to allocate 4-Kbyte blocks to reduce the need to copy an entire
128-Kbyte block when only 4 Kbyte of it has been modified.

When the object grows beyond the size that can be described by a single-level indirect block, its
dnode is promoted to use two levels of indirect blocks. The dnode’s block pointer references a
16-Kbyte second-level block. The single-level block that it previously referenced is moved to be
referenced from the first pointer in the new second-level indirect block. As the object continues
to grow, additional first-level indirect blocks are allocated and referenced from the second-level
indirect block.

If the object outgrows the size that can be described by a two-level set of indirect blocks, the
dnode grows to support a three-level hierarchy, similarly to the way it was expanded to support
a two-level hierarchy.

One important use of dnodes is to reference ZAP objects. A ZAP object stores a key-to-value
hashtable. They were first used for directories that map from names to object numbers. An
object number is an index into an objset dnode array that maps the object number to the
location of the object on the disk. Directories require fast entry lookup, new entry insertion, old
entry deletion, and full-directory scanning. All these properties are provided by ZAP objects.
Because the ZAP module is flexibly written and these directory-like properties are needed in
many other contexts, ZAP objects are used to store attribute and property lists along with many
other types of metadata in the DSL and the SPA.

ZFS Block Pointers

Figure 10.4 shows a ZFS block-pointer structure. Unlike the traditional UFS 8-byte block
pointer that references a block number within a disk partition, the ZFS block pointer is a
128-byte structure that can contain pointers to as many as three copies of a block, each on a
different disk along with the block’s size and its checksum. By keeping the checksum separate
from the data, errors such as misdirected reads and writes can be detected. If the checksum
were stored in the data block itself, a misdirected read or write would appear to be correct since
both the data and the checksum would have been misdirected.

Figure 10.4 Description of a block pointer. Key: vdev—virtual device identifier; grid—RAIDZ
layout information (reserved for future use); asize—allocated size (including RAIDZ parity and
gang-block headers); G—gang-block flag; offset—offset into virtual device; B—byteorder
(endianness) flag; D—deduplication flag; X—unused flag; lvl—number of levels of indirection for
data described by this block pointer; type—DMU object type; cksum—checksum function
identifier; comp—compression function identifier; psize—physical size (after compression);
lsize—logical size; physical birth time—transaction group in which the block was physically
allocated, zero if same as logical birth time; logical birth time—transaction group in which the
block was logically allocated; fill count—number of nonzero blocks under this block pointer;
checksum[ ]—256-bit checksum of the data described by this block pointer.

By default, ZFS checksums every block that it is managing. With multiple-core processors being
common, the CPU cost of performing the checksum is insignificant in comparison to the cost of
performing an I/O operation.

For systems with multiple disks, the first line of defense against data corruption or loss is RAID.
If a disk block or even an entire disk is lost, the RAID disk structure can recover the data. For
systems with only a single disk such as a laptop, and as a secondary backup for systems with
multiple disks running with RAID, ZFS by default provides double redundancy for all metadata.
Thus, all ZFS block pointers that reference metadata will have two of the three block-pointer
fields in use. Filesystems can be configured to have all data replicated. Here, all block-pointers
that reference user data will have two of the three block-pointer fields in use. When running in
this mode, ZFS uses triple redundancy for all metadata. Thus, metadata block pointers will have
all three block-pointer fields in use.

Each block has an associated birth time. Birth time is measured as the number of checkpoints
that have been taken since the ZFS pool was created. When the pool is first created, the
transaction group (TXG) is set to zero. Each time that a checkpoint is done, the transaction
group is incremented. The problem with using seconds since the epoch for the birth time is that
seconds since the epoch can fail to be monotonically increasing if the battery maintaining the
hardware clock fails or if a time daemon sets incorrect time information. Self-consistency is
ensured by using transaction groups rather than seconds since the epoch. It also ensures that if
two checkpoints are taken less than 1 second apart, the birth times of blocks from the two
checkpoints can be distinguished. As described in the next section, the birth time is needed to
determine when a block has no references so that it can be freed.

The dedup flag identifies a block that is in the deduplication table. The flag is used when trying
to free a block. If the deduplication flag is set, ZFS must find the corresponding entry in the
deduplication table and decrement its reference count as the block can only be freed when the

reference count reaches zero. The deduplication table is huge so it typically does not fit in
memory. Pieces of it are brought in when needed. Thus, checking for a block in the
deduplication table is expensive, especially if the required block of the deduplication table is not
in memory. If the deduplication flag is not set, ZFS can avoid the cost of looking it up in the
deduplication table.

Most blocks have only a logical birth time that is equal to the TXG in which they were created.
Only deduplication blocks need a physical birth time. The first time a block is written, it gets just
a logical birth time. When the same contents are written again, the deduplication module
creates a new block pointer to the original copy. The new block pointer has a logical birth time of
the current TXG but a physical birth time of the TXG of the original block’s logical birth time.
The reason that the physical birth time is needed is so that when the filesystem is traversed after
a disk failure to reconstruct the RAIDZ, the kernel knows the actual times that blocks were
created and hence knows which ones need to be reconstructed.

Normally, when the SPA needs to allocate a block of a given size, it is able to do so. However,
when the pool of unused blocks becomes small, there may not be a single block of space large
enough to fulfill the request. Here, the SPA must allocate two or more smaller pieces to make up
the bigger block. These smaller pieces are described by an array of pointers in a structure called
a gang-block header. The gang-block flag is set when the reference in the block pointer is to one
of these gang-block headers so that header can be interpreted by the I/O system to gather
together the pieces that make up the block.

Each block pointer has three sizes associated with it:

1. lsize – the logical size of the block

2. psize – the physical size of the block, which may be smaller than the logical size if it has been
compressed.

3. asize – the allocated size on the disk including RAIDZ parity and gang-block headers.

For blocks that reference indirect blocks, the level of the referenced block is also maintained.
Since any given dnode uses a fixed number of indirection levels as described earlier in this
subsection, maintaining the level count in the block pointer is used purely as a consistency check
and is not needed for normal operation. Similarly, the type field is known, so it is used only as a
consistency check.

ZFS objset Structure

The objset structure describes a set of objects. An objset structure is used to describe the set of
objects in a filesystem, a snapshot, a clone, or a ZVOL. When used in this role, their closest
analogy to UFS is that of the superblock, which is the data structure that describes all the objects
in a filesystem. Another important use of the objset structure is to describe the collection of
objects that make up the MOS. The objects in the MOS include the descriptors for all the
filesystems, clones, snapshots, and ZVOLs in the pool along with their relationships to each
other. The MOS also includes a master node that includes properties that apply to the pool and
space-map objects that identify the used and available blocks in the pool.

10.3 ZFS Structure

Having described the most important ZFS data structures, it is now possible to describe the
layout of a ZFS pool in more detail. Figure 10.5 shows a typical ZFS pool that is anchored at its
top by an uberblock.

Figure 10.5 ZFS Structure.

Two 256-Kbyte blocks of space are reserved for volume labels at the beginning and end of every
device in the ZFS pool. Half of each of these four volume labels are used to store redundant
copies of information specific to the device. The other half of each of these four labels holds an
array of 128 uberblocks. The final step to complete a checkpoint is to write out the uberblock.
When the pool is created, the initial uberblock is written to the zeroth entry in each of the
uberblock arrays on all the devices. The uberblock for the first checkpoint (TXG number one) is
written to the first entry in all the uberblock arrays of up to three of the devices that are selected
at random. After all 128 entries in an uberblock array have been used, the checkpoint location of
the uberblock update reverts to the zeroth entry in that uberblock array.

The MOS Layer

A single block pointer contained in the uberblock references an objset structure that describes
the set of objects making up the MOS layer. The MOS contains the data structures managed by
the DSL that tracks datasets, which include chains of snapshots, trees of clones, the active
filesystems, and ZFS volumes (ZVOLs) that appear like traditional fixed-size disk partitions. The
DSL is also responsible for tracking filesystem properties and the deadlists. The MOS also
contains data structures managed by the Storage Pool Allocator (SPA) that tracks allocated
versus freed blocks. The SPA module is also responsible for handling compression and
deduplication as well as I/O queueing and scheduling. Thus, the MOS manages filesystems
while the volume manager found in traditional filesystem layering manages blocks.

Each of the objects in the MOS is described by a dnode. One important object in the MOS is the
first dnode, often referred to as the master node. The master node contains pool-wide
information including pool-wide property lists and configurations, recent error logs, and
operational statistics. Another important object in the MOS layer is the dnode that contains the
space map. The space map identifies the allocation of blocks within the pool.

Most of the dnodes in the MOS are used to describe a filesystem, clone, snapshot, or ZVOL.
Each of these dnodes has a dsl_dataset structure embedded within it. This structure serves two
main purposes:

1. It keeps a set of pointers to track the relationship of snapshots and clones to their associated
filesystem.

2. It contains the object number of the deadlist that tracks when blocks are no longer referenced
and can be freed.

The management of relationships and the operation of deadlists is described in the next section.

The dsl_dataset structure within all these dnodes, except those for snapshots, points to a second
dnode object in the MOS that contains an embedded dsl_dir structure. The dsl_dir structure
contains:

• The object number of the MOS object for its parent’s dsl_dir.

• The object number of the ZAP object listing its children’s dsl_dirs.

• The object number of the ZAP object listing its properties. Its properties include typical
filesystem properties such as whether to honor the set-user-identifier flag on executables,
whether to maintain access time on files and directories, etc. The ZAP object also records the use
of compression and, if enabled, the compression algorithm being used.

• The object number of the ZAP object that lists all its clones.

• Block accounting for all filesystems and clones mounted below it.

• Its quota and reservation byte counts.

• For clones, the object number of the MOS object for the snapshot from which they were
created.

The relationships between a filesystem and its clones and snapshots is shown in Figure 10.6.
ZFS can take snapshots and make clones of both filesystems and ZVOLs, so everything
described below in the context of filesystems applies equally to ZVOLs. Clones cannot be taken
of a filesystem or another clone; they can only be taken from a snapshot. It is possible to create
multiple clones from the same snapshot. When a clone is promoted to being a filesystem, the
previous filesystem is demoted to being a clone. Clone promotion does not change the datasets’
names, mountpoints, or contents. Renaming operations must be done separately.

Figure 10.6 Filesystem, clone, and snapshot relationships.

The Object-Set Layer

Each of the dsl_dataset structures in the MOS layer has a block pointer that points to an objset
structure in the object-set layer. The bottom half of Figure 10.5 shows three distinct
organizations of the objset. From left to right in the object-set layer, they are:

1. A snapshot of a filesystem or a clone (see number 3). The organization of the snapshot is the
same as that of a filesystem or clone except that since it cannot be changed, it does not need to
track user or group quotas. A snapshot does keep a copy of the user and group quotas as they
existed at the time that the snapshot was made so that they are available for use after a rollback
is done or a clone is made. They are stored in the objset as is done for a filesystem, but are not
shown in Figure 10.5.

2. ZVOLs have a single dnode in their objset that references an array of two dnodes. The first
dnode references an array of block pointers that is the size of the device partition with one
pointer per 4-Kbyte block. The other dnode describes the master node. It is a ZAP object that
records ZVOL-specific information.

3. Filesystems have three dnodes in their objset. Two are ZAP objects that record the user and
group space usage for a filesystem. The third references the filesystem’s array of the files and
directories. The first dnode of the array is its master node, described later in this section. Clones
of filesystems have the same objset organization as a filesystem, while clones of ZVOLs have the
same objset organization as a ZVOL.

The filesystem master node is a ZAP object that contains the following information:

• It records the object number of the root inode.

• It records the objects numbers for the user and group quota files.

• It records the ZAP object number that tracks the set of files that have been unlinked but cannot
be reclaimed because they are still referenced by an open file descriptor. The ZAP object simply
records a list of the unlinked object numbers. Objects are added when they become unlinked
and removed when their final reference is closed. Use of the ZAP object ensures that these
operations can be done in constant time. After a reboot, the list is traversed to remove the
unlinked and now unreferenced files.

The layout of a snapshot mirrors that of the object set that it snapshots. The snapshot of a
filesystem in Figure 10.6 shows how its structure mirrors that of a filesystem. A snapshot of a

ZVOL has a structure that mirrors that of a ZVOL. Similarly, the layout of a clone of a filesystem
or ZVOL snapshot is the same as that of the object that it is cloning.

Each of the objsets that describe a filesystem, clone, or ZVOL has a zil_header structure
embedded within it that points to a linked list of blocks containing the ZIL intent log. The ZIL
records all the changes since the last checkpoint for recovery after a crash.

10.4 ZFS Operation

Unlike overwriting filesystems like UFS that continuously update their on-disk state, ZFS
collects all filesystem updates in memory. Periodically, it writes all the changes to an unused
disk area to create a checkpoint. None of the changes to the on-disk state are visible until the
final write of the checkpoint is made, which is to update the root of the ZFS pool, the uberblock.
Thus, a ZFS filesystem is always consistent; that is, it transitions from one consistent state to a
new consistent state.

Each checkpoint is taken across the entire pool and affects every filesystem, snapshot, clone, and
ZVOL in the pool at the same time. ZFS calls these checkpoints transaction groups, abbreviated
to TXGs. Snapshots taken across several filesystems that all fall within the same checkpoint will
all be consistent at the same instant in time. Thus, two different snapshots within the same pool
with the same TXG will be precisely synchronized with each other in time. Conversely, it is
difficult to get consistent snapshots across two different pools because it would require the
precise coordination when they take a checkpoint.

Many operations in ZFS, such as the way that writes to files appear atomic to different processes
doing write system calls to the same file, are handled similarly to those of traditional
overwriting filesystems like UFS. This section will not describe functionality that is similar to the
UFS functionality described in Chapter 9. This section details the operations performed by the
ZFS filesystem that differ significantly from the way they are performed in UFS.

Writing New Data to Disk

All updates to the filesystems, clones, and ZVOLs within a pool are accumulated in memory
until a specified time has passed (default is 5 seconds), 64 Mbyte of dirty data have been
accumulated, or an administrative action is taken that requires a checkpoint such as a snapshot
request. To flush the new data to disk, ZFS must take a checkpoint of the pool.

Taking a checkpoint requires that all modifications to the filesystem, made since the previous
checkpoint, be saved to disk. The first step is to get a consistent state for the filesystem, which

requires that all system calls modifying filesystem data must be complete. ZFS uses a technique
similar to the one described in Section 9.7 as step 3 of taking a snapshot in UFS. Specifically,
processes that are already in progress on such system calls are permitted to finish those system
calls. The checkpoint proceeds once all the in-progress system calls have finished.

It may take several seconds to write out all the disk blocks making up the checkpoint. Allowing
no modifications during that entire period would cause an unacceptable delay to applications
running on the system. To avoid this delay, all the dirty blocks that will be written to make the
checkpoint are tagged with their transaction group (TXG). New modifications to the filesystems,
clones, and ZVOLs are tagged with a new transaction group. If a modification finds that the
block it needs to modify is marked as being part of a checkpoint in progress, ZFS makes a copy
of that block in memory and the modification is made to the copy. The copied blocks become
part of the next checkpoint. As I/O completes on the blocks that are part of the current
checkpoint, ZFS must decide how to handle the in-memory buffers. If they were not copied, they
can be marked as available for current use. If they were copied, then their contents are now out
of date so the memory holding the out-of-date copy is freed.

Figure 10.7 shows the nine steps that must be taken to flush the changes for a file to which data
has been added since the last checkpoint:

1. All the blocks of new data must be written. If the write has been done over existing data, the
modified data block must be written to a new location as ZFS never overwrites any existing data.

2. Typically, the update requires an update of a block pointer in one of the file’s indirect blocks.
Since the indirect block has been modified, it will need to be written to a new location, which
means the indirect block that references it will need to be modified. These modifications
continue up the indirect tree until they reach the dnode for the file.

3. Update the dnode for the file to reference the new block location for the top of its indirect
pointers. Since ZFS cannot overwrite the existing dnode when it has changed, it must write a
copy of the block containing the dnode with the updated size and new block pointer.

In UFS, reading in an inode requires allocating a piece of memory that is the size of an inode
including the space needed to store the on-disk dinode, reading in the disk block that contains
the inode, copying the dinode from the disk block to the newly allocated memory, and then
releasing the disk buffer. Writing an inode back to disk requires reading in the disk block that
contains the inode, copying the modified inode into the appropriate part of the buffer, and then
writing the updated buffer back to the disk.

In ZFS, reading in a dnode begins by allocating a piece of memory that is the size of the
in-memory dnode. The in-memory dnode does not contain the on-disk dnode; it includes only a
pointer to the on-disk part. ZFS reads in and locks in memory the disk block that contains the
on-disk dnode. It then sets the pointer in the dnode to point to its on-disk part in the disk buffer.
Writing the dnode back to the disk requires only that the disk buffer containing the modified
dnode be written to its new location.

The benefit of the ZFS approach is less memory-to-memory copies and fewer I/O operations at
the expense of using more memory. For a system with 100,000 cached nodes, UFS will use 50
Mbyte of memory while ZFS typically uses 200 Mbyte and can use up to 1.6 Gbyte of memory.

The original log-structured filesystem (LFS) collected all the modified inodes together in sets of
64 that could then be packed into a 16-Kbyte block. The drawback to this approach is that it
required another metadata file that mapped from inode number to disk location. ZFS simply
writes all the in-memory disk blocks that contain modified dnodes. By updating the block
pointers in its objset dnode that have changed, there is no requirement for a separate metadata
file to track their location as they can be found using a simple look up at their known offset in
the objset dnode. Though this approach requires more I/O than the LFS approach, it simplifies
and speeds later lookup of the dnodes.

4. Once all the filesystem dnodes have been updated, the changed block pointers referencing
them are propagated up through the indirect blocks of the filesystem objset in the same way that
they were in step 2 for the file.

5. Update the filesystem objset dnode object to reference the new block location for the top of
the objset dnode’s indirect pointers.

6. Update the block pointer in the MOS dsl_dataset to reference the new copy of the filesystem
objset to which it points.

7. Once all the dsl_dataset pointers have been updated to point to their new objset objects, the
changed block pointers referencing them are propagated up through the indirect blocks of the
MOS objset in the same way that they were in steps 2 and 4 for the file and filesystem objsets.

8. Update the MOS objset dnode object to reference the new block location for the top of its
indirect pointers.

9. Once all these updates have been written to their disk locations, the last step in checkpoint
creation is to update the block pointer in the uberblock to point at the new MOS objset and
update its TXG transaction group to reflect the new checkpoint. The updated uberblock is then
written to its new locations as is described in Section 10.3.

Figure 10.7 Nine steps to create a checkpoint.

Logging

ZFS keeps all ZPL-level changes logged in memory. The log is handled by the ZFS Intent Log
(ZIL). Examples of log entries are:

• Write these 700 bytes of data to this offset of this file,

• Change the permissions of this file to this mode, or

• Create a new symbolic link in this directory with this name that points to this path.

Unlike logs associated with traditional overwriting filesystems that are needed to bring the
filesystem back into a consistent state, ZFS is always consistent so its only requirement for its
log is to retain any changes between checkpoints that need to be persistent. An example of the
need for persistence is the fsync system call that needs to ensure the associated file is stable
before returning. Because of the time and I/O operations required to do a ZFS checkpoint, fsync
is implemented by forcing a log write, not by doing a checkpoint.

Traditional filesystems often log only filesystem metadata changes as meta-data tends to be
much smaller than the data updates and returning to a consistent state requires only that the
metadata be recovered. When performing an fsync on a file, a traditional filesystem can commit
modified data by overwriting the same disk blocks that held the previous value of the data. The
traditional filesystem can also overwrite a file’s inode to reflect any newly allocated blocks. ZFS
has to log both data and metadata because it does not have the option of just flushing the data
and inode to disk to synchronize them. ZFS reduces the overhead of writing file data to both the

log and the disk by allocating a disk block, writing the data to it, and then placing a pointer to
that data in the log. When the next checkpoint is made, ZFS can reference the already-written
block. By default, ZFS only allocates and writes blocks of size 32 Kbyte and larger, but the
logbias property allows the setting of a lower threshold.

The high volume of data being written to the ZFS log can often be a throughput-performance
bottleneck. The logging bottleneck can be alleviated by using a solid-state disk (SSD) to store the
log. The log often does not need all the space available on the SSD. ZFS can use the remaining
space on the SSD to extend its in-memory ARC cache by pushing less actively read items to the
SSD. ZFS refers to this SSD cache as its L2ARC.

Recovery of a ZFS pool starts from the last checkpoint. When the pool is first opened, the kernel
must read in an uberblock array from every device and scan through them to find the uberblock
with the highest TXG value as that will represent the most current checkpointed state of the ZFS
pool. If an uberblock array on a device is unreadable or corrupted, the kernel reads an
alternative copy of the uberblock array from that device.

Once the uberblock has been found, ZFS has to find and claim all the log blocks. The blocks are
claimed by updating the MOS space map to show that all the log blocks are allocated. This
reclaim must happen when the pool is first opened and before any other modifications are made
to it to ensure that the log blocks are not overwritten by later writes. The log blocks are
identified by looking up the objset for all the filesystems, ZVOLs, and clones listed in the MOS.
Each of these objsets contains an intent-log header that points to its linked list of log blocks. The
pool then starts processing a new transaction group (TXG).

The processing of filesystems, ZVOLs, and clones is completely analogous. In the rest of this
section filesystems are described, but the description applies equally to ZVOLs and clones.
Recovery for each filesystem then proceeds as follows:

1. The filesystem is mounted.

2. ZFS plays forward through its intent log whose list head is contained in its objset structure.
Each of the operations contained in the log is made to the filesystem.

3. The blocks from the fully replayed log are freed.

4. The filesystem begins accepting new requests.

In the normal course of events, the transaction completes with a new uberblock being written. If
the system crashes before the new uberblock has been written, then all the recovery work is lost
and must be done again when the system is restarted. No data will be lost as any writes that

were done before the crash will be to parts of the disk that were previously unallocated, so none
of the existing filesystem data will have been corrupted. Any modifications accepted for the
filesystems that had completed step 4 above will have been added to their intent log. Thus, these
changes will be included in the filesystem when the system successfully completes its recovery
process.

RAIDZ

Traditional layered design separates the filesystem implementation from the disk-storage
implementation. Thus, the storage layer has no knowledge of the data being stored on it. RAID
is typically used in modern storage systems. Since the size and organization of the data is
unknown to the storage layer, each stripe in the RAID array is a fixed-size. For example,
consider a traditional RAID running with four data disks plus a single parity disk. If the disks
have a 4-Kbyte sector size, the stripe size is 16 Kbyte using one sector on each of the four data
drives plus a 4-Kbyte sector on the parity drive. If an application writes a 24-Kbyte block, this
RAID will write one full-size stripe and then have to read in a 16-Kbyte stripe, replace the first 8
Kbyte of the 16-Kbyte stripe, recalculate the parity, and write out the new 8 Kbyte of data and
the updated 4-Kbyte parity sector. If a disk fails, the RAID reconstructs by reading every stripe,
rebuilds the bad 4-Kbyte block, and writes the rebuilt block back to the replacement disk. The
rebuild time can be reduced by using dirty-region logging to keep track of the stripes that are in
use, but it comes at a cost of increased complexity and reduced performance.

Because ZFS integrates its RAIDZ disk-storage implementation with its filesystem
implementation, it can support a variable-size stripe. Instead of writing fixed-size stripes, each
block that it writes fills in the amount of space that it requires. Each block that is written is
referenced by a block pointer that contains the size of the block so the disk-storage
implementation can determine the size of the stripe to use. Figure 10.8 shows the layout of
blocks on a RAIDZ-1 pool constructed from five disks with a single parity per stripe. Each block
requires a parity sector for each four blocks of data sectors. A block that is not a multiple of four
sectors requires a parity block for its residual set of sectors. To get double redundancy
(RAIDZ-2), each block would require two parity sectors for each three blocks of data sectors.
The smallest possible allocation on RAIDZ-N is N + 1 sectors constructed from N parity sectors
plus one data sector.

Figure 10.8 Layout of blocks in a RAIDZ disk pool. The blocks have been written sequentially
and are shown alternating between light and dark backgrounds.

In Figure 10.8, the first block has two parity and eight data sectors. The second and third blocks
have one parity sector and three data sectors. The fourth block exhibits the worst overhead with
one parity and one data sector. The fifth block has fourteen data and four parity sectors. The
sixth block contains one parity sector, four data sectors, and an unused sector. To avoid the
creation of unallocatable segments, ZFS requires all allocations be a multiple of N + 1 sectors. In
Figure 10.8, N is equal to one, so allocations must be a multiple of two. Since the sixth block
uses five sectors, its allocation must be rounded up to six sectors thus charging the odd-size
block for the wasted space. If the sixth block is freed and the space is later reallocated to a block
with one parity and three data sectors, the two-sector residual space will still be usable for a
block containing one parity and one data sector. Had the allocation for the sixth block not been
rounded up, the residual space would have been a single sector that could not be used. The
seventh data block containing a single parity and two data sectors also needs to allocate an
unused sector. The eighth and final block contains three parity and nine data sectors. The parity
sectors for a given block are all on the same disk. The disk holding the parity for a block is the
one on which the block begins. Thus, parity blocks are distributed among the disks.

If a disk fails, the RAIDZ reconstructs it by traversing the pool’s filesystems and rebuilding each
block that it encounters using the block’s size to determine its stripe size. An added benefit of
this approach is that reconstruction time is often lowered since ZFS need only rebuild the part of
the disk holding allocated data. Despite the slowdown from random reads to the data to be

rebuilt, the need to rebuild just the allocated data is faster than rebuilding the whole disk when
the allocated data use less than about half of the disk. However, in worst-case scenarios of pools
configured to use 4-Kbyte blocks, such as those supporting databases or virtual-disk images
with totally random block placement and most of the disk space allocated, ZFS reconstruction
may take 10 times longer to complete.

Snapshots

Taking a snapshot in ZFS is quick and easy, and for reasons explained later in this section, there
are no limits on the number of snapshots that can be taken. The steps involved in taking a
snapshot are:

• Take a checkpoint.

• Allocate a new dnode in the MOS to contain the new dsl_dataset that will represent the
snapshot.

• Copy the block pointer from the dsl_dataset of the filesystem being snapshotted to the
dsl_dataset in the newly allocated snapshot dnode. Until at least the next checkpoint is taken,
the block pointers of both the snapshot and the filesystem will reference the same objset block.
The next checkpoint made after any change in the filesystem will create a new copy of the
filesystem objset. The block pointer in the snapshot will continue to reference the old objset,
while the block pointer in the filesystem will reference the new objset.

• Link the new dnode into the head of the filesystem’s snapshot list (as it is the youngest
snapshot).

• Add the new snapshot’s name and object number into the snapshot name list for the
filesystem.

• Move the filesystem’s deadlist to the snapshot. Since the filesystem’s deadlist contains blocks
that it no longer references, they will not be referenced by the snapshot. The freeing of deadlists
is described in a later subsection.

At this point, the new snapshot is complete and is ready to be accessed.

ZFS Block Allocation

Space allocation is handled by the SPA module. It manages all the space in the pool and makes it
available to filesystems, clones, and ZVOLs as it is needed. The SPA uses the space map in the

MOS to identify the allocation of blocks within the pool. Rather than having a single map to
describe the entire pool, the blocks are broken up into fixed-size groups analogous to the way
that UFS breaks a filesystem up into cylinder groups, each with a fixed-size block map. Unlike
cylinder-group maps, ZFS maps are described using base-length pairs similar to those used to
describe space in an extent-based filesystem. A disk will typically be described by about 200 of
these fixed-size maps. The next subsection describes how blocks are freed back to the pool.

A ZFS allocation proceeds as follows:

1. Select a disk from which to do the allocation. The preference is to choose the disk with the
most free space.

2. From among the fixed-size space maps describing the space on the disk, select the one that is
least fragmented.

3. Allocate a chunk of space with the needed size that is closest to the previous allocation.

In addition to managing the space map, the SPA also handles related operations such as
compression and deduplication, and it determines block layout into a RAIDZ stripe as well as
the stripe’s parity calculation. Finally, the SPA manages the scheduling, queueing, and
completion handling of the block I/O operations.

Freeing Blocks

The first implementations of nonoverwriting filesystems were described as log-structured
filesystems [Rosenblum & Ousterhout, 1992]. A production version of a log-structured
filesystem, LFS, was released as part of 4.4BSD [McKusick et al., 1996; Seltzer et al., 1993]. New
data were appended to the filesystem partition until they reached the end of the partition. A
garbage collection process was run over the filesystem partition to find the blocks that were no
longer being referenced. The filesystem operations then resumed until these blocks had been
used at which point another garbage collection pass was done. While this technique for
managing free space worked, and much research was done on ways to minimize its effect, it still
produced awkward pauses that made production use difficult [Blackwell et al., 1995].

In the 1990’s, two commercial implementations of nonoverwriting filesystems were started, ZFS
by Sun Microsystems and the Write Anywhere File Layout (WAFL) filesystem by Network
Appliance (NetApp) [Hutchinson et al., 1999]. Both of these implementations chose to track the
used and available blocks continuously as is done in traditional filesystems but used different
techniques.

WAFL keeps and updates a complete block list. In WAFL, each block has a 256-bit word
associated with it. Bit 0 in the word is set to show that the block is in use in the active filesystem.
Bit 1 is set to show that the block is in use in snapshot 1, bit 2 is set to show that the block is in
use in snapshot 2, etc. When all bits in the word are 0, the block is free and available for use.
When a new snapshot is made, WAFL allocates an available bit number for it and then makes a
pass over the entire bitmap, copying all the set bits in bit 0 to the new snapshot’s bit column.
Freeing a snapshot makes a pass over the entire bitmap, clearing the bit in the snapshot’s bit
location. Thus, the cost to create or delete a WAFL snapshot is proportional to the size of the
filesystem and the number of snapshots is limited to the width of the block-map word. ZFS does
not have these limitations.

ZFS tracks its used and available blocks using space maps, birth time, and deadlists. The benefit
of the ZFS approach is that it never has to traverse its space map when creating or freeing a
snapshot, clone, or ZVOL. When a filesystem needs a new block, it requests one from the SPA
that allocates it from the pool’s space map. The current transaction group (TXG) is recorded in
the block’s pointer. The block then becomes part of an object in the filesystem. Over time, the
filesystem or clone may be snapshotted, which will also reference the block.

When an object in a filesystem is overwritten, truncated, or deleted, its blocks will be released.
For each block freed from an object, the kernel must determine whether to free it. The kernel
checks the block pointer’s birth time and, if it was born after the most recent (youngest)
snapshot, it is not referenced by any snapshots so the block can be freed (i.e., the SPA can return
the block to the pool’s space map). Otherwise, the block must be remembered for later freeing
by adding it to the filesystem’s deadlist. Each dsl_dataset contains the object number of its
deadlist. The deadlist of a given dataset (filesystem, ZVOL, clone, or snapshot) is the list of
blocks referenced by the previous snapshot and possibly some older snapshots, but not
referenced by the dataset.

When a snapshot is freed, the kernel needs to free any blocks referenced only by that snapshot
[Ahrens, 2005]. Figure 10.9 shows the four lifetimes of blocks that need to be considered when
freeing “this snap.” The kernel must determine the blocks to be freed and those that need to
remain on a deadlist. It iterates over the blocks in the “next snap” deadlist (blocks A and B in
Figure 10.9). Each block is removed from the list and the block’s birth time is compared to the
birth time of “prev snap.” If the block was born before “prev snap” (block A), then the kernel
cannot free it, so it adds the block to the deadlist of “this snap.” Otherwise, the block was born
after “prev snap” (block B), so the kernel must free it. Having emptied the deadlist of “next
snap,” the kernel sets the deadlist of “next snap” to the deadlist of “this snap.” Finally, the kernel
removes “this snap” from the linked list of snapshots and from the directory of snapshot names.

Figure 10.9 Four lifetimes of blocks considered by the kernel when a snapshot is deleted.

While the implementation is simple, the algorithm is subtle. The blocks that the kernel must free
are those that are referenced by only the snapshot the kernel is deleting (block B). The blocks to
be deleted must meet four constraints:

1. They were born after “prev snap,”

2. They were born before “this snap,”

3. They died after “this snap,” and

4. They died before the “next snap.”

The blocks on the “next snap” deadlist are those that meet constraints 2, 3, and 4. They are live
in “this snap,” but dead in the “next snap.” Thus, to find the blocks that meet all constraints, the
kernel examines all the blocks on the deadlist of “next snap” and finds those that meet
constraint 1 (i.e., if the block’s birth time is after the “prev snap”). Note that the argument
applies if “next snap” is the live filesystem.

To confirm that the kernel left the correct blocks on the deadlist of “next snap,” observe that the
deadlist of “this snap” contains the blocks that were live in “prev snap” and dead in “this snap”
(block D). If “this snap” did not exist, then the blocks would be live in “prev snap” and dead in
“next snap,” and therefore should be on the deadlist of “next snap.” Additionally, the blocks that
were live for both “prev snap” and “this snap” but dead in “next snap” (block A) should be on the
deadlist of “next snap.”

Originally, the deadlist contained the object number of an object that contained an array of all
the dead-block pointers associated with the filesystem, ZVOL, snapshot, or clone. Since every
block on the list has to be considered for deletion, snapshot deletion time is proportional to the
size of its deadlist. As the number of deleted or changed blocks grows, the size of the deadlists
also grows. Because the only blocks that could be deleted are those in the transaction group that
covers the snapshot or clone being deleted, the deadlist was reorganized.

To decouple the removal time of a snapshot from the size of the deadlist, the deadlist has now
been split into separate lists organized by the ranges of transaction groups between each of the
snapshots that existed at the time the snapshot was created. The new deadlist contains the
object number of a ZAP object that maps the first transaction group of a specific range of birth
times to an object that contains an array of all the dead block pointers for just that range of birth
times. Typically, only one of these lists needs to be scanned when the snapshot is deleted, which
improves snapshot deletion time as it only needs to consider the subset of blocks that it will
need to free. If several snapshots have been deleted between the snapshot being deleted and the
one that currently precedes it, then several lists will need to be traversed, but all the blocks on
the traversed lists will need to be freed. Thus, with this new organization, the time required at
snapshot removal time is a function of the number of blocks that the snapshot will free
independent of the number of other blocks that remain.

The elegance of this design is that it places no limit on the number of snapshots that can be
created and it never needs to traverse the entire block-allocation map, so snapshot creation and
removal times are not affected by the size of the disk space being managed.

Deduplication

ZFS provides deduplication on a pool-wide basis [Bonwick, 2009]. Deduplication is
implemented in the SPA module. Logically, when a new block is created, the pool is checked to
see if a block with identical contents already exists. If an identical block does exist, the existing
block is referenced rather than creating a duplicate copy of it. Deduplication is most useful when
there are many duplicate blocks, such as when many instances of the same virtual-machine
image are being stored among the filesystems in the pool.

To speed the check for an existing block with a given value, ZFS computes a hash of each unique
block and stores it in the MOS in a ZAP table that maps from hash to block location. Rather than
computing both a hash and a checksum for each block, the checksum is used as the hash. The
hash must use a function such as SHA-256 that uniquely identifies data with very high
probability. Thus, when using deduplication, the fletcher4 checksumming function, which is
faster to compute but more likely to have collisions, is replaced with SHA-256.

When a block is to be written, ZFS computes its hash and then checks the table to see if a block
with that hash already exists. If it does, a pointer to the existing block is created and the
reference count associated with the block is incremented. Otherwise, the hash, the new block’s
location, and a reference count of 1 are inserted into the table and the block is written to disk.

Not all users of the pool need to participate in deduplication. Only filesystems and ZVOLs that
administratively elect to participate have their blocks deduplicated. The size of the
hash-to-block mapping table is proportional to the number of blocks allocated to the
participating filesystems and ZVOLs. When the table grows too large to be kept entirely in
memory, write throughput to the participating filesystems and ZVOLs slows dramatically as new
allocations have to wait for the needed part of the table to be read into memory to check whether
they are a duplicate. Because of the cost of deduplication, most administrators only enable
deduplication on filesystems and ZVOLs on which there are likely to be many duplicate blocks.
The administrators further limit the number of filesystems participating in deduplication to a
level that provides enough memory to keep the entire table resident.

Note that redundant copies of blocks that have been made for reliability are not deduplicated. As
described in Section 10.2, ZFS supports up to three copies of a block referenced from its block
pointer. When the first instance of the block is created, all the requested copies will be made.
Later instances of the block will have block pointers that also reference all the copies of the data.

Remote Replication

As with all filesystems, ZFS must be able to provide a mechanism for performing backup both
locally and remotely. Backup is handled by the DMU layer that understands how to traverse the
data structures of any type of objset to create a data stream much like the UFS dump creates a
data stream from a filesystem image using its knowledge of the filesystem’s on-disk data
structures. ZFS refers to creating this data stream as a send operation.

The stream of data can be directed locally or over a network to a remote backup site where it can
be stored as a blob of data on a tape or disk, or it can be interpreted by the DMU layer to create
another copy of the contents. ZFS refers to accepting a data stream as a receive operation. This
functionality is similar to a UFS dump stream that can be stored as a blob of data on a tape or
disk or immediately reconstructed into a filesystem using the restore program.

Much like the UFS dump program, ZFS is able to send either the complete contents of a
snapshot (equivalent to a full dump) or just the differences between two snapshots (equivalent
to an incremental dump).

10.5 ZFS Design Tradeoffs

This section compares the design tradeoffs between a traditional overwriting filesystem versus
ZFS’s nonoverwriting architecture. The biggest difference between the two architectures is the
tradeoff between reading and writing. Writes in a traditional filesystem architecture are

scattered across the disk as data for different files being written at the same time may be
scattered far apart on the disk. Additionally, the metadata for those files will typically be stored
separately from the file data. The payoff for the scattered writes is that when the file is later read,
its data will all be clustered together even if they were written over a long period of time (as
would be the case for a log file). The nonoverwriting filesystem does all its writes sequentially.
All the modified file data along with any metadata changes are collected and written together.
The result of the sequential writing is that a file can end up requiring many random accesses
when it is later read. ZFS mitigates the reading cost by dedicating enough memory to the ARC to
be able to keep all actively accessed files resident. ZFS also attempts to prefetch data when files
are being read.

The areas in which ZFS’s architecture works well are as follows:

• When disk pools are less than half full, RAIDZ can reconstruct a failed disk faster than
fixed-size RAID since it only needs to copy the blocks that are in use.

• Traditional filesystems using RAID have to handle a condition known as the RAID write hole.
Each update to a RAID stripe requires writing to several disks which cannot be done atomically.
Thus, unprotected RAID stripes can become damaged during a crash or power outage. For
example, if two of five disks are written and the power fails, the data and parity for that stripe
are inconsistent. Therefore, if a disk fails, the RAID reconstruction process generates garbage
the next time any data is read from that stripe. The write-hole problem can be avoided by using
nonvolatile memory to hold data until all the disks in a stripe have been written. However,
nonvolatile memory is expensive and when full, the system must pause and wait for enough I/O
to complete to release some of it. Because ZFS never overwrites existing data, it can avoid the
write-hole problem by waiting for all disk I/O to complete before creating a new checkpoint.

• Moving allocation and freeing of storage out of the filesystems, and managing it as part of the
pool optimizes the utilization of the space since individual filesystems do not need to be
over-provisioned for their highest expected usage scenarios.

• The tight integration of ZFS’s architecture means that all the features work well together. For
example, snapshots work the same when taken on filesystems, clones, and ZVOLs.

• Administration is easier because the pool is aware of the relationships between all the
filesystems, clones, and snapshots. Thus, it keeps track of how everything should be mounted
(subsuming the need to maintain /etc/fstab), allows properties to be inherited down the tree
rather than needing to be set individually, and organizes NFS exports (subsuming the need to
maintain /etc/exports).

The areas in which ZFS’s architecture works less well than UFS are as follows:

• As implemented, ZFS’s block cache must fit in the kernel’s address space. Thus, it works well
only on 64-bit systems.

• Like all nonoverwriting filesystems, ZFS operates best when at least a quarter of its disk pool is
free. Write throughput becomes poor when the pool gets too full. By contrast, UFS can run well
to 95 percent full and acceptably to 99 percent full.

• Traditional RAID implementations have a fixed overhead for the parity. For example, with five
drives, one-fifth of the space will be dedicated to parity. With a RAIDZ pool filled with
sector-size blocks, half of the space will be dedicated to parity, effectively reducing it to the
density of a mirror. This scenario arises when using disks with 4-Kbyte sectors to build pools
configured to use 4-Kbyte blocks such as those supporting databases or ZVOLs.

• ZFS caches its data in its ARC that is not part of the unified-memory cache managed by the
virtual memory. The result is that when mmap is used on a ZFS file, read faults are first read
into the ARC and then copied to a page in the unified-memory cache. When dirty
unified-memory pages are flushed, they must be copied to an ARC buffer and then written by
ZFS. To ensure coherency whenever mmap has been used on a ZFS file, reads and writes to that
file need to check whether, for each page in the transfer, the requested page is present in the
unified-memory cache and, if present, use that page to do the I/O. If the page is not present in
the unified-memory cache, then the I/O can proceed normally from the ARC. This approach
provides coherency between memory-mapped and I/O access at the expense of wasted memory
due to having two copies of the file in memory and extra overhead caused by the need to copy
the contents between the two copies.

Similarly, when using sendfile on a file in ZFS, it must be copied from the ARC to the
unified-memory cache thereby losing the benefits of the no-copy semantics of sendfile. The
primary use of sendfile is by Web-server applications like Apache.

Integrating ZFS’s ARC into the unified-memory cache would require massive changes. The
problem is easily seen in Figure 10.1. The unified-memory cache operates at the vnode interface
level and the ARC operates at the physical block level. The pages in the ARC are identified by
their block number on a device. The ARC representation is efficient because access to an
unmodified file in a filesystem and access to the same file in a snapshot will reference the same
entry in the ARC. By contrast, the unified-memory cache identifies pages by their vnode and
logical block number. In the unified-memory cache, access to an unmodified file in a filesystem
and access to the same file in a snapshot will reference different pages even though their

contents are identical. The benefit of this approach is that modification of the file’s copy of a
block will not affect the snapshot’s copy of that block.

ZFS was designed to manage and operate enormous filesystems easily, which it does well. Its
design assumed that it would have many fast 64-bit CPUs with large amounts of memory to
support these enormous filesystems. When these resources are available, it works extremely well.
However, it is not designed for or well suited to run on resource-constrained systems using
32-bit CPUs with less than 8 Gbyte of memory and one small, nearly-full disk, which is typical of
many embedded systems.

Exercises

10.1 What is the purpose of the dnode data structure?

10.2 List five problems that ZFS’s checksums can detect.

10.3 What is the role of ZFS’s Meta-Object Set?

10.4 What is the role of ZFS’s Object Set?

10.5 Why does the ZFS block pointer contain three disk addresses?

10.6 Why is the ZFS checksum stored in its block pointer?

10.7 Given that ZFS’s on-disk state is always consistent, why does it need a log?

10.8 Why does ZFS checksum using SHA-256 instead of fletcher4 when doing deduplication?

*10.9 Much of the time required to rebuild a RAIDZ disk pool after replacing a disk arises from
all the random reads it requires. Describe an algorithm that would reduce the time to perform
these random reads.

**10.10 Describe a design for integrating the unified-memory cache into ZFS.

References

Ahrens, 2005.

M.     Ahrens,     “It    Is    Magic,”      Unpublished     Blog    entry,    available    from
http://www.mckusick.com/bookrefs/is_it_magic.html, November 2005.

Blackwell et al., 1995.

T. Blackwell, J. Harris, & M. Seltzer, “Heuristic Cleaning Algorithms in Log-Structured File
Systems,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 277–288, January 1995.

Bonwick, 2009.

J.   Bonwick,       “ZFS    Deduplication,”   Unpublished     Blog     entry,      available   from
http://www.mckusick.com/bookrefs/zfs_dedup.html, November 2009.

Bonwick et al., 2003.

J. Bonwick, M. Ahrens, V. Henson, M. Maybee, & M. Shellenbaum, “The Zettabyte File System,”
Unpublished Paper, available from http://www.mckusick.com/bookrefs/zfs_overview.pdf,
November 2003.

Hutchinson et al., 1999.

N. Hutchinson, S. Manley, M. Federwisch, G. Harris, D. Hitz, S. Kleiman, & S. O’Malley,
“Logical vs. Physical File System Backup,” USENIX 3rd Symposium on Operating Systems
Design         and         Implementation,      pp.         239–250,            available      from
https://www.usenix.org/legacy/publications/library/proceedings/osdi99/full_papers/hutchins
on/hutchinson_html/hutchinson.html, February 1999.

McKusick et al., 1996.

M. McKusick, K. Bostic, M. Karels, & J. Quarterman, The Design and Implementation of the
4.4BSD Operating System, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1996.

Rosenblum & Ousterhout, 1992.

M. Rosenblum & J. Ousterhout, “The Design and Implementation of a Log-Structured File
System,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 26–52, Association for
Computing Machinery, February 1992.

Seltzer et al., 1993.

M. Seltzer, K. Bostic, M. K. McKusick, & C. Staelin, “An Implementation of a Log-Structured File
System for UNIX,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 307–326, January 1993.

