                 Chapter 11. The Network Filesystem

A commonly provided user-level service in any collection of UNIX systems is the network
filesystem (NFS) that allows a set of computers connected to a network to share files. NFS
provides client computers with a namespace and a set of file access semantics similar to the
capabilities of a local filesystem. Providing local-filesystem semantics in a distributed system is a
challenging problem. Sections 11.1 and 11.2 cover the development of NFSv2 and NFSv3. Section
11.3 describes NFSv4 which attempts to address the problems discovered in the first 25 years of
deploying NFS. NFSv3 is the most widely used version in 2014, but NFSv4 is rapidly overtaking
it in popularity. FreeBSD supports all three versions of NFS.

11.1 Overview

The most commercially successful and widely available remote-filesystem protocol on UNIX
systems is NFS, originally designed and implemented by Sun Microsystems [Sandberg et al.,
1985; Walsh et al., 1985]. There are two important components to the success of NFS. First, Sun
placed the protocol specification for NFS in the public domain. Second, Sun sold that
implementation to anyone who wanted it, for less than the cost the company would have
incurred to implement it. Thus, most vendors chose to buy the Sun implementation. They were
willing to buy from Sun because they knew that they could always legally write their own
implementation. The 4.4BSD implementation was written from the protocol specification rather
than being incorporated from Sun because of the developers’ desire to be able to redistribute it
freely in source form.

The first widely released implementation of NFS was version 2 by Sun in 1984. Although version
3 was expected to be released within a year or two of version 2, it suffered several iterations of
hugely complicated proposals before an incremental improvement on version 2 was finally
released in 1992. The final release of 4.4BSD included an implementation of NFS that supported
both versions 2 and 3. FreeBSD’s NFS implementation is a direct descendant of the code
released in 4.4BSD.

Although versions 2 and 3 of NFS were designed entirely within Sun, the growing set of
companies providing NFS-based products put increasing pressure on Sun to bring others into
the design of NFS version 4. After much political maneuvering, Sun agreed to pass the
responsibility for defining the specification of NFS version 4 to the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF). Version 4 greatly expands the functionality of the earlier versions of NFS.

Sun’s NFS is not the only remote filesystem protocol currently in use. Research at
Carnegie-Mellon lead to the Andrew filesystem (AFS) [Howard, 1988]. AFS was commercialized
by Transarc and eventually became part of the Distributed Computing Environment
promulgated by the Open Software Foundation and was supported by many vendors. It was
designed to handle widely distributed servers and clients, and also to work well with mobile
computers that operate while detached from the network for long periods. AFS did not see wide
commercial use.

In the Microsoft family of operating systems, remote filesystem access is provided by the
Common Internet File System (CIFS), which runs on top of the Server Message Block (SMB)
protocol [SNIA, 2002]. In FreeBSD, support for SMB and CIFS client and server is provided by
Samba, which resides in /usr/ports/net/samba. Since this book deals with the kernel, and
Samba runs mostly external to the kernel, we will not discuss it further.

NFS was designed as a client-server application. Its implementation is divided into a client part
that imports filesystems from other machines and a server part that exports local filesystems to
other machines. The general model is shown in Figure 11.1. In FreeBSD, the kernel can be
configured to support just the client, just the server, or both client and server. Many goals went
into the NFS design:

• The protocol is designed to be stateless. Because there is no state to maintain or recover, NFS
can continue to operate even during periods of client or server failures. Thus, it was thought to
be much more robust than a system that operates with state.

• NFS is designed to support UNIX filesystem semantics. However, its design also allows it to
support the possibly less-rich semantics of other filesystem types, such as the MS-DOS
filesystem.

• The protection and access controls follow the UNIX semantics of having the process present a
UID and set of groups that are checked against the file’s owner, group, and other access modes.
The security check is done by filesystem-dependent code that can do more or fewer checks based
on the capabilities of the filesystem that it is supporting. For example, the MS-DOS filesystem
cannot implement the full UNIX security validation, and it makes access decisions solely based
on the UID.

• The protocol design is transport independent. Although it was originally built using the UDP
datagram protocol in version 2, it was easily moved to the TCP stream protocol in version 3. It
has also been ported to run over numerous other non-IP-based protocols.

Figure 11.1 The division of NFS between client and server.

Some of the design decisions limit the set of applications for which NFS is appropriate:

• The design envisions clients and servers being connected on a local, fast network. The NFS
protocol does not work well over slow links. When using an unreliable protocol, such as UDP as
the transport, it does not work well between clients and servers with intervening gateways. It
also works poorly in mobile computing environments that have extended periods of
disconnected operation.

• The caching model assumes that most files will not be shared. Performance suffers when files
are heavily shared.

• The stateless protocol requires some loss of traditional UNIX semantics. Filesystem locking
(flock) has to be implemented by a separate stateful daemon. Deferral of the release of space in
an unlinked file until the final process has closed the file is approximated with a heuristic that
sometimes fails.

Despite these limitations, NFS proliferated because it makes a reasonable tradeoff between
semantics and performance; its low cost of adoption has now made it ubiquitous.

11.2 Structure and Operation

NFS operates as a typical client–server application. The server receives remote procedure
call (RPC) requests from its various clients. An RPC operates much like a local procedure call:
the client makes a procedure call and then waits for the result while the procedure executes. For
a remote procedure call, the parameters must be marshalled together into a message.
Marshalling includes replacing pointers by the data to which they point and converting data
into network byte order. The message is then sent to the server, where it is unmarshalled
(separated out into its original pieces) and processed as a local filesystem operation. The result

must be similarly marshalled and sent back to the client. The client unmarshalls the result and
returns that value to the calling process as though the result were being returned from a local
procedure call [Birrell & Nelson, 1984]. NFS uses Sun’s RPC and external data-representation
(XDR) protocols [Reid, 1987]. Although the kernel implementation is done by hand to get
maximum performance, the user-level daemons described later in this section use the RPC and
XDR libraries.

The NFS protocol can run over any available stream- or datagram-oriented protocol but the
most common choice is TCP because it provides better service over a wide range of network
types from local to wide area. Each NFS RPC message may need to be broken into multiple
packets to be sent across the network. A motivating factor to move away from running NFS over
a datagram protocol, such as UDP, is that any single RPC may be broken into up to six packets;
if any of these packets are lost, the entire RPC is lost and needs to be resent. When running over
a stream protocol, such as TCP, the RPC will still be broken into several packets; however,
individual lost packets, rather than the entire message, will be retransmitted by TCP. The
problems with running NFS over an unreliable datagram protocol are exacerbated on
high-bandwidth local-area networks. NFS messages will always fit into a single UDP datagram
but the underlying network usually requires the messages to be split, a process called IP
fragmentation. Each IP packet contains an identifier that allows large packets, that were broken
up, to be reassembled when they are received by the server. The IP identifier field is only 16 bits,
which means that once a concurrent and highly fragmented workload is present, the birthday
paradox kicks in where different streams have a high probability of selecting overlapping
IP-identifier sequences. The server’s network stack will now reassemble the UDP datagrams
incorrectly, leading to datagrams with failed checksums that require retransmission. The
ensuing poor performance is the main reason use of NFS over UDP is heavily discouraged even
for local-area networks. In FreeBSD, NFS over UDP is retained primarily for use in network
booting. For a more complete discussion of IP fragmentation see Section 13.1.

The set of RPC requests that a client can send to a server, under version 3 of the protocol, is
shown in Table 11.1. After the server handles each request, it responds with the appropriate data
or with an error code explaining why the request could not be completed. As noted in the table,
many operations are idempotent. An idempotent operation is one that can be repeated several
times without the final result being changed or an error being caused. For example, writing the
same data to the same offset in a file is idempotent because it will yield the same result whether
it is done once or many times. However, trying to remove the same file more than once is
nonidempotent because the file will no longer exist after the first try. Idempotency is an issue
when the server is slow or when an RPC acknowledgment is lost and the client retransmits the
RPC request. The retransmitted RPC will cause the server to attempt the same operation again.
For a nonidempotent request, such as a request to remove a file, the retransmitted RPC, if

undetected by the server recent-request cache [Juszczak, 1989], will cause a “no such file” error
to be returned, because the file will have been removed already by the first RPC. Users may be
confused by the error because they believe that they are attempting to remove an existing file.

Table 11.1 NFS, Version 3, RPC requests.

Each file on the server is identified by a unique file handle. A file handle is the token by which
clients refer to files on a server. The handles are passed in operations, such as read and write,
that reference a file. A file handle is created by the server when a pathname-translation request
(lookup) is sent from a client to the server. The server must find the requested file or directory
and ensure that the requesting user has access permission. If permission is granted, the server
returns a file handle for the requested file to the client. The file handle identifies the file in
future access requests by the client. A file handle is meant to be opaque to the client. The client

is not allowed to peek into or infer any information from the file handle but only to present it to
the server as part of routine file operations. Servers are free to build file handles from whatever
information they find convenient.

In the FreeBSD NFS implementation, each filesystem can decide what data goes into a file
handle. In ZFS, the file handle is created from the underlying file ID. ZFS is covered in Chapter
10.

In UFS, covered in Chapter 9, the file handle is built from a filesystem identifier, an inode
number, and a generation number. The server creates a unique filesystem identifier for each
of its locally mounted filesystems. A generation number is assigned to an inode each time that
the latter is allocated to represent a new file. The generation number is selected by using the
kernel’s random-number generator. The kernel ensures that the same generation value is never
used for two consecutive allocations of the same underlying inode or file ID.

The purpose of the file handle is to provide the server with enough information to find the file in
future requests. The generation number verifies that the file handle still references the same file
that it referenced when the file was first accessed. Using a generation number allows the server
to detect when a file has been deleted, and a new file is later created using the same inode or file
ID. Although the new file has the same filesystem identifier and inode number, it is a completely
different file from the one that the previous file handle referenced. Since the generation number
is included in the file handle, a previously used generation number for an inode will not match
the new generation number in the same inode. When a file handle representing a previous
version of the file is presented to the server by a client, the server refuses to accept it and instead
returns the “stale file handle” error message.

The use of the generation number ensures that the file handle is time stable. Distributed systems
define a time-stable identifier as one that refers uniquely to some entity both while that
entity exists and for a long time after it is deleted. A time-stable identifier allows a system to
remember an identity across transient failures and allows the system to detect and report errors
for attempts to access deleted entities.

Versions 2 and 3 of the NFS protocol are stateless. Being stateless means that the server does
not need to maintain any information about which clients it is serving or about the files that they
currently have open. Every RPC request that is received by the server is completely
self-contained. The server does not need any additional information beyond that contained in
the RPC to fulfill the request. For example, a read request will include the credential of the user
doing the request, the file handle on which the read is to be done, the offset in the file to begin
the read, and the number of bytes to be read. This information allows the server to open the file,
verify that the user has permission to read it, seek to the appropriate point, read the desired

contents, and close the file. In practice, the server caches recently accessed file data. However, if
there is enough activity to push the file out of the cache, the file handle provides the server with
enough information to reopen the file.

The benefit of a stateless protocol is that there is no need to do state recovery after a client or
server has crashed and rebooted or after the network has been partitioned and reconnected.
Because each RPC is self-contained, the server can simply begin servicing requests as soon as it
begins running; it does not need to know which files its clients have open. Indeed, it does not
even need to know which clients are currently using it as a server.

There are drawbacks to a stateless protocol. First, the semantics of the local filesystem imply
state. When files are unlinked, they continue to be accessible until the last reference to them is
closed. Because NFS knows neither which files are open on clients nor when those files are
closed, it cannot properly know when to free file space. As a result, it always frees the space at
the time of the unlink of the last link to the file. Clients that want to preserve the
freeing-on-last-close semantics convert unlinks of open files to renames to obscure names on
the server. The names are in the form .nfs.tttttttt.xxxx4.4, where the tttttttt is the number of
CPU ticks since the system booted and xxxx is replaced with the hexadecimal value of the
process identifier. The ticks are successively incremented until an unused name is found. When
the last close is done on the client, the client sends an unlink of the obscure filename to the
server. This heuristic works for file access on only a single client; if one client has the file open
and another client removes the file, the file will still disappear from the first client at the time of
the remove. Other stateful semantics include the advisory locking described in Section 9.5. The
locking semantics cannot be handled by the NFS protocol. Under versions 2 and 3 of the NFS
protocol, they are handled by a separate lock manager; the FreeBSD version of NFS implements
them using the user-level rpc.lockd daemon. Locking is handled differently under version 4 of
the protocol (see Section 11.3).

The second drawback of a stateless protocol is related to performance. Under version 2 of the
NFS protocol, all operations that modify the filesystem must be committed to stable storage
before the RPC can be acknowledged. Most servers do not have battery-backed memory; the
stable-store requirement means that all written data must be on the disk before they can reply to
the RPC. For a growing file, an update may require up to three synchronous disk writes: one for
the inode to update its size, one for the indirect block to add a new data pointer, and one for the
new data. At a minimum, a single write to a filesystem log is required. Each synchronous write
takes several milliseconds; this delay severely restricts the write throughput for any given client
file.

Version 3 of the NFS protocol eliminated some of the synchronous writes by adding a new
asynchronous write RPC request. When such a request is received by the server, it is permitted
to acknowledge the RPC without writing the new data to stable storage. Typically, a client will do
a series of asynchronous write requests followed by a commit RPC request when it reaches the
end of the file or it runs out of buffer space to store the file. The commit RPC request causes the
server to write any unwritten parts of the file to stable store before acknowledging the commit
RPC. The server benefits by having to write the inode and indirect blocks for the file only once
per batch of asynchronous writes, instead of on every write RPC request. The client benefits
from having higher throughput for file writes. The client does have the added overhead of
having to save copies of all asynchronously written buffers until a commit RPC is done because
the server may crash before having written one or more of the asynchronous buffers to stable
store. Each time the client does an asynchronous write RPC, the server returns a cookie, which
acts as a verification token. When the client sends the commit RPC, the acknowledgment to that
RPC also includes a cookie. The client uses the cookie to determine whether the server has
rebooted between a call to write data and a later call to commit it. The cookie is guaranteed to be
the same throughout a single boot session of the server and to be different each time the server
reboots where uncommitted data may be lost. If the cookie changes, the client knows that it
must retransmit all asynchronous write RPCs done since the last commit RPC that were verified
with the old cookie value.

The NFS protocol does not specify the granularity of the buffering that should be used when files
are written. Most implementations of NFS utilize 8-Kbyte buffers when working on file blocks in
system memory. If an application writes 10 bytes in the middle of a block, the client reads the
entire block from the server, modifies the requested 10 bytes, and then writes the entire block
back to the server. The FreeBSD implementation also uses 8-Kbyte buffers, but it keeps
additional information that describes which bytes in the buffer are modified. If an application
writes 10 bytes in the middle of a block, the client reads the entire block from the server,
modifies the requested 10 bytes, but then writes back only the 10 modified bytes to the server.
The block read is necessary to ensure that, if the application later reads back other unmodified
parts of the block, it will get valid data. Writing back only the modified data has two benefits:

1. Fewer bytes are sent over the network, reducing contention for a scarce resource.

2. Nonoverlapping modifications to a file are not lost. If two different clients simultaneously
modify different parts of the same file block, both modifications will show up in the file since
only the modified parts are sent to the server. When clients send back entire blocks to the server,
changes made by the first client will be overwritten by data read before the first modification
was made and then will be written back by the second client.

Another performance problem that comes from the stateless nature of the NFS protocol is that
the server must check permissions for each I/O operation that a client requests. The server does
not support, nor understand, the concept of an open file; it only handles I/O operations based
on the paths that are sent by the clients. Checking the permissions on each request requires
extra filesystem accesses on the server, resulting in higher overhead per operation.

The FreeBSD NFS Implementation

The NFS implementation that appears in FreeBSD was written by Rick Macklem at the
University of Guelph, using the specifications of the Version 2 protocol published by Sun
Microsystems [Macklem, 1994a; Sun Microsystems, 1989]. He later extended it to support the
protocol extensions found in version 3 [Callaghan et al., 1995; Pawlowski et al., 1994], and has
most recently added support for version 4 of the protocol [Haynes & Noveck, 2014]. Table 11.1
lists the functionality in the version 3 protocol. Version 3 of the protocol provides the following:

• Sixty-four-bit file offsets and sizes

• An access RPC that provides server permission checking on file open, rather than having the
client guess whether the server will allow access

• An append option on the write RPC

• A defined way to make special device nodes and fifos

• Optimization of bulk directory access

• The ability to batch writes into several asynchronous RPCs followed by a commit RPC to
ensure that the data are on stable storage

• Additional information about the capabilities of the underlying filesystem

In addition to the version 2 and version 3 support, Rick Macklem made several other extensions
to the BSD NFS implementation; the extended version became known as the Not Quite NFS
(NQNFS) protocol [Macklem, 1994b]. The NQNFS extensions added support for extended file
attributes to support FreeBSD filesystem functionality more fully and a variant of short-term
leases with delayed-write client caching that provided distributed cache consistency and
improved performance [Gray & Cheriton, 1989]. Although the NQNFS extensions were never
widely adopted in version 3 implementations, they were instrumental in proving the value of
using leases in NFS. The leasing technology was adopted for use in the NFS version 4 protocol,

not only for cache consistency and improved performance, but also as a mechanism to bound
the recovery time for locks.

The NFS implementation distributed in FreeBSD supports clients and servers running any of
versions 2, 3, or 4 of the NFS protocol. The code that implemented the experimental NQNFS
protocol was removed during the development of FreeBSD 5.

The FreeBSD client and server implementations of NFS are kernel resident. NFS interfaces to
the network with sockets via the kernel RPC layer. The kernel RPC layer contains calls to the
in-kernel versions of the socket routines sosend() and soreceive() (see Chapter 12 for a
discussion of the socket interface) and frees the NFS daemons from having to handle socket
communication on their own.

The less time-critical operations, such as the mounting and unmounting of remote filesystems,
as well as determination of which filesystems may be exported and to what set of clients they
may be exported are managed by user-level system daemons. For the server side to function, the
portmap, mountd, and nfsd daemons must be running. For full NFS functionality, the
rpc.lockd and rpc.statd daemons must also be running.

The portmap acts as a clearing house for the services provided by the machine on which it is
running. Whenever any RPC daemon is started, it tells the portmap daemon to what port
number it is listening and what RPC services it is prepared to serve. When a client wishes to
make an RPC call to a given service, it will first contact the portmap daemon on the server
machine to determine whether a service is available and, if it is available, the port number to
which RPC messages should be sent.

The interactions between the client and server daemons when a remote filesystem is mounted
are shown in Figure 11.2. The mountd daemon handles two important functions:

1. On startup and after a hangup signal, mountd reads the /etc/exports file and creates a list
of hosts and networks to which each local filesystem may be exported. It passes this list into the
kernel using the mount system call; the kernel links the list to the associated local filesystem
mount structure so that the list is readily available for consultation when an NFS request is
received.

2. Client mount requests are directed to the mountd daemon. After verifying that the client has
permission to mount the requested filesystem, mountd returns a file handle for the requested
mount point. This file handle is used by the client for later traversal into the filesystem.

Figure 11.2 Daemon interaction when a remote filesystem is mounted. Step 1: The client’s
mount process sends a message to the well-known port of the server’s portmap daemon,
requesting the port address of the server’s mountd daemon. Step 2: The server’s portmap
daemon returns the port address of its server’s mountd daemon. Step 3: The client’s mount
process sends a request to the server’s mountd daemon with the pathname of the filesystem
that it wants to mount. Step 4: The server’s mountd daemon requests a file handle for the
desired mount point from its kernel. If the request is successful, the file handle is returned to the
client’s mount process. Otherwise, the error from the file-handle request is returned. If the
request is successful, the client’s mount process does a mount system call, passing in the file
handle that it received from the server’s mountd daemon.

The NFS server is implemented as a set of kernel libraries that are invoked by a pool of service
threads that remain perpetually resident in the kernel. The user level nfsd daemon creates, and
fills in, a structure that it passes to the nfssvc system call that tells the kernel how many NFS
daemon threads to run. Typical servers run four to six nfsd kernel threads but more may be
used to increase throughput if the underlying hardware has sufficient resources. Other than
starting the kernel nfsd master thread, the user level NFS daemon does very little work. The
nfsd kernel threads rely on the kernel RPC and service libraries.

Any kernel thread that wishes to provide an RPC creates a transport object and then registers it
with the service layer. To create a datagram-based transport service the thread uses the
svc_dg_create() routine while creating a connection-oriented service is accomplished with the
svc_vc_create() routine. After the transport is created, it must be registered with the service, in
order to start receiving RPCs, via the svc_reg() routine. All versions of NFS for both datagram
and connection oriented protocols register the nfssvc_program() entry point, which
demultiplexes incoming requests into the correct parts of the protocol libraries. Once the
demultiplexing is complete, the nfsd kernel thread verifies the sender and then passes the
request to the appropriate local filesystem for processing. When the result comes back from the
filesystem, it is returned to the requesting client. Each individual request results in a kernel
thread invoking nfssvc_program(), which returns once its work is complete. The maximum

degree of concurrency on the server is determined by the number of nfsd kernel threads that
are running.

For connection-oriented transport protocols, such as TCP, there is one connection for each
client-to-server mount point. For datagram-oriented protocols, such as UDP, the server creates
a fixed number of incoming RPC sockets when it starts its nfsd daemons; clients create one
socket for each imported mount point. The socket for a mount point is created in the kernel in
response to the mount command on the client calling the nmount() system call. The client side
uses it to communicate with the mountd daemon on the server. Once the client-to-server
connection is established, the daemon processes on a connection-oriented protocol may perform
additional verification, such as authentication. If the connection breaks while the mount point is
still active, the client will attempt a reconnect with a new socket.

For version 2 and version 3 of the NFS protocol, the rpc.lockd daemon manages locking
requests for remote files. Client locking requests are exported from the kernel through a fifo,
/var/run/lock. The rpc.lockd daemon reads the locking request from the fifo and sends the
lock request across the network to the rpc.lockd daemon on the server that holds the file. The
daemon running on the server opens the file to be locked and uses the flock system call to
acquire the requested lock. Once the lock has been acquired, the server daemon sends a message
back to the client daemon. The client daemon writes the lock status into the fifo, which is then
read by the kernel and passed up to the user application. The release of the lock is handled
similarly. If the rpc.lockd daemon is not run, then lock requests on NFS files will fail with an
“operation not supported” error.

The rpc.statd daemon cooperates with rpc.statd daemons on other hosts to provide a
status-monitoring service. The daemon accepts requests from programs running on the local
host (typically rpc.lockd) to monitor the status of specified hosts. If a monitored host crashes
and restarts, the daemon on the crashed host will notify the other daemons that it crashed when
it is restarted. When notified of a crash, or when a daemon determines that a remote host has
crashed because of its lack of response, it will notify the local program(s) that requested the
monitoring service. If the rpc.statd daemon is not run, then locks held by clients on a host that
crashed may be held indefinitely. By using the rpc.statd service, crashes will be discovered and
the locks held by a crashed host will be released.

The client side can operate without any daemons running, but the system administrator can
improve performance by running several nfsiod daemons. As with the server, for full
functionality the client must run the rpc.lockd and rpc.statd daemons.

The purpose of the nfsiod daemons is to perform asynchronous read-ahead and write-behind.
The daemons are typically started when the kernel begins running multiuser, and are started via

the nfsiod_setup() routine. They are completely kernel resident, providing a process context for
the NFS RPC client side. In their absence, each read or write of an NFS file that cannot be
serviced from the local client cache must be done in the context of the requesting process. The
process sleeps while the RPC is sent to the server, the RPC is handled by the server, and a reply
is sent back. No read-ahead is done and write operations proceed at the disk-write speed of the
server. When present, the nfsiod daemons provide a separate context in which to issue RPC
requests to a server. When a file is written, the data are copied into the buffer cache on the client.
The buffer is then passed to a waiting nfsiod that does the RPC to the server and awaits the
reply. When the reply arrives, nfsiod updates the local buffer to mark that buffer as written.
Meanwhile, the process that did the write can continue running. The NFS protocol flushes all
the blocks of a file to the server when that file is closed. If all the dirty blocks have been written
to the server when a process closes a file that it has been writing, it will not have to wait for them
to be flushed.

When reading a file, the client first hands a read-ahead request to the nfsiod that does the RPC
to the server. It then looks up the buffer that it has been requested to read. If the sought-after
buffer is already in the cache because of a previous read-ahead request, then it can proceed
without waiting. Otherwise, it must do an RPC to the server and wait for the reply. The
interactions between the client and server daemons when I/O is done are shown in Figure 11.3.

Figure 11.3 Daemon interaction when I/O is done. Step 1: The client’s process does a write
system call. Step 2: The data to be written are copied into a kernel buffer on the client, and the
write system call returns. Step 3: An nfsiod daemon awakens inside the client’s kernel, picks up
the dirty buffer, and sends the buffer to the server. Step 4: The incoming write request is
delivered to the next available nfsd daemon running inside the kernel on the server. The
server’s nfsd daemon writes the data to the appropriate local disk and waits for the disk I/O to
complete. Step 5: After the I/O has completed, the server’s nfsd daemon sends back an

acknowledgment of the I/O to the waiting nfsiod daemon on the client. On receipt of the
acknowledgment, the client’s nfsiod daemon marks its local buffer as clean.

Client–Server Interactions

A local filesystem is unaffected by network service disruptions. It is always available to the users
on the machine unless there is a catastrophic event, such as a disk or power failure. Since the
entire machine hangs or crashes, the kernel does not need to concern itself with how to handle
the processes that were accessing the filesystem. By contrast, the client end of a network
filesystem must have ways to handle processes that are accessing remote files when the client is
still running but the server becomes unreachable or crashes. Each NFS mount point is provided
with three alternatives for dealing with server unavailability:

1. The default is a hard mount that will continue to try to contact the server indefinitely to
complete the filesystem access. This type of mount is appropriate when processes on the client
that access files in the filesystem do not tolerate I/O system calls that return transient errors. A
hard mount is used for processes for which access to the filesystem is critical for normal system
operation. It is also useful if the client has a long-running program that simply wants to wait for
the server to resume operation (e.g., after the server is taken down for maintenance).

2. The other extreme is a soft mount that retries an RPC a specified number of times, and then
the corresponding system call returns with a transient error. For a connection-oriented protocol,
the actual RPC request is not retransmitted; instead, NFS depends on the protocol
retransmission to do the retries. If a response is not returned within the specified time, the
corresponding system call returns with a transient error. The problem with this type of mount is
that most applications do not expect a transient error return from I/O system calls (since they
never occur on a local filesystem). Often, they will mistakenly interpret the transient error as a
permanent error and will exit prematurely. An additional problem is deciding how long to set
the timeout period. If it is set too low, error returns will start occurring whenever the NFS server
is slow because of heavy load or when the network is heavily loaded. Alternately, a large retry
limit can result in a process being hung for a long time because of a crashed server or network
partitioning.

3. Most system administrators take a middle ground by using an interruptible mount that will
wait forever like a hard mount but checks to see whether a termination signal is pending for any
process that is waiting for a server response. If a signal (such as an interrupt) is sent to a process
waiting for an NFS server, the corresponding I/O system call returns with a transient error.
Normally, the process is terminated by the signal. If the process chooses to catch the signal, then
it can decide how to handle the transient failure. This mount option allows interactive programs

to be aborted when a server fails, while allowing long-running processes to await the server’s
return.

Security Issues

NFS versions 2 and 3 are not secure because the protocol was not designed with security in
mind. Despite several attempts to fix security problems in these versions, NFS security is still
limited. In particular, the security work only addresses authentication; file data are sent over the
network in clear text. Even if someone is unable to get your server to send him or her a sensitive
file, he or she can just wait until a legitimate user accesses it, and then can pick it up as it goes by
on the net. Much of the work that went into version 4 addressed both authentication and data
security. As version 4 moves into general use, NFS filesystems will be able to be run more
securely than previously.

NFS export control is at the granularity of local filesystems. Associated with each local
filesystem mount point is a list of the hosts to which that filesystem may be exported. A local
filesystem may be exported to a specific host, to all hosts that match a subnet mask, or to all
other hosts (the world). For each host or group of hosts, the filesystem can be exported
read-only or read–write. In addition, a server may specify a set of subdirectories within the
filesystem that may be mounted. However, this list of mount points is enforced by only the
mountd daemon. If a malicious client wishes to do so, it can access any part of a filesystem that
is exported to it.

The final determination of exportability is made by the list maintained in the kernel. As a result,
even if a rogue client manages to snoop the net and to steal a file handle for the mount point of a
valid client, the kernel will refuse to accept the file handle unless the client presenting that
handle is on the kernel’s export list. When NFS is running with TCP, the check is done once
when the connection is established. When NFS is running with UDP, the check must be done for
every RPC request.

The NFS server also permits limited remapping of user credentials. Typically, the credential for
the superuser is not trusted and is remapped to the low-privilege user “nobody.” The credentials
of all other users can be accepted as given or also mapped to a default user (typically “nobody”).
Use of the client UID and GID list unchanged on the server implies that the UID and GID space
are common between the client and server (i.e., UID N on the client must refer to the same user
on the server). One of the main problems in the deployment of NFS in large, heterogeneous
environments is the need for a unified UID and GID space. The system administrator can
support more complex UID and GID mappings by using the umapfs filesystem described in
Section 7.5.

NFSv3 can use Kerberos to authenticate users of the system. A fuller discussion of the use of
Kerberos within NFS is presented in Section 11.3.

Techniques for Improving Performance

Remote filesystems face a challenging performance problem: providing both a coherent
network-wide view of the data and delivering that data quickly are often conflicting goals. The
server can maintain coherency easily by keeping a single repository for the data and sending
them out to each client when the clients need them; this approach tends to be slow because
every data access requires the client to wait for an RPC round-trip time. The delay is further
aggravated by the huge load that it puts on a server that must service every I/O request from its
clients. To increase performance and to reduce server load, remote filesystem protocols attempt
to cache frequently used data on the clients themselves. If the cache is designed properly, the
client will be able to satisfy many of its own I/O requests directly from the cache. Performing
these accesses is faster than communicating with the server, reducing latency on the client and
load on the server and network. The hard part of client caching is keeping the caches
coherent—that is, ensuring that each client quickly replaces any cached data that are modified
by writes done on other clients. If one client writes a file that is later read by a second client, the
second client wants to see the data written by the first client, rather than the stale data that were
in the file previously. There are two main ways that the stale data may be read accidentally:

1. If the second client has stale data sitting in its cache, the client may use those data because it
does not know that newer data are available.

2. The first client may have new data sitting in its cache but may not yet have written those data
back to the server. Here, even if the second client asks the server for up-to-date data, the server
may return the stale data because it does not know that one of its clients has a newer version of
the file in that client’s cache.

The second of these problems is related to the way that client writing is done. Synchronous
writing requires that all writes be pushed through to the server during the write system call.
This approach is the most consistent because the server always has the most recently written
data. It also permits any write errors, such as “filesystem out of space,” to be propagated back to
the client process via the write system-call return. With an NFS filesystem using synchronous
writing, error returns most closely parallel those from a local filesystem. Unfortunately, this
approach restricts the client to only one write per RPC round-trip time.

An alternative to synchronous writing is delayed writing, where the write system call returns as
soon as the data are cached on the client; the data are written to the server sometime later. This

approach permits client writing to occur at the rate of local storage access up to the size of the
local cache. Also, for cases where file truncation or deletion occurs shortly after writing, the
write to the server may be avoided entirely because the data have already been deleted. Avoiding
the data push saves the client time and reduces load on the server.

There are some drawbacks to delayed writing. To provide full consistency, the server must notify
the client when another client wants to read or write the file so that the delayed writes can be
written back to the server. There are also problems with the propagation of errors back to the
client process that issued the write system call. For example, a semantic change is introduced by
delayed-write caching when the file server is full. Here, delayed-write RPC requests can fail with
an “out of space” error. If the data are sent back to the server when the file is closed, the error
can be detected only if the application checks the return value from the close system call. For
delayed writes, written data may not be sent back to the server until after the process that did
the write has exited—long after it can be notified of any errors. The only solution is to modify
programs writing an important file to do an fsync system call and to check for an error return
from that call instead of depending on getting errors from write or close. Finally, there is a risk
of the loss of recently written data if the client crashes before the data are written back to the
server.

A compromise between synchronous writing and delayed writing is asynchronous writing. The
write to the server is started during the write system call, but the write system call returns
before the write completes. This approach reduces the risk of data loss because of a client crash
but negates the possibility of reducing server write load by discarding writes when a file is
truncated or deleted.

Since NFS has no way of knowing when write sharing might occur, it tries to bound the period of
inconsistency by writing the data back when a file is closed. Files that are open for long periods
are written back when their oldest dirty data becomes 30 seconds old. Thus, the NFS
implementation does a mix of asynchronous and delayed writing, but it always pushes all writes
to the server on close. Pushing the delayed writes on close negates much of the performance
advantage of delayed writing because the delays that were avoided in the write system calls are
observed in the close system call. With this approach, the server is always aware of all changes
made by its clients with a maximum delay of 30 seconds and usually sooner, because most files
are open only briefly for writing.

The server maintains read consistency by always having a client verify the contents of its cache
before using that cache. When a client reads data, it first checks for the data in its cache. Each
cache entry is stamped with an attribute that shows the most recent time that the server says
that the data were modified. If the data are found in the cache, the client sends a timestamp RPC

request to its server to find out when the data were last modified. If the modification time
returned by the server matches that associated with the cache, the client uses the data in its
cache; otherwise, it arranges to replace the data in its cache with the new data.

The problem with checking with the server on every cache access is that the client still
experiences an RPC round-trip delay for each file access, and the server is still inundated with
RPC requests, although they are considerably quicker to handle than are full I/O operations. To
reduce this client latency and server load, most NFS implementations track how recently the
server has been asked about each cache block. The client then uses a tunable parameter that is
typically set at a few seconds to delay asking the server about a cache block. If an I/O request
finds a cache block and the server has been asked about the validity of that block within the
delay period, the client does not ask the server again, but just uses the block. Because certain
blocks are used many times in succession, the server will be asked about them only once, rather
than on every access. For example, the directory block for the /usr/include directory will be
accessed once for each #include in a source file that is being compiled. The drawback to this
approach is that changes made by other clients may not be noticed for up to the delay number of
seconds.

A more consistent approach used by some network filesystems is to use a callback mechanism
where the server keeps track of all the files that each of its clients has cached. When a cached file
is modified, the server notifies the clients holding that file so that they can purge it from their
cache. This algorithm dramatically reduces the number of queries from the client to the server,
with the effect of decreasing client I/O latency and server load [Howard et al., 1988]. The
drawback is that this approach introduces state into the server because the server must
remember the clients that it is serving and the set of files that they have cached. If the server
crashes, it must rebuild this state before it can begin running again. Rebuilding the server state
is a significant problem when everything is running properly; it gets even more complicated and
time-consuming when it is aggravated by network partitions that prevent the server from
communicating with some of its clients [Mogul, 1993].

The FreeBSD NFS implementation uses asynchronous writes while a file is open but
synchronously waits for all data to be written when the file is closed. This approach gains the
speed benefit of writing asynchronously, yet ensures that any delayed errors will be reported no
later than the point at which the file is closed. The implementation will query the server about
the attributes of a file at most once every 3 seconds. This 3-second period reduces network
traffic for files accessed frequently, yet ensures that any changes to a file are detected with no
more than a 3-second delay. Although these heuristics provide tolerable semantics, they are
noticeably imperfect.

11.3 NFS Evolution

Over its 25-year history, the NFS protocol has had to evolve to meet changing technology and
user requirements. Many of the features that were considered experimental extensions to
version 3 of NFS, as well as the work done in NQNFS, have been codified and included as fully
fledged features in the latest versions of the protocol, NFS version 4.0 and 4.1. NFS version 3, in
particular, depended on external daemons for certain operations, such as locking, that have now
been subsumed into the base protocol in version 4, obviating the need for supplementary
daemons. The scale of the work undertaken to update NFS for version 4 was monumental, with
the initial update to version 4.0 spanning over 250 pages of description [Shepler et al., 2003].
Version 4.1, an update to version 4.0, is described in an even larger, 600-page-plus document,
although much of the length of the update can be attributed to the more extensive description of
each of the possible NFS operations [Shepler et al., 2010]. FreeBSD contains an implementation
of both a client and server that supports the NFS protocol up through version 4.1. This section
describes the design and implementation of both of the protocols as if they were one. The
differences between the major version and the revision will be noted only when absolutely
necessary. The NFSv4.0 RFC lists four goals for the latest version of the protocol:

• Improved access and good performance on the Internet. The protocol should not only do well
in   a   high-bandwidth/low-latency      network      such   as   a   LAN,   but      also   over   a
low-bandwidth/high-latency network such as a WAN. The earlier versions of the protocol
operate poorly over WANs.

• Strong security with negotiation built into the protocol. When NFS was first designed,
computers that were powerful enough to run a UNIX-like operating system were generally used
in medium to large installations and were not carried around by individuals who might connect
them to an insecure network and then expect to get full access to their files on a server. The
advent of mobile computing and pervasive, high-speed, wireless networking has made it so that
all network protocols must address security concerns, and NFS is no different. Version 4 of the
protocol had security mechanisms designed into it from the beginning.

• Good cross-platform interoperability. NFS was designed so that computers running UNIX-like
operating systems, with similar directory structures and file operations, could share a
centralized store of files. The adaptation of NFS to non-UNIX environments required rethinking
the protocol so that more types of clients could interoperate with NFS servers.

• Designed for protocol extensions. A shortcoming of both version 2 and version 3 of the NFS
protocol was that it was virtually impossible to extend once it had been deployed. An inability to
evolve the protocol has meant that necessary changes took a long time to get into the field.

Revision 4.1 of the NFS protocol adds a few new goals:

• Correct significant structural weaknesses and oversights discovered in version 4.0 of the
protocol

• Add clarity and specificity to areas left unaddressed or not addressed in enough detail in
version 4.0 of the protocol

• Add specific features based on experience with the existing protocol and recent industry
developments

• Provide protocol support for clustered-server deployments including providing scalable
parallel access to files distributed across multiple servers

NFSv4 is a significantly different protocol from its predecessors. A fundamental change in
NFSv4 is the move to a stateful protocol. Many of the new features in version 4, such as caching,
delegation, and locking, require that the server maintain state. Another significant change
comes at the lowest level of the protocol where the 20 standard RPCs present in version 3 of the
protocol have been replaced with two regular procedures, NULL and COMPOUND, and two
callback procedures, CB_NULL and CB_COMPOUND. The operations that were previously
encoded as their own RPCs in NFS versions 2 and 3 (see Section 11.2) are now encoded as
operations within the COMPOUND or CB_COMPOUND RPCs. The COMPOUND procedure
encapsulates, in a single RPC call, several NFS operations that are to be carried out by the server.
When a server receives a COMPOUND RPC, it attempts to perform the operations encapsulated
therein, in the order in which they are encoded into the message. If an error occurs in processing
any of the operations received in the COMPOUND RPC, processing immediately stops and an
error is returned. Encapsulating multiple operations into a single message can help to improve
the performance of NFS by reducing the number of round trips that each operation requires. In
practice, it has not been possible to group operations within the COMPOUND RPCs because too
often one operation is dependent on the successful completion of a previous operation. Although
the current implementation of NFSv4 in FreeBSD groups between 3 and 5 operations, the
number of messages needed to do an operation in NFSv4 is the same as NFSv3.

Comparing the set of operations available in NFSv4, shown in Table 11.2 with the RPCs that
were given in Table 11.1 shows that there are more than twice as many available in NFSv4. The
new operations exist to support new features available in NFSv4 including locking, which was
handled by a separate protocol under previous versions of NFS, delegations, which allow for
local open and lock operations to be carried out on the client; and more aggressive caching of
file data and attributes.

Table 11.2 NFS Version 4 operations.

A significant change between previous versions of NFS, and NFSv4 is the addition of explicit
OPEN and CLOSE operations. Integrating support for features that require state, such as
locking and caching, lead to the addition of OPEN and CLOSE, which bring the filesystem
semantics present in NFSv4 closer to those of a stateful local filesystem such as UFS. In previous
versions of NFS, all the client needed to manipulate a file on the server was the file’s handle.
NFSv4 requires clients to open a file and obtain a file handle specific to that file before it can
perform operations such as reading and writing data.

The original version of NFS targeted UNIX and UNIX-like operating systems in which there was
always a single unique filesystem root. Systems such as Windows have a root for each filesystem
that appears as the drive letter, C:, D: etc. Version 4 of the protocol tries to address the
multiple-root problem by having the server maintain a pseudo-filesystem hierarchy that
brings back the concept of a single root to the filesystem tree. The motivation for providing a
single namespace comes from the way that many users access their files. They progressively
browse the directory and file hierarchy through a graphical chooser or via tab completion on the
command line.

A way to reduce the load on the server and to improve the user’s experience on the client is to
allow the client to cache as much file and metadata as possible. Removing round trips between
the client and server by keeping copies of data at the client is a well-known technique for
improving performance in a distributed system. Caching data at the client introduces the
problem discussed in Section 11.2, maintaining the coherence of data over many systems which
must be handled carefully to avoid cases where data are mangled or lost by conflicting changes
submitted by different clients. If two clients have opened and modified the same file, and those
modifications occur on copies of the data that are locally cached at the client, then the server has
no way of knowing which modification is correct and which should be thrown away. To avoid
cache-coherency problems, NFSv4 only allows a client to cache information if either it is the
only one writing data to the file or if all clients are only reading from the file. When a server
allows a client to cache data, it is said to be delegating responsibility for that data to the client.
To properly support delegation, the protocol must also have a way to regain control over the
data it delegated, for example, if a second client requests to open a file for writing. To regain
control over a delegated piece of data, the server uses a callback mechanism to contact the client
to which it has delegated the data and tell the client that the data can no longer be cached. In the
absence of delegations, NFSv4 reverts to caching data, similarly to the way it was cached in
NFSv3, by having the client periodically check for file change with the server.

Namespace

A problem users encounter when browsing a server’s filesystem under version 2 or 3 of NFS is
reaching a dead end in the directory hierarchy caused by having to cross a mount point. On a
simple server, all the underlying filesystems might be exported to all clients, but exporting to all
clients would be an unusual case. More commonly, a subset of the filesystems are exported, such
as those in Table 11.3, where there are two exported filesystems, / and /usr/ports bracketing
one that is not exported. In previous versions of NFS, users that had changed their directory to
the root would not be able to see /usr/ports from the root directory because the /usr volume
was not exported, leaving a hole in the directory hierarchy. NFSv4 servers maintain a complete

hierarchy of their exported filesystems filling in any holes with pseudo-filesystems that appear
to the client as read-only exports.

Table 11.3 Unified namespace.

Representing a unified namespace to the client requires the server to handle four operations
differently from all others. The LOOKUP, GETATTR, GETFH, and SECINFO operations are the
only client requests that are allowed to cross mount-points on the server. The function
nfsrvd_compound(), which handles all COMPOUND RPCs for the server, checks to see if the
operation is one of the four listed above and returns an error to the client if any other operation
attempts to cross a mount point. It is by allowing these four operations to cross mount points
that the client and server can present a unified filesystem hierarchy to the user.

Attributes

Version 3 of the NFS protocol contained limited support for file attributes. Attributes are
metadata that are associated with a file, such as its size, and the times at which it was created,
modified, and accessed. The original 13 file attributes that were available in NFSv3 proved to be
insufficient for more modern filesystems that store more metadata. Information such as
whether the file has been recently archived or the maximum supported file size, only some of
which may be supported by a filesystem, are handled as attributes within NFSv4.

Clients have the ability to request attributes on an operation-by-operation basis, which means
that the client can be highly specific about what it wants to know about the server or any object
stored on it. The attributes that the server supports are themselves communicated as an
attribute between the server and the client. The OPEN operation only asks for 2 attributes, the
most recent modification time of the file and a server-generated change value that is used by the
client to determine if the file or any of its associated metadata have been changed. The attribute
is generated by the server, stored by the client, and used periodically after a successful OPEN
call to make sure that the file has not changed on the server. A file can change when it is opened
by multiple writers or when a user local to the server modifies the file directly. The ACCESS
operation, which determines if the user can access an object, asks for 16 different attributes,

including the file’s owner and group, the file’s mode, and the largest read request that the server
will support. Unlike previous versions of NFS, the owner and group for a filesystem object are
not a numeric user id and group id. Rather, they are strings that encode the user and domain
name of the system, for example, gnn@FreeBSD.org.

The RFC defines three groups of attributes for version 4 of NFS. Required attributes are those
pieces of metadata that every server must provide and every client must be able to handle.
Examples of required attributes are file size, file type, and whether the server supports links.
Recommended attributes are those that the authors of the RFC felt would be best for servers to
support but are not strictly necessary. An example of a recommended attribute is an
access-control list. The next subsection discusses recommended attributes such as whether a file
should be considered as hidden by the Windows operating system, the maximum size of files,
links and names supported by the server, and many others. The NFSv4 RFC includes 43
recommended attributes.

A goal for the NFSv4 protocol is extensibility, which includes being able to extend the set of
attributes that can be associated with a filesystem object. Named attributes make extensibility of
the attribute system in the field possible. A named attribute can be thought of as a key/value
pair, where both the key and value are uninterpreted strings that can be associated with any
filesystem object. The implementation of named attributes is dependent on the server, but the
most common implementation creates a directory of named attributes. This attribute directory
is sometimes referred to as a fork file. Each attribute appears as a file in this attribute directory.
Each attribute file can be opened, read, and written to modify the named attribute. Named
attributes are not supported by the FreeBSD 10 NFSv4 server.

Clients request attributes by using the GETATTR operation that is encoded into a COMPOUND
RPC, with other operations such as ACCESS and OPEN. Unlike previous versions of NFS,
attributes are not sent in a fixed-size structure. They are requested when the client sets specific
bits in a bit array. The implementation of NFSv4 in FreeBSD uses a set of macros to simplify
handling the bits in the attribute array. The server replies to each GETATTR query from the
client using the same 64-bit-wide array to indicate to the client which of the requested attributes
are present. A single routine, nfsv4_fillattr(), does all the work of encoding attributes on the
server. Centralizing the handling of attributes makes the code easier to manage and update.
Clients can also set attributes on filesystem objects on the server by using the SETATTR
operation. An example of setting an attribute is changing the access control list on an object, as
discussed in the next subsection.

Access Control Lists

Although it is possible to use UNIX-style users, groups, and mode bits to control access to a set
of files, such a system is limited in several ways. The first limitation is that there are clients such
as Windows that do not understand UNIX user and group IDs, or UNIX mode bits. The second,
and more important, limitation is that users and groups do not scale well in a heterogeneous
environment. If two different departments both allocate user and group numbers independently,
there is a high likelihood of a collision should these users and groups ever attempt to share a
single filesystem. Forcing one set of users to change their user and group IDs can be a daunting
task if there are many files that need to have their user and group IDs changed. Finally, the
traditional UNIX model is often too coarse grained for large organizations that have multiple
layers of security. For these reasons NFSv4 has added support for Access Control Lists
(ACLs) to the protocol.

An ACL can express a specific set of permissions on any object in the filesystem, including files,
directories, and links. Several filesystems present in FreeBSD including UFS and ZFS have
built-in support for ACLs. For information on how ACLs are represented in a filesystem, see
Section 5.7. ACLs in NFSv4 are a way of communicating the ACLs present in the filesystem over
the network. The structures for ACLs are shared between NFSv4 and the on-disk filesystems
ZFS and UFS. ACLs are contained in attributes, which is why setting or retrieving an ACL is
done with the SETATTR and GETATTR operations rather than with a dedicated set of
operations just for ACLs. Several operations can handle ACLs including: OPEN, CREATE,
SETATTR, and GETATTR.

Caching, Delegation, and Callbacks

One way to improve the performance of a distributed system is to cache as much data and do as
many operations at the client as possible. There are three caching scenarios in a distributed
filesystem:

1. A file is being read by one or more clients. The file can be cached at all the clients at the same
time as long as there are no updates to the file’s data, and only minor changes to its metadata,
such as changes to its time of last access.

2. A file is being written by a single client. The client that is writing the file may cache writes
locally so that updates to the file are batched before being sent to the server, thereby improving
write performance.

3. A file is being both read and written simultaneously on several clients and, therefore, cannot
be cached at any of the clients but must be updated and accessed only on the server.

To properly handle all three of these scenarios and the inevitable transitions between them,
NFSv4 provides clients with the ability to work with files locally through a mechanism called
delegation. NFSv4 maintains control over delegated files via a series of callbacks from the
server to the client. Caching and delegation are intimately related with normal file operations.
This section illustrates these mechanisms by describing how the client and server establish
communication and how they work together during the typical operation where clients are
opening, closing, reading, and writing files.

Before a client can open a file, it must first mount the filesystem exported by the server, at which
time several key structures are created. An NFSv4 client begins the mounting process by testing
to see if the server exists using a CB_NULL message. If the client receives a correct reply, it then
establishes a session with the server. Mounting an NFSv4 filesystem requires the creation of two
persistent pieces of information shared by the client and the server. A client ID is created to
identify the client and a session ID identifies all operations between the client and the server.
The client ID is a unique 64-bit value that identifies each client from the server’s perspective.
The client establishes its identity with the server by using an EXCHANGE_ID operation. The
EXCHANGE_ID operation is the first of a twopart operation that establishes the identity of the
client on the server. The exchange_id() service executing in the server’s kernel allocates an
nfsclient structure that tracks all the client’s interactions with the server. The nfsclient structure
is retained until either the client unmounts all the filesystems that it has mounted from the
server or the server or client crash. The process of mounting a filesystem is shown in Figure 11.4.

Figure 11.4 Mounting an NFSv4 Filesystem. Step 1: Client looks for the server with a
CB_NULL RPC. Step 2: The Server replies to the CB_NULL. Step 3: Client requests a client ID
from the server with an EXCHANGE_ID call. Step 4: The Server replies with a valid client ID
constructed from their server’s boot time and an incrementing boot count. Step 5: Client
establishes a session with a CREATE_SESSION RPC. Step 6: The Server returns a set of
communication parameters to the client establishing the session. Step 7: The Server checks to
see whether the client is running the nfscbd daemon with its own CB_NULL call. Step 8: The
client’s nfscbd daemon replies to the CB_NULL RPC.

Structures in the FreeBSD NFS implementation are named such that they can be easily
identified as belonging either to the client or the server code. All structures that are part of the
client software have the letters “cl” embedded between “nfs” and the structure’s descriptive
name. Thus, the structure that encapsulates the client’s state in the client code is named
nfsclclient, while the server structure that encapsulates the client’s state is named nfsclient.
Table 11.4 lists several of the client and server structures.

Table 11.4 Client and server data structures.

When the server is contacted by a client with an EXCHANGE_ID call, it searches its client hash
list for a pre-existing instance of the client and if no preexisting client is found, initializes a new
nfsclient structure. Each client is assigned a unique client ID based on the boot time of the
server and an incrementing counter. The combination of the boot time and the counter make
client IDs unique across server reboots. This information is used by the client to detect when it
must recover state from a crashed server. The boot time increases whenever the server is
rebooted; a client that sends a request with an out-of-date client ID will receive an error from
the server.

The second part of establishing initial communication between a client and server is the creation
of a session. The next operation after the EXCHANGE_ID must be a CREATE_SESSION as no
other operations can take place until a session has been created. All operations in NFSv4, other
than the establishment of the client ID, occur as part of a session.

The session concept was added during the update to NFSv4.1 and does not exist in version 4.0.
One reason sessions were added was to provide exactly once semantics. On the server side,
each session has associated with it a set of available slots. Operations posted to a slot will always
be serialized; they will never be run in parallel. If a client wants to serialize a set of calls, for
example, a series of locking operations, it will use the same slot on the server for all the locking
calls so that the RPC calls are serialized on that single slot. Operations that do not require

serialization, such as reads, can be spread across the slots to increase parallelism and receive the
fastest level of service from the server.

A session describes all the state necessary for the client and server to communicate, including
several parameters that influence resource allocation and performance. The parameters
negotiated as part of setting up a session include the maximum number of concurrent requests
the session can carry at any one time, the maximum number of operations per request, and the
maximum number of replies that the server can cache. Fine-grained performance tuning can be
implemented using the session parameters, as they allow the server to express what it can
handle in terms of parallelism and the amount of state it is willing to maintain on behalf of each
client. To create a session, the client sends its client ID to the server along with its set of
requested communications parameters. The server responds with a session ID and a possibly
modified set of communications parameters. If the parameters are unacceptable to either the
client or the server, then an error is returned and the session is not created. Once the client and
server have created a session, the structures shown in Figure 11.5 are in place. The session
structure on both the client and the server contain the negotiated communication parameters
for use by the kernel when filesystem operations are executed. To complete the mounting
process the server sends a CB_NULL RPC to the client and waits for a reply. If the server
receives a reply to its CB_NULL call, it can then allow the client to cache data through the
delegation process. If there is no reply to the CB_NULL RPC then the server will never grant a
delegation to the client but will allow the client to receive file services. The callback mechanism
is not used to test the network path between the client and server, as the client and server have
already demonstrated their ability to properly communicate over the network. The server sends
the call back to the client to ensure that the client is running the call back service, which is what
allows the server to recall a delegation.

Figure 11.5 Session and client structure (server side).

The need to handle callbacks in the NFSv4 protocol has led to the creation of a new daemon that
must run on the client and whose job it is to receive and respond to the callbacks. The nfscbd
program is an optional daemon that must be run if the client is to receive delegations. It is
nfscbd that responds to the CB_NULL RPCs sent by the server, and to which all
CB_COMPOUND RPCs will be sent. The full complement of callback operations is given in
Table 11.5. The daemon itself is simple; like the NFS daemons described in Section 11.2, it is
implemented by a set of kernel libraries that register a callback, nfscb_program(), with the
kernel RPC service. The nfscb_program() interprets the CB_COMPOUND or CB_NULL RPC
that it receives and takes the appropriate action. While it would be possible to add the callback

functionality directly into the nfsd program, it is cleaner and simpler to place it in its own
daemon.

Table 11.5 NFS Version 4.1 callback operations from server to client.

Once the client and state IDs and client and session structures are set up, the client can ask for
services from the server.

NFSv4 uses delegations combined with a system of callbacks to provide clients the ability to
cache both data and metadata. Figure 11.6 shows a typical delegation and recall scenario. A
delegation is a recallable right granted by the server to the client that allows the client to
perform operations locally for a fixed but extendable period of time without consulting the
server. Delegations are always under the control of the server and may be revoked at any time.
There are two important problems that NFSv4 has to handle with respect to delegations. The
first is that the server must be able to revoke a delegation. Revoking a delegation requires the
server to contact the client, which reverses the normal client-server relationship seen in
previous versions of NFS. The second problem is that the client or server may crash or they may
be unable to communicate for some period of time because of a network partition. If the server
is unable to retrieve a delegation from a client, then it cannot allow other clients to proceed with
operations on the same file. To prevent files from being caught in this deadlock situation, the
server only allows the client to use a delegation for a fixed period of time, which is called a lease.

Figure 11.6 Delegating and recalling delegations. Step 1: Client A opens file foo.txt and wishes
to cache it locally. Step 2: The server replies to the OPEN and includes an
OPEN_DELEGATE_WRITE delegation type. Step 3: Client B asks the server for foo.txt, the
same file that client A asked for in Step 1. Step 4: The server informs client A, via a
CB_COMPOUND callback, that it must return the delegation for foo.txt. Step 5: Client A
flushes any of its pending changes to foo.txt and returns the delegation by sending a
DELEG_RETURN message to the server. Step 6: The server finishes the open and grants a file
handle for foo.txt to client B with a delegation type of DELEGATE_NONE.

A lease is a piece of data that acts as a contract between the client and server, permitting an
activity that is valid until some expiration time. As long as a client holds a valid lease, it knows
that the server will not violate the terms of the contract, for example, by handing out a
conflicting lock to another client. The server maintains a single lease for each client and the
lease covers all the state including delegations and locks that are granted to the client. When the
client first contacts the server and establishes a session, it will ask for the lease time via a
GETATTR request and the server will return the lease time, which by default is 120 seconds. The
client must renew the lease before the lease period ends. A lease is only considered stale by the
server if it is older than five times the lease duration. If the client fails to renew the lease, it must
return all the delegations and locks that were previously granted by the server. Several common
operations, including opening or locking files, will cause the lease time to be extended. The

server will respond with an error of NFS4ERR_EXPIRED to any operation from a client whose
client ID has expired. The client must contact the server before the lease has expired if it wants
to continue to hold the lock.

Leases are issued using time intervals rather than absolute times to avoid the requirement of
time-of-day clock synchronization. If NFSv4 used absolute times for its leases, then the server
and all its clients would need to have their clocks synchronized, via an external time protocol
such as NTP or PTP, so that they would all share the same concept of the current time [Mills,
1992; IEEE, 2008]. By using an interval time, the server and clients can all have completely
unsynchronized clocks and still execute the lease protocol correctly because each system has the
ability to know when a certain amount of time has passed. A small amount of slop is allowed
into the lease calculation to account for differing clock speeds between the clients and the
server.

The server attempts to maintain client state as long as possible and will not forcibly remove a
client that has delegations or active opens so long as it has enough resources to maintain the
state. Each server has a maximum number of active clients that it is willing to service, 1000 by
default, and so long as this number is not exceeded, a client’s state ID, and therefore its implied
lease, can remain active on the server for up to a week.

Each session has only one lease expiration time associated with it and all operations that must
operate under a lease, including locking and delegations, are constrained by the same timeout.
Although there is a specific operation to renew a lease it is rarely used because any operation
initiated by the client that contains a valid client ID extends the lease time. Operations that
extend the lease include OPEN, CLOSE, READ, WRITE, LOCK, and several others. When a lease
has almost expired, and no other operation has taken place that might extend it, the client will
attempt to extend the lease using the RENEW operation. If the request to renew the lease is
granted, then operations can continue as before, with the new lease expiration being another
120 seconds into the future. When the server denies the request, the client loses all its locks and
share reservations that it had in place up to the point when it received the denial from the
server.

Clients that open a file exclusively for reading where no client is attempting to write, may cache
data from the opened file and may also repeatedly open the same file without contacting the
server. If a server has delegated control of a file to a client and then another client attempts to
open the file for writing, the server must invalidate the original delegation and the first client
must return the delegation to the server before the second client can be given access to the file.

Locking

Previous versions of NFS did not include support for file or record locking as part of the protocol.
Limited support for locking was provided in NFSv3 by an out-of-band protocol and an external
daemon, the Network Lock Manager. NFSv4 distinguishes between two cases when dealing with
locks: a byte-range lock and a lock on an entire file, which is referred to in the protocol as a
share reservation. Whole-file locking is handled through the OPEN RPC. When a client opens a
file it specifies the type of access that it wishes to have: read, write, or both. It also specifies the
level of control it wishes to maintain over the entire file in the form of a set of share deny bits, as
shown in Table 11.6. During on open file operation, the client can indicate that it needs exclusive
control over read, write, or both operations. A client that does not need to lock a file in any way
specifies a share deny of none.

Table 11.6 Open share types.

The server maintains a global structure that is a hashed list of all locks relating to files.
Whenever a file is opened, a new nfslockfile structure is allocated and added to the nfslockhash
table whether the client is asking the server to lock the file or a byte range within it. An
nfslockfile structure exists for all open files so that there is one common place to which the
server can refer to check on or allocate locking state in the future.

Byte-range locks are acquired and released via a separate set of RPC calls: LOCK, LOCKU, and
LOCKT, which respectively lock, unlock, and test for byte-range locks. A single, large, routine,
nfsrv_lockctrl() is at the center of all byte-range-locking operations and is called by the server’s
nfsrvd_lock(), nfsrvd_locku(), and nfsrvd_lockt() routines, which map to the RPC operations
listed above. File locking is handled via the nfsrv_open() routine as described earlier in this
section. Prior to locking a byte range, the nfsrv_lockctrl() routine must first check to make sure
that there are no conflicting delegations or conflicting locks. A conflicting delegation would exist

only if another client had been granted a write delegation in the past. The write delegation must
be recalled by the callback mechanism before the lock can be granted. Read delegations do not
conflict with locks because the lock does not deny a client the ability to read data. The server
locks a range of bytes within a file by adding an nfslock structure to the nfslockfile structure
associated with the underlying file. When the client requests a byte-range lock, the server looks
up the nfslockfile structure for the underlying file and searches the lf_lock list for any conflicting
locks. If no conflicting lock is found, then a new nfslock structure is allocated and added to the
list of locks for the file. The list of locks is kept in increasing order of byte range so that only a
single pass over the list is necessary to find potential conflicts as well as the proper location to
add or coalesce entries. All the actual changes to the file’s locking state are handled by the
nfsrv_updatelock() routine, which is responsible for adding and removing lock structures from
the file’s lf_lock list. Figure 11.7 shows an example containing two files, one of which has two
byte-range locks. Acquiring a lock is considered a heavyweight operation in which much state
may be passed between the client and the server. Reading and writing data, which should be the
majority of the work of the protocol, should not be burdened with the state needed to maintain
control of a lock.

Figure 11.7 NFSv4 locking data structures.

Both share reservations and byte-range locks are acquired under the same lease that is used for
delegations. The lease limits the time that the client can maintain a lock on a file or piece of a file
without a renewal.

Security

Versions 2 and 3 of NFS had little support for security features. Since the original goal of the
NFS protocol was to enable the sharing of files within a single work-group, and certainly within
a single organizational domain, it did not seem necessary to have heavyweight mechanisms for
authenticating, encrypting, or validating data. Network filesystems are now deployed widely
within companies and across more hostile environments, such as the Internet, so NFSv4 has
integrated support for various levels of security directly into the protocol. There are three
components that interact to provide security within NFSv4: an authentication system, a library
that secures data within the RPC layer, and NFSv4 itself.

A system that wishes to provide a secure communication environment must have a way to
authenticate participants such as users and hosts. Authentication is the process by which a
participant, such as a user, proves to some other participant, such as a remote file server, that
the participant is who it claims to be. NFSv4 relies on version 5 of the Kerberos Network
Authentication Service to provide authentication between participants of the system [Neuman et
al., 2005]. The Kerberos systems acts as a trusted third party that is used by both clients and
servers to verify the truthfulness of various assertions that are made by participants in the
system. A client wishing to communicate with a server using Kerberos must first contact a
Kerberos authentication server to acquire the proper credentials, referred to in Kerberos as a
ticket. A ticket has a limited lifetime to protect against a malicious entity gaining permanent
access to the system. Using the ticket, the client can authenticate itself to the server and perform
various cryptographic operations that allow the client and server to encrypt their data and
communicate privately. Kerberos is a relatively complex network security protocol and will not
be covered in further detail here. Interested readers are recommended to the RFC cited above
for further information on the Kerberos protocol. For the purposes of our discussion within
NFSv4 Kerberos should be thought of as the system that hands out, to both clients and servers,
the keys to lock and unlock data transported over the network.

An authentication system is a necessary requirement to implement a secure network-based
filesystem, but it does not really have any ability to secure or verify the data that is exchanged in
the system. Securing data in NFSv4 is done using the RPCSEC_GSS protocol that depends on
the Generic Security Service Application Program Interface (GSSAPI) [Eisler et al., 1997; Linn,
2000]. Three parameters describe the mechanism, service, and quality of protection that
secures data between the client and the server. When taken together, these three parameters are

referred to as the security-triple and each unique security triple is referred to as a flavor. There
are three possible services that can be provided by the GSSAPI. The authentication service
guarantees that a user or other entity wishing to gain access to a piece of data is the user or
entity that they claim to be. NFSv4 uses Kerberos to authenticate users and systems, and so does
not use the authentication service in GSS. The integrity service guarantees that the data has not
been tampered with in transit but does not prevent an attacker from reading the data from the
network while they are in transit between the client and server. The privacy service encrypts the
data between the client and server so that an attacker cannot read the data while they are in
transit. The actual encryption and decryption of data is done by the RPC libraries in the kernel
and not by NFS directly, which has little or no direct knowledge of how data is secured.

The only situation in which NFSv4 deals directly with security, rather than relying on other
protocols or libraries, is when a client needs to know the choice of security protocols that it can
use with a server. An NFS client starts by assuming that there is only minimal security
implemented on the server. At some point, perhaps as early as when a filesystem is mounted by
the client, the server can respond with an NFS4ERR_WRONGSEC error, forcing the client to
negotiate security parameters with the server. The client sends a SECINFO operation in
response to the NFS4ERR_WRONGSEC message and receives back from the server a security
flavor. If the security flavor is RPCSEC_GSS, then the reply to the SECINFO operation also
contains a security triple, indicating the type of security and quality of security service that the
server supports. Servers may return a list of security triples and the client picks the first one that
it can support.

Data security in NFSv4 is available on a filesystem by filesystem basis, meaning that many
different operations may fail with an NFS4ERR_WRONGSEC reply and necessitate the
negotiation of security parameters.

Crash Recovery

A distributed system such as NFS must gracefully handle several common error conditions such
that applications using the service can treat it as they would a local filesystem. Maintaining this
illusion of consistency requires the protocol to have mechanisms that prevent recoverable or
transient errors from permanently interrupting the service. While it should not be a common
occurrence, the client or the server may crash, leading to an inconsistent state among the
communicating systems. A more common problem is a network partition, where a client and
server that were once able to communicate can no longer reach each other for some period of
time. Network partitions may be brief, but if the state on the client and server get out of sync
during the period when the client and server cannot communicate, then they must have a way to
agree on a consistent state once the partition is repaired. From the point of view of both the

client and server, it is impossible, without some help from the protocol, to determine whether a
system has crashed or whether a temporary network partition has occurred. The NFSv4 protocol
has mechanisms that handle regaining consistent state after a network partition or the failure of
either the client or server system.

A client that has crashed and restarted would like to return to a correct running state as quickly
as possible. Even though a client has crashed and restarted, the server continues to hold state
for the client. Each client has an associated client ID. All state for the client is maintained at the
server until the server restarts or the client dismounts all its mounted filesystems and destroys
its session and client ID with explicit DESTROY_SESSION and DESTROY_CLIENTID RPC
calls. Even if the client restarts within the lease period, it will still have to create a new client ID
with the server via the EXCHANGE_ID mechanism described earlier in this section.
Establishing a new client ID lets the server know that the client has restarted, at which point the
server can invalidate and free all state associated with the previous incarnation of the client.
After establishing a new client ID, the client can again use the NFS service.

Recovering from a server crash is a more complicated process than that required when a client
restarts. When a server experiences a restart, it must take care to restore any locking state that
existed prior to the system restarting. A client that attempts an operation with a server that has
restarted will find that both its session and client IDs are invalid, and will have to establish new
values for both before it can again use the service. A client that had locking state stored on the
server must then go through a reclamation process to reacquire the locks that it previously held.

When a server restarts, it takes several steps to make sure that it is in a consistent state before it
continues serving files to its clients. All NFSv4 servers record the time at which they were
booted, in seconds since the epoch, and place that time into all client and state IDs. When a
server is restarted, its boot time will have changed and any requests that contain a client or state
ID from a previous incarnation of the server will receive an NFS4ERR_BAD_SESSION error,
informing the client that it must reestablish itself with the server. During normal operation, the
NFSv4 server makes a record of certain operations in a local file that recovers state after a server
crash. The local state file includes a list of all the previous boot times of the server to guard
against a collision in boot times. The server’s boot time is used to construct client and state IDs
and a collision could allow stale client or state IDs to go unnoticed, resulting in file corruption.
Following the list of previous boot times is a set of variable-size entries containing client IDs and
flags. The flags indicate whether the client has active state associated with it or whether the state
has been revoked.

When the server starts up, it sets a grace period of 15 seconds before it will grant new locks.
During the grace period, clients are expected to reestablish any claims to state on the server,

such as locks, via a reclamation process. The OPEN RPC contains a claim argument that shows
whether the client is trying to reclaim state on the server. In normal operation, the claim
argument is set to NULL, but when a client is forced to reestablish state with the server, its
OPEN RPCs will contain a claim outlined in Table 11.7.

Table 11.7 Open claims.

The client must also reclaim any locks that it had when the server restarted. A lock can be
reclaimed by sending a LOCK RPC with the reclaim bit set. Once the client has completed the
process of reclaiming all its state, it sends a RECLAIM_COMPLETE message to the server, at
which point the server can discard the client’s previous state records from its state file.

The local state file is created when the server is started via a call to the nfsrv_setupstable()
routine. Any time the state file is written to by the server, it is also backed up via a call to
nfsrv_backupstable() as an extra, paranoid measure to protect against the corruption of the
state file during a system crash.

Exercises

11.1 Describe the functions done by an NFS client.

11.2 Describe the functions done by an NFS server.

11.3 Describe three benefits that NFSv3 derives from being stateless.

11.4 Name two new features added to version 4 of the NFS protocol.

11.5 Give two reasons why TCP is a better protocol to use than UDP for handling the NFS RPC
protocol.

11.6 Describe the contents of a file handle in FreeBSD. How is a file handle used?

11.7 When is a new generation number assigned to a file? What purpose does the generation
number serve?

11.8 Describe the three ways that an NFS client can handle filesystem-access attempts when its
server crashes or otherwise becomes unreachable.

11.9 Give two reasons why leases are given a limited lifetime.

11.10 What is a callback? When is it used? Which daemon sends callbacks? Which daemon
receives them?

11.11 What are the two types of locking that are supported in NFSv4?

11.12 Describe how an NFSv4 server recovers after a crash.

*11.13 Give a network time diagram that shows the process of a client acquiring a record lock
within a file, writing data to the record, and releasing the lock.

**11.14 Assume that leases have an unlimited lifetime. Design a system for recovering the lease
state after a client or server crash.

References

SNIA, 2002.

Storage Networking Industry Association SNIA, Common Internet File System (CIFS) Technical
Reference,    available    from    www.snia.org/tech_activities/CIFS/CIFS-TR-1p00_FINAL.pdf,
March 2002.

Birrell & Nelson, 1984.

A. D. Birrell & B. J. Nelson, “Implementing Remote Procedure Calls,” ACM Transactions on
Computer Systems, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 39–59, Association for Computing Machinery, February
1984.

Callaghan et al., 1995.

B. Callaghan, B. Pawlowski, & P. Staubach, “NFS: Network File System Version 3 Protocol
Specification,” RFC 1813, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1813.html, June 1995.

Eisler et al., 1997.

M. Eisler, A. Chiu, & L. Ling, “RPCSEC_GSS Protocol Specification,” RFC 2203, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2203.html, September 1997.

Gray & Cheriton, 1989.

C. Gray & D. Cheriton, “Leases: An Efficient Fault-Tolerant Mechanism for Distributed File
Cache Consistency,” Proceedings of the Twelfth Symposium on Operating Systems Principles,
pp. 202–210, December 1989.

Haynes & Noveck, 2014.

T. Haynes & D. Noveck, NFS Version 4 Protocol (rfc3530bis Draft 33), available from
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-nfsv4-rfc3530bis/, April 2014.

Howard, 1988.

J. Howard, “An Overview of the Andrew File System,” USENIX Association Conference
Proceedings, pp. 23–26, January 1988.

Howard et al., 1988.

J. Howard, M. Kazar, S. Menees, D. Nichols, M. Satyanarayanan, R. Sidebotham, & M. West,
“Scale and Performance in a Distributed File System,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 51–81, Association for Computing Machinery, February 1988.

IEEE, 2008.

IEEE, 1588-2008 - IEEE Standard for a Precision Clock Synchronization Protocol for
Networked Measurement and Control Systems, July 2008.

Juszczak, 1989.

C. Juszczak, “Improving the Performance and Correctness of an NFS Server,” USENIX
Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 53–63, January 1989.

Linn, 2000.

J. Linn, “Generic Security Service Application Program Interface Version 2, Update 1,” RFC
2743, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2743.html, January 2000.

Macklem, 1994a.

R. Macklem, “The 4.4BSD NFS Implementation,” in 4.4BSD System Manager’s Manual, pp.
6:1–14, O’Reilly & Associates, Inc., Sebastopol, CA, 1994.

Macklem, 1994b.

R. Macklem, “Not Quite NFS, Soft Cache Consistency for NFS,” USENIX Association
Conference Proceedings, pp. 261–278, January 1994.

Mills, 1992.

D. L. Mills, “The NTP Time Synchronization Protocol,” RFC 1305, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1305.html, March 1992.

Mogul, 1993.

J. Mogul, “Recovery in Spritely NFS,” Research Report 93/2, Digital Equipment Corporation
Western Research Laboratory, Palo Alto, CA, June 1993.

Neuman et al., 2005.

C. Neuman, T. Yu, S. Hartman, & K. Raeburn, “The Kerberos Network Authentication Service
(V5),” RFC 4120, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc4120.html, July 2005.

Pawlowski et al., 1994.

B. Pawlowski, C. Juszczak, P. Staubach, C. Smith, D. Lebel, & D. Hitz, “NFS Version 3: Design
and Implementation,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 137–151, June 1994.

Reid, 1987.

Irving Reid, “RPCC: A Stub Compiler for Sun RPC,” USENIX Association Conference
Proceedings, pp. 357–366, June 1987.

Sandberg et al., 1985.

R. Sandberg, D. Goldberg, S. Kleiman, D. Walsh, & B. Lyon, “Design and Implementation of the
Sun Network Filesystem,” USENIX Association Conference Proceedings, pp. 119–130, June
1985.

Shepler et al., 2003.

S. Shepler, B. Callaghan, D. Robinson, R. Thurlow, C. Beame, M. Eisler, & D. Noveck, “Network
File    System        (NFS)   version     4   Protocol,”   RFC      3530,     available   from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc3530.html, April 2003.

Shepler et al., 2010.

S. Shepler, M. Eisler, & D. Noveck, Network File System (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 1
Protocol, available from http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc5661.txt, January 2010.

Sun Microsystems, 1989.

Sun Microsystems, “NFS: Network File System Protocol Specification,” RFC 1094, available
from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1094.html, March 1989.

Walsh et al., 1985.

D. Walsh, B. Lyon, G. Sager, J. Chang, D. Goldberg, S. Kleiman, T. Lyon, R. Sandberg, & P.
Weiss, “Overview of the Sun Network File System,” USENIX Association Conference
Proceedings, pp. 117–124, January 1985.

