        Part IV: Interprocess Communication

             Chapter 12. Interprocess Communication

FreeBSD provides a rich set of interprocess-communication facilities intended to support the
construction of distributed programs built on top of communications primitives. Support
for these facilities is described in this chapter.

No one mechanism can provide for all types of interprocess communication. The subsystems
that provide IPC in FreeBSD 10 can be broken down into two areas. The first provides for IPC on
a single system and includes support for semaphores, message queues, and shared
memory. These subsystems were described in Section 7.2. The second is the socket interface,
which provides a uniform communication API for network communication.

The socket API is deeply entwined with the network subsystem. The overall architecture of the
network system is described in this chapter and is then referenced and refined in Chapters 13
and 14, which describe the implementation of network layer and transport layer protocols
respectively. You will find it easiest to understand the material in the following two chapters if
you read this chapter first.

12.1 Interprocess-Communication Model

There were several goals in the design of the interprocess-communication enhancements to
UNIX. The most immediate need was to provide access to communication networks such as the
Internet [Cerf, 1978]. Previous work in providing network access had focused on the
implementation of the network protocols, exporting the transport facilities to applications via
special-purpose—and often awkward—interfaces [Cohen, 1977; Gurwitz, 1981]. As a result, each
new network implementation resulted in a different application interface, requiring most
existing programs to be altered significantly or rewritten completely. For 4.2BSD, the
interprocess-communication facilities were intended to provide a sufficiently general interface
to allow network-based applications to be constructed independently of the underlying
communication facilities.

The second goal was to allow multiprocess programs, such as distributed databases, to be
implemented. The UNIX pipe requires all communicating processes to be derived from a
common parent process. The use of pipes forced systems to be designed with a somewhat

contorted structure. New communication facilities were needed to support communication
between unrelated processes residing locally on a single host computer and residing remotely on
multiple host machines.

Finally, it became important to provide new communication facilities to allow construction of
local-area network services, such as file servers. The intent was to provide facilities that could be
used easily in supporting resource sharing in a distributed environment and not to build a
distributed UNIX system.

The interprocess-communication facilities were designed to support the following:

• Transparency: Communication between processes should not depend on whether the
processes are on the same machine.

• Efficiency: The applicability of any interprocess-communication facility is limited by the
performance of the facility. A naive implementation of interprocess communication often results
in a modular but inefficient implementation because most interprocess communication facilities,
especially those related to networks, are broken down into many layers. At each layer boundary,
the software must do some work, either adding information to a message or removing it.
FreeBSD only introduces layers where they are absolutely necessary for the proper functioning
of the system and does not introduce arbitrary and unnecessary layers.

• Compatibility: Existing naive processes should be usable in a distributed environment without
change. A naive process is characterized as a process that does its work by reading from the
standard input file and writing to the standard output file. A sophisticated process uses
knowledge about the richer set of interfaces provided by the kernel to do its work. A major
reason UNIX has been successful is the operating system’s support for modularity by naive
processes that act as byte-stream filters. Although sophisticated applications such as web
servers and screen editors exist, they are far outnumbered by the collection of naive application
programs.

While designing the interprocess-communication facilities, the developers identified the
following requirements to support these goals, and they developed a unifying concept for each:

• The system must support communication networks that use different sets of protocols,
different naming conventions, different hardware, and so on. The notion of a communication
domain was defined for these reasons. A communication domain embodies the standard
semantics of communication and naming. Different networks have different standards for
naming communication endpoints, which may also vary in their properties. In one network, a
name may be a fixed address for a communication endpoint, whereas in another it may be used

to locate a process that can move between locations. The semantics of communication can
include the cost associated with the reliable transport of data, the support for multicast
transmissions, the ability to pass access rights or capabilities, and so on.

• A unified abstraction for an endpoint of communication that can be manipulated with a file
descriptor is needed. The socket is the abstract object from which messages are sent and
received. Sockets are created within a communication domain, just as files are created within a
filesystem. Unlike files, however, sockets exist only as long as they are referenced. Once the file
descriptor that represents a socket is closed, and its reference count drops to zero, the socket is
freed.

• The semantic aspects of communication must be made available to applications in a controlled
and uniform way. Applications must be able to request different styles of communication, such
as reliable byte stream or unreliable datagram, and these styles must be provided consistently
across all communication domains. All sockets are typed according to their communication
semantics. Types are defined by the semantic properties that a socket supports. These properties
are:

1. In-order delivery of data

2. Unduplicated delivery of data

3. Reliable delivery of data

4. Connection-oriented communication

5. Preservation of message boundaries

6. Support for out-of-band messages

Pipes have the first four properties, but not the fifth or sixth. An out-of-band message is one that
is delivered to the receiver outside the normal stream of incoming, in-band data and is usually
associated with an urgent or exceptional condition. A connection is a mechanism that protocols
use to avoid having to transmit the identity of the sending socket with each packet of data.
Instead, the identity of each endpoint of communication is exchanged before transmission of
any data and is maintained at each end so that it can be presented at any time. On the other
hand, connectionless communications require a source and destination address associated with
each transmission. A datagram socket provides unreliable, connectionless packet
communication; a stream socket provides a reliable, connection-oriented byte stream that
may support out-of-band data transmission; and a sequenced-packet socket provides a
sequenced, reliable, unduplicated connection-based communication that preserves message

boundaries. The socket API is extensible and other types of sockets can be and have been added
to the system.

Processes must be able to locate endpoints of communication so that they can rendezvous
without prior knowledge, so sockets can be named. A socket’s name is meaningfully interpreted
only within the context of the communication domain in which the socket is created. The names
used by most applications are human-readable strings. However, the name for a socket that is
used within a communication domain is usually a low-level address. Rather than placing
name-to-address translation functions in the kernel, FreeBSD provides a userspace library for
application programs to use in translating names to addresses.

Use of Sockets

Since the creation of the sockets API, several excellent books have been written about socket
programming from the user’s perspective [Stevens et al., 2003]. This section includes a brief
description of a client and server program communicating over a reliable byte stream in the
IPv4 communication domain. The client is described first and the server second. For more
detailed information on writing network applications, please see the cited references.

A program that wants to use a socket creates it with the socket system call:

int sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);

The type of socket is selected according to the characteristic properties required by the
application. In this example, reliable communication is required, so a stream socket (type =
SOCK_STREAM) is selected. The domain parameter specifies the communication domain (or
address family; see Section 12.4) in which the socket should be created, here the IPv4 Internet
(domain = AF_INET). The final parameter, the protocol, can give a specific communication
protocol for use in supporting the socket’s operation. Protocols are specified by well-known
(standard) constants specific to each communication domain. When zero is used, the system
picks an appropriate protocol. The socket system call returns a file descriptor (a small integer;
see Section 7.1) that is then used in all later socket operations.

After a socket has been created, the next step depends on the type of socket being used. Since
this example is connection oriented, the sockets require a connection before being used.
Creating a connection between two sockets usually requires that each socket have an address
bound to it, which is simply a way of identifying each endpoint of the communication.

Applications may explicitly specify a socket’s address or may permit the system to assign one.
The address to be used with a socket must be given in a socket address structure. The
format of addresses can vary among domains; to permit a wide variety of different formats, the
system treats addresses as variable-length byte arrays, which are prefixed with a length and a
tag that identifies their format. Each domain has its own addressing format, which can always
be mapped into the most generic one.

A connection is initiated with a connect system call:

int error, sock;
struct sockaddr_in rmtaddr;
int rmtaddrlen = sizeof(struct sockaddr_in);

error =
  connect(sock, (struct sockaddr *)&rmtaddr, rmtaddrlen);

When the connect call completes, the client has a fully functioning communication endpoint on
which it can send and receive data.

A server follows a different path once it has created a socket. It must bind itself to an address
and then accept incoming connections from clients. The call to bind an address to a socket is as
follows:

int error, sock, addrlen = sizeof(struct sockaddr_in);
struct sockaddr_in addr;

error =
  bind(sock, (struct sockaddr*)&localaddr, localaddrlen);

where sock is the descriptor created by a previous call to socket.

For several reasons, binding a name to a socket was separated from creating a socket. First,
sockets are potentially useful without names. If all sockets had to be named, users would be
forced to devise meaningless names without reason. Second, in some communication domains,
it may be necessary to supply additional information to the system before binding a name to a
socket—for example, the “type of service” required when a socket is used. If a socket’s name had

to be specified at the time that the socket was created, supplying this information would not be
possible without further complicating the interface.

In the server process, the socket must be marked to specify that incoming connections are to be
accepted on it by using the listen system call:

int error, sock, backlog = 5;

error = listen(sock, backlog);

The backlog parameter used in the listen call specifies an upper bound on the number of
pending connections that should be queued for acceptance. Having an upper bound on the listen
queue is one way to prevent resource exhaustion in the kernel.

Connections are then received, one at a time, with the accept call:

int newsock, sock;
struct sockaddr_in clientaddr;
int clientaddrlen = sizeof(struct sockaddr_in);

newsock = accept(sock, (struct sockaddr *)&clientaddr,
         clientaddrlen);

The accept call returns a new connected socket, as well as the address of the client, by specifying
the clientaddr and clientaddrlen parameters. The new socket is the one through which
communication can take place. The original socket, sock, is used solely for managing the queue
of connection requests in the server.

A variety of calls are available for sending and receiving data; these calls are summarized in
Table 12.1. The richest of these interfaces are the sendmsg and recvmsg calls that can handle
scatter-gather operations, specify an address on transmission and reception, supply optional
flags, and handle specially interpreted ancillary data or control information. The message
header structure that is used by sendmsg and recvmsg is shown in Figure 12.1. Ancillary data
may include protocol-specific data, such as addressing or options, and also specially interpreted
data, called access rights. Further details of the usage of the message header structure are given
in Section 12.6.

Table 12.1 Sending and receiving data on a socket.

Figure 12.1 Data structures for the sendmsg and recvmsg system calls.

In addition to these system calls, several other calls are provided to access miscellaneous
services. The getsockname call returns the locally bound address of a socket, whereas the
getpeername call returns the address of the socket at the remote end of a connection. The
shutdown call terminates data transmission or reception at a socket, and two ioctl-style
calls—setsockopt and getsockopt—can be used to set and retrieve various parameters that
control the operation of a socket or of the underlying network protocols. Sockets are discarded
with the normal close system call.

The interface to the interprocess-communication facilities was purposely designed to be
orthogonal to the existing standard system interfaces—that is, to the open, read, and write

system calls. This decision was made to avoid overloading the familiar interface with undue
complexity. In addition, the developers thought that using an interface that was completely
independent of the filesystem would improve the portability of software because, for example,
pathnames would not be involved. Backward compatibility, for the sake of naive processes, was
still deemed important. Thus, the familiar read–write interface was augmented to permit access
to the new communication facilities wherever that made sense (e.g., when connected stream
sockets were used).

12.2 Implementation Structure and Overview

The interprocess-communication facilities are layered on top of the networking facilities, as
shown in Figure 12.2. Data flows from the application through the socket layer to the
networking layer and vice versa. State required by the socket layer is fully encapsulated within it,
whereas any protocol-related state is maintained in data structures that are specific to the
supporting protocols. Responsibility for storage associated with transmitted data is passed from
the socket layer to the network layer. Consistent adherence to this rule assists in simplifying
details of storage management. Within the socket layer, the socket data structure is the focus of
all activity. The system-call interface routines manage the actions related to a system call,
collecting the system-call parameters (see Section 3.2) and converting user data into the format
expected by the socket-layer routines. Most of the socket abstraction is implemented within the
socket-layer routines. All socket-layer routines have names with a so prefix, and they directly
manipulate socket data structures and manage the synchronization between asynchronous
activities; these routines are listed in Table 12.2.

Figure 12.2 Interprocess-communication implementation layering. The boxes on the left name
the standard layers; the boxes on the right name specific examples of the layers that might be
used by an individual socket.

Table 12.2 Socket-layer support routines.

The remainder of this chapter focuses on the implementation of the socket layer. Section 12.3
discusses how memory is managed at the socket layer and below in the networking subsystem;
Section 12.4 covers the socket and related data structures; Section 12.5 presents the algorithms
for connection setup; Section 12.6 discusses data transfer; and Section 12.7 describes connection
shutdown. Throughout these sections, references to the supporting facilities provided by the
network-communication protocols are made with little elaboration. Section 12.8 describes the
internal structure of the network-communication protocols. Section 12.9 describes the
socket-to-protocol interface. Section 12.10 describes the protocol-to-protocol interface. Section
12.11 describes the protocol-to-network interface. Section 12.12 describes network buffering and
flow control. Section 12.13 concludes the chapter with a discussion of network virtualization.

12.3 Memory Management

The requirements placed on a memory-management scheme by interprocess-communication
and network protocols tend to be substantially different from those of other parts of the
operating system. Although all require the efficient allocation and reclamation of memory,
communication protocols in particular need memory in widely varying sizes. Memory is needed
for variable-size structures such as communication protocol packets. Protocol implementations
must frequently prepend headers or remove headers from packetized data. As packets are sent

and received, buffered data may need to be divided into packets, and received packets may be
combined into a single record. In addition, packets and other data objects must be queued when
awaiting transmission or reception. A special-purpose memory-management facility exists for
use by the interprocess-communication and networking systems to address these needs.

Mbufs

The memory-management facilities revolve around a data structure called an mbuf (see Figure
12.3). Mbufs, or memory buffers, vary in size depending on what they contain. All mbufs contain
a fixed m_hdr structure that keeps track of various bits of bookkeeping about the mbuf. An
mbuf that contains only data has space for 224 bytes (256 bytes total for the mbuf minus 32
bytes for the mbuf header). All structure sizes are calculated for 64-bit processors.

Figure 12.3 Memory-buffer (mbuf) data structure.

For large messages, the system can associate larger sections of data with an mbuf by referencing
an external mbuf cluster from a private virtual memory area. The size of an mbuf cluster may
vary by architecture, as specified by the macro MCLBYTES, and is 2 Kbyte on the X86.

Data are stored either in the internal data area or in an external cluster, but never in both. To
access data in either location, a data pointer within the mbuf is used. In addition to the
data-pointer field, a length field is also maintained. The length field shows the number of bytes

of valid data to be found at the data-pointer location. The data and length fields allow routines
to trim data efficiently at the start or end of an mbuf. In deletion of data at the start of an mbuf,
the pointer is incremented and the length is decremented. To delete data from the end of an
mbuf, the length is decremented, but the data pointer is left unchanged. When space is available
within an mbuf, data can be added at either end. This flexibility to add and delete space without
copying is particularly useful in communication-protocol implementation. Protocols routinely
strip protocol information off the front or back of a message before the message’s contents are
handed to a higher-layer processing module, or they add protocol information as a message is
passed to lower layers.

Multiple mbufs can be linked together to hold an arbitrary quantity of data. This linkage is done
with the m_next field of the mbuf. By convention, a chain of mbufs linked through the m_next
field is treated as a single object. For example, the communication protocols build packets from
chains of mbufs. A second field, m_nextpkt, links objects built from chains of mbufs into lists of
objects. Throughout our discussions, a collection of mbufs linked together with the m_next field
will be called a chain; chains of mbufs linked together with the m_nextpkt field will be called a
queue.

Each mbuf is typed according to its use. This type serves two purposes. The only operational use
of the type is to distinguish optional components of a message in an mbuf chain that is queued
for reception on a socket data queue. Otherwise, the type information is used in maintaining
statistics about storage use and, if there are problems, as an aid in tracking mbufs.

The mbuf flags are logically divided into two sets: flags that describe the usage of an individual
mbuf and those that describe an object stored in an mbuf chain. The flags describing an mbuf
specify whether the mbuf references external storage (M_EXT), whether the mbuf contains a set
of packet header fields (M_PKTHDR), and whether the mbuf completes a record (M_EOR). A
packet normally would be stored in an mbuf chain (of one or more mbufs) with the M_PKTHDR
flag set on the first mbuf of the chain. The mbuf flags describing the packet would be set in the
first mbuf and could include either the broadcast flag (M_BCAST) or the multicast flag
(M_MCAST). The latter flags specify that a transmitted packet should be sent as a broadcast or
multicast, respectively, or that a received packet was sent in that manner.

If the M_PKTHDR flag is set on an mbuf, the mbuf has a second set of header fields
immediately following the standard header. This addition causes the mbuf data area to shrink
from 224 bytes to 168 bytes. The packet header shown in Table 12.3 is only used on the first
mbuf of a chain. It includes several fields: a pointer to the interface on which the packet was
received, the total length of the packet, a field relating to packet checksum calculation, and a
pointer to a list of arbitrary tags.

Table 12.3 Important fields in (mbuf) data structure with M_PKTHDR.

An mbuf that uses external storage is marked with the M_EXT flag. Here, a different header
area overlays the internal data area of an mbuf. The fields in this header, which is shown in
Figure 12.4, describe the external storage, including the start of the buffer and its size. One field
is designated to point to a routine to free the buffer, in theory allowing various types of buffers
to be mapped by mbufs. In the current implementation, the free function is not used and the
external storage is assumed to be a standard mbuf cluster. An mbuf may be both a packet header
and have external storage. Here, the standard mbuf header is followed by the packet header and
then the external storage header.

Figure 12.4 Memory-buffer (mbuf) data structure with external storage.

The ability to refer to mbuf clusters from an mbuf permits data to be referenced by different
entities within the network code without a memory-to-memory copy operation. When multiple
copies of a block of data are required, the same mbuf cluster is referenced from multiple mbufs.
Since the mbuf headers are transient, the reference count for the clusters cannot be stored in the
m_ext structure. Instead, the reference counts for clusters are managed as a separate array
referenced from the mbufs that are sharing mbuf clusters. The array is large enough for every
mbuf cluster that could be allocated by the system. The memory dedicated to mbufs and clusters
is set based on the kernel parameter maxusers, which is itself based on the amount of physical
memory in the system. Basing the amount of memory dedicated to the networking subsystem on
the amount of physical memory gives a good default value but can be increased when a system is
dedicated to networking tasks such as a Web server, firewall, or router.

Mbufs have fixed-size, rather than variable-size, data areas for several reasons. First, the fixed
size minimizes memory fragmentation. Second, communication protocols are frequently
required to prepend or append headers to existing data areas, to split data areas, or to trim data
from the beginning or end of a data area. The mbuf facilities are designed to handle such
changes without reallocation or copying whenever possible.

Since the mbuf is the central object of all the networking subsystems, it has undergone changes
with each large change in the code. It now contains a flags field and two optional sets of header
fields. The data pointer replaces a field used as an offset in the initial version of the mbuf. The

use of an offset was not portable when the data referenced could be in an mbuf cluster. The
addition of a flags field allowed the use of a flag indicating external storage. Earlier versions
tested the magnitude of the offset to see whether the data were in the internal mbuf data area.
The addition of the broadcast flag allowed network-level protocols to know whether packets
were received as link-level broadcasts, as was required for standards conformance. Several other
flags have been added for use by specific protocols and to handle fragment processing.

The optional header fields have undergone the largest changes since 4.4BSD. The two headers
were originally designed to avoid redundant calculations of the size of an object, to make it
easier to identify the incoming network interface of a received packet, and to generalize the use
of external storage by an mbuf. Since FreeBSD 5, the packet header has been expanded to
include information on checksum calculation (a traditionally expensive operation that can now
be done in hardware) as well as on the management of flows of packets, quality of service
parameters, a receive-side scaling hash to steer packets to particular hardware queues, and an
arbitrary set of tags.

Tags are fixed-size structures that can point to arbitrary pieces of memory and are used to store
information relevant to different modules within the networking subsystem. Each tag has a link
to the next tag in the list, a 16-bit ID, a 16-bit length, and a 32-bit cookie and a module-defined
type. The cookie identifies the module that owns the tag. The type is a piece of data that is
private to the module that describes to the module the type of tag it is handling. Tags carry the
information about a packet that should not be placed into the packet itself and they are often
used as an extension mechanism for the networking subsystem. Instead of modifying the mbuf
structures, and thereby losing binary compatibility between versions of FreeBSD, new
networking modules can define their own tags as a way of communicating arbitrary out-of-band
information between different components of the network stack. Examples of these tags are
given in Section 13.7.

Storage-Management Algorithms

Providing the system with a network stack capable of multiprocessing required a complete
rework of the memory-allocation algorithms underlying the mbuf code. Whereas previous
versions of BSD allocated memory with the system allocator and then carved it up for mbufs and
clusters, such a simple technique does not work when using multiple CPUs.

As is described in detail in Section 6.3, FreeBSD allocates virtual memory among a series of lists
for use by the network memory allocation code. Each CPU has its own private container of
mbufs and clusters. There is also a single, general pool of mbufs and clusters from which
allocations are attempted when a per-CPU list is empty or to which memory is freed when a

per-CPU list is full. A uniprocessor system acts as if it is a multiprocessor system with one CPU,
which means that it has one per-CPU list as well as the general one.

Mbuf-allocation requests specify either that they must be fulfilled immediately or that they can
wait for available resources. If a request is marked as “can wait” and the requested resources are
unavailable, the process is put to sleep to await available resources. A nonblocking request will
fail if no resources are available. Although a nonblocking allocation request is no longer
necessary for code that executes at interrupt level, the networking code still operates assuming
nonblocking is required. If mbuf allocation has reached its limit or memory is unavailable, the
mbuf-allocation routines ask the network-protocol modules to give back any available resources
that they can spare.

An mbuf-allocation request is made through a call to m_get(), m_gethdr(), or through an
equivalent macro. An mbuf is retrieved from the currently running CPU’s per-CPU list by the
mb_alloc() function and is initialized. For m_gethdr(), the mbuf is initialized with the optional
packet header. The MCLGET macro adds an mbuf cluster to an mbuf.

Release of mbuf resources is straightforward: m_free() frees a single mbuf and m_freem() frees
a chain of mbufs. When an mbuf that references an mbuf cluster is freed, the reference count for
the cluster is decremented. Mbuf clusters are placed onto the currently running CPU’s per-CPU
list when their reference counts reach zero.

Mbuf Utility Routines

Many useful utility routines exist for manipulating mbufs within the kernel networking
subsystem. The m_copym() routine makes a copy of an mbuf chain starting at a logical offset, in
bytes, from the start of the data. This routine may be used to copy all or only part of a chain of
mbufs. If an mbuf is associated with an mbuf cluster, the copy will reference the same data by
incrementing the reference count on the cluster. The m_copydata() function is similar, but it
copies data from an mbuf chain into a caller-provided buffer. This buffer is not an mbuf, or
chain, but an area of memory such as an I/O buffer elsewhere in the kernel.

The m_adj() routine adjusts the data in an mbuf chain by a specified number of bytes, removing
data from either the front or back. No data are ever copied; m_adj() operates purely by
manipulating the offset and length fields in the mbuf structures. The mtod() macro takes a
pointer to an mbuf header and a data type, and returns a pointer to the data in the buffer, cast to
the given type.

The m_pullup() routine rearranges an mbuf chain such that a specified number of bytes reside
in a contiguous data area within the mbuf (not in external storage). This operation is used so

that objects such as protocol headers are contiguous and can be treated as normal data
structures. If there is room, m_pullup() will increase the size of the contiguous region up to the
maximum size of a protocol header in an attempt to avoid being called in the future.

The M_PREPEND() macro adjusts an mbuf chain to prepend a specified number of bytes of
data. If possible, space is made in place, but an additional mbuf may have to be allocated at the
beginning of the chain. It is currently impossible to prepend data within an mbuf cluster
because different mbufs might refer to data in different portions of the cluster.

12.4 IPC Data Structures

Sockets are the objects used by processes communicating over a network. A socket’s type defines
the basic set of communication semantics, whereas the communication domain defines auxiliary
properties important to the use of the socket and may refine the set of available communication
semantics. Table 12.4 shows the four types of sockets currently supported by the system. To
create a new socket, applications must specify its type and the communication domain. The
request may also indicate a specific network protocol to be used by the socket. If no protocol is
specified, the system selects an appropriate protocol from the set of protocols supported by the
communication domain. If the communication domain is unable to support the type of socket
requested (i.e., no suitable protocol is available), the request will fail.

Table 12.4 Socket types supported by the system.

Sockets are described by a socket data structure that is dynamically created at the time of a
socket system call. Communication domains are described by a domain data structure that is
statically defined within the system based on the system’s configuration (see Section 15.3).
Communication protocols within a domain are described by a protosw structure that is also

statically defined within the system for each protocol implementation configured. Having these
structures defined statically reduces communication startup time and reduces the complexity of
the implementation because there is no need to support the dynamic addition and deletion of
protocols or domains at run time.

When a request is made to create a socket, the system uses the value of the communication
domain to search linearly the list of configured domains. If the domain is found, the domain’s
table of supported protocols is consulted for a protocol appropriate for the type of socket being
created or for the specific protocol requested. A wildcard entry may exist for a raw socket.
Should multiple protocol entries satisfy the request, the first is selected. This section describes
the domain structure. The protosw structure that lists a domain’s supported protocols is
discussed in Section 12.8.

The domain structure is shown in Figure 12.5. The dom_name field is the string that names
the communication domain. The dom_family field identifies the address family used by the
domain; some possible address-family values are shown in Table 12.5. Address families refer to
the addressing structure of a domain. An address family generally has an associated protocol
family. Protocol families refer to the suite of communication protocols of a domain used to
support the communication semantics of a socket. The dom_protosw field points to the table of
functions that implement the protocols supported by the communication domain, and the
dom_protoswNPROTOSW pointer marks the end of the table. The remaining entries contain
pointers to domain-specific routines used in the management and transfer of access rights and
fields relating to routing and network interface initialization for the domain.

Figure 12.5 Communication-domain data structure.

Table 12.5 Address families.

The socket data structure is shown in Figure 12.6. Storage for the socket structure is allocated by
the zone allocator (described in Section 6.3). Sockets contain information about their type, the
supporting protocol in use, and their state. States are shown in Table 12.6. Data being
transmitted or received are queued at the socket as a list of mbuf chains. Various fields are
present for managing queues of sockets created during connection establishment. Each socket
structure also holds a process-group identifier. The process-group identifier is used in delivering
the SIGURG and SIGIO signals. SIGURG is sent when an urgent condition exists for a socket,
and SIGIO is used by the asynchronous I/O facility (see Section 7.1). The socket contains an
error field, which is needed for storing asynchronous errors to be reported to the owner of the
socket.

Figure 12.6 Socket data structure.

Table 12.6 Socket states.

Sockets are located using a process’s file descriptor via a file entry. When a socket is created, the
f_data field of the file structure is set to point at the socket structure, and the f_ops field is set to
point to the set of routines defining socket-specific file operations. Here, the socket structure is a
direct parallel of the vnode structure used by the filesystems.

The socket structure acts as a queueing point for data being transmitted and received. As data
enter the system as a result of system calls, such as write or send, the socket layer passes the
data to the networking subsystem as a chain of mbufs for transmission. If the supporting
protocol module decides to postpone transmission of the data, or if a copy of the data are to be
maintained until an acknowledgment is received, the data are queued in the socket’s send queue.
When the network has consumed the data, it discards them from the outgoing queue. On
reception, the network passes data up to the socket layer, also in mbuf chains, where they are
then queued until the application makes a system call to request them. The socket layer can also
make a callback to an internal kernel client of the network when data arrive, allowing the data to
be processed without a context switch. Callbacks are used by the NFS server (see Chapter 11).

To avoid resource exhaustion, sockets impose upper bounds on the number of bytes of data that
can be queued in a socket data buffer as well as on the amount of storage space that can be used
for data. This high watermark is initially set by the protocol, although an application can
change the value up to a system maximum. The network protocols can examine the high
watermark and use the value in flow-control policies. A low watermark also is present in
each socket data buffer. The low watermark allows applications to control data flow by
specifying a minimum number of bytes required to satisfy a reception request, with a default of 1

byte and a maximum of the high watermark. For output, the low watermark sets the minimum
amount of space available before transmission can be attempted; the default is the size of an
mbuf cluster. These values also control the operation of the select system call when it is used to
test for ability to read or write the socket.

When connection indications are received at the communication-protocol level, the connection
may require further processing to complete. Depending on the protocol, that processing may be
done before the connection is returned to the listening process, or the listening process may be
allowed to confirm or reject the connection request. Sockets used to accept incoming connection
requests maintain two associated queues of sockets. The list of sockets headed by the so_incomp
field represents a queue of connections that must be completed at the protocol level before being
returned. The so_comp field heads a list of sockets that are ready to be returned to the listening
process. Like the data queues, the queues of connections also have an application-controllable
limit. The limit applies to both queues. Because the limit may include sockets that cannot yet be
accepted, the system enforces a limit 50 percent larger than the nominal limit.

Although a connection may be established by the network protocol, the application may choose
not to accept the established connection or may close down the connection immediately after
discovering the identity of the client. A network protocol may delay completion of a connection
until after the application has obtained control with the accept system call. The application
might then accept or reject the connection explicitly with a protocol-specific mechanism.
Otherwise, if the application does a data transfer, the connection is confirmed; if the application
closes the socket immediately, the connection is rejected.

Socket Addresses

Sockets may be labelled so that peers can connect to them. The socket layer treats an address as
an opaque object. Applications supply and receive addresses as tagged, variable-length arrays of
bytes. Addresses are placed in mbufs within the socket layer. A structure called a sockaddr,
shown in Figure 12.7, is used as a template for referring to the identifying tag and length of each
address. Most protocol layers support a single address type as identified by the tag, known as
the address family.

Figure 12.7 Socket-address template structure.

It is common for addresses passed in by an application to reside in mbufs only long enough for
the socket layer to pass them to the supporting protocol for transfer into a fixed-size address
structure—for example, when a protocol records an address in a protocol control block. The
sockaddr structure is the common means by which the socket layer and network-support
facilities exchange addresses. The size of the generic data array was chosen to be large enough to
hold many types of addresses directly, although generic code cannot depend on having sufficient
space in a sockaddr structure for an arbitrary address. For example, the local communication
domain (formerly known as the UNIX domain) stores filesystem pathnames in mbufs and
allows socket names as large as 104 bytes, as shown in Figure 12.8. Both IPv4 and IPv6 use a
fixed-size structure that combines a network address and a port number. The difference is in the
size of the address (4 bytes for IPv4 and 16 bytes for IPv6) and in the fact that IPv6 address
structures carry other information including the scope and flow information. Both Internet
protocols reserve space for addresses in a protocol-specific control-block data structure and free
up mbufs that contain addresses after copying the addresses.

Figure 12.8 Local-domain, IPv4, and IPv6 address structures.

Locks

Section 4.3 discussed the need for locking structures in a multiprocessing kernel. The
networking subsystem uses these locks internally to protect its data structures.

When multiprocessing features were first introduced, the entire networking subsystem was
placed, with the rest of the kernel, under the giant lock. During the development of FreeBSD 5,
several pieces of networking code were modified to run without the giant lock. As of FreeBSD 10,
all parts of the networking system are locked using fine-grained locks and never resort to using

the giant lock. Specific instances of networking-subsystem locks are discussed in the section in
which they are most relevant.

12.5 Connection Setup

For two processes to pass information between them, an association must be established. The
steps involved in creating an association (socket, connect, listen, accept, etc.) were described in
Section 12.1. This section describes the operation of the socket layer in establishing associations.
Since the state associated with a connectionless transfer of data is fully encapsulated in each
message that is sent, our discussion will focus on connection-oriented associations established
with the connect, listen, and accept system calls.

Connection establishment in the client–server model is asymmetric. A client actively initiates a
connection to obtain service, whereas a server passively accepts connections to provide service.
Figure 12.9 shows the state-transition diagram used by a socket to initiate or accept connections.
State transitions are initiated either by user actions (i.e., system calls) or by protocol actions that
result from receiving network messages or servicing timers that expire.

Figure 12.9 Socket state transitions during process rendezvous.

Sockets are normally used to send and receive data. When they are used in establishing a
connection, they are treated somewhat differently. If a socket is to be used to accept a
connection, the listen system call must be used. The listen call invokes solisten(), which notifies

the supporting protocol that the socket will be receiving connections, establishes an empty list of
pending connections at the socket (through the so_comp field), and then marks the socket as
accepting connections, SO_ACCEPTCON. At the time a listen is done, a backlog parameter is
specified by the application. This parameter sets a limit on the number of incoming connections
that the system will queue awaiting acceptance by the application. The system enforces a
maximum on this limit to prevent resource exhaustion. Once a socket is set up to receive
connections, the remainder of the work in creating connections is managed by the protocol
layers. For each connection established at the server side, a new socket is created with the
sonewconn() routine. These new sockets may be placed on the socket’s queue of partially
established connections (see Figure 12.10) while the connections are being completed, or they
may be placed directly into the queue of connections ready to be passed to the application via
the accept call. The new sockets might be ready to be passed to the application either because no
further protocol action is necessary to establish the connection or because the protocol allows
the listening process to confirm or reject the connection request. In the latter case, the socket is
marked as confirming (state bit SS_CONFIRMING) so that the pending connection request will
be confirmed or rejected as needed. Once sockets on the queue of partly established connections
are ready, they are moved to the queue of connections completed and pending acceptance by an
application. When an accept system call is made to obtain a connection, the system verifies that
a connection is present on the socket’s queue of ready connections. If no connection is ready to
be returned, the system puts the process to sleep until one arrives (unless nonblocking I/O is
being used with the socket, in which case an EAGAIN error is returned). When a connection is
available, the associated socket is removed from the queue, a new file descriptor is allocated to
reference the socket, and the result is returned to the caller. If the accept call indicates that the
peer’s identity is to be returned, the peer’s address is obtained from the protocol layer and is
copied into the supplied buffer.

Figure 12.10 Connections queued at a socket awaiting an accept call.

On the client side, an application requests a connection with the connect system call, supplying
the address of the peer socket to which to connect. The system verifies that a connection attempt
is not already in progress for that socket and then invokes soconnect() to initiate the connection.
The soconnect() routine first checks the socket to see whether the latter is already connected. If
the socket is already connected, and supports a connection-oriented protocol, the connection is
first dropped and then an EINVAL error is returned to the caller. With the socket in an
unconnected state, soconnect() makes a request to the protocol layer to initiate the new
connection. Once the connection request has been passed to the protocol layer, if the connection
request is incomplete, the system puts the process to sleep to await notification by the protocol
layer that a completed connection exists. A nonblocking connect may return at this point, but a
process awaiting a completed connection will awaken only when the connection request has
been completed—either successfully or with an error condition. If the socket supports a
datagram protocol, soconnect() sets a destination network address for the socket so that the
program can use the write system call to send data, rather than the commonly used send or
sendmsg calls.

A socket’s state during connection establishment is managed jointly by the socket layer and the
supporting protocol layer. The socket’s state value is never altered directly by a protocol; to
promote modularity, all modifications are performed by surrogate socket-layer routines, such as
soisconnected(). These routines modify the socket state as indicated and notify any waiting
processes. The supporting protocol layers never use synchronization or signalling facilities to
directly modify the socket structure. Errors that are detected asynchronously are communicated
to a socket in its so_error field. The socket layer always inspects the value of so_error on return
from a call to sleep(); this field reports errors detected asynchronously by the protocol layers.
For example, if a connection request fails because the protocol layer detects that the requested
service is unavailable, the so_error field is set to ECONNREFUSED before the requesting
process is awakened.

12.6 Data Transfer

Most of the work done by the socket layer lies in sending and receiving data. Note that the
socket layer itself explicitly refrains from imposing any structure on data transmitted or received
via   sockets    other     than    optional    record     boundaries.     Within     the   overall
interprocess-communication model, any data interpretation or structuring is logically isolated
in the implementation of the communication domain. An example of this logical isolation is the
ability to pass file descriptors between processes using local-domain sockets.

Sending and receiving data can be done with any one of several system calls. The system calls
vary according to the amount of information to be transmitted and received, and according to

the state of the socket doing the operation. For example, the write system call may be used with
a socket that is in a connected state, since the destination of the data is known to the socket. The
sendto or sendmsg system calls, however, allow the process to specify the destination for a
message explicitly. Likewise, when data are received, the read system call allows a process to
receive data on a connected socket without receiving the sender’s address; the recvfrom and
recvmsg system calls allow the process to retrieve the incoming message and the sender’s
address. The differences between these calls were summarized in Section 12.1. The recvmsg and
sendmsg system calls allow scatter-gather I/O with multiple user-provided buffers. In addition,
recvmsg reports additional information about a received message, such as whether it was
expedited (out of band), whether it completes a record, or whether it was truncated because a
buffer was too small. The decision to provide many different system calls rather than only a
single general interface is debatable. It would have been possible to implement a single
system-call interface and to provide simplified interfaces to applications via user-level library
routines. However, the single system call would have to be the most general call, which has
somewhat higher overhead. Internally, all transmission and reception requests are converted to
a uniform format and are passed to the socket-layer sendit() and recvit() routines, respectively.

Transmitting Data

The sendit() routine is responsible for gathering all the system-call parameters from the
application into the kernel’s address space (except for the actual data) and for invoking the
sosend() routine to do the transmission. The parameters may include the following components,
illustrated in Figure 12.1:

• An address to which data will be sent, if the socket has not been connected

• Optional ancillary data (control data) associated with the message; ancillary data can include
protocol-specific data associated with a message, protocol option information, or access rights

• Normal data, specified as an array of buffers (see Section 7.1)

• Optional flags, including out-of-band and end-of-record flags

The sosend() routine handles most of the socket-level data-transmission options, including
requests for transmission of out-of-band data and for transmission without network routing.
This routine is also responsible for checking socket state—for example, seeing whether a
required connection has been made, whether transmission is still possible on the socket, and
whether a pending error should be reported rather than transmission attempted. In addition,
sosend() is responsible for putting processes to sleep when their data transmissions exceed the
space available in the socket’s send buffer. The actual transmission of data is done by the

supporting communication protocol; sosend() copies data from the user’s address space into
mbufs in the kernel’s address space and then makes calls to the protocol to transfer the data.

Most of the work done by sosend() lies in checking the socket state, handling flow control,
checking for termination conditions, and breaking up an application’s transmission request into
one or more protocol transmission requests. The request must be broken up only when the size
of the user’s request plus the number of data queued in the socket’s send data buffer exceeds the
socket’s high watermark. It is not permissible to break up a request if the protocol is atomic,
because each request made by the socket layer to the protocol modules implicitly indicates a
boundary in the data stream. Most datagram protocols are of this type. Honoring each socket’s
high watermark ensures that no process or group of processes can monopolize system resources.

For sockets that guarantee reliable data delivery, a protocol will normally maintain a copy of all
transmitted data in the socket’s send queue until receipt is acknowledged by the receiver.
Protocols that provide no assurance of delivery normally accept data from sosend() and directly
transmit the data to the destination without keeping a copy, but sosend() itself does not
distinguish between reliable and unreliable delivery.

If a socket has insufficient space in its send buffer to hold all the data to be transmitted, sosend()
uses the following strategy: If the protocol is atomic, sosend() verifies that the message is no
larger than the send buffer size; if the message is larger, it returns an EMSGSIZE error. If the
available space in the send queue is less than the send low watermark, the transmission is
deferred. If the process is not using nonblocking I/O, the process is put to sleep until more space
is available in the send buffer; otherwise, an EAGAIN error is returned. When space is available,
a protocol transmit request is formulated according to the available space in the send buffer.
The sosend() routine copies data from the user’s address space into mbuf clusters whenever the
data are larger than the minimum cluster size (specified by MINCLSIZE). If a transmission
request for a nonatomic protocol is large, each protocol transmit request will normally contain a
full mbuf cluster. Although additional data could be appended to the mbuf chain before delivery
to the protocol, it is preferable to pass the data to lower levels immediately, which allows better
pipelining because data reach the bottom of the protocol stack earlier and can begin physical
transmission sooner. This procedure is repeated until no space remains; it resumes each time
additional space becomes available. This strategy tends to preserve the application-specified
message size and helps to avoid fragmentation at the network level. The latter benefit is
important because system performance is significantly improved when data-transmission units
are large—for example, the size of an mbuf cluster.

When the receiver or network is slower than the transmitter, the underlying connection-based
transmission protocols usually apply some form of flow control to delay the sender’s

transmission. Here, the amount of data that the receiver will allow the sender to transmit can
decrease to a size that the sender’s natural transmission size drops below its optimal value. To
retard this effect, sosend() delays transmission rather than breaking up the data to be
transmitted in the hope that the receiver will reopen its flow-control window and allow the
sender to perform optimally. The effect of this scheme is subtle and is also related to the
networking subsystem’s optimized handling of incoming data packets that are a multiple of the
machine’s page size.

Receiving Data

The soreceive() routine receives data queued at a socket. As the counterpart to sosend(),
soreceive() appears at the same level in the internal software structure and does similar tasks.
Three types of data may be queued for reception at a socket: in-band data, out-of-band data, and
ancillary data, such as access rights. In-band data may also be tagged with the sender’s address.
Handling of out-of-band data varies by protocol. They may be placed at the beginning of the
receive buffer or at the end of the buffer to appear in order with other data, or they may be
managed in the protocol layer separately from the socket’s receive buffer. In the first two cases,
they are returned by normal receive operations. In the final case, they are retrieved through a
special interface when requested by the user. These options allow varying styles of urgent data
transmission.

The soreceive() routine checks the socket’s state, including the receive data buffer, for incoming
data, errors, or state transitions, and processes queued data according to their type and the
actions specified by the caller. A system-call request may specify that only out-of-band data
should be retrieved (MSG_OOB) or that data should be returned but not removed from the data
buffer (by specifying the MSG_PEEK flag). Receive calls normally return as soon as the low
watermark is reached. Because the default is one byte, the call returns when any data are
present. The MSG_WAITALL flag specifies that the call should block until it can return all the
requested data, if possible. Alternatively, the MSG_DONTWAIT flag causes the call to act as
though the socket was in nonblocking mode, returning EAGAIN rather than blocking.

Data present in the receive data buffer are organized in one of several ways, depending on
whether message boundaries are preserved. There are three common cases for stream, datagram,
and sequenced-packet sockets. In the general case, the receive data buffer is organized as a list
of messages (see Figure 12.11). Each message can include a sender’s address (for datagram
protocols), ancillary data, and normal data. Depending on the protocol, it is also possible for
expedited or out-of-band data to be placed into the normal receive buffer. Each mbuf chain on a
list represents a single message or, for the final chain, a possibly incomplete record. Protocols
that supply the sender’s address with each message place a single mbuf containing the address

at the front of message. Immediately following any address is an optional mbuf containing any
ancillary data. Regular data mbufs follow the ancillary data. Names and ancillary data are
distinguished by the type field in an mbuf; addresses are marked as MT_SONAME, whereas
ancillary data are tagged as MT_CONTROL. Each message other than the final one is
considered to be terminated. The final message is terminated implicitly when an atomic protocol
is used, such as most datagram protocols. Sequenced-packet protocols could treat each message
as an atomic record, or they could support records that could be arbitrarily long, as is done in
SCTP, which is described in Section 14.7. In the latter case, the final record in the buffer might
or might not be complete, and a flag on the final mbuf, M_EOR, marks the termination of a
record. Record boundaries (if any) are generally ignored by a stream protocol. However,
transition from out-of-band data to normal data in the buffer, or presence of ancillary data,
causes logical boundaries. A single receive operation never returns data that cross a logical
boundary. Note that the storage scheme used by sockets allows them to compact data of the
same type into the minimal number of mbufs required to hold those data.

Figure 12.11 Data queueing for datagram socket.

On entry to soreceive(), a check is made to see whether out-of-band data are being requested.
Whenever out-of-band data are available from the protocol layer, they are returned to the caller

immediately on request. Otherwise, data from the normal queue have been requested. The
soreceive() function first checks whether the socket is in confirming state, with the peer
awaiting confirmation of a connection request. If it is, no data can arrive until the connection is
confirmed, and the protocol layer is notified that the connection should be completed. The
soreceive() routine then checks the receive data buffer character count to see whether data are
available. If they are, the call returns with at least the data currently available. If no data are
present, soreceive() consults the socket’s state to find out whether data might be forthcoming.
Data may no longer be received because the socket is disconnected (and a connection is required
to receive data) or because the reception of data has been terminated with a shutdown by the
socket’s peer. In addition, if an error from a previous operation was detected asynchronously,
the error needs to be returned to the user; soreceive() checks the so_error field after checking
for data. If no data or error exists, data might still arrive, and if the socket is not marked for
nonblocking I/O, soreceive() puts the process to sleep to await the arrival of new data.

When data arrive for a socket, the supporting protocol notifies the socket layer by calling
sorwakeup(). Soreceive() can then process the contents of the receive buffer, observing the
data-structuring rules described previously. Soreceive() first removes any address that must be
present, then optional ancillary data, and finally normal data. If the application has provided a
buffer for the receipt of ancillary data, they are passed to the application in that buffer;
otherwise, they are discarded. The removal of data is slightly complicated by the interaction
between in-band and out-of-band data managed by the protocol. The location of the next
out-of-band datum can be marked in the in-band data stream and used as a record boundary
during in-band data processing. That is, when out-of-band data are received by a protocol that
holds out-of-band data separately from the normal buffer, the corresponding point in the
in-band data stream is marked. Then, when a request is made to receive in-band data, only data
up to the mark will be returned. This mark allows applications to synchronize the in-band and
out-of-band data streams so that, for example, received data can be flushed up to the point at
which out-of-band data are received. Each socket has a field, so_oobmark, that contains the
character offset from the front of the receive data buffer to the point in the data stream at which
the last out-of-band message was received. When in-band data are removed from the receive
buffer, the offset is updated so that data past the mark will not be mixed with data preceding the
mark. The SS_RCVATMARK bit in a socket’s state field is set when so_oobmark reaches zero to
show that the out-of-band data mark is at the beginning of the socket receive buffer. An
application can test the state of this bit with the SIOCATMARK ioctl call to find out whether all
in-band data have been read up to the point of the mark.

Once data have been removed from a socket’s receive buffer, soreceive() updates the state of the
socket and notifies the protocol layer that data have been received by the user. The protocol
layer can use this information to release internal resources, to trigger end-to-end

acknowledgment of data reception, to update flow-control information, or to start a new data
transfer. Finally, if any access rights were received as ancillary data, soreceive() passes them to a
communication-domain-specific routine to convert them from their internal representation to
the external representation.

The soreceive() function returns a set of flags that are supplied to the caller of the recvmsg
system call via the msg_flags field of the msghdr structure (see Figure 12.1). The possible flags
include MSG_EOR to specify that the received data complete a record for a nonatomic
sequenced-packet protocol, MSG_OOB to specify that expedited (out-of-band) data were
received from the normal socket receive buffer, MSG_TRUNC to specify that an atomic record
was truncated because the supplied buffer was too small, and MSG_CTRUNC to specify that
ancillary data were truncated because the control buffer was too small.

12.7 Socket Shutdown

Although closing a socket and reclaiming its resources appears at first glance to be a
straightforward operation, it can be complicated. The complexity arises because of the implicit
semantics of the close system call. In certain situations (e.g., when a process exits), a close call is
never expected to fail. However, when a socket promising reliable delivery of data is closed with
data still queued for transmission or awaiting acknowledgment of reception, the socket must
attempt to transmit the data, perhaps indefinitely, for the close call to maintain the socket’s
advertised semantics. If the socket discards the queued data to allow the close to complete
successfully, it violates its promise to deliver data reliably. Discarding data can cause naive
processes, which depend on the implicit semantics of close, to work unreliably in a network
environment. However, if sockets block until all data have been transmitted successfully, then,
in some communication domains, a close may never complete!

In an effort to address this problem, the socket layer compromises yet maintains the semantics
of the close system call. Figure 12.12 shows the possible state transitions for a socket from a
connected to a closed state. In normal operation, closing a socket causes any queued but
unaccepted connections to be discarded. If the socket is in a connected state, a disconnect is
initiated. The socket is marked to indicate that a file descriptor is no longer referencing it, and
the close operation returns successfully. When the disconnect request completes, the network
support notifies the socket layer, and the socket resources are reclaimed. The network layer may
attempt to transmit any data queued in the socket’s send buffer, although there is no guarantee
that it will. However, commonly used connection-oriented protocols generally attempt to
transmit any queued data asynchronously after the close call returns, preserving the normal
semantics of close on a file.

Figure 12.12 Socket-state transitions during shutdown.

Alternatively, a socket may be marked explicitly to force the application process to linger when
closing until pending data have drained and the connection has shut down. This option is
marked in the socket data structure using the setsockopt system call with the SO_LINGER
option. When an application indicates that a socket is to linger, it also specifies a duration for
the lingering period. The application can then block for as long as the specified duration while
waiting for pending data to drain. If the lingering period expires before the disconnect is
completed, the socket layer then notifies the network that it is closing, possibly discarding any
data still pending. Some protocols handle the linger option differently. In particular, if the linger
option is set with a duration of zero, the protocol may discard pending data rather than attempt
to deliver them asynchronously.

12.8 Network-Communication Protocol Internal Structure

The network subsystem is logically divided into three layers as shown in Figure 12.13. These
three layers manage the following tasks:

1. Interprocess data transport

2. Internetwork addressing and message routing

3. Data-link layer

Figure 12.13 Network subsystem layering. The boxes on the left name the standard layers; the
boxes on the right name specific examples of protocols used at those layers.

The first two layers are made up of modules that implement communication protocols. The
software in the third layer handles protocols, such as Ethernet and WiFi, that are responsible for
encapsulating and decapsulating packets over physical or wireless links.

The topmost layer in the network subsystem is termed the transport layer. The transport
layer must provide an addressing structure that permits communication between sockets and
any protocol mechanisms necessary for socket semantics, such as reliable data delivery. The
second layer, the network layer, is responsible for the delivery of data destined for remote
transport or for network-layer protocols. In providing internetwork delivery, the network layer
must manage a private routing database or use the systemwide facility for routing messages to
their destination host. Beneath the network layer is the datalink layer, which handles the
differences between various hardware standards for networking, such as Ethernet and WiFi. The
link layer is responsible for transporting messages between hosts connected to a common
transmission medium. The link layer is mainly concerned with driving the network devices
involved   and   performing     any   necessary     link-level   protocol   encapsulation     and
decapsulation. The transport, network, and link layers of the network subsystem correspond
to the transport, network, and link layers of the ISO Open Systems Interconnection Reference
Model [ISO, 1984], respectively.

The internal structure of the networking software is not directly visible to users. Instead, all
networking facilities are accessed through the socket layer. Each communication protocol that
permits access to its facilities exports a set of user request routines to the socket layer. These
routines are used by the socket layer in providing access to network services.

The layering described here is a logical layering, meaning that the software that implements
network services may use more or fewer communication protocols according to the design of the
network architecture being supported. For example, raw sockets often use a null
implementation at one or more layers. At the opposite extreme, tunneling of one protocol

through another uses one network protocol to encapsulate and deliver packets for another
protocol and involves multiple instances of some layers.

Data Flow

Early versions of BSD were used as end systems in a network. They were either the source or
destination of communication. Although many installations used a workstation as an office
router, dedicated hardware did the more complex tasks of bridging and routing. At the time of
the original design and implementation of the networking subsystem, the possibility of securing
data by encrypting packets was still far too computationally slow. Since that initial design, many
different uses have been made of the code. Bridges and routers can be built out of stock parts
and the advent of specialized cryptographic accelerators has made packet encryption practical in
almost any environment. These facts conspire to make discussion of data flow within the
network subsystem more complex than it was in earlier systems.

There are four paths through a network node:

Inbound

Destined for this node and possibly a user-level application

Outbound

Originating on this node and destined, via a network, for another

Forward

Whether bridged or routed, the packets are not for this node but to be sent on to another
network or host

Error

A packet has arrived that requires the network subsystem to send a response without the
involvement of a user-level application.

Inbound data received at a network interface flow upward through communication protocols
until they are placed in the receive queue of the destination socket. Outbound data flow down to
the network subsystem from the socket layer through calls to the transport-layer modules that
support the socket abstraction. The downward flow of data typically is started by system calls.
The data flowing in the outbound direction are handled by a transport protocol (see Chapter 14),
which then hands the data over to the network layer protocols (see Chapter 13) and thence on to

the data link protocols, and are finally transmitted by a network device driver (see Chapter 8).
Data flowing upward are received asynchronously and are passed from the link layer to the
appropriate communication protocol through direct dispatch via the netisr subsystem, as shown
in Figure 12.14. The system handles inbound network traffic by dispatching it directly from the
device driver (see Section 12.8), through the link, network, and transport layers, until it is finally
deposited in a socket buffer. When possible, FreeBSD processes all packets to completion.

Figure 12.14 Example of inbound flow of a data packet in the network subsystem. Key:
Ethernet—Ethernet header; IPv4—Internet Version 4 Protocol header; TCP—Transmission
Control Protocol header.

Communication Protocols

A network protocol is defined by a set of conventions including packet formats, states, and state
transitions. A communication-protocol module implements a protocol and is made up of a
collection of procedures and private data structures. Protocol modules are described by a
protocol-switch structure that contains the set of externally visible entry points and certain
attributes shown in Figure 12.15. The socket layer interacts with a communication protocol
solely through the latter’s protocol-switch structure, recording the address of the structure in
the socket’s so_proto field. This isolation of the socket layer from the networking subsystem is
important in ensuring that the socket layer provides users with a consistent interface to all the
protocols supported by a system. When a socket is created, the socket layer looks up the domain
for the protocol family to find the array of protocol-switch structures for the family (see Section
12.4). A protocol is selected from the array based on the type of socket supported (the type field)
and, optionally, a specific protocol number (the protocol field). The protocol switch has a back
pointer to the domain (the domain field). Within a protocol family, every protocol capable of
supporting a socket directly (for example, most transport protocols) must provide a
protocol-switch structure describing the protocol. Lower-level protocols such as network-layer
protocols may also have protocol-switch entries, although whether they do can depend on
conventions within the protocol family.

Figure 12.15 Protocol-switch structure.

Before a protocol is first used, the protocol’s initialization routine is invoked. Thereafter, the
protocol will be invoked for timer-based actions every 200 milliseconds if the fast timeout entry
is present, and every 500 milliseconds if the slow timeout entry point is present. In general,

protocols use the slower timer for most timer processing; the major use of the fast timeout is for
delayed-acknowledgment processing in reliable transport protocols. The drain entry is provided
so that the system can notify the protocol if the system is low on memory and would like any
noncritical data to be discarded.

Protocols may pass data between their layers in chains of mbufs (see Section 12.3) using the data
input and data output routines. The data input routine passes data up toward the user, whereas
the data output routine passes data down toward the network. Similarly, control information
passes up and down via the control-input and control-output routines. The table of
user-request routines is the interface between a protocol and the socket level; they are
described in detail in Section 12.9.

In general, a protocol is responsible for storage space occupied by any of the arguments passed
downward via these procedures and must either pass the space onward or dispose of it. On
output, the lowest level reached must free space passed as arguments; on input, the highest level
is responsible for freeing space passed up to it. Auxiliary storage needed by protocols is allocated
from the mbuf pool. This space is used temporarily to formulate messages or to hold variablesize
socket addresses. Mbufs allocated by a protocol for private use must be freed by that protocol
when they are no longer in use.

The flags field in a protocol’s protocol-switch structure describes the protocol’s capabilities and
certain aspects of its operation that are pertinent to the operation of the socket level; the flags
are listed in Table 12.7. Protocols that are connection based specify the PR_CONNREQUIRED
flag, so that socket routines will never attempt to send data before a connection has been
established. If the PR_WANTRCVD flag is set, the socket routines will notify the protocol when
the user has removed data from a socket’s receive queue. This notification allows a protocol to
implement acknowledgment on user receipt and also to update flow-control information based
on the amount of space available in the receive queue. The PR_ADDR field indicates that any
data placed in a socket’s receive queue by the protocol will be preceded by the address of the
sender. The PR_ATOMIC flag specifies that each user request to send data must be done in a
single protocol-send request; it is the protocol’s responsibility to maintain record boundaries on
data to be sent. This flag also implies that messages must be received and delivered to processes
atomically. The PR_RIGHTS flag indicates that the protocol supports the transfer of access
rights; this flag is currently used by only those protocols in the local communication domain.
Connection-oriented protocols that allow the user to set up, send data, and tear down a
connection all in a single sendto call have the PR_IMPLOPCL flag set. The PR_LASTHDR flag is
used by secure protocols, such as IPSec, where several headers must be processed to get the
actual data.

Table 12.7 Protocol flags.

12.9 Socket-to-Protocol Interface

The interface from the socket routines to the communication protocols is through the table of
user-request routines and the control-output routine defined in the protocol-switch structure for
each protocol. When the socket layer requires services of a supporting protocol, it makes a call
to a function in Table 12.8. The control-output routine implements the getsockopt and
setsockopt system calls; the user-request routines are used for all other operations. Calls to the
control-output routine specify SOPT_GET to get the current value of an option, or SOPT_SET
to set the value of an option.

Table 12.8 User-request routines.

Protocol User-Request Routines

Calls to the user-request routines have a routine-specific signature, but the first argument is
always a pointer to a socket structure that specifies the socket for which the operation is
intended. An mbuf data chain is supplied for output operations and for certain other operations
where a result is to be returned. A pointer to a sockaddr structure is supplied for
address-oriented requests, such as pru_bind(), pru_connect(), and pru_send() (when an
address is specified—e.g., the sendto call). Where it is used, the control parameter is a pointer to

an optional mbuf chain containing protocol-specific control information passed via the sendmsg
call. Each protocol is responsible for disposal of the data mbuf chains on output operations. A
nonzero return value from a user-request routine indicates an error number that should be
passed to higher-level software. A description of each of the possible requests follows:

• pru_attach(): attach protocol to socket. When a protocol is first bound to a socket (with the
socket system call), the protocol module’s pru_attach() routine is called. It is the responsibility
of the protocol module to allocate any resources necessary. The attach routine will always
precede any of the other operations and will occur only once per socket.

• pru_detach(): detach protocol from socket. This operation is the inverse of the attach routine
and is used at the time that a socket is deleted. The protocol module may deallocate any
resources that it allocated for the socket in a previous pru_attach() call.

• pru_bind(): bind address to socket. When a socket is initially created, it has no address bound
to it. This routine binds an address to an existing socket. The protocol module must verify that
the requested address is valid and is available for use.

• pru_listen(): listen for incoming connections. A listen request indicates that the user wishes
to listen for incoming connection requests on the associated socket. The protocol module should
make any state changes needed to meet this request (if possible). A call to the listen routine
always precedes any request to accept a connection.

• pru_connect(): connect socket to peer. The connect request routine indicates that the user
wants to establish an association. The addr parameter describes the peer to which a connection
is desired. The effect of a connect request may vary depending on the protocol. Stream protocols
use this request to initiate establishment of a network connection. Datagram protocols simply
record the peer’s address in a private data structure, where they use it as the destination address
of all outgoing packets and as a source filter for incoming packets. There are no restrictions on
how many times a connect routine may be used after an attach, although most stream protocols
allow only one connect call.

• pru_accept(): accept pending connection. Following a successful listen request and the arrival
of one or more connections, this routine is called to indicate that the user is about to accept a
socket from the queue of sockets ready to be returned. The socket supplied as a parameter is the
socket that is being accepted; the protocol module is expected to fill in the supplied buffer with
the address of the peer connected to the socket.

• pru_disconnect(): disconnect connected socket. This routine eliminates an association created
with the connect routine. It is used with datagram sockets before a new association is created; it
is used with stream protocols only when the socket is closed.

• pru_shutdown(): shut down socket data transmission. This call indicates that no more data
will be sent. The protocol may, at its discretion, deallocate any data structures related to the
shutdown or the protocol may leave all that work for its pru_detach() routine. The module may
also notify a connected peer of the shutdown at this time.

• pru_rcvd(): data were received by user. This routine is called only if the protocol entry in the
protocol-switch table includes the PR_WANTRCVD flag. When the socket layer removes data
from the receive queue and passes them to the user, this routine will be called in the protocol
module. This routine may be used by the protocol to trigger acknowledgments, refresh
windowing information, initiate data transfer, and so on. This routine is also called when an
application attempts to receive data on a socket that is in the confirming state, indicating that
the protocol must accept the connection request before data can be received (see Section 12.5).

• pru_send(): send user data. Each user request to send data is translated into one or more calls
to the protocol module’s pru_send() routine. A protocol may indicate that a single user send
request must be translated into a single call to the pru_send() routine by specifying the
PR_ATOMIC flag in its protocol description. The data to be sent are presented to the protocol as
a chain of mbufs, and an optional address is supplied in the addr parameter. The protocol is
responsible for preserving the data in the socket’s send queue if it is not able to send them
immediately or if it may need them at some later time (e.g., for retransmission). The protocol
must eventually pass the data to a lower level or free the mbufs.

• pru_abort(): abnormally terminate service. This routine effects an abnormal termination of
service. The protocol should delete any existing associations.

• pru_control(): perform control operation. The control request routine is called when a user
does an ioctl system call on a socket and the ioctl is not intercepted by the socket routines. This
routine allows protocol-specific operations to be provided outside the scope of the common
socket interface. The cmd parameter contains the actual ioctl request code. The data parameter
contains any data relevant to the command being issued and the ifp parameter contains a
pointer to a network-interface structure if the ioctl operation pertains to a particular network
interface.

• pru_sense(): sense socket status. The sense request routine is called when the user makes an
fstat system call on a socket; it requests the status of the associated socket. This call returns a

standard stat structure that typically contains only the optimal transfer size for the connection
(based on buffer size, windowing information, and maximum packet size).

• pru_rcvoob(): receive out-of-band data. This routine requests that any out-of-band data now
available are to be returned. An mbuf is passed to the protocol module, and the protocol should
either place data in the mbuf or attach new mbufs to the one supplied if there is insufficient
space in the single mbuf. An error may be returned if out-of-band data are not (yet) available or
have already been consumed. The flags parameter contains any options, such as MSG_PEEK,
that should be observed while this request is carried out.

• pru_sosend(): a generic routine, usable by system calls, as well as the kernel, to send data
using a protocol.

• pru_soreceive(): routine that implements the kernel’s part of the recv and recvmsg system
calls.

• pru_sopoll(): check a socket to see if it has any available data. Used by both the select and poll
system calls.

• pru_sockaddr(): retrieve local socket address. This routine returns the local address of the
socket if one has been bound to the socket. The address is returned in the nam parameter, which
is a pointer to a sockaddr structure.

• pru_peeraddr(): retrieve peer socket address. This routine returns the address of the peer to
which the socket is connected. The socket must be in a connected state for this request to
succeed. The address is returned in the nam parameter, which is a pointer to a sockaddr
structure.

• pru_connect2(): connect two sockets without binding addresses. In this routine, the protocol
module is supplied two sockets and is asked to establish a connection between the two without
binding any addresses, if possible. The system uses this call in implementing the socketpair
system call.

• pru_sosetlabel(): Set a MAC label on a socket.

• pru_bindat(): PF_LOCAL specific bind routine for use with Capsicum and capabilities.

• pru_connectat(): PF_LOCAL specific connect routine for use with Capsicum and capabilities.

• pru_flush(): used only by SCTP to flush input or output data.

• pru_close(): close down the connection associated with a socket.

Protocol Control-Output Routine

A call to the control-output routine is of the form

int (*pr->pr_ctloutput)(
     struct socket *so,
     struct sockopt *sopt);

where so is the socket to be modified and sopt is a socket option structure.

enum sopt_dir { SOPT_GET, SOPT_SET };

struct sockopt {
     enum sopt_dir sopt_dir;
     int sopt_level;
     int sopt_name;
     void *sopt_val;
     size_t sopt_valsize;
     struct thread *sopt_td;
};

The direction is either SOPT_SET to set an option or SOPT_GET to retrieve it. The sopt_level
member indicates the layer of software that should interpret the option request. A sopt_level of
SOL_SOCKET is specified to control an option at the socket layer. When the option is to be
processed by a protocol module below the socket layer, level is set to the appropriate protocol
number (the same number used in the socket system call). Each level has its own set of option
names; this name is interpreted only by the targeted layer of software. The rest of the structure
contains a pointer to the value being passed into or out of the module, the size of the pointed-to
data, and a pointer to a thread structure. If the operation takes place wholly inside the kernel,
then the pointer to the thread structure is null.

In supporting the getsockopt and setsockopt system calls, the socket layer always invokes the
control-output routine of the protocol attached to the socket. To access lower-level protocols,
each control-output routine must pass control-output requests that it does not intend to
perform downward to the next protocol in the protocol hierarchy. Chapter 14 describes some of
the options provided by the protocols in the Internet-communication domain.

12.10 Protocol-to-Protocol Interface

The interface between protocol modules uses the pr_usrreqs() routines as well as the
pr_ctloutput() routine. The pr_usrreqs() and pr_ctloutput() routines are used by the socket
layer to communicate with protocols.

Although imposing a standard calling convention for all a protocol’s entry points might
theoretically permit an arbitrary interconnection of protocol modules, it would be difficult in
practice. Crossing a protocol-family boundary—for example, between IPv4 and IPX—would
require a network address to be converted from the format of the caller’s domain to the format
of the receiver’s domain. Consequently, connection of protocols in different communication
domains is not generally supported, and calling conventions for the routines listed in the
preceding paragraph are typically standardized on a per-domain basis. (However, the system
does support encapsulation of packets from one protocol into packets of a protocol in another
family to tunnel one protocol through another.)

In this section, we briefly examine the general framework and calling conventions of protocols.
In Chapter 14, we examine specific protocols to see how they fit into this framework.

pr_output

Each protocol has a different calling convention for its output routine. This lack of
standardization is a reason that protocol modules cannot be freely interchanged with each other
in arbitrary stacks, such as is done in the STREAMS system [Ritchie, 1984]. Thus far, interface
standardization has not been considered necessary because each protocol stack tends to stand
on its own without ever borrowing from others. An arbitrary stacking of protocol modules would
also complicate the interpretation of network addresses in each module, since each module
would have to check to make sure that the address made some sense to them in their domain.

The simplest example of a protocol output routine often uses a calling convention designed to
send a single message on a connection; for example,

int (*pr_output)(
  register struct inpcb *inp,
  struct mbuf *msg,
  struct sockaddr *addr
  struct mbuf *control,
  struct thread *td);

would send a message contained in msg on a socket described by protocol control block inp.
Special address and control information are passed in addr and control, respectively.

pr_input

Upper-level protocol input routines are usually called by the network software-interrupt task
once the network-level protocol has located the protocol identifier. They have stricter
conventions than do output routines because they are called via the protocol switch. Depending
on the protocol family, they may receive a pointer to a control block identifying the connection,
or they may have to locate the control block from information in the received packet. A typical
calling convention is

void (*pr_input)(
  struct mbuf *msg,
  int hlen);

In this example, the incoming packet is passed to a transport protocol in an mbuf msg with the
network protocol header still in place for the transport protocol to use, as well as the length of
the header, hlen, so that the header can be removed. The protocol does the endpoint-level
demultiplexing based on information in the network and transport headers.

pr_ctlinput

This routine passes control information (i.e., information that might be passed to the user but
does not consist of data) upward from one protocol module to another. The common calling
convention for this routine is

void (*pr_ctlinput)(
  int cmd,
  struct sockaddr *addr,
  void* opaque);

The cmd parameter is a value shown in Table 12.9. The addr parameter is the remote address to
which the condition applies. Many of the requests have been derived from the Internet Control
Message Protocol (ICMP) [Postel, 1981] and from error messages defined in the 1822 host
(Internet Message Processor) convention [BBN, 1978]. Some protocols may pass additional
parameters internally, such as local addresses or more specific information.

Table 12.9 Control-input routine requests.

12.11 Protocol-to-Network Interface

The lowest layer in the set of protocols that constitutes a protocol family must interact with one
or more network interfaces to transmit and receive packets. It is assumed that any routing
decisions have been made before a packet is sent to a network interface; a routing decision is
necessary to locate any interface at all. Although there are four paths through any network stack,
there are only two cases concerning protocols and network interfaces that we should consider:
transmission of a packet and receipt of a packet. We shall consider each separately. The
interactions between the kernel device-driver software and network interface hardware was
described in Section 8.5.

Network Interfaces and Link-Layer Protocols

Each network interface configured in a system defines a link-layer path through which messages
can be sent and received. A link-layer path is a path that allows a message to be sent via a single
transmission to its destination, without network-level forwarding. Normally, a hardware device
is associated with this interface, although there are software-based interfaces such as the
loopback interface. In addition to manipulating the hardware device, a network-interface
module is responsible for encapsulation and decapsulation of any link-layer protocol header
required to deliver a message to its destination. For common interface types, the link-layer
protocol is implemented in a separate sublayer that is shared by various hardware drivers. The
selection of the interface to use in sending a packet is a routing decision carried out at the
network-protocol layer. An interface may have addresses in one or more address families. Each
address is set when the device is brought into a running state using an ioctl system call on a
socket in the appropriate domain. This operation is implemented by the protocol family after
the network interface verifies the operation. The network-interface abstraction provides
protocols with a consistent interface to all hardware devices that may be present on a machine.

An interface and its addresses are defined by the structures shown in Figure 12.16. As interfaces
are found at startup time, the ifnet structures are initialized and are placed on a linked list. The
network-interface module generally maintains the ifnet interface data structure as part of a
larger structure that also contains information used in operating the underlying hardware
device. Similarly, the ifaddr interface-address structure is often part of a larger structure
containing additional protocol information about the interface or its address. Because network
socket addresses are variable in size, each protocol is responsible for allocating the space
referenced by the address, mask, and broadcast or destination address pointers in the ifaddr
structure.

Figure 12.16 Network-interface data structures. The fields marked in bold are broken out and
described more fully in figures shown later in this section.

Each network interface is identified in two ways: a character string identifying the driver plus a
unit number for the driver (e.g. cxgbe0), and a binary systemwide index number. The index is
used as a shorthand identifier—for example, when a route that refers to the interface is
established. As each interface is initialized, the system creates an array of pointers to the ifnet
structures for the interfaces. It can thus locate an interface quickly given an index number,
whereas the lookup using a string name is less efficient. Some operations, such as interface
address assignment, name the interface with a string for the user’s convenience because
performance is not critical. Other operations, such as route establishment, pass a newer style of
identifier that can use either a string or an index. The new identifier uses a sockaddr structure in
a new address family, AF_LINK, indicating a link-layer address. The family-specific version of
the structure is a sockaddr_dl structure, shown in Figure 12.17, which may contain up to three
identifiers. It includes an interface name as a string plus a length, with a length of zero denoting
the absence of a name. It also includes an interface index as an integer, with a value of zero
indicating that the index is not set. Finally, it may include a binary link-level address, such as an
Ethernet address, and the length of the address. An address of this form is created for each
network interface as the interface is configured by the system and is returned in the list of local
addresses for the system along with network protocol addresses (see later in this subsection).
Figure 12.17 shows a structure describing an Ethernet interface that is the first interface on the
system; the structure contains the interface name, the index, and the link-layer (Ethernet)
address.

Figure 12.17 Link-layer address structure. The box on the left names the elements of the
sockaddr_dl structure. The box on the right shows sample values for these elements for an
Ethernet interface. The sdl_data array may contain a name (if sdl_nlen is nonzero), a link-layer
address (if sdl_alen is nonzero), and an address selector (if sdl_slen is nonzero). For an
Ethernet, sdl_data contains a name followed by a unit number, cxgbe0, followed by a 6-byte
Ethernet address.

The interface data structure includes an if_data structure, broken out in Table 12.10, which
contains the externally visible description of the interface. It includes the link-layer type of the
interface, the maximum network-protocol packet size that is supported, and the sizes of the
link-layer header and address. It also contains numerous statistics, such as packets and bytes
sent and received, input and output errors, and other data required by the netstat program and
network-management protocols. The statistics are a subset of the statistics maintained by the
network card. They are copied periodically from registers on the network interface into the
if_data structure. Most network interfaces expose a much larger set of statistics via the sysctl
subsystem.

Table 12.10 Per ifnet meta-data and statistics. Fields marked in bold and italic record statistics
at run time for use by other tools such as netstat.

The state of an interface and certain externally visible characteristics are stored in the if_flags
field described in Table 12.11. The first set of flags characterizes an interface. If an interface is
connected to a network that supports transmission of broadcast messages, the
IFF_BROADCAST flag will be set, and the interface’s address list will contain a broadcast
address to be used in sending and receiving such messages. If an interface is associated with a
point-to-point hardware link (e.g., a leased line circuit), the IFF_POINTOPOINT flag will be set,
and the interface’s address list will contain the address of the host on the other side of the
connection. Note that the broadcast and point-to-point attributes are mutually exclusive. These
addresses and the local address of an interface are used by network-layer protocols in filtering
incoming packets. The IFF_MULTICAST flag is set by interfaces that support multicast packets

in addition to IFF_BROADCAST. A multicast address is used to send a packet to a group of
hosts rather than a single host on the network. A network has many multicast addresses
available. A group that wishes to receive packets selects an available address and then every
member of the group signs up to receive packets sent to that multicast address. Packets sent to
the group’s selected multicast address are received by all members of the group that have
requested to receive it.

Table 12.11 Network interface flags.

Additional interface flags describe the operational state of an interface. An interface sets the
IFF_RUNNING flag after it has allocated system resources and has posted an initial read on the
device that it manages. This state bit avoids multiple-allocation requests when an interface’s

address is changed. The IFF_UP flag is set when the interface is configured and is ready to
transmit messages. The IFF_PROMISC flag is set by network-monitoring programs to enable
promiscuous reception when they wish to receive packets for all destinations rather than only
those destined for the local system. Packets addressed to other systems are passed to the
monitoring packet filter but are not delivered to network protocols. The IFF_ALLMULTI flag is
similar, but it only applies to multicast packets and is used by multicast-forwarding agents. The
IFF_SIMPLEX flag is set by Ethernet drivers whose hardware cannot receive packets that they
send. Here, the output function simulates reception of broadcast and (depending on the
protocol) multicast packets that have been sent. Finally, the IFF_DEBUG flag can be set to
enable any optional driver-level diagnostic tests or messages. Three flags are defined for use by
individual link-layer drivers (IFF_LINK0, IFF_LINK1, and IFF_LINK2). They can be used to
select link-layer options, such as Ethernet medium type.

Interface addresses and flags are set with ioctl requests. The requests specific to a network
interface pass the name of the interface as a string in the input data structure, with the string
containing the name for the interface type plus the unit number. Either the SIOCSIFADDR or
the SIOCAIFADDR request is used initially to define each interface’s addresses. The former sets
a single address for the protocol on this interface. The latter adds an address, with an associated
address mask and broadcast address. It allows an interface to support multiple addresses for the
same protocol. In either case, the protocol allocates an ifaddr structure and sufficient space for
the addresses and any private data, and appends the structure onto the list of addresses for the
network interface. In addition, most protocols keep a list of addresses for the protocol. The
result appears like a two-dimensional linked list, as shown in Figure 12.18. An address can be
deleted with the SIOCDIFADDR request.

Figure 12.18 Network-interface and protocol data structures. The linked list of ifnet structures
appears on the left side of the figure. The ifaddr structures storing the addresses for each
interface are on a linked list headed in the ifnet structure and shown as a horizontal list. The

ifaddr structures for most protocols are linked together as well, shown in the vertical lists
headed by pf1_addr and pf2_addr.

The SIOCSIFFLAGS request can be used to change an interface’s state and to do site-specific
configuration.   The   destination     address   of     a   point-to-point   link   is   set   with   the
SIOCSIFDSTADDR request. Corresponding operations exist to read each value. Protocol
families also can support operations to set and read the broadcast address. Finally, the
SIOCGIFCONF request can be used to retrieve a list of interface names and protocol addresses
for all interfaces and protocols configured in a running system. Similar information is returned
by a newer mechanism based on the sysctl system call with a request in the routing protocol
family (see Sections 12.4 and 13.5). These requests permit developers to construct network
processes, such as a routing daemon, without detailed knowledge of the system’s internal data
structures.

The ifnet contains a table of function pointers that is filled in by the device driver when the
device is initialized. The routines, shown in Table 12.12, define the kernel-programming
interface (KPI) for working with network devices. The if_input() and if_output() routines are
described in the following subsections.

Table 12.12 The ifnet routine table.

The if_ioctl() routine is responsible for controlling the underlying device. The state of the device,
the hardware features that are enabled, the flags that are set, and whether it is able to receive or
send packets, are all controlled by a set of commands that are sent via the if_ioctl() routine.

One of the more complex operations carried out by the if_ioctl() routine is maintenance of the
interface’s multicast filters. Network-interface devices that operate over broadcast media, such

as Ethernet and WiFi, all have the ability to receive packets destined for a multicast address that
is meant to reach any interested listener on the local network. To receive packets with a
multicast address as its destination, the network card implements a hardware filter. The filter
accepts just the packets in the filtered multicast group so that the card does not need to see
every packet on the network to know whether one of them has the selected multicast address set.
Each network card manufacturer has its own scheme for filtering multicast packets and there
has never been a unified way for the kernel to map this feature of the card into a single data
structure. The kernel keeps a list of multicast addresses that user programs have asked it to
listen for in a list pointed to by the if_multiaddrs field of the ifnet structure. Whenever a
program joins or leaves a multicast group, a command is issued to the if_ioctl() routine of the
driver telling the driver that the multicast-address list has now changed. It is the responsibility
of the driver to reprogram the network-device hardware so that the device’s filtering hardware
matches what is expected by the kernel. The current implementation is somewhat lacking in
terms of performance in the face of large multicast lists. Each update to the list often requires
reprogramming the network-device hardware, because most network-device hardware does not
provide fine-grained access to the underlying hardware tables. Whenever an entry is added to or
removed from the if_multiaddrs list, the driver clears the hardware tables and then adds the
updated list, entry by entry, until hardware has an updated view of the multicast address list. If
hardware designers provided a proper API that allowed driver writers to add or remove single
addresses directly from the hardware list, it would ease doing such operations.

The if_resolvemulti() routine exists to map a network-layer address to a hardware-layer
multicast address. Each type of network device has a different way of mapping network-layer
multicast addresses to link-layer multicast addresses and therefore must have a device-specific
function to perform the mapping. The mapping is commonly handled by a link-layer protocol
module such as Ethernet.

Packet Transmission

Once a network-layer protocol has chosen an interface, the protocol transmits a fully formatted
network-level packet with the following call (where ifp is a pointer to the selected
network-interface structure):

int (*if_output)(
  struct ifnet *ifp,
  struct mbuf *msg,
  struct sockaddr *dst,
  struct rtentry *rt);

Between network-layer protocols and the hardware devices is a layer of software responsible for
resolving next-hop hardware addresses and adding link-layer information such as Ethernet
hardware addresses to the packet. The output routine for the link-layer protocol modifies the
packet header (msg) based on the destination address (dst) and route entry (rtentry)
information. Once the fully formed packet reaches hardware, it may be transmitted immediately
or held in the device for later transmission. In reality, transmission may not be immediate or
successful. Typically, the device’s transmit routine copies the packet into the device’s transmit
buffers or queues the packet. For unreliable media, such as Ethernet or wireless LANs,
successful transmission means only that the packet has been placed on the wire or transmitted
by radio without a collision. In contrast, a reliable point-to-point network such as X.25 can
guarantee proper delivery of a packet or give an error indication for each packet that was not
successfully transmitted. The model employed in the networking system attaches no promise of
delivery to the packets presented to a network interface and thus corresponds most closely to
the Ethernet. Errors returned by the output routine are only those that can be detected
immediately and are normally trivial in nature (network down, no buffer space, address format
not handled, etc.). If errors are detected after the call has returned, the protocol is not notified.

When messages are transmitted in a broadcast network such as Ethernet, each network
interface must formulate a link-layer address for each outgoing packet. The network layer for
each protocol family selects a destination address for each message and then uses that address
to select the appropriate network interface to use. This destination address is passed to the link
layer’s output routine as a sockaddr structure. The link layer is responsible for mapping the
destination network-layer address into an address for the link-layer protocol associated with the
transmission medium that the interface supports. This mapping may be a simple algorithm, it
may require a table lookup, or it may require more involved techniques such as use of the
address-resolution protocol described in Section 13.1.

Packet Reception

Network interfaces receive packets and dispatch packets to the appropriate network-layer
protocol according to information encoded in the link-layer protocol header. Each protocol
family must have one or more protocols that constitute the network layer described in Section
12.8. Prior to FreeBSD 5, network packets were processed by a kernel thread running a
network-interrupt service routine (netisr). Though still referred to as the netisr subsystem, the
FreeBSD kernel now processes received network packets using a run-to-completion model of
data processing also referred to as direct dispatch. Each packet is carried up through as many
layers of the networking code as possible. Packets that are not destined for a user process, such
as those that are being forwarded to other nodes in the network, are processed until they are
transmitted on to the next hop in the path to their ultimate destination. Earlier versions of

FreeBSD had many points in the networking code, including between devices and protocols,
where packets might be placed on a queue to be picked up and processed later. Using queues
allows for a clean separation between various modules in the network stack, but it also
introduces a performance penalty because of the cost of context switching between kernel
threads and thrashing in the CPU’s cache. The direct-dispatch model allows the system to carry
out as much work as possible with a single thread whose data relevant to the current processing
operation is still in the CPU’s cache. Kernel threads that handle packet reception may be pinned
to a particular CPU so that the maximum amount of cache coherency can be maintained
throughout the packet reception process. Only when the kernel can no longer make progress
processing a received packet does it place the packet on a queue for handling by another thread
to execute later.

Protocols register protocol-handling functions with the netisr subsystem by calling
netisr_register(). On receiving a packet, a device driver places the received data into an mbuf,
records the interface on which the packet was received in the mbuf’s packet header structure,
and passes the packet to the lower part of the link-layer protocol via a call to netisr_dispatch().
The netisr_dispatch() routine makes the decision about whether to use direct dispatch and
where an inbound packet should be processed. When using direct dispatch, the netisr_dispatch()
can choose to pin the thread that is handling an inbound packet to a particular CPU. The system
administrator can request that the old approach of queueing the packet and using a separate
kernel thread to process all incoming packets be used. Queueing works best when many
uniformly spaced packets arrive in periodic bursts. Here, the queue can hold the burst of packets
that can then be processed during the slack period before the next burst. With direct dispatch, if
packets arrive faster than they can be processed, all the CPUs will be busy handling earlier
packets and the excess unclaimed packets will be lost by the network hardware when new
packets arrive and overwrite older unclaimed ones.

The netisr module is used twice in the case of Ethernet packets. From the ether_input() routine,
a packet is first sent through the netisr system so that the kernel can decide whether to process
the packet on the current CPU, another CPU based on a tunable dispatching policy, or queued
for later processing by a different kernel thread. Systems that expect to receive many packets
typically process packets via direct dispatch, allowing the packet processing to run to
completion.

Once a decision has been made on where to process the packet, it is passed into the netisr
system again via the ether_demux() routine that handles passing the packet into the
network-layer protocol. The ether_demux() routine uses the packet’s ether type, a 16-bit value
that indicates the network-layer protocol, to dispatch the packet via the netisr subsystem into
the appropriate network-layer protocol. Each network-layer protocol accepts only an mbuf chain

as an argument. By the time the packet reaches the network-layer protocol, the mbuf chain
already has all the information necessary to complete processing of the packet for both network
and transport-layer protocols.

12.12 Buffering and Flow Control

A major factor affecting the performance of a protocol is the buffering policy. Lack of a proper
buffering policy can force packets to be dropped, cause false windowing information to be
emitted by protocols, fragment memory, and degrade system performance. Because of these
problems, most systems allocate a fixed pool of memory to the networking system and impose a
policy optimized for normal network operation.

At boot time, a fixed amount of memory is allocated by the networking system for mbufs and
mbuf clusters. More system memory may be requested for mbuf clusters as the need arises, up
to a preconfigured limit. Although the kernel memory allocator can reclaim unused memory
from zones, it has been configured never to reclaim memory from the zones used for mbufs and
mbuf clusters. Because of the wide and frequent swings in network buffer needs, the network
developers have found it more efficient to let the mbuf memory pool stay at its high-watermark
usage level.

Protocol Buffering Policies

When a socket is created, the protocol reserves a protocol-selected amount of buffer space for
send and receive queues. These amounts define the high water-marks used by the socket
routines in deciding when to block and unblock a process.

Protocols that provide connection-level flow control, such as TCP and SCTP, select a space
reservation based on the expected bandwidth and round-trip time for the connection. In
operation, windows sent to peers are calculated based on the amount of free space in the
socket’s receive queue, and utilization of the send window received from a peer is dependent on
the space available in the send queue.

Queue Limiting

Incoming packets from the network are always received unless memory allocation fails or the
kernel fails to collect them from the network interface before the arrival of another packet. The
default operation of the FreeBSD networking system is to use direct dispatch that carries every
packet it receives through to its destination, whether that is a socket for an application on the
host or transmitting it through another network interface. When the netisr subsystem has been

set up to queue packets as they are received instead of running them to completion, each
received packet is queued for later processing. Each queue has an upper bound on its length and
any packets exceeding that bound are discarded. As explained in Section 12.11, direct dispatch is
implicitly input limited when the system is too busy to collect packets from the network
interface.

It is possible for a host to be overwhelmed by excessive network traffic if it is forwarding packets
from a high-bandwidth network to a low-bandwidth network. As a defense mechanism, the
output-queue limits can be adjusted to control network-traffic load on the system. Dropping
packets is likely to increase the load on the network as applications and protocols retransmit the
dropped packets. However, excessive buffering leads to large network delays and slows the
feedback to TCP, which should tell TCP to slow down. The queue limit should be sufficiently
high that transient overload can be handled by buffering, but not high enough to cause buffer
bloat in routers [Gettys & Nichols, 2011].

The queuing in the netisr system is a single coarse knob that is tuned for the whole system.
Network applications such as routers require a more complex set of queueing mechanisms. The
ALTQ and Dummynet subsystems provide finer-grained control over selecting when packets are
dropped. The Dummynet subsystem is discussed in Section 13.8.

12.13 Network Virtualization

With the increasing power of computer systems, it is now possible to have services running
simultaneously that once would have required several separate machines. There are two basic
ways in which the increased power of computing has been harnessed. One way is to virtualize
the underlying hardware, introducing a layer of software on which several complete and isolated
systems can execute at the same time. Hardware virtualization is not a new idea, but systems are
now inexpensive and powerful enough that the use of virtualization software is common in the
industry [Creasy, 1981]. Another way to harness the power of modern computing systems for
multiple disparate purposes is to virtualize the services themselves. Virtualization is what an
operating system does with the underlying hardware, making it appear to multiple programs
that each of them has exclusive use of the machine. One type of software virtualization discussed
in Section 5.9 are jails, which are containers for entire sets of programs running on top of
FreeBSD.

The networking and interprocess-communication subsystems in FreeBSD have been virtualized
so that many copies of the network subsystem can run in parallel. The framework that
virtualizes the network subsystems is referred to as VIMAGE. Each virtual network stack is a
world unto itself, with its own set of sockets and network interfaces. The implementation of the

FreeBSD network stack relies on a collection of kernel global variables that maintain the data
structures for all the network services. With the introduction of VIMAGE, each data structure
had to be virtualized, meaning that if there are N instances of the network stack there are also N
instances of each global variable. The global variables defined by the stack are collected in a
special linker set, which is a collection of global variables that are encapsulated by the linker
when a program, such as the kernel, is built. The kernel uses the linker set, set_vnet, to create
new instances of the network stack’s global state whenever a new vnet instance is created. To
reduce the overhead of finding a global variable in a particular instance, a simple offset is used
from the base of the memory containing the virtualized global variables. A memory offset is the
fastest way to effect a lookup of the proper variable but it requires that the memory blocks
containing the global variables be exactly the same size and laid out the same way in memory. If
kernel developers had to do all this work themselves, it would be both tedious and error prone.
A small set of macros are used to declare variables that are global to the network stack. The
VNET_DEFINE macro is used throughout the kernel to set up global variables to be used by
VIMAGE. When modules need to refer to externally defined variables, they use the
VNET_DECLARE macro. Each virtualized global variable name is preceded by the characters
V_, which is a convention used in the kernel to denote virtualized global variables. A complete
set of each virtual stack’s global state is kept in a vnet structure, shown in Figure 12.19. All vnets
are kept on a singly-linked list and contain a count of the number of interfaces and sockets that
are currently in use by the virtual network instance. The global variables are accessed via the
vnet_data_mem pointer. Programmers do not access the global data members directly but
instead use the macros discussed above to indicate the global variable that they are trying to
access. When VIMAGE is not compiled into a kernel, all the macros that handle the indirection
and variable lookup are null and empty, meaning there is no performance penalty for variable
access when only a single network stack is in use.

Figure 12.19 The vnet structure.

Virtualized network stacks in FreeBSD 10 are inextricably tied to jails. A vnet is created via a call
to vnet_alloc() that is called from the jail_set system call. Each jail may contain only one vnet.
All the network stack’s global state is initialized using the same kernel routines in the virtualized

and nonvirtualized cases, with the VNET_ macros handling the proper indexing and offsets at
run time.

Mapping IPC-related system calls to vnet instances is handled in the kernel using the credential
structure associated with a thread. If a jail has been created with a vnet instance then every
process in the jail has a valid pointer to a vnet instance in its prison structure. The system call
then executes using the global variables ultimately pointed to from the prison structure. User
applications and system-management programs, such as netstat do not expose vnet IDs to
users of the system, but instead they, too, are a part of the jail and cannot see any data
structures not already encapsulated in the jail. When a user outside the jail, such as a system
administrator, wishes to look at the vnet instance inside a jail, he or she uses the jexec command,
which executes the requested program from within the jail, thereby removing the need for
anyone using the system to know the VNET ID of a vnet instance.

Exercises

12.1 What limitation in the use of pipes inspired the developers to design alternative
interprocess-communication facilities?

12.2 Why are the FreeBSD interprocess-communication facilities designed to be independent of
the filesystem for naming sockets?

12.3 Why is interprocess communication layered on top of networking in FreeBSD, rather than
the other way around?

12.4 Would a screen editor be considered a naive or a sophisticated program, according to the
definitions given in this chapter? Explain your answer.

12.5 What are out-of-band data? What types of sockets support the communication of
out-of-band data? Describe one use for out-of-band data.

12.6 Give two requirements that interprocess communication places on a memory-management
facility.

12.7 How many mbufs and mbuf clusters would be needed to hold a 3024-byte message? Draw
a picture of the necessary mbuf chain and any associated mbuf clusters.

12.8 Why does an mbuf have two link pointers? For what is each pointer used?

12.9 Each socket’s send and receive data buffers have high and low watermarks. For what are
these watermarks used?

12.10 Consider a socket with a network connection that is queued at the socket awaiting an
accept system call. Is this socket on the queue headed by the so_comp or by the so_incomp field
in the socket structure? What is the use of the queue that does not contain the socket?

12.11 Describe two types of protocols that would immediately place incoming connection
requests into the queue headed by the so_comp field in the socket structure.

12.12 How does the protocol layer communicate an asynchronous error to the socket layer?

12.13 Sockets explicitly refrain from interpreting the data that they send and receive. Do you
believe that this approach is correct? Explain your answer.

12.14 Why does the sosend() routine ensure there is enough space in a socket’s send buffer
before making a call to the protocol layer to transmit data?

12.15 How is the type information in each mbuf used in the queueing of data at a datagram
socket? How is this information used in the queueing of data at a stream socket?

12.16 Why does the soreceive() routine optionally notify the protocol layer when data are
removed from a socket’s receive buffer?

12.17 What might cause a connection to linger forever when closing?

12.18 Describe a deadlock between two processes, A and B, that are sharing two semaphores, S1
and S2.

12.19 How can a message queue implement a priority queue? How can it be used to allow full
duplex communication?

12.20 Why doesn’t the shmdt system call free the underlying shared memory?

*12.21    What    effect     might   storage   compaction      have   on   the   performance   of
network-communication protocols?

**12.22 Why is releasing mbuf-cluster storage back to the system complicated? Explain why it
might be desirable.

**12.23 In the original design of the interprocess-communication facilities, a reference to a
communication domain was obtained with a domain system call,

int d; d = domain("inet");

(where d is a descriptor, much like a file descriptor), and sockets then were created with

s = socket(type, d, protocol);
int s, type, protocol;

What advantages and disadvantages does this scheme have compared to the one that is used in
FreeBSD? What effect does the introduction of a domain descriptor type have on the
management and use of descriptors within the kernel?

**12.24 Design and implement a simple replacement for local IPC semaphores that operates on
a single semaphore instead of an array. The new system should adhere to the original API to the
extent that it should implement a semget, semctl, and semop routine.

References

BBN, 1978.

BBN, “Specification for the Interconnection of Host and IMP,” Technical Report 1822, Bolt,
Beranek, and Newman, Cambridge, MA, May 1978.

Cerf, 1978.

V. Cerf, “The Catenet Model for Internetworking,” Technical Report IEN 48, SRI Network
Information Center, Menlo Park, CA, July 1978.

Cohen, 1977.

D. Cohen, “Network Control Protocol (NCP) Software,” University of Illinois Software
Distribution, University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, IL, 1977.

Creasy, 1981.

R. J. Creasy, “The origin of the VM/370 time-sharing system,” IBM J. Res. Dev., pp. 483–490,
September 1981.

Gettys & Nichols, 2011.

J. Gettys & K. Nichols, “Bufferbloat: Dark Buffers in the Internet,” ACM Queue, available from
http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2071893, November 2011.

Gurwitz, 1981.

R. F. Gurwitz, “VAX-UNIX Networking Support Project—Implementation Description,”
Technical Report IEN 168, SRI Network Information Center, Menlo Park, CA, January 1981.

ISO, 1984.

ISO, “Open Systems Interconnection: Basic Reference Model,” ISO 7498, International
Organization for Standardization, available from the American National Standards Institute,
1430 Broadway, New York, NY 10018, 1984.

Postel, 1981.

J.   Postel,     “Internet   Control    Message         Protocol,”   RFC   792,   available   from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc792.html, September 1981.

Ritchie, 1984.

D. Ritchie, “A Stream Input-Output System,” AT&T Bell Laboratories Technical Journal, vol. 63,
no. 8-2, pp. 1897–1910, October 1984.

Stevens et al., 2003.

R. Stevens, B. Fenner, & A. M. Rudoff, UNIX Network Programming Volume 1: The Sockets
Networking API, Third Edition, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 2003.

