               Chapter 13. Network-Layer Protocols

Chapter 12 presented the network-communications architecture of FreeBSD. This chapter
examines the network protocols implemented within this framework. The FreeBSD system
supports several major communication domains including IPv4, IPv6, Xerox Network Systems
(NS), ISO/OSI, and the local domain (formerly known as the UNIX domain). The local domain
does not include network protocols because it operates entirely within a single system. This
chapter studies the portions of the TCP/IP protocols that implement the network-layer software.
The protocols that make up the network layer of the TCP/IP software are responsible for moving
packets between intermediate hosts in the Internet. Because the TCP/IP protocols implement a
packet-switched network, there is a logical split between the components that handle,
hop-by-hop, packets that reside in the network layer, and the components that present those
packets as streams or datagrams to user programs, that reside in the transport layer. The
transport layer protocols, including UDP, TCP, and SCTP, are discussed in Chapter 14.

Currently, there are two sets of defined protocols for the network layer of the Internet. IPv4 is
the network-layer protocol that most programmers are familiar with and that has been
developed and defined over a period of three decades. IPv6 is the next generation of the IP
protocol and is now being deployed as an eventual replacement for IPv4. Both IPv4 and IPv6,
and their attendant control and error protocols, are presented in this chapter, which describes
the overall architecture of the IPv4 protocols and examines their operation according to the
structure defined in Chapter 12. It then discusses changes the developers made in the system
that were motivated by aspects of the IPv6 protocols and their implementation. Following the
examination of the IPv4 and IPv6 network protocols is a discussion of the routing system that is
integral to the network-layer protocols and the security protocols that are also implemented at
the network layer. The chapter finishes with a discussion of the various packet-processing
frameworks that exist within FreeBSD and which are also deeply enmeshed in the network layer.

13.1 Internet Protocol Version 4

The TCP/IP suite was developed under the sponsorship of DARPA for use on the ARPANET
[DARPA, 1983; McQuillan & Walden, 1977]. The protocols are commonly known as TCP/IP,
although TCP and IP are only two of the many protocols in the suite. These protocols do not
assume a reliable subnetwork that ensures delivery of data. Instead, IPv4 was devised for a
model in which hosts were connected to networks with varying characteristics and the networks
were interconnected by routers. The Internet Protocols are responsible for host-to-host

addressing and routing, packet forwarding, and packet fragmentation and reassembly. Unlike
the transport protocols, they do not always operate for a socket on the local host, but may
forward packets, receive packets for which there is no local socket, or generate error packets in
response to these situations. The Internet protocols were designed for packet-switching
networks using datagrams sent over links such as Ethernet that provide no indication of
delivery.

The internetworking model leads to the use of at least two protocol layers. One layer operates
end to end between two hosts involved in a conversation. It is based on a lower-level protocol
that operates on a hop-by-hop basis, forwarding each message through intermediate routers to
the destination host. In general, there exists at least one protocol layer above the other two: the
application layer, which uses the transport protocols to implement a service or system. The
three layers correspond roughly to levels 3 (network), 4 (transport), and 7 (application) in the
ISO Open Systems Interconnection reference model [ISO, 1984].

The protocols that support this model have the layering illustrated in Figure 13.1. The Internet
Protocol (IP) implements the network-layer protocol in the ISO model. In a packet-switched
network, datagrams move hop by hop from the originating host to the destination via
intermediate routers. IP provides the network-level services of host addressing, routing, and, if
necessary, packet fragmentation and reassembly if intervening networks cannot send an entire
packet in one piece. The transport protocols use the services of IP. The User Datagram Protocol
(UDP), Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)
are transport-level protocols that provide additional facilities to applications that use IP. At the
network layer, IP uses host addresses to identify endpoints in the network, while each protocol
specifies a port identifier so that local and remote sockets can be identified. TCP provides
connection-oriented, reliable, unduplicated, and flow-controlled transmission of data; it
supports the stream socket type in the Internet domain. UDP provides a data checksum for
checking integrity in addition to a port identifier, but otherwise adds little to the services
provided by IP. UDP is the protocol used by datagram sockets in the Internet domain. The
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) is used for error reporting and for other simple
network-management tasks; it is logically a part of IP but, like the transport protocols, is layered
above IP. It usually is not accessed by users. Raw access to the IP and ICMP protocols is possible
through raw sockets (see Section 13.6 for information on this facility).

Key: TCP—Transmission Control Protocol; UDP—User Datagram Protocol; IP—Internet
Protocol; ICMP—Internet Control Message Protocol.

Figure 13.1 TCP/IP protocol layering.

All fields in the Internet protocols that are larger than a byte are expressed in network byte
order, with the most-significant byte first. When the IP protocols were first designed, hardware
manufacturers disagreed on the order in which bytes ought to be stored in memory. Some
manufacturers stored data in bigendian format, which is the same as network byte order, while
others, including Intel, stored data in little-endian format. The FreeBSD network
implementation uses a set of routines or macros to convert 16-bit and 32-bit integer fields
between host and network byte order on hosts (such as X86 systems) that have a different native
ordering. While X86 systems continue to use little-endian format, many embedded processors,
particularly those used for building network routers and switches, use big-endian format.
Converting between big- and little-endian byte formats introduces overhead that router and
switch vendors do not want to incur, and so their systems are built with processors whose native
memory format matches network byte order. On big-endian systems, the conversion macros are
empty and are optimized out by the compiler.

The functions IP performs are illustrated by the contents of its packet header, shown in Figure
13.2. The header identifies source and destination hosts and the destination protocol, and it
contains header and packet lengths. The identification and fragment fields are used when a
packet or fragment must be broken into smaller sections for transmission on its next hop and to
reassemble the fragments when they arrive at the destination. The fragmentation flags are Don’t
Fragment and More Fragments; the latter flag plus the offset are enough information to
assemble the fragments of the original packet at the destination.

Figure 13.2 IPv4 header. IHL is the Internet header length specified in units of 4 bytes.
Options are delimited by IHL. All field lengths are given in bits.

IP options are present in an IP packet if the header length field has a value larger than the
20-byte minimum. The no-operation option and the end-of-option-list option are each one byte
in length. All other options are self-encoding, with a type and length preceding any additional
data. Hosts and routers are able to skip over options that they do not implement. Examples of
existing options are the timestamp and record-route options, which are updated by each router
that forwards a packet, and the source-route options, which supply a complete or partial route to
the destination. These options are used rarely and most network operators silently drop packets
with the source-route option because it makes it difficult to manage traffic on the network.

IPv4 Addresses

An IPv4 address is a 32-bit number that identifies the network on which a host resides and
uniquely identifies a network interface on that host. It follows that a host with network
interfaces attached to multiple networks has multiple addresses. Network addresses are
assigned in blocks by Regional Internet Registries (RIRs) to Internet Service Providers (ISPs),
which then allocate addresses to companies or individual users. If address assignment were not
done in this centralized way, conflicting addresses could arise in the network and it would be
impossible to route packets correctly.

Historically, IPv4 addresses were rigidly divided into three classes (A, B, and C) to address the
needs of large, medium, and small networks [Postel, 1981a]. Three classes proved to be too
restrictive and also too wasteful of address space. The current IPv4 addressing scheme is called
Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) [Fuller et al., 1993]. In the CIDR scheme, each
organization is given a contiguous group of addresses described by a single value and a
netmask. Using CIDR a site administrator can create multiple subnetworks each with its own
netmask, without having to ask for a new address allocation from their ISP. The netmask

determines to which subnetwork an address belongs. For example, a network might have a
group of addresses defined by a 16-bit netmask, which means that the network is defined by the
first 16 bits. The remaining 16 bits can potentially be used to identify hosts in the network, or be
used to create a series of subnetworks, each of which have their own more narrowly scoped
netmask. Figure 13.3 shows a network with a 16-bit netmask and two subnetworks, each with a
24-bit netmask. With this scheme the allocated network is broken up into 256 subnetworks and
each subnetwork may have up to 253 hosts. The host part of each subnetwork address is 8 bits.
Each subnetwork can only have 253 hosts because two addresses are held back for use in
broadcasting packets and one is held back for the router. Networks need not be allocated on byte
boundaries, but they must be a contiguous set of bits at the high end of the address. Because of
this constraint, bit masks are described by a single number specifying the number of bits that
represent the network part of the address. For example:

Figure 13.3 Allocating subnetworks.

128.32.96.0/20

represents an address with a netmask of

0xfffff000.

Each Internet address assigned to a network interface is maintained in an in_ifaddr structure
that contains a protocol-independent interface-address structure as well as additional
information for use in the Internet domain (see Figure 13.4). When an interface’s network mask
is specified, it is recorded in the ia_subnetmask field of the address structure. The only time
that a class-based address is used is when an interface’s address is set without specifying a
netmask. The system interprets local Internet addresses using the ia_subnetmask value. An
address is considered to be local to the subnet if the field under the subnetwork mask matches
the subnetwork field of an interface address.

Figure 13.4 Internet interface-address structure (in_ifaddr).

Broadcast Addresses

On networks capable of supporting broadcast datagrams, 4.2BSD used the address with a host
part of zero for broadcasts. After 4.2BSD was released, the Internet broadcast address was
defined as the address with a host part of all 1s [Mogul, 1984]. This change and the introduction
of subnets complicated the recognition of broadcast addresses. Hosts may use a host part of 0s
or 1s to signify broadcast, and some may understand the presence of subnets, whereas others
may not. For these reasons, 4.3BSD and later BSD systems set the broadcast address for each
interface to be the host value of all 1s but allow the alternate address to be set for backward
compatibility. If the network is subnetted, the subnet field of the broadcast address contains the
normal subnet number. The logical broadcast address for the network is calculated when the
address is set; this address would be the standard broadcast address if subnets were not in use.
This address is needed by the IP input routine to filter input packets. On input, FreeBSD
recognizes and accepts subnet and network broadcast addresses with host parts of all 0s or all 1s,
as well as the address with 32 bits of 1 (“broadcast on this physical link”). Routers always drop
packets where the destination address is set to the broadcast address, which prevents broadcast
packets from leaving the local subnet and causing a broadcast storm.

Internet Multicast

Many link-layer network technologies, such as Ethernet, have the ability to send a single packet
to a group of hosts. Being able to multicast data to a group of interested listeners is an efficient
way to implement certain types of protocols, such as automatic configuration of local network
parameters. IP provides a similar facility at the network-protocol level, using link-layer
multicast where available [Deering, 1989]. IP multicasts are sent using destination addresses
with high-order bits set to 1110. Unlike host addresses, multicast addresses do not contain
network and host portions; instead, the entire address names a group, such as a group of hosts
using a particular service. These groups are created dynamically and the members of the group
change over time. IP multicast addresses map directly to physical multicast addresses on
networks such as the Ethernet, using the low 24 bits of the IP address along with a constant
24-bit prefix to form a 48-bit link-layer address.

For a socket to use multicast, it must join a multicast group using the setsockopt system call.
This call informs the link layer that it should receive multicasts for the corresponding link-layer
address, and it also sends a multicast membership report using the Internet Group Management
Protocol (IGMP) [Cain et al., 2002]. Routers and switches receive all multicast packets from
directly attached networks and forward multicast datagrams as needed to group members on
other networks. This function is similar to the role of routers that forward normal (unicast)
packets, but the criteria for packet forwarding are different, and a packet can be forwarded to
multiple neighboring networks. The purpose of IGMP is to allow switches and routers to track
which hosts are interested in receiving data for a group or set of groups. Without a protocol such
as IGMP, a network switch that received a multicast packet on one of its ports would not know
to which other ports to forward that packet: and as a result, the packet would either be flooded
to all ports or dropped. Flooding a packet to all ports is an inefficient use of network resources.
Routers and switches are configured to drop packets that arrive for a group for which no
connected host or network has asked for IGMP.

Link-Layer Address Resolution

Before a host can communicate with the broader Internet, it must first be able to talk to its
neighbors. Hosts communicating with the IPv4 network protocol use the address-resolution
protocol (ARP) to locate and communicate with their neighbors on the network. ARP is a
link-level protocol that provides a dynamic address-translation mechanism for networks that
support broadcast or multicast communication [Plummer, 1982]. ARP maps 32-bit IPv4
addresses to 48-bit media-access-control (MAC) addresses, such as those used by Ethernet and
the wireless 802.11 link-layer protocols. Although ARP is not specific either to IPv4 protocol

addresses or to Ethernet, the FreeBSD network subsystem supports only that combination,
although it makes provision for additional combinations to be added. ARP is incorporated into
the network-interface layer, although it logically sits between the network and link layers.

ARP maintains a set of translations from network addresses to link-layer addresses. When an
address-translation request is made to the ARP service by a network-layer protocol, and the
requested address is not in ARP’s set of known translations, an ARP message is created that
specifies the requested network address for the unknown link-layer address. This message is
then broadcast by the interface with the expectation that a host attached to the network will
know the translation—usually because the host is the intended target of the original message. If
a response is received promptly, the ARP service uses the response to update its translation
tables and to resolve the pending request, and the requesting network interface is then called to
transmit the original message.

This algorithm is complicated by the need to avoid stale translation data, to minimize
broadcasts when a target host is down, and to deal with failed translation requests. In addition,
it is necessary to deal with packets for which transmission is attempted before the translation is
completed. The ARP translation tables are implemented using a link-layer table (lltable) made
up of link-layer entry structures (llentry). Both the lltable and llentry data structures are generic
enough to handle different types of network to link-layer translation protocols such as the IPv6
neighbor-discovery protocol described in Section 13.3. Each lltable structure contains pointers
to three functions, one to look up a translation, a second to free an entry, and a third to dump
the table in some convenient format for display to a user. Every link-layer translation protocol
creates its own table and populates the function pointer elements such that the kernel can call
the relevant functions when necessary.

Every entry in the ARP table is contained in an llentry structure, shown in Table 13.1. Two of the
challenges to implementing ARP are the need to time out entries so they do not get stale, and to
hold packets from being transmitted until a proper reply to an ARP request is received. The
llentry structure has elements to address both of these challenges specifically. Each entry has an
lle_timer element that is used to set and reset a call-out timer for each entry in the table. When
the timeout fires, the arptimer() routine is called and it cleans up and removes the stale entry.
Entries have a limited lifetime to prevent a mapping from an IPv4 address to a link-layer
address from remaining in the system, possibly after a host has had its IPv4 address change,
either through the action of an administrator or because the host has been assigned a new IPv4
address via a protocol such as the dynamic host-configuration protocol (DHCP). A stale entry in
the ARP table would prevent one host from reaching another host until the stale entry was
cleared by an administrator. The default timeout for ARP entries is 20 minutes. The timeout
attempts to strike a balance between having a stale entry in the table and generating excessive

ARP requests on the network. If hosts do not change their IPv4 addresses often, then having a
longer timeout makes sense because ARP requests are overhead from the point of view of the
network’s user, as the ARP packets carry no user data.

Table 13.1 Link-layer entry.

Unlike many other network-layer protocols, ARP is not a transport protocol, yet it must hold
packets for later transmission. When an IPv4 packet is ready to be transmitted by the system,
the ARP table is checked by the arpresolve() routine to see if the kernel has a mapping for the
destination’s hardware address. If no such mapping exists, the arpresolve() routine must first
prepare and transmit a request for the proper mapping. The arpresolve() routine cannot block
the entire system while waiting for a reply, but it also cannot drop the IPv4 packet that it has
been given for translation. IPv4 packets that arrive for transmission before an ARP entry has
been resolved are placed on the la_hold queue until a proper ARP reply has been received or a
timeout occurs. The la_hold queue is limited in size so that a malicious process cannot exhaust
the kernel’s store of mbufs by transmitting at a high rate to a destination that will not reply to an
ARP request.

13.2 Internet Control Message Protocols (ICMP)

The Internet Control Message Protocols (ICMP) are the control- and error-message
protocols for IPv4 [Postel, 1981b] and IPv6 [Conta et al., 2006]. Although they are layered above
IP for input and output operations, they are really an integral part of IP. Most ICMP messages
are received and implemented by the kernel. ICMP messages may also be sent and received via a
raw IP socket (see Section 13.6).

ICMP messages fall into three general classes. One class includes various errors that may occur
somewhere in the network and that may be reported back to the originator of the packet
provoking the error. Such errors include routing failures (network or host unreachable),
expiration of the time-to-live field in a packet, or a report by the destination host that the target
protocol or port number is not available. Error packets include the IP header plus at least 8
additional bytes of the packet that encountered the error. The second message class may be
considered as router-to-host control messages. Instances of such messages include the routing
redirect message that informs a host that a better route is available for a host or network, and
router advertisements that provide a simple way for a host to discover its next-hop router. The
final message class includes network management, testing, and measurement packets. These
packets include a network-address request and reply, a network-mask request and reply, an
echo request and reply, a timestamp request and reply, and a generic information request and
reply.

All the actions and replies required by an incoming ICMP message are done by the relevant
ICMP module. ICMPv4 and ICMPv6 packets follow a similar trajectory through the network
code, the only difference being the use of the number 6 in the routines relating to IPv6. The
discussion that follows describes the path of ICMPv4 packets through the network stack, but the
reader is encouraged to seek out and review the ICMPv6 related functions to see how closely
they resemble their IPv4 counterparts. ICMP packets are received from IP via the normal
protocol-input entry point because ICMP has its own protocol number (1). The ICMP input
routines handle three major cases. If the packet is an error, such as port unreachable, then the
message is processed and delivered to any higher-level protocol that might need to know it, such
as the one that initiated the communication. Messages that require a response—for example, an
echo—are processed and then sent back to their source with the icmp_reflect() routine. Finally,
if there are any sockets listening for ICMP messages, they are given a copy of the message by a
call to rip_input() at the end of the icmp_input() routine.

When error indications are received, a generic address is constructed in a sockaddr structure.
The address and error code are reported to each network protocol’s control-input entry,

pr_ctlinput(), by the icmp_input() routine. For example, an ICMP port unreachable message
causes errors for only those connections with the specified remote port and protocol.

Routing changes suggested by redirect messages are processed by the rtredirect() routine, which
verifies that the router from which the message was received was the next-hop gateway in use
for the destination, and checks that the new gateway is on a directly attached network. If these
tests succeed, the kernel routing tables are modified accordingly.

Once an incoming ICMP message has been processed by the kernel, it is passed to rip_input()
for reception by any ICMP raw sockets. The raw sockets can also be used to send ICMP
messages. The network test program ping works by sending ICMP echo requests on a raw
socket and listening for corresponding replies.

ICMP is also used by other Internet network protocols to generate error messages. Many
different errors may be detected by IP, especially on systems used as IP routers. The
icmp_error() function constructs an error message of a specified type in response to an IP
packet. Most error messages include a portion of the original packet that caused the error, as
well as the type and code for the error. The source address for the error packet is selected
according to the context. If the original packet was sent to a local system address, that address is
used as the source. Otherwise, an address is used that is associated with the interface on which
the packet was received, as when forwarding is done; the source address of the error message
can then be set to the address of the router on the network closest to (or shared with) the
originating host. Also, when IP forwards a packet via the same network interface on which that
packet was received, it may send a redirect message to the originating host if that host is on the
same network. The icmp_error() routine accepts an additional parameter for redirect messages:
the address of the new router to be used by the host.

ICMPv6 has one responsibility that is not shared by ICMPv4, which is to handle various
neighbor-discovery messages. Neighbor discovery is the protocol that allows IPv6 hosts to
autoconfigure their network parameters. Unlike ARP, the neighbor-discovery protocols do not
sit directly on top of the link-layer protocols, such as Ethernet and 802.11, but instead sit atop
the ICMPv6 protocol. All the neighbor-discovery messages, including router and neighbor
solicitation, neighbor advertisements, and router redirects, first pass through the ICMPv6
module before reaching the neighbor-discovery software.

13.3 Internet Protocol Version 6

After many successful years of deploying and using IPv4, several issues arose that caused the
Internet community to start working on new versions of the Internet protocols. The motivation

for the new versions was that the original Internet was running out of addresses [Gross &
Almquist, 1992]. Several solutions had been proposed and implemented within the IPv4
protocols to handle this problem, including subnetting, and Classless Inter-Domain Routing
(CIDR) [Fuller et al., 1993; Mogul & Postel, 1985] but neither of them proved sufficient. Several
different proposals were made to replace the IPv4 protocols completely, and it took several years
to make a final decision. Work on the new generation of the Internet protocols has been
proceeding since the early 1990s, but it was not until 2003 that the protocol was rolled out by
any large vendors. To date, the adoption of the new protocols has been limited because of the
huge installed base of IPv4 hosts that must be converted.

FreeBSD includes an IPv6 networking domain that contains an implementation of the IPv6
protocols. The domain supports the entire suite of protocols from the network through the
transport layers. The protocols are described in a large set of RFCs starting with Deering &
Hinden [1998]. During the development of IPv6, several open-source implementations were
written. Each implementation supported a different subset of the full features of IPv6 according
to the needs of its authors. The one that eventually had the most complete set was developed by
the KAME project [KAME, 2003] and is the implementation that was adopted by FreeBSD. A
complete discussion of IPv6 is beyond the scope of this book. This section discusses the areas of
IPv6 that make it different from IPv4 and the changes that had to be made to FreeBSD to
accommodate those differences.

There are several major differences between IPv4 and IPv6 including:

• 128-bit addresses at the network layer

• Packet fragmentation discouraged

• Emphasis on automatic configuration

• Native support for security protocols

The biggest factor driving the move to a new protocol was the need for more addresses. The first
change to be made between IPv4 and IPv6 was to enlarge the size of an address. An IPv4
address is 32 bits, which is theoretically large enough to address over 4 billion interfaces. There
are two primary reasons why that theoretical maximum has never been reached. First is the
need to control the size of the routing tables in the core Internet routers. Internet routing is
most efficient when many addresses can be communicated by a single address, the address of
the router to that network. If each address required its own route, there would be over 4 billion
addresses in every routing table in the Internet, which would not be possible given the current
state of network hardware and software. Thus, addresses are aggregated into blocks, and these

blocks are assigned to ISPs, which then carve them up into smaller blocks for their customers.
The customers then take these blocks and break them down further, through subnetting, and
finally assign individual addresses to particular computers. At each level of this hierarchy, some
addresses are kept aside for future use, which leads to the second source of IP address waste,
overallocation. Because it is expensive and difficult to renumber a large installation of machines,
customers request more addresses than they need in an attempt to prevent ever having to
renumber their networks. This overallocation has lead to several calls for companies and ISPs to
return unused addresses [Nesser, 1996]. For these reasons, the size of the IP address space was
extended to 128 bits. The number of addresses available in IPv6 has been compared to
numbering all the atoms in the universe or giving every person on the earth over a billion IP
addresses.

As the Internet has been embraced by people who are not computer scientists and engineers, a
major stumbling block has been the difficulty of setting up and maintaining an
Internet-connected host. Companies have teams of professionals who do this work, but for a
small company the task can be daunting. These difficulties led the designers of IPv6 to include
several types of autoconfiguration into the protocol. Ideally, anyone using IPv6 can turn on a
computer, connect a network cable to it, and be on the Internet in a matter of minutes. This goal
has not been fully achieved, but it does explain many of the design decisions in the IPv6
protocols.

Even before the Internet was a commercial success, network researchers and operators
understood that the original protocols did not provide any security to users of the network. The
lack of security had two causes: the first was the initial emphasis of Internet development on
sharing information; the second was that until the end of the 1990s the United States
government prohibited the export of any security-related software. IPv6 includes a set of
security protocols (IPSec) that are defined for IPv4 as well. IPSec is a standard part of IPv6 and
is covered in Section 13.7.

IPv6 Addresses

IPv6 defines several types of addresses:

Unicast

Just like a unicast address in IPv4, the IPv6 unicast address is a 128-bit quantity that uniquely
identifies an interface on a host.

Multicast

An address that identifies a set of interfaces participating in some form of group communication.
A packet sent to a multicast address is delivered to all interfaces in the network that are bound
to that address.

Anycast

Anycast addresses are used to identify common services. The network will route a packet sent to
an anycast address to the nearest interface bound to that address. Nearest is measured by the
number of hops the packet would have to make between the source and destination.

Note that unlike IPv4, IPv6 does not have the concept of a broadcast address that is received by
all interfaces on a particular link. The role of broadcast addresses in IPv4 is to provide a way for
hosts to discover services even when they do not yet have their own IP address. Broadcast
packets are wasteful in that they are delivered to every host on a link, even if that host does not
provide the relevant service. Rather than using broadcast addresses as a way for a host to find a
service, IPv6 uses a well-known multicast address for each service being offered. Hosts that are
prepared to provide a service register to listen on the well-known multicast address assigned to
that service.

The 128-bit addresses in IPv6 necessitated creating new structures to hold them and new
interfaces to handle them. While it is reasonably easy to work with the traditional dotted-quad
notation of IPv4 (i.e., 192.168.1.1), writing out an IPv6 address textually requires a bit more
work, which is why the addressing architecture of IPv6 received its own RFC [Deering & Hinden,
2006]. When an IPv6 address is written, it is represented as a set of colon-separated hex bytes.
The value between each set of colons represents a 16-bit value. For example, the string

fd69:0:0:8:0:0:200C:417A

represents a local unicast address in the IPv6 network, similar to the IPv4 addresses defined in
RFC 1918. When written out as text, a portion of the address that contains zeros may be
abbreviated with a double colon:

fd69::8:0:0:200C:417A

The first set of two zeros was eliminated in this address. When an address is abbreviated, only
one set of zeros may be removed. For the run of zeros being eliminated, either all zeros must be
removed or none. The following are examples of improper abbreviations of the preceding
address:

fd69::0:8:0:0:200C:417A
fd69::8::200C:417A

The first example does not subsume the entire first set of zeros. The second example is
ambiguous because you cannot tell how to divide the four zeros between the two areas marked
with double colons.

Unicast and multicast addresses are differentiated by the bits set at the beginning of the address.
All globally routable unicast addresses begin with the bits 001, while multicast addresses start
with 1111 1111. Examples of the most common addresses are shown in Table 13.2. The
unspecified address is used by a host that has not yet been assigned an address when it is in the
process of bringing up its network interface. The solicited-node address is used during neighbor
discovery, which is covered later in this section.

Table 13.2 Well-known IPv6 addresses.

A piece of baggage that was not carried over from IPv4 to IPv6 was the concept of network
classes in addresses. IPv6 always uses the CIDR style of marking the boundary between the
network prefix (hereafter referred to simply as the prefix) and the interface identifier, which is
what identifies an interface on a particular host. The following examples all define the same
fictitious network that has a 60-bit prefix:

fd69:0000:0000:1230:0000:0000:0000:0000/60
fd69::1230:0:0:0:0/60
fd69:0:0:1230::/60

IPv6 Packet Formats

When IPv6 was being designed, one goal was to reduce the amount of work necessary for a
router to forward a packet. This reduction was addressed as follows:

• Simplification of the packet header. Comparing the IPv6 packet header in Figure 13.5 to the
IPv4 header shown in Figure 13.2, we see that there are four fewer fields in the IPv6 header and
that only one of them needs to be modified while the packet is in transit: the hop limit. The
hop limit is decremented every time the packet is forwarded by a router until the hop limit
reaches 0, at which point the packet is dropped.

Figure 13.5 IPv6 packet header.

• The packet header is a fixed size. The IPv6 header never carries any options or padding within
it. Options processing in IPv4 is an expensive operation that must be carried out whenever an
IPv4 packet is sent, forwarded, or received.

• IPv6 removed fragmentation at the network layer. Avoiding packet fragmentation simplifies
packet forwarding as well as processing by hosts, since hosts are where the reassembly of
fragmented packets takes place.

• The IPv6 header does not contain a checksum. Checksums are expensive to calculate and the
IPv4 checksum only protected the IPv4 header. Since all modern transport protocols include a
checksum over their data, a checksum at the IPv6 layer was deemed redundant.

All these simplifications make processing IPv6 packets less compute intensive than processing
those of IPv4. Completely removing features that were inconvenient, such as options or
fragmentation, would have decreased the acceptance of IPv6. Instead, the designers came up
with a way to add these features, and several others, without polluting the base packet header.
Extra features and upper-layer protocols in IPv6 are handled by extension headers. An

example packet is shown in Figure 13.6. All extension headers begin with a next-header field as
well as an 8-bit length field that shows the length of the extension in units of 8 bytes. All packets
are aligned to an 8-byte (64-bit) boundary. The IPv6 header and the extension headers form a
chain linked together by the next-header field, present in each of them. The next-header field
identifies the type of data immediately following the header that is currently being processed
and is a direct descendant of the protocol field in IPv4 packets. TCP packets are indicated by the
same number in both protocols (6). Routers do not look at any of the extension headers when
forwarding packets except for the hop-by-hop options header, which is meant for use by routers.
Each of the extension headers also encodes its length in some way. TCP packets are unaware of
being carried over IPv6 and use their original packet-header format, which means they carry
neither a next-header field nor a length. The length for TCP packets is computed as it is in IPv4.

Figure     13.6    Extension     headers.    Key:      AH—authentication     header     (type    51);
ESP—encapsulating-security payload (type 50).

Hosts are required to encode and decode extension headers in a particular order so that it is
unnecessary to ever backtrack through a packet. The order in which headers should appear is
shown in Figure 13.6. The hop-by-hop header (type 0) must immediately follow the IP header so
that routers can find it easily. The authentication header (AH) and encapsulating-security
payload (ESP) headers are used by security protocols that are discussed in Section 13.7 and must
come before the TCP header and data, since the information in the security headers must be
retrieved before they can be used to authenticate and decrypt the TCP header and data.

Changes to the Socket API

It has always been the policy of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) to specify protocols
and not implementations. For IPv6, this rule was bent so that application developers would have
an API to which they could code and speed the migration of applications to IPv6. The designers
took the original sockets interface, as it was then implemented in BSD, and specified extensions
[Gilligan et al., 1999] that are included in FreeBSD. There were several goals in extending the
sockets API:

• The changes should not break existing applications. The kernel should provide backward
compatibility for both source and binary.

• Minimize the number of changes needed to get IPv6 applications up and running.

• Ensure interoperability between IPv6 and IPv4 hosts.

• Addresses carried in data structures should be 64-bit aligned to obtain optimum performance
on 64-bit architectures.

Adding a new address type was easy because all the routines that handle addresses, such as bind,
accept, connect, sendto, and recvfrom, already work with addresses as opaque entities. A new
data structure, sockaddr_in6, was defined to hold information about IPv6 endpoints as shown
in Figure 13.7. The sockaddr_in6 structure is similar to the sockaddr_in shown in Section 12.4.
It contains the length of the structure, the family (which is always AF_INET6), a 16-bit port that
identifies the transport-layer endpoint, a flow identifier, network-layer address, and a scope
identifier. Many proposals have been put forth for the use of the flow information and scope
identifier, but these fields are currently unused. The flow information is intended as a way of
requesting special handling for packets within the network. For example, a real-time audio
stream might have a particular flow label so that it would be given priority over less time-critical
traffic. Although the idea is simple to explain, its implementation in a network where no one
entity controls all the equipment is problematic. At present, there is no way to coordinate what a
flow label means when it leaves one network and enters another. Until this conundrum is solved,
the flow label will be used only in private network deployments and research labs.

Figure 13.7 IPv6–domain socket-address structure.

IPv6 defines several scopes in which an address can be used. In IPv4, all addresses are global in
scope, meaning that they are valid no matter where they are found on the Internet. The defined
scopes in IPv6 are link local, site local, organization local, and global. An address in a lesser
scope may not be passed out to a broader scope. For example, a link-local address will not be
forwarded to another link by a router.

Working with 128-bit addresses by hand is clumsy and error prone. Applications are expected to
deal almost exclusively with named entities for IPv6 by using the domain name system (DNS)
[Thomson & Huitema, 1995]. The original API for looking up an address from a hostname,
gethostbyname(), was specific to the IPv4 protocol, so a new API was added to lookup any type
of address given a name. When a client wishes to find a server, it uses the getaddrinfo() routine:

int getaddrinfo(
    char *name,
    const char *servname,
    const struct addrinfo *hints,
    struct addrinfo **res);

The getaddrinfo() routine can work with any address family because the third argument is a
structure that specifies the address family and the last argument is a similar structure that
contains the address type being returned along with the properly formatted address. Services
are looked up using the structure shown in Table 13.3, which includes fields for the address
family, socket type, and protocol being sought, as well as the string name of the host.

Table 13.3 Fields of the addrinfo structure.

Autoconfiguration

A goal of IPv6 is to make adding a computer to the network a simpler process, one that requires
less human intervention. The mechanisms and protocols that are used to reach this goal are
called autoconfiguration. For a host to be automatically configured it has to be able to discover
several pieces of information from the network without any prior knowledge. The host must be

able to automatically figure out its own address, the address of its next-hop router, and the
network prefix of the link to which it is attached. To communicate with other hosts on its link
and with its next-hop router, a host needs the link-level addresses for those other systems.
These questions are answered by the neighbor-discovery protocol that is a part of IPv6 and is
defined in Narten et al. [2007]. Neighbor discovery either enhances or replaces disparate
protocols that were a part of IPv4 and unifies them in a set of ICMPv6 messages [Conta et al.,
2006]. Neighbor discovery uses ICMPv6 and is available on any system running IPv6. The first
step of the neighbor-discovery protocol is router discovery used to find its next-hop router. The
second step is the neighbor discovery, which is used to get the addresses of its neighbors.

A host finds its next-hop router in two different ways. IPv6 routers periodically send
router-advertisement messages to the all-nodes multicast address. The format of a
router-advertisement message is shown in Figure 13.8. The code field is currently always zero
and the flags are unused. They are intended to allow for future extensions to the protocol. All
hosts configured to pick up these multicast packets will see the router advertisement and
process it. Although router advertisements are sent often enough to make sure that all hosts on a
link know the location of their router and know when it has failed, this mechanism is insufficient
for bringing a new host up on the link. When a host first connects to the network, it sends a
router-solicitation message to the all-routers multicast address. A router that receives a
valid solicitation must immediately send a router advertisement in response. The advertisement
will be sent to the multicast address of all nodes unless the router knows that it can successfully
send a unicast response to the host that sent the solicitation. Router advertisements include a
retransmit timer value that tells the receiving host how many milliseconds to wait between
sending   its   neighbor   solicitations.   The retransmit    timer   controls   the   number   of
neighbor-solicitation messages any one host can send and keeps the overhead of such traffic
from overwhelming the network. A router may send an option with the advertisement that
includes the link-layer address of the router. If the link-layer address option is included, the
receiving hosts will not need to perform neighbor discovery before sending packets to the router.

Figure 13.8 Router advertisement. Key: M—managed flag; O—other flag.

Each host maintains a linked list of its router entries. A single router entry is shown in Figure
13.9. Whenever a router advertisement is received, it is passed to the defrtrlist_update() routine
that checks the message to see if it represents a new router and, if so, places a new entry at the
head of the default router list. Each router advertisement message contains a lifetime field. This
lifetime controls how long an entry may stay in the default router list. Whenever
defrtrlist_update() receives a router advertisement for a router that is already present in the
default router list, that router’s expiration time is extended.

Figure 13.9 Router entry.

For a host to determine if the next hop to which a packet should be sent is on the same link as
itself, it must know the prefix for the link. Historically, the prefix was manually configured on
each interface in the system, but now it is handled as part of router discovery.

Prefix information is sent as an option within a router advertisement. The format of the prefix
option is shown in Figure 13.10. Each prefix option carries a 128-bit address. The number of
valid bits in this address is given by the prefix-length field of the option. For example, the prefix
given in the preceding example would be sent in a prefix option with

fd69:0000:0000:1230:0000:0000:0000:0000

Figure 13.10 Prefix option. Key: O—onlink flag; A—auto flag.

encoded into the prefix field and 60 stored in the prefix-length field. Each prefix is only valid for
the period shown by the valid lifetime. Later router advertisements that contain prefix options
will have valid lifetimes that move into the future. The preferred lifetime controls the period of
time that the prefix should be used by the host and may be shorter than the valid lifetime. A
prefix that has passed the valid lifetime cannot be used. A prefix that has passed the preferred
lifetime may be used but will trigger a new solicitation. The response to the solicitation will be
either the same prefix or a new prefix with a new valid lifetime. When a host discovers that it has
a prefix whose lifetime has expired, the prefix is removed from the interface with which it is
associated, and the expired prefix no longer determines whether a destination address is on the
local link. One way to support a backup router would be to send out its advertisement with an
expired preferred lifetime, but a long valid lifetime. If the primary router with a valid preferred
lifetime is available, it will be used, but if it goes down or times out, the backup router can be
found and used.

All options encoded into neighbor- and router-discovery messages are appended immediately
after the message being sent. For example, the prefix option follows the router-advertisement
message to which it relates. All options start with a nonzero type and a length that specifies the
number of bytes present in the option. Router- and neighbor-discovery packets are contained
within ICMPv6 packets that are themselves contained in IPv6 packets. The IPv6 packet length
contains the size of the IPv6 header, the ICMPv6 header, ICMPv6 options, and any message.
When unpacking a router or neighbor advertisement, the IPv6 packet length is used to ensure
that the packet is valid. If the kernel finds that the length given in the packet is too short to
encompass any options, then the packet is discarded.

When a host has a packet for another host on its link, including its next-hop router, it must find
the link-layer address of the host to which it wishes to send the packet. In IPv4, this process was

handled by the address-resolution protocol (ARP); see Section 13.1. A problem with ARP is that
it is Ethernet specific and has encoded in it assumptions about link-layer addresses that makes
it difficult to adapt to other link types.

A host learns the link-layer addresses of its neighbors using a pair of messages: the neighbor
solicitation and the neighbor advertisement. When the kernel wants to send an IPv6 packet to
another host, the packet eventually passes through the ip6_output() routine, which does various
checks on the packet to make sure that it is suitable for transmission. All properly formed
packets are then passed down to the neighbor-discovery module via the nd6_output() routine.
In earlier versions of FreeBSD, the nd6_output() routine handled mapping the IPv6 address to
the link-layer address through a lookup in the routing table. After the link-layer address tables
were removed from the routing table, a new routine, nd6_output_lle() was introduced to handle
the mapping process. The nd6_output_lle() routine is now called by all the other IPv6 routines
to pass packets down toward the interface layer. The nd6_output() routine is maintained for
backwards compatibility but is now a simple wrapper around nd6_output_lle(). Once the packet
has a correct link-layer destination address, it is passed to a network-interface driver via the
driver’s if_output() routine. The relationships between the various protocol modules are shown
in Figure 13.11. The neighbor-discovery module does not have an nd_input() routine because it
receives messages via the ICMPv6 module. This inversion of the protocol layering allows the
neighbor-discovery protocol to be independent of the link layer. In IPv4, the ARP module is
hooked into the network interface so that it can send and receive messages. The connection
between ARP and the underlying link-layer interfaces means that the ARP code must
understand every link type that the system supports.

Figure 13.11 IPv6-module relationships. nd6_ra_input()—router-advertisement input routine;
nd6_na_input()—neighbor-advertisement input routine.

Link-layer addresses are stored in their own link-layer table, and that is where nd6_output_lle()
attempts to look up the link-layer address for the packets that are passed to it. When the host
does not yet know the link-layer address for the destination, the outgoing packet must be held
until neighbor discovery completes. The outgoing packet is added to the end of the list of packets
pointed to by the ln_hold field of the llentry structure. The nd6_output_lle() routine does not
wait for the neighbor advertisement but returns. When a response is received as a neighbor
advertisement, it is processed by the IPv6 and ICMPv6 modules and is finally passed into the
neighbor-discovery module by a call to the nd6_na_input() routine, as shown in Figure 13.11.
The nd6_na_input() routine records the link-layer address and checks to see if any packets
were being held for transmission to that destination. If there are packets awaiting transmission,
the nd6_output_lle() routine is invoked to send them. A link-layer address for the saved
packet’s destination is now in the system, so nd6_output_lle() will copy the link-layer address
into the mbuf chain and invoke the network interface’s if_output() routine to transmit the
packet.

Once per second, the nd6_timer() routine walks the neighbor-discovery link-layer address list
as well as the default-router and interface lists and removes the entries that have passed their
expiration time. Removing stale entries prevents the system from trying to send data to a host
that has failed or become unreachable.

13.4 Internet Protocols Code Structure

The interface between the transport- and network-layer protocols in FreeBSD is defined by a
small set of routines, which either take packets from the transport layers and encapsulate them
for transmission, or take network-layer packets that have arrived on one interface and forward
them out via another interface. The routines that implement the IPv4 and IPv6 protocols are
similar in structure and will be described in this section.

Output

The calling convention for IPv4’s output routine is

int ip_output(
  struct mbuf *msg,

  struct mbuf *opt,
  struct route *ro,
  int flags,
  struct ip_moptions *imo,
  struct inpcb *inp);

The parameter msg is an mbuf chain containing the packet to be sent, including a skeletal IP
header; opt is an optional mbuf containing IP options to be inserted into the header. If the route
ro is given, it contains a reference to a routing entry (rtentry structure) that specifies a route to
the destination from a previous call and in which any new route will be left for future use.
Cached routes were moved from the network layer into the transport-layer protocols in FreeBSD
5.2 (see the TCP host-cache metrics described in Section 14.4). The cached route should appear
as a TCP host-cache metric, but as of FreeBSD 10 it has not been added, so the ro entry is never
specified. Unless a cached route is passed down through the ro parameter, a route lookup must
be performed for each packet. The flags may allow the use of broadcast or may indicate that the
routing tables should be bypassed. If present, imo includes options for multicast transmissions.
The protocol control block, inp, is used by the IPSec subsystem (see Section 13.7) to hold data
about security associations for the packet.

int ip6_output(
  struct mbuf *m0,
  struct ip6_pktopts *opt,
  struct route_in6 *ro,
  int flags,
  struct ip6_moptions *im6o,
  struct ifnet **ifpp,
  struct inpcb *inp)

The IPv6 output routine takes nearly the same arguments as the IPv4 output routine. The only
additional parameter is a pointer ifpp where the IPv6 module can let the transport layer know
something about the physical interface on which the packet was output. The returned interface
pointer is currently used only in recording statistics about how many packets were transmitted
on an interface.

The outline of the work performed by ip_output() is as follows:

• Insert any IP options.

• Fill in the remaining header fields (IP version, zero offset, header length, and a new packet
identification) if the packet contains an IP pseudo-header.

• Determine the route (i.e., outgoing interface and next-hop address).

• Check whether the destination is a multicast address. If it is, determine the outgoing interface
and hop count.

• Check whether the destination is a broadcast address; if it is, check whether broadcast is
permitted.

• Do any IPSec manipulations that are necessary on the packet such as encryption.

• See if there are any filtering rules that would modify the packet or prevent the system from
sending it.

• If the packet size is no larger than the maximum packet size for the outgoing interface,
compute the checksum and call the interface output routine.

• If the packet size is larger than the maximum packet size for the outgoing interface, break the
packet into fragments and send each in turn.

If no route reference is passed as a parameter, an internal routing-reference structure is used
temporarily. A route structure that is passed from the caller is checked to see that it is a route to
the same destination and that it is still valid. If either test fails, the old route is freed. After these
checks, if there is no route, in_rtalloc_ign() is called to allocate a route. The route returned
includes a pointer to the outgoing interface. The interface information includes the maximum
packet size, flags including broadcast and multicast capability, and the output routine. If the
route is marked with the RTF_GATEWAY flag, the network-layer address of the next-hop router
is given by the route; otherwise, the packet’s destination is the next-hop destination. If routing is
to be bypassed because of a MSG_DONTROUTE option or a SO_DONTROUTE option, a
directly attached network shared with the destination is sought. If there is no directly attached
network, an error is returned. Once the outgoing interface and next-hop destination are found,
enough information is available to send the packet.

As described in Section 12.11, the interface output routine normally validates the destination
address and places the packet on its output queue, returning errors only if the interface is down,
the output queue is full, or the destination address is not understood.

The ip6_output() routine follows the same pattern as the one presented for ip_output() but
adds a few IPv6-specific steps. Unlike the IPv4 protocol, in which the header is a single entity,

an IPv6 packet is made up of a chain of smaller headers, all of which must be processed before
the packet can be transmitted. Many of the differences between the IPv6 and IPv4 output
routines exist to handle extension-header processing. A packet that does not contain extension
headers, such as hop-by-hop options, is simpler to construct than a similar IPv4 packet. One
other difference between the IPv4 and IPv6 output routines is the need to handle the scoping
rules for the packet. Section 13.2 describes how IPv6 packets all have a scope: link local, site
local, organization local, and global. Deciding what scope a packet belongs to is handled in the
ip6_output() routine and is based on the source address attached to the interface on which the
packet will be transmitted. Because the scope is based on the interface that the packet will be
transmitted on, it must be calculated after the packet’s route is selected, as well as having been
passed through any packet filters, including IPSec. One core concept in IPv6 was to prevent
packets from being fragmented as they had been in IPv4. Fragmentation complicates the
packet-processing code, not only in hosts but also in the intermediate routers, as well as in
firewalls and other systems internal to a network. Unfortunately, practical concerns required the
ability to fragment packets to be retrofitted into the IPv6 code. Retrofitting fragmentation into
the output routine has caused it to be even more complex than the similar code in IPv4, as can
be seen by reading the last section of ip6_output().

Input

In Section 12.11, we described the reception of a packet by a network interface. The netisr
subsystem then runs the packet through the various upper-layer protocols via direct dispatch.
The IPv4 and IPv6 input routines are invoked when network interfaces receive messages for one
of these protocols. The input routine, ip_input() or ip6_input(), is called with an mbuf that
contains the packet to be processed. A packet is processed in one of four ways: it is passed as
input to a higher-level protocol, it encounters an error that is reported back to the source, it is
dropped because of an error, or it is forwarded to the next hop on its path to its destination. In
outline form, the steps in the processing of a packet on input are as follows:

1. Verify that the packet is at least as long as an IPv4 or IPv6 header and ensure that the header
is contiguous.

2. For IPv4, checksum the header of the packet and discard the packet if there is an error.

3. Verify that the packet is at least as long as the header indicates and drop the packet if it is not.
Trim any padding from the end of the packet.

4. Do any filtering or security functions required by ipfw or IPSec.

5. Process any options associated with the header.

6. Check whether the packet is for this host. If it is, continue processing the packet. If it is not,
and if the system is acting as a router, try to forward the packet; otherwise, drop it.

7. If the packet has been fragmented, keep it until all its fragments are received and reassembled,
or until it is too old to keep.

8. Pass the packet to the input routine of the next-higher-level protocol.

When the incoming packet is passed into the input routine, one field of the mbuf is a pointer to
the interface on which the packet was received. This information is passed to the next protocol,
to the forwarding function, or to the error-reporting function. If any error is detected and is
reported to the packet’s originator, the source address of the error message will be set according
to the incoming packet’s destination and the incoming interface.

The decision whether to accept a received packet for local processing by a higher-level protocol
is not simple. If a host has multiple addresses, the packet is accepted if its destination matches
any one of those addresses. If any of the attached networks support broadcast and the
destination is a broadcast address, the packet is also accepted.

The IPv4 input routine uses a simple and efficient scheme for locating the input routine for the
receiving protocol of an incoming packet. The protocol field in the packet is 8 bits long; thus,
there are 256 possible protocols. Fewer than 256 protocols are defined or implemented, and the
Internet protocol switch has far fewer than 256 entries. Therefore, ip_input() uses a
256-element mapping array to map from the protocol number to the protocol-switch entry of
the receiving protocol. Each entry in the array is initially set to the index of a raw IP entry in the
protocol switch. Then, for each protocol with a separate implementation in the system, the
corresponding map entry is set to the index of the protocol in the IP protocol switch. When a
packet is received, IP simply uses the protocol field to index into the mapping array and calls the
input routine of the appropriate protocol. Locating the next-layer protocol for IPv6 is different
from the IPv4 case because IPv6 packets are linked together by their next-header fields. Instead
of simply passing the packet up to the next layer directly via a single call through the inet6sw
array, the ip6_input() routine can call many input routines including udp6_input(),
tcp6_input(), sctp6_input(), or any other, high-level protocol-input routine until one of them
returns a value of IPPROTO_DONE. The loop that walks the chain of IPv6 headers can be seen
at the end of the ip6_input() routine.

Forwarding

Implementations of IP traditionally have been designed for use by either hosts or routers, rather
than by both. A system was either an endpoint for packets or a router. Routers forward packets

between hosts on different networks but only use upper-level protocols for maintenance
functions. Traditional host systems do not incorporate packet-forwarding functions; instead, if
they receive packets not addressed to them, they simply drop the packets. 4.2BSD was the first
common implementation that attempted to provide both host and router services in normal
operation. This approach meant that 4.2BSD hosts connected to multiple networks could serve
as routers and hosts, reducing the requirement for dedicated router hardware. Early routers
were expensive and not especially powerful. Alternatively, the existence of router-function
support in ordinary hosts made it more likely for misconfiguration errors to result in problems
on the attached networks. The most serious problem had to do with forwarding of a broadcast
packet because of a misunderstanding by either the sender or the receiver of the packet’s
destination. The packet-forwarding router functions are disabled by default in FreeBSD. They
may be enabled at run time, on a per-protocol basis, by setting either or both of the
net.inet.ip.forwarding or net.inet6.ip6.forwarding sysctl variables. Hosts not configured as
routers never attempt to forward packets or to return error messages in response to misdirected
packets. As a result, far fewer misconfiguration accidents occur.

The procedure for forwarding IP packets received at a router but destined for another host is the
following:

1. Check that forwarding is enabled. If it is not, drop the packet.

2. Check that the destination address is one that can be forwarded.

3. Save some important components of the received message in case an error message must be
generated in response.

4. Determine the route to be used in forwarding the packet.

5. If the outgoing route uses the same interface as that on which the packet was received, and if
the originating host is on that network, send a redirect message to the originating host.

6. Handle any IPSec updates that must be made to the packet header.

7. Call the appropriate output routine, either ip_output() for IPv4 or nd6_output() for IPv6, to
send the packet to its destination or to the next-hop gateway.

8. If an error is detected, send an ICMP error message to the source host.

Multicast transmissions are handled separately from other packets. Systems may be configured
as multicast routers independently from other routing functions. Multicast routers receive all
incoming multicast packets and forward those packets to local receivers and group members on

other networks according to group memberships and the remaining hop count of incoming
packets.

13.5 Routing

The networking system was designed for a heterogeneous network environment, in which a
collection of local-area networks are connected at one or more points through routers, as shown
in Figure 13.12. Routers are nodes with multiple network interfaces, one on each local- or
wide-area network. In such an environment, issues related to packet routing are important. For
others, the network system provides simple mechanisms on which more involved policies can be
implemented. These mechanisms ensure that, as these problems become better understood,
their solutions can be incorporated into the system. Note that at the time of the original design
of this part of the system, a network node that forwarded network-level packets was generally
known as a gateway. The current term is router. We use both terms interchangeably, in part
because the kernel data structures continue to use the name gateway.

Figure 13.12 Example of the topology for which routing facilities were designed.

The routing facilities were designed for use by singly connected and multiply connected hosts, as
well as by routers. There are several components involved in routing, illustrated in Figure 13.13.
The design of the routing system places some components within the kernel and others at user
level. Routing is an overbroad term. In a complex modern network, there are at least three
major components to a routing system. The gathering and maintenance of route information
(i.e., which interfaces are up, what the cost is to use each available link, etc.) as well as the
implementation of routing policies (which interfaces can be used to forward traffic) are handled
at user level by routing daemons. The actual forwarding of packets, which is the selection of the
interface on which a packet will be sent, is split between two tables stored in the kernel. Earlier

versions of FreeBSD maintained both routing and forwarding information in a single,
per-protocol routing table. A more modern design, which splits routing information and
forwarding information, was adopted as part of FreeBSD 8. Section 13.1 covers examples of the
forwarding information base (FIB) that describes ARP and neighbor discovery. Removing the
forwarding information from the routing table improved the performance of the system by
removing lock contention on the routing table. In the earlier design, routing updates and
forwarding lookups contended on the same set of locks to do their work, resulting in decreased
performance for some networking workloads. A second important advantage to a split design is
that the APIs for accessing each type of data are now cleaner and it is possible to easily replace
the FIB with hardware, as is done in modern routing and switching gear.

Figure 13.13 Routing design.

The routing mechanism is a simple lookup that provides a next-hop route (a specific
network interface) for each outbound packet, while the forwarding mechanism provides the
next-hop address to be used when transmitting the packet. The current design places enough
information in the kernel for packets to be sent on their way without external help; all other
components are outside the kernel. User-level routing daemons communicate with the kernel
via a routing socket to manipulate the kernel forwarding table and to listen for internal changes
such as interfaces being brought up or down. Each of these components is described in this
section.

Kernel Routing Tables

The kernel routing mechanism implements a routing table for looking up next-hop routes. It
includes two distinct portions: a data structure describing each specific route (a routing entry)
and a lookup algorithm to find the correct route for each possible destination. This subsection
describes the entries in the routing table, and the next subsection explains the lookup algorithm.
A destination is described by a sockaddr structure with an address family, a length, and a value.

Routes are classified as either host (direct) or network (indirect) routes. The host–network
distinction determines whether the route applies to a specific host or to a group of hosts with a
portion of their addresses in common, based on a prefix of the address. For host routes, the
destination address of a route must exactly match the desired destination; the address family,
length, and bit pattern of the destination must match those in the route. For network routes, the
destination address in the route is paired with a mask. The route matches any address that
contains the same bits as the destination in the positions indicated by bits set in the mask. A
host route is a special case of a network route, in which all the mask bits are set, and thus no bits
are ignored in the comparison. Another special case is a wildcard route—a network route
with an empty mask. Such a route matches every destination and serves as a default route for
unknown destinations. This fallback network route is usually pointed to a router that can then
make more informed routing decisions.

The other major distinction between types of routes is either direct or indirect. A direct route is
one that leads directly to the destination: The first hop of the path is the entire path, and the
destination is on a network shared with the source. Most routes are indirect: the route specifies
a router on a local network that is the firsthop destination for the packet. Much of the literature
(especially for Internet protocols) refers to a local–remote decision, where an implementation
checks first whether a destination is local to an attached network or is remote. In the first case, a
packet is sent locally (via the link layer) to the destination; in the latter case, it is sent to a router
that can forward it to the destination. In the FreeBSD implementation, the local–remote
decision is made as part of the routing lookup. If the best route is direct, then the destination is
local. Otherwise, the route is indirect, the destination is remote, and the route entry specifies the
router for the destination. In either case, the route specifies only the first-hop gateway—a
link-level interface to be used in sending packets—and the destination for the packets in this hop
if different from the final destination. This information allows a packet to be sent via a local
interface to a destination directly reachable via that interface—either the final destination or a
router on the path to the destination. This distinction is needed when the link-layer
encapsulation is done. If a packet is destined for a peer that is not directly connected to the
source, the packet header will contain the address of the eventual destination, whereas the
link-layer protocol header will address the intervening router.

The network system maintains a set of routing tables used by protocols to select a network
interface to use when delivering a packet to its destination. These tables are composed of rtentry
structures as shown in Table 13.4.

Table 13.4 Elements of a routing-table entry (rtentry) structure.

An rtentry structure, contains a reference to the destination address and mask, unless the route
is to a host, in which case the mask is implicit. The destination address, address mask, and
gateway address are different sizes and thus are placed in separately allocated memory. Routing
entries also contain a reference to a network interface, a set of flags that characterize the route,
and optionally, a gateway address. The flags indicate a route’s type (host or network, direct or
indirect) and the other attributes shown in Table 13.5. If the route is a member of a virtual
networking instance, the route entry will reference the virtual network. The route entry also
contains a set of metrics and a mutex for locking the entry. The RTF_HOST flag in a
routing-table entry indicates that the route applies to a single host, using an implicit mask
containing all the bits of the address. The RTF_GATEWAY flag in a routing-table entry indicates
that the route is to a router and that the link-layer header should be filled in from the
rt_gateway field, instead of from the final destination address. The route entry contains a field
that can be used by the link layer to cache a reference to the direct route for the router. The
RTF_UP flag is set when a route is installed. When a route is removed, the RTF_UP flag is
cleared, but the route entry is not freed until all users of the route have noticed the failure and
have released their references. The route entry contains a reference count because it is allocated
dynamically and cannot be freed until all references have been released. Other flags
(RTF_REJECT and RTF_BLACKHOLE) mark the destination of the route as being unreachable,
causing either an error or a silent failure when an attempt is made to send to the destination.
Reject routes are useful when a router receives packets for a cluster of addresses from the
outside, but may not have routes for all hosts or networks in the cluster at all times. Packets with
unreachable destinations should not be sent outside the cluster via a default route because the

default router would send back such packets for delivery within the cluster. Black-hole routes
are used during routing transients when a new route may become available shortly.

Table 13.5 Route-entry flags.

Many connection-oriented protocols wish to retain information about the characteristics of a
particular network path. Some of this information can be estimated dynamically for each
connection, such as the round-trip time or path MTU. It is useful to cache such information so
that the estimation does not need to begin anew for each connection [Mogul & Deering, 1990].
The routing entry contains a set of route metrics stored in a rt_metrics_lite structure that may
be set externally or may be determined dynamically by the protocols. These metrics include the
maximum packet size for the path, called the maximum transmission unit (MTU); the
lifetime for the route; and the number of packets that have been sent using this route.

Routing Lookup

Given a set of routing entries describing various destinations, from specific hosts to a wildcard
route, a routing lookup algorithm is required. The lookup algorithm in FreeBSD uses a variation
of the radix search trie [Sedgewick, 1990]. (The initial design was to use a PATRICIA search,
also described in Sedgewick [1990], which differs only in the details of storage management.)
The radix search algorithm provides a way to find a bit string, such as a network address, in a set
of known strings. Although the modified search was implemented for routing lookups, the radix
code is implemented in a more general way so that it can be used for other purposes. For
example, the filesystem code uses a radix tree to manage information about clients to which
filesystems can be exported. Each kernel route entry begins with the data structures for the
radix tree, including an internal radix node and a leaf node that refers to the destination address
and mask.

The radix search algorithm uses a binary tree of nodes beginning with a root node for each
address family. Figure 13.14 shows an example of a radix tree. A search begins at the root node
and descends through internal nodes until a leaf node is found. Each internal node requires a
test of a specific bit in the string, and the search descends in one of two directions depending on
the value of that bit. The internal nodes contain an index of the bit to be tested, as well as a
precomputed byte index and mask for use in the test. A leaf node is marked with a bit index of
–1, which terminates the search. For example, a search for the address 127.0.0.1 (the loopback
address) with the tree in Figure 13.14 would start at the head and would branch left when testing
bit 0, branch right at the node for bit 1, and branch right on testing bit 31. This search leads to
the leaf node containing a host route specific to that host; such a route does not contain a mask
but uses an implicit mask with all bits set.

Figure 13.14 Example radix tree. This simplified example of a radix tree contains routes for the
IPv4 protocol family, which uses 32–bit addresses. The circles represent internal nodes,
beginning with the head of the tree at the top. The bit position to be tested is shown within the
circle. Leaf nodes are shown as rectangles containing a key (a destination address, listed as four
decimal bytes separated by dots) and the corresponding mask (in hexadecimal). Some interior
nodes are associated with masks found lower in the tree, as indicated by dashed arrows.

This lookup technique tests the minimum number of bits required to distinguish among a set of
bit strings. Once a leaf node is found, either it specifies the specific bit string in question or that
bit string is not present in the tree. This algorithm allows a minimal number of bits to be tested
in a string to look up an unknown, such as a host route; however, it does not provide for partial
matching as required by a routing lookup for a network route. Thus, the routing lookup uses a
modified radix search, in which each network route includes a mask, and nodes are inserted into
the tree such that longer masks are found earlier in the search [Sklower, 1991]. Interior nodes
for subtrees with a common prefix are marked with a mask for that prefix. Masks generally
select a prefix from an address, although the mask does not need to specify a contiguous portion
of the address. As the routing lookup proceeds, the internal nodes that are passed are associated
with masks that increase in specificity. If the route that is found at the leaf after the lookup is a
network route, the destination is masked before comparison with the key, thus matching any
destination on that network. If the leaf node does not match the destination, an interior node
visited during the route lookup should refer to the best match. After a lookup does not find a
match at the leaf node, the lookup procedure iterates backward through the tree, using a parent
pointer in each node. At each interior node that contains a mask, a search is made for the part of
the destination under that mask from that point. For example, a search for the address
128.32.33.7 in the tree in Figure 13.14 would test bits 0, 18, and 29 before arriving at the host
route on the right (128.32.33.5). Because this address is not a match, the search moves up one
level, where a mask is found. The mask is a 24-bit prefix, and it is associated with the route to
128.32.33.0, which is the best match. If the mask was not a prefix (in the code, a route with a
mask specifying a prefix is called a normal route), a search would have been required for the
value 128.32.33.7 starting from this point.

The first match found is the best match for the destination; that is, it has the longest mask for
any matching route. Matches are thus found by a combination of a radix search, testing 1 bit per
node on the way down the tree, plus a full comparison under a mask at the leaf node. If the leaf
node (either host or network) does not match, the search backtracks up the tree, checking each
parent with a mask until a match is found. This algorithm avoids a complete comparison at each
step when searching down the tree, which would eliminate the efficiency of the radix-search
algorithm. It is optimized for matches to routes with longer masks and performs least efficiently
when the best match is the default route (the route with the shortest mask).

Another complication of using a radix search is that a radix tree does not allow duplicated keys.
There are two possible reasons for a key to be duplicated in the tree: either multiple routes exist
to the same destination or the same key is present with different masks. The latter case is not a
complete duplicate, but the two routes would occupy the same location in the tree. The routing
code supports duplicate routes in two different ways, depending on the features compiled into
the kernel. By default, the radix code supports multiple routes that differ in only the mask.
When the addition of a route causes a key to be duplicated, the affected routes are chained
together from a single leaf node. The routes are chained in order of mask significance, the most
specific mask first. If the masks are contiguous, longer masks are considered to be more specific
(with a host route considered to have the longest possible mask). If a routing lookup visits a
node with a duplicated key when doing a masked comparison (either at the leaf node or while
moving back up the tree), the comparison is repeated for each duplicate node on the chain, with
the first successful comparison producing the best match.

Duplicate routes to different gateways are referred to as equal-cost multi-path routes (ECMP)
and are supported by the RADIX_MPATH feature. ECMP routes can be used to balance traffic
load across multiple links as well as to provide the ability for a single link to fail without the total
loss of connectivity to the next hop in the network. When ECMP routes are used for failover, one
gateway may go over a valid but less-preferred route to the destination. A less-preferred route
might transit a slower or more expensive link. The use of multi-path routes allows the system to
failover gracefully when one link goes down. Enabling ECMP changes the routine used to look
up a route as well as the way in which multiple routes are stored in a radix trie’s leaf nodes.

Each radix trie has a single radix_node_head structure that contains both data about the trie,
and a set of pointers to functions to use when performing operations on it. The rnh_matchaddr()
field is filled in appropriately at the time that the table is initialized to point to the correct
routine to return a matching route. When ECMP routing is in use, the rtalloc_mpath_fib()
routine is ultimately used to look up a route rather than rtalloc_fib(). When ECMP routes are
used to load balance traffic across a set of links, the matching algorithm uses a Modulo-N hash
to choose the gateway to forward any single packet. The Modulo-N hash is calculated to
guarantee that packets with the same source and destination information always cross the same
link. If two packets from the same flow cross different links there is the chance that they will
arrive at their destination out of order, causing a drop in network performance, (see Section 14.5)
[Thaler & Hopps, 2000]. When ECMP routes are used to implement failover links, where one
link is unused until the failure of a primary link, each equal-cost route is given a weight that is
used as part of the gateway selection algorithm. The route with the greatest weight will be used
instead of any other equal-cost route. When a link goes down, the routing entry will remain in
the trie but it will not be used to route packets. The next hop gateway will be selected from the
remaining equal cost routes at the same leaf node in the tree.

Routing Redirects

A routing redirect message is a control request from a protocol to the routing system to
modify an existing routing-table entry or to create a new routing-table entry. Protocols usually
generate such requests in response to redirect messages that they receive from routers. Routers
generate redirect messages when they recognize that a better route exists for a packet that they
have been asked to forward. For example, if two hosts, A and B, are on the same network, and
host A sends a packet to host B via a router C, then C will send a redirect message to A specifying
that A should send packets directly to B.

On hosts where exhaustive routing information is too expensive to maintain (e.g., SOHO routers,
cable modems, and other embedded systems), the combination of wildcard routing entries and
redirect messages can be used to provide a simple routing-management scheme without the use
of a higher-level policy process, such as a user-level routing daemon. Statistics are kept by the
routing-table routines on the use of routing-redirect messages and on the latter’s effect on the
routing tables. A redirect causes the gateway for a route to be changed if the redirect applies to
all destinations to which the route applies. A user-level routing daemon will normally clean up
stale host routes, but most hosts do not run routing daemons.

Routing-Table Interface

A protocol accesses the routing tables through three types of routines: one to allocate a route,
one to free a route, and one to process a routing-redirect control message. The routine rtalloc()
allocates a route. It is called with a pointer to a route structure that contains the desired
destination and a pointer that will be set to reference a rtentry structure that is the best match
for the destination. Figure 13.15 shows the resulting route allocation. The destination is recorded
so that later output operations can check whether the new destination is the same as the
previous one, allowing the same route to be used. With the addition of VIMAGE, it was
necessary to provide routines such as rtalloc_ign_fib() that allowed the caller to pass in an
index for the kernel to use to pick the appropriate routing table. All route allocation routines
eventually wind up calling rtalloc_ign_fib(), where the work of looking up a route takes place.
The route returned is assumed to be held by the caller until released with a call to the RTFREE
macro. All accesses to the routing table must be properly locked in FreeBSD and the RTFREE
macro handles the locking as well as decrementing the route’s reference count, freeing the route
entry when the reference count reaches zero. Since a route can only be present in a single
routing table, there is no need to have a specific rtfree_fib() routine. The rtalloc_ign_fib()
routine simply checks whether the route already contains a reference to a valid route. If no route
is referenced or the route is no longer valid, rtalloc_ign_fib() calls the rtalloc1_fib() routine to

look up a routing entry for the destination, passing a flag indicating whether the route will be
used or is simply being checked.

Figure 13.15 Data structures used in route allocation.

The rtredirect_fib() routine is called to process a redirect control message. It is called with a
destination address and mask, the new gateway to the referenced destination, and the source of
the redirect. Redirects are accepted from only the current router for the destination. If a
nonwildcard route exists to the destination, the gateway entry in the route is modified to point
at the new gateway supplied; otherwise, a new host route is created. Routes to interfaces and
routes to gateways that are not directly accessible from the host are ignored.

User-Level Routing Policies

The kernel routing facilities deliberately refrain from making policy decisions. Instead, routing
policies are determined by user processes, which then add, delete, or change entries in the
kernel routing tables. The decision to place policy decisions in a user process implies that
routing-table updates may lag a bit behind the identification of new routes or the failure of
existing routes. This period of instability is normally short if the routing process is implemented
properly. Internet-specific advisory information, such as ICMP error messages, may also be read
from raw sockets (described in Section 13.6).

Several routing-policy processes have been implemented. The system standard routing
daemon, routed, uses the Routing Information Protocol (RIP) [Hedrick, 1988]. Many sites
that require the use of other routing protocols or more configuration options than are provided

by routed use either a commercial package or the open-source Quagga Routing Suite [Ishiguro,
2003].

User-Level Routing Interface: Routing Socket

User-level processes that implement routing policy and protocols require an interface to the
kernel routing table so that they can add, delete, and change kernel routes.

User level processes on FreeBSD use a socket to communicate with the kernel routing layer. A
privileged process creates a raw socket in the routing protocol family, AF_ROUTE, and then
passes messages to and from the kernel routing layer. A routing socket operates like a normal
datagram socket, including queueing of messages received at the socket, except that
communication takes place between a user process and the kernel. Messages include a header
with a message type identifying the action, as listed in Table 13.6. Messages to the kernel are
requests to add, modify, or delete a route, or are requests for information about the route to a
specific destination. The kernel sends a message in reply with the original request, an indication
that the message is a reply, and an error number for failures. Because routing sockets are raw
sockets, each open routing socket receives a copy of the reply and must filter for the messages it
wants. The message header includes a process ID and a sequence number so that each process
can determine whether this message is a reply to its own request and can match replies with
requests. The kernel also sends messages as indications of asynchronous events, such as
redirects and changes in local interface state. These messages allow a daemon to monitor
changes in the routing table made by other processes, events detected by the kernel, and
changes to the local interface addresses and state. The routing socket is also used to deliver
requests for external resolution of a link-layer route when the RTF_XRESOLVE flag is set on a
route entry.

Table 13.6 Routing-message types.

Requests to add or change a route include all the information needed for the route. The header
has a field for the route flags listed in Table 13.5, and contains a rt_metrics structure of metrics
that may be set or locked. Metrics that can be set on a route include the MTU and expiration
time. The header also carries a bit vector that describes the set of addresses carried in the
message; the addresses follow the header as an array of variable-size sockaddr structures. A
destination address is required, as is a mask for network routes. A gateway address is generally
required as well. The system normally determines the interface to be used by the route from the
gateway address, using the interface shared with that gateway.

13.6 Raw Sockets

A raw socket allows privileged users direct access to a protocol other than those normally used
for transport of user data—for example, network-level protocols. Raw sockets are intended for
knowledgeable processes that wish to take advantage of some protocol feature not directly

accessible through the normal interface or for the development of protocols built atop existing
protocols. For example, the ping program is implemented using a raw ICMP socket (see Section
13.2). The raw IP socket interface attempts to provide an identical interface to the one a protocol
would have if it were resident in the kernel.

The raw-socket support is built around a generic raw-socket interface, possibly augmented by
protocol-specific processing routines. This section describes only the core of the raw-socket
interface; details specific to particular protocols are not discussed. Some protocol families
(including IPv4) use private versions of the routines and data structures described here.

Control Blocks

Every raw socket has a protocol control block of the form shown in Figure 13.16. Raw control
blocks are kept on a singly linked list for performing lookups during packet dispatch.
Associations may be recorded in fields referenced by the control block and may be used by the
output routine in preparing packets for transmission. The rcb_proto field contains the protocol
family and protocol number with which the raw socket is associated. The protocol, family, and
addresses are used to filter packets on input, as described in the next subsection.

Figure 13.16 Raw-socket control block.

A raw socket is datagram oriented: each send or receive on the socket requires a destination
address. Destination addresses are supplied by the user. If routing is necessary, it must be
performed by an underlying protocol.

Input Processing

Input packets are assigned to raw sockets based on a simple pattern-matching scheme. Each
protocol (and potentially some network interfaces) gives unassigned packets to the raw input
routine with the call

void raw_input_ext(
  struct mbuf *msg,
  struct sockproto *proto,
  struct sockaddr *src)

Input packets are placed into the input queues of all raw sockets that match the header
according to the following rules:

1. The protocol family of the socket and header agree.

2. If the protocol number in the socket is nonzero, then it agrees with that found in the packet
header.

A basic assumption in the pattern-matching scheme is that protocol information in the control
block and packet header (as constructed by the network interface and any raw input-protocol
module) is in a canonical form that can be compared on a bit-for-bit basis. If multiple sockets
match the incoming packet, the packet is copied as needed.

Output Processing

On output, each send request results in a call to the raw socket’s raw_usend routine, which calls
an output routine specific to the protocol or protocol family. Any necessary processing is done
before the packet is delivered to the appropriate network interface.

13.7 Security

We mentioned in Section 13.3 that a suite of security protocols was developed as part of IPv6.
These protocols were written to be independent of any particular version of IP, so they have
been integrated into IPv4 and IPv6. At the network layer, security mechanisms have been added
to provide authentication so that one host can know with whom it is communicating. Encryption

has been added so that data can be hidden from untrusted entities as they cross a network. The
protocols that collectively provide security within the network layer are referred to as IPSec.

Placing the security protocols at the network layer within the protocol stack was not an arbitrary
decision. It is possible to place security at just about any layer within a communication system.
For example, transport-layer security (TLS) supports communication security at the application
layer and allows a client and a server to communicate securely over an arbitrary network. At the
opposite end of the spectrum are the various protocols that support security over wireless
networks working at the data-link layer. The decision to put security at the network layer was
made for several reasons:

• The IP protocols act as a uniform platform in which to place the security protocols. Differences
in underlying hardware, such as different types of network media, did not have to be taken into
account when designing and implementing IPSec because if a piece of hardware could send and
receive IP datagrams, then it could also support IPSec.

• Users need not do any work to use the security protocols. Because IPSec is implemented at the
network, instead of the application layer, users who run network programs are automatically
working securely as long as their administrators have properly configured the system.

• Key management can be handled in an automatic way by system daemons. The most difficult
challenge in deploying network security protocols is giving out and canceling the keys used to
secure the data. Since IPSec is handled in the kernel, and is not usually dealt with by users, it is
possible to write daemons to handle the management of keys.

Security within the context of IPSec means several things:

• The ability to trust that a host is who it claims to be (authentication)

• Protection against the replay of old data

• Confidentiality of data (encryption)

Providing a security architecture for the Internet protocols is a complex problem. The relevant
protocols are covered in several RFCs, and an overview is given in Kent & Atkinson [1998a].

IPSec Overview

The IPSec protocol suite provides a security framework for use by hosts and routers on the
Internet. Security services, such as authentication and encryption, are available between two
hosts, a host and a router, or two routers. When any two entities on the network (hosts or

routers) are using IPSec for secure communication, they are said to have a security
association (SA) between them. Each SA is unidirectional, which means that traffic is only
secured between two points in the direction in which the SA has been set up. For a completely
secure link two SAs are required, one in each direction.

SAs are uniquely identified by their destination address, the security protocol being used, and a
security-parameter index (SPI), which is a 32-bit value that distinguishes among multiple
SAs terminating at the same host or router. The SPI is the key used to look up relevant
information in the security-association database that is maintained by each system running
IPSec.

An SA can be used in two modes. In transport mode, a portion of the IP header is protected
as well as the IPSec header and the data. The IP header is only partially protected because it
must be inspected by intermediate routers along the path between two hosts, and it is neither
possible nor desirable, to require every possible router to run the IPSec protocols. One reason to
run security protocols end to end is so intermediate routers do not have to be trusted with the
data they are handling. Another reason is that security protocols are often computationally
expensive and intermediate routers often do not have the computational power to decrypt and
reencrypt every packet before it is forwarded.

Since only a part of the IP header is protected in transport mode, this type of SA only provides
protection to upper-layer protocols, those that are completely encapsulated within the data
section of the packet, such as UDP, TCP and SCTP. Figure 13.17 shows a transport-mode SA
between hosts Alice and Bob, as well as the packet that would result. Alice sets up a normal IP
packet with Bob as the destination. She then adds the IPSec header and data. Finally, she
applies whatever security protocol has been selected by the user and sends the packet, which
travels through routers in Tokyo and New York and finally to Bob. Bob decrypts the packet by
looking up the security protocol and keys in its security-association database.

Figure 13.17 Security association in transport mode. Key: AH—authentication header;
ESP—encapsulating-security payload; SPI—security-parameter index.

The other mode is tunnel mode, shown in Figure 13.18, where the entire packet is placed
within an IP-over-IP tunnel [Simpson, 1995]. In tunneling, the entire packet, including all the
headers and data, are placed as data within another packet and sent between two locations.
Alice again wants to send a packet to Bob. When the packet reaches the Tokyo router, it is placed
in a secure tunnel between Tokyo and New York. The entire original packet is placed inside a
new packet and secured. The outer IP header identifies only the endpoints of the tunnel, the
routers in Tokyo and New York, and does not give away any of the original packet’s header
information. When the packet reaches the end of the tunnel in New York, it is decrypted and
then sent on to Bob, its original destination. In this example, neither Alice nor Bob knows that
the data have been encrypted nor do they have to be running the IPSec protocols to participate
in this secure communication.

Figure 13.18 Security association in tunnel mode. Key: AH—authentication header;
ESP—encapsulating-security payload; SPI—security-parameter index.

Tunnel mode is only used for host-to-router or router-to-router communications and is most
often seen in the implementation of virtual private networks that connect two private
networks or that connect users to a corporate LAN over the public Internet.

Security Protocols

There are two security protocols specified for use with IPSec: the authentication header (AH)
and the encapsulating-security payload (ESP), each of which provides different security services
[Kent & Atkinson, 1998b; Kent & Atkinson, 1998c]. Both protocols are used with IPv4 and IPv6
without changes to their headers. This dual usage is possible because the packet headers are

really IPv6 extension headers that properly encode information about the other protocols
following them in the packet.

The AH protocol provides a packet-based authentication service as well as protection against an
attacker attempting to replay old data. To understand how AH provides security, it is easiest to
look at its packet header, shown in Figure 13.19. The next-header field identifies the type of
packet that follows the current header. The next-header field uses the same value as the one that
appears in the protocol field of an IPv4 packet: 6 for TCP, 17 for UDP, and 1 for ICMP. The
payload length specifies the number of 32-bit words that are contained in the authentication
header minus 2. The fudge factor of removing 2 from this number comes from the specification
for IPv6 extension headers. The SPI is a 32-bit number that is used by each endpoint to look up
relevant information about the security association.

Figure 13.19 Authentication header.

Authentication is provided by computing an integrity-check value (ICV) over the packet. If
an AH is used in transport mode, then only parts of the IP header are protected because some of
the fields are modified by intermediate routers in transit and the changes are not predictable at
the sender. In tunnel mode, the whole header is protected because it is encapsulated in another
packet, and the ICV is computed over the original packet. The ICV is computed using the
algorithm specified by the SPI with the result stored in the authentication-data field of the
authentication header. The receiver uses the same algorithm, requested by the SPI to compute
the ICV on the packet it received, and compares this value with the one found in the packet’s
authentication-data field. If the values are the same, then the packet is accepted; otherwise, it is
discarded.

One possible attack on a communication channel is called a replay attack. An attacker attempts
to insert malicious packets that duplicate packets sent in the past as if they were coming from
the authentic source. To guard against a replay attack, the AH protocol uses a sequence-number
field to uniquely identify each packet that is transmitted across an SA. This sequence-number
field is distinct from the field of the same name in TCP. When an SA is established, both the

sender and receiver set the sequence number field to zero. The sender increments the sequence
number before transmitting a packet. The receiver implements a fixed-size sliding window, with
its left edge being the lowest sequence number that it has seen and validated, and the right edge
being the highest. When a new packet is received, its sequence number is checked against the
window with three possible results:

1. The packet’s sequence number is less than the sequence number on the left edge of the
window and the packet is discarded.

2. The packet’s sequence number is within the window. The receiver keeps a bitmap that tracks
the packets that have been received within the window. The packet is checked to see if it is
already marked in the bitmap. If it is in the bitmap, it is a duplicate and is discarded. If the
packet is not a duplicate, it is inserted into the window and the bitmap is updated to show that
its sequence number has been received.

3. The packet’s sequence number is to the right of the current window. The ICV is verified and,
if correct, the window is moved to the right to encompass the new sequence number value. The
bitmap is updated to reflect that its sequence number has been received.

When the sequence number rolls over, after over 4 billion packets, the security association must
be torn down and restarted. This restart is only a slight inconvenience because at gigabit
Ethernet rates of 83,000 packets per second, it takes over 14 hours for the security sequence
number to roll over, and a user-level daemon can automatically tear down and reestablish the
link without human intervention.

All senders assume that a receiver is using the antireplay service and is always incrementing the
sequence number, but it is not required for the receiver to implement the antireplay service, and
it may be turned off at the discretion of the operator of the receiving system.

The ESP provides confidentiality using encryption. As with the AH, it is easiest to understand
the ESP by examining its packet header, shown in Figure 13.20. The ESP header contains all the
same fields as were found in the AH header, but it adds three more. The encrypted data sent
using an ESP is stored in the payload-data field of the packet. The padding field that follows the
payload data may be used for three purposes:

• The encryption algorithm might require that the data to be encrypted be some multiple
number of bytes. The padding data is added to the data to be encrypted so that the chunk of data
is of the correct size.

• Padding might be required to properly align some part of the packet. For example, the
pad-length and next-header fields must be right-aligned in the packet, and the
authentication-data field must be aligned on a 4-byte boundary.

• The padding may also be used to obscure the original size of the payload in an attempt to
prevent an attacker from gaining information by watching the traffic flow.

Figure 13.20 Encapsulating security-protocol header.

Key Management

User-level applications cannot use IPSec in the same way that they use transport protocols like
UDP and TCP. For example, an application cannot open a secure socket to another endpoint
using IPSec. Instead, all SAs are kept in the kernel and managed using a new domain and
protocol family called PF_KEY_V2 [McDonald et al., 1998].

The automated distribution of keys for use in IPSec is handled by the Internet Key Exchange
(IKE) protocol [Harkins & Carrel, 1998]. User-level daemons that implement the IKE protocol,
such as Racoon, interact with the kernel using PF_KEY_V2 sockets [Sakane, 2001]. As these
daemons are not implemented in the kernel, they are beyond the scope of this book.

User-level applications interact with the security database by opening a socket of type PF_KEY.
There is no corresponding AF_KEY address family. Key sockets are based on the routing-socket
implementation and function much like a routing socket. Whereas the routing-socket API
manipulates the kernel routing table, the key-socket API manages security associations and
policies. Key sockets support a connectionless-datagram facility between user applications and

the kernel. User-level applications send commands in packets to the kernel’s security database.
Applications can also receive messages from a key socket about changes to the security database
such as the expiration of security associations.

The messages that can be sent using a key socket are shown in Table 13.7. Two groups of
messages are defined for key sockets: a base set of messages that all start with a
security-association database (SADB) and a set of extension messages that all start with
SADB_X. The type of the message is the second part of the name. In FreeBSD, the extension
messages manipulate a security-policy database (SPDB) that is separate from the SADB.

Table 13.7 PF_KEY messages.

Key-socket messages are made up of a base header, shown in Figure 13.21, and a set of extension
headers. The base header contains information that is common to all messages. The version
ensures that the application will work with the version of the key-socket module in the kernel.
The command being sent is encoded in the message-type field. Errors are sent to the calling
socket using the same set of headers that are used to send down commands. Applications cannot
depend on all errors being returned by a send or write system call made on the socket, and they
must check the error number of any returned message on the socket for proper error handling.
The errno field is set to an appropriate error number before the message is sent to the listening
socket. The type of security association that the application wants to manipulate is placed in the
SA-type field of the packet. The length of the entire message, including the base header, all
extension headers, and any padding that has been inserted, is stored in the length field. Each
message is uniquely identified by its sequence and PID fields that match responses to requests.
When the kernel sends a message to a listening process, the PID is set to 0.

Figure 13.21 PF_KEY-base header.

The security-association database and security-policy database cannot be changed using the
base header. To make changes, the application adds one or more extension headers to its
message. Each extension header begins with a length and a type so that the entire message can
be easily traversed by the kernel or an application. An association extension is shown in Figure
13.22. The association extension makes changes to a single security association, such as
specifying the authentication or encryption algorithm to be used.

Figure 13.22 PF_KEY-association extension.

Whenever an association extension is used, an address extension must be present as well, since
each security association is identified by the network addresses of the communicating endpoints.
An address extension, shown in Figure 13.23. stores information on the IPv4 or IPv6 addresses
using sockaddr structures.

Figure 13.23 PF_KEY address extension.

One problem with the current PF_KEY implementation is that it is a datagram protocol and the
message size is limited to 64 Kbyte. A 64-Kbyte limit is not important to users with small
databases, but when a system using IPSec is deployed in a large enterprise, with hundreds and
possibly thousands of simultaneous security associations, the SADB will grow large and this size
limitation makes it more difficult to write user-level daemons to manage the kernel’s security
databases.

A security-association structure is shown in Figure 13.24. Like many other data structures in
FreeBSD, security-association structures are really objects implemented in C. Each
security-association structure contains all the data related to a specific security association as
well as the set of functions necessary to operate on packets associated with that association. The
security-association database is stored as a doubly linked list of security-association structures.
Each security association can be shared by more than one entity in the system, which is why it
contains a reference count.

Figure 13.24 Security-association structure.

Security associations can be in four states: LARVAL, MATURE, DYING, and DEAD. When an
SA is first being created, it is put into the LARVAL state, which indicates that it is not yet usable.
Once an SA is usable, it moves to the MATURE state. An SA remains in the MATURE state until
some event, such as the SA exceeding its lifetime, moves it to the DYING state. SAs in the
DYING state can be revived if an application makes a request to use an SA with the same
parameters before it is marked as DEAD.

The security-association structure contains all the information on a particular SA including the
algorithms used, the SPI, and the key data. This information is used in processing packets for a
particular association. The lifetime fields limit the usage of a particular SA. Although an SA is
not required to have a lifetime, and so might not expire, recommended practice is to set a
lifetime. Lifetimes can be given a time limit using the addtime and usetime fields of the
sadb_lifetime structure, and can be given a data-processing limit using the bytes field. The three
lifetime structures pointed to by the security association encode the current usage for the
association and its hard and soft limits. When reached, the soft-lifetime value puts the SA into
the DYING state to show that its useful life is about to end. When reached, the hard-lifetime
value indicates that the SA is no longer usable. Once an SA passes the hard-lifetime limit, it is

set to the DEAD state and can be reclaimed. The current-lifetime structure contains the present
usage values for the SA—for example, how many bytes have been processed since the SA was
created.

Each security-association structure has several tables of functions that point to routines that do
the work on packets handled by that association. The tdb_xform table contains pointers to
functions that implement the initialization, input, and output functions for a particular security
protocol such as ESP or AH. The other three tables are specific to a protocol and contain
pointers to the appropriate cryptographic functions for handling the protocol being used by the
SA. The reason for having this plethora of tables is that the cryptographic subsystem ported
from OpenBSD used these tables to encapsulate the functions that do the real work of
cryptography. To simplify the maintenance of the code, this set of interfaces and tables was
retained during the port. A useful side effect of having these tables is that it makes adding new
protocols or cryptographic routines simple. The use of these tables is described later in this
section.

User-level daemons interact with the IPSec framework via key sockets. Key sockets are
implemented in the same way as other socket types. There is a domain structure, keydomain; a
protocol-switch structure, keysw; a set of user-request routines, key_usrreqs; and an output
routine, key_output(). Only those routines necessary for a connectionless-datagram type of
protocol are implemented in the key_usrreqs structure. Any attempt to use a key socket in a
connection-oriented way—for instance, calling connect on a key socket—will result in the kernel
returning EINVAL to the caller.

When an application writes to a key socket, the message is eventually transferred down into the
kernel and is handled by the key_output() routine. After some rudimentary error checking, the
message is passed to key_parse(), which does more error checks, and then is finally shuttled off
through a function-pointer switch called key_types. The functions pointed to by key_types are
those that do the manipulation of the security-association and security-policy databases.

If the kernel needs to send a message to listening applications because of changes in the security
databases, it uses the key_sendup_mbuf() routine to copy the message to one or more listening
sockets. Each socket receives its own copy of the message.

IPSec Implementation

The IPSec protocols affect all areas of packet handling in the IPv4 and IPv6 protocol stacks. In
some places, IPSec uses the existing networking framework, and in others, direct callouts are

made to do some part of the security processing. We will look at three of the possible paths
through the IPv4 stack: inbound, outbound, and forwarding.

One twist that IPSec adds to normal packet processing is the need to process some packets more
than once. An example is the arrival of an encrypted packet bound for the current system. The
packet will be processed once in its encrypted form and then a second time, by the same
routines, after it has been decrypted. This multipass processing is unlike regular TCP or UDP
processing where the IP header is stripped from the packet and the result is handed to the TCP
or UDP modules for processing and eventual delivery to a socket. This continuation style of
processing packets is one reason that the IPSec software makes extensive use of packet tags.
Another reason to use packet tags is that parts of IPSec, namely the cryptographic algorithms,
can be supported by special-purpose hardware accelerators. A hardware accelerator may do all
or part of the security processing, such as checking a packet’s authentication information or
decrypting the packet payload and then passing the resulting packet into the protocol stack for
final delivery to a waiting socket. The hardware needs some way to tell the protocol stack that it
has completed the necessary work. It is neither possible, nor desirable, to store this information
in the headers or data of the packet. Adding such information to a packet’s header is an obvious
security hole because a malicious sender could simply set the appropriate field and bypass the
security processing. It would have been possible to extend the mbuf structure to handle this
functionality, but packet tags are a more flexible way of adding metadata to packets without
modifying a key data structure in the network stack. The tags used by IPSec are described in
Table 13.8.

Table 13.8 IPSec packet tags.

As we saw in Section 13.4, when an IPv4 packet is received by the kernel, it is initially processed
by ip_input(). The ip_input() routine does two checks on packets that are related to IPSec. The
first is to see if the packet is really part of a tunnel. If a packet is being tunneled and it has been
processed by the IPSec software already, it can bypass any filtering by filter hooks or the kernel’s
firewall code. The second check is done when a packet is to be forwarded. Routers can
implement security policies on packets that are forwarded. Before a packet is passed to

ip_forward(), it is checked by calling the ipsec_getpolicy() function to see if there is a policy
that is associated with the packet itself. The ipsec_getpolicybyaddr() function is called to check
if there is a policy associated with the address of the packet. If either function returns a pointer
to a policy routine, the packet is passed to that policy routine to be checked. If the packet is
rejected, it is silently dropped and no error is returned to the sender.

When ip_input() has determined that the packet is valid and is destined for the local machine,
the protocol-stack framework takes over. The packet is passed to the appropriate input routine
using the pr_input field of the inetsw structure. Although packets using different protocols have
different entry points, they eventually wind up being passed to a single routine,
ipsec_common_input(), for processing. The ipsec_common_input() routine attempts to find
the appropriate security-association structure for the packet based on its destination address,
the security protocol it is using, and the SPI. If an appropriate association is found, then control
is passed to the input routine contained in the SA’s xform-switch structure. The
security-protocol’s input routine extracts all the relevant data from the packet—for example, the
key being used—and creates a cryptography-operation descriptor. This descriptor is then passed
into the cryptographic routines. When the cryptographic routines have completed their work,
they call a protocol-specific callback routine, which modifies the mbufs associated with the
packet so that it may now be passed, unencrypted, back into the protocol stack via the ip_input()
routine.

Applications do not know that they are using IPSec to communicate with other hosts in the
Internet. For outbound packets, the use of IPSec is really controlled from within the ip_output()
routine. When an outbound packet reaches the ip_output() routine, a check is made to see if
there is a security policy that applies to the packet, either because of its destination address or
because of the socket that sent it. If a security policy is found, then the packet is passed into the
IPSec code via the ipsec4_process_packet() routine. If a security association has not been set up
for this particular destination, one is created for it in the security-association database. The
ipsec4_process_packet() uses the output() routine from the xform switch in the security
association to pass off the packet to the security protocol’s output routine. The security
protocol’s output routine uses the appropriate cryptographic routine to modify the packet for
transmission. Once the packet has been modified appropriately, it is passed again into
ip_output() but with the tag IPSEC_OUT_DONE attached to it. This tag marks the packet as
having completed IPSec processing, showing that it can now be transmitted like any other
packet.

Underlying all the security protocols provided by IPSec is a set of APIs and libraries that support
cryptography. The cryptographic subsystem in FreeBSD supports both symmetric and
asymmetric cryptography. Symmetric cryptography, used by IPSec, uses the same key to

encrypt data as it does to decrypt them. Asymmetric cryptography, which implements
public-key encryption, uses one key to encrypt data and another key to decrypt them. The
cryptographic APIs are covered in detail in Section 5.12. Readers interested in how data are
encrypted within the IPSec subsystem are encouraged to read the complete discussion found
there.

13.8 Packet-Processing Frameworks

Most of the packets that are processed by a host pass through network-protocol modules such as
TCP/IP. Some applications may need to get access to packets as they pass through the kernel
without using the more common mechanisms provided by sockets. Over the last 20 years
several different packet-processing frameworks have been developed in FreeBSD, from simple
packet filtering to more complex frameworks in which new protocols can be developed.
Packet-processing frameworks are used for debugging network problems, implementing
fire-walls, performing network address translation (NAT), and providing software for
network-research testbeds.

Berkeley Packet Filter

The Berkeley Packet Filter (BPF) [McCanne & Jacobson, 1993], FreeBSD’s packet sniffing
system, is arguably the simplest packet-processing framework provided by the operating system.
BPF provides a uniform user-level interface to all the operating system’s network interfaces,
allowing programs with root privilege to get access to raw packets as they pass by on the
network. Most users do not interact directly with BPF but instead run programs such as
tcpdump that use the packet-capture library, libpcap, to express easily understandable
filtering rules that govern which packets are to be captured. The tcpdump program directs the
BPF pseudo-device to read raw packets from a network device before any network protocols
access them. Being implemented as a pseudo-device means that userspace programs can
interact with BPF via the well-known open, close, read, write, and ioctl interfaces. The device
nodes exposed by BPF are bi-directional, meaning that applications can not only receive packets
but can also inject packets into the network from userspace.

BPF implements a simple high-speed packet-matching engine in software using a synthetic
domain-specific assembly language. Comprising less than 30 instructions, the BPF virtual
machine is general enough to do all the computational tasks of a CPU including fetching and
storing data, mathematical operations, and branching. The simplicity and generality of the BPF
instruction set make it possible to write complex filtering rules, have them compiled and
optimized in userspace, and deliver the final instruction stream into the kernel. Separating the

compilation and execution of BPF programs makes creating extensions easier and minimizes the
amount of work that must be done on each packet during filtering, thereby reducing the
overhead of deciding which packets to capture. One feature that the split between compilation
and execution has made possible is just-in-time (JIT) compilation of filters to native machine
code, which allows the kernel to avoid the overhead of virtual-machine instruction execution
altogether.

For BPF to work when the system is transmitting packets, it must be hooked into each network
driver’s source code. A simple macro, BPF_MTAP, is provided for driver authors to use in their
source code. The purpose of the macro is to take packets, from as near the hardware layer as
possible, and feed them into BPF so that it can determine if the packets are of interest to a
listener in userspace. On packet reception, the BPF_MTAP macro is called from the link-layer
protocols, such as Ethernet. The BPF_MTAP macro is the only interface required by BPF to do
its work. Providing a single macro that is easy to remember and use has made it possible to
convince device-driver authors to include this code when writing software for new hardware.

Internally, the BPF_MTAP macro calls the bpf_mtap() function that contains the calls to the
filtering and copying routines. The heart of the filtering code is in bpf_filter(), that executes the
virtual assembly language to decide whether a packet matches a filter. When a packet matches a
filter, it is copied into a buffer. Aside from data copying, the catchpacket() routine does all the
tasks that are important to packet filtering: figuring out how much of the packet was captured,
determining the length of the packet header, and timestamping the captured packet. How the
packet is copied depends on the function that is passed as an argument to the catchpacket()
routine. Copying packet data is an expensive operation. One optimization uses zero-copy buffers
that combine virtual memory and a shared-memory protocol to share buffers directly between
the kernel and userspace rather than requiring explicit copying. The bpf_append_mbuf()
function      contains   a   two-case     switch     statement    that    calls   out    to   either
bpf_buffer_append_mbuf() or bpf_zerocopy_append_mbuf(). The zero-copy code does a
small bit of extra work to ensure that the buffers used to capture the packet data are reused as
the packet moves toward userspace, reducing the number of times that the packet’s data must
be copied. The bpf_buffer_append_mbuf() code is simpler because it just loops over the packet
data to copy it. However, the act of copying data between buffers is expensive and that is why
the zero-copy code is available. Zero copy is more complex to implement but much faster at run
time.

IP Firewalls

The job of a firewall is to inspect a packet and take an action based on the packet’s contents.
While BPF might copy the same packet to various listeners in userspace, it will neither modify

nor drop the packet along the way. A firewall exists solely to modify or drop packets in transit.
The kernel provides a generic set of hooks for use in implementing firewalls. All firewalls in
FreeBSD are built using pfil, which stands for “packet filter.” Firewalls register filtering
functions with the pfil system, and these functions are executed whenever a packet passes
through a pfil barrier point in the networking modules. The kernel has twenty one barrier points
in the networking code where these functions may be added or removed at run time. Barrier
points include the IPv6 and IPv4 input and output routines discussed in Section 13.4. Providing
a generic packet filtering system in the kernel has enabled various developers to write firewall
software without the need for them to modify the kernel on their own. When new network code
is written, new barrier points are added in the appropriate places such that the firewall authors
can extend their software further in a fully generic manner.

Firewalls register their hooks by calling the pfil_add_hook() routine, specifying the function to
call and whether it should be called for packets that are inbound, outbound, or traveling in
either direction. Once a hook is registered, it is called by pfil_run_hooks() whenever a packet
reaches the barrier. The functions called from the pfil_run_hooks() routine can modify the
mbuf that they are passed, for example, while performing network address translation. If a hook
function returns a nonzero value, then packet processing ends and no other hooks are called.
When a hook function decides to drop a packet, it is responsible for freeing the associated mbuf,
which presents new module authors with the potential for memory leaks. All the firewalls in
FreeBSD are built on top of this simple set of routines.

IPFW and Dummynet

The IP firewall (IPFW) system is both a firewall and generic packet-processing framework that
can be used to manipulate IPv6 and IPv4 packets as they enter and exit the system. A single pfil
hook, ipfw_check_hook(), is responsible for capturing packets from within the IPv6 and IPv4
input and output routines: ip6_input(), ip6_output(), ip6_forward(), ip_input(), ip_output(),
and ip_fastforward(). In each of these functions, a single call to pfil_run_hooks() decides
whether packet processing will continue.

IPFW contains a single central-dispatch function, ipfw_chk(), that decides the fate of all packets
that are passed to it. Packets can be passed through unchanged, copied, diverted, subjected to
network address translation, reassembled for further inspection, sent to dummynet, or dropped.
The action taken on any packet is determined by the return value from the ipfw_chk() routine.
The complete list of return values and their meanings is given in Table 13.9.

Table 13.9 IPFW packet disposition based on ipfw_chk() return value.

The ipfw_chk() routine does its work in two phases. In the first phase, ipfw_chk() dissects the
packet gathering network addresses, the transport-protocol type, source, and destination ports,
and any associated flags into a set of internal variables. The work done by ipfw_chk() is similar
to that done in any of the IPv6 and IPv4 input routines. With the packet’s state properly
dissected, ipfw_chk moves on to phase two, where it decides what to do with the packet. A set of
rules that are controlled at a high level by the administrator of the system dictates what should
be done with the packet. The rules are stored in lists called chains. Each rule contains a set of
opcodes that control the action that should be taken at each position in the packet. A decision is
made about the disposition of the packet when an opcode is reached that terminates packet
processing. Table 13.10 shows the set of opcodes that result in an action being taken with the
packet. The opcodes in IPFW mirror those in BPF.

Table 13.10 IPFW action opcodes.

Using a set of opcodes, rather than hard-coded individual functions, gives IPFW flexibility and
reduces its code size. A single 1200-line loop is responsible for any action that can be taken with
a packet. Having a centralized location for decisions about the disposition of a packet reduces
the complexity of the code and also increases the likelihood that any errant bugs can be found
quickly and repaired. Opcodes in IPFW can have data associated with them. For example, the IP
opcodes all carry an address and a mask that can be used to check whether the packet’s IP
address matches the one in the rule that is currently being executed. A subset of the IP opcodes
is given in Table 13.11.

Table 13.11 IPFW IP opcodes.

Dummynet is a packet-processing framework that provides traffic shaping, packet delay
emulation, and packet scheduling. The original purpose of dummynet was to provide a way to
test network protocols such as TCP that have performance issues when their packet streams are
subjected to variable networking delays or drops. It has grown into being a generic
bandwidth-shaping tool used in various devices often at the edge of the network.

Dummynet passes all traffic through an object called a pipe. A pipe emulates a communication
link driven by a scheduler that arbitrates access for several independent queues. The features of
the pipe are programmable. Features include the pipe’s bandwidth and delay. They also include
the scheduling policy, the number and size of the queues, and the queues relative priorities. The
system permits the dynamic creation of many pipes and queues, and the algorithms used in
dummynet are designed to scale to tens of thousands of pipes and queues without introducing
excessive overhead.

The dummynet system assigns every packet that it touches to a flow. A flow is a set of packets
that match a pre-determined set of criteria, such as having the same destination address and
port number. All packets that are part of a flow are processed similarly. Traffic shaping is carried
out by dropping packets at the network layer as this approach forces protocols such as TCP to
scale back their transmissions and results in a lower offered bandwidth. Dummynet can also
delay packets by holding them in a pipe for a configurable amount of time. It is this delay
property that was originally used for testing TCP in a laboratory environment.

Queues are served by a packet scheduler through one of the available scheduling policies listed
in Table 13.12. The schedulers manage and shape packet flows as they traverse the system.
Schedulers differ in the service guarantees they provide and their packet-processing cost. Better
guarantees for minimum bandwidth or maximum delay require more effort, though
state-of-the-art algorithms such as quick fair queueing (QFQ) perform well [Checconi et al.,

2013]. Dummynet provides three weight-based schedulers. Each scheduler incurs a different
amount of per-packet overhead when processing packets. The weighted round robin (WRR)
scheduler has a constant run time but poor service guarantees, while a variant of weighted fair
queueing (WFQ+) has optimal guarantees and a packet service time logarithmic in the number
of flows. Finally, QFQ, has nearly optimal guarantees and constant processing time per packet.
Other schedulers, including those based on priorities or other criteria, can be implemented as
loadable kernel modules.

Table 13.12 Dummynet schedulers.

Packets are first classified by IPFW or another firewall before being passed into dummynet. As
packets enter dummynet, an mbuf tag is attached to each mbuf via the tag_mbuf() routine. The
mbuf tag contains a reference to the pipe to be used, as well as other metadata that associates
the packet to a flow. The packet is then passed to the dummynet_io() routine that completes the
classification and stores the packet into the correct queue, dropping the packet if the queue is
full. When the link emulated by the pipe is ready to transmit a new packet, the scheduler selects
the queue to serve and extracts a packet from it. Once this work is complete, a timer is set to run
the scheduler again after a time equal to the packet length divided by the pipe’s bandwidth. The
resulting traffic exits the scheduler at exactly the programmed rate. Packets selected by the
scheduler are put into a delay line, a FIFO queue from which packets are removed after a time
equal to the delay associated with the pipe. The dummynet mbuf tag has an output_time field
that tracks the time at which the packet needs to be transmitted. When packets are removed
from the FIFO, they are reinserted into the network stack at the point from which they were
intercepted. Depending on the configuration of the classifier, they may be reclassified and sent
to another pipe.

Dummynet may have many queues and pipes that may need to be served. Thus, dummynet
implements its own timer queue using a priority queue and processes it through a function,
dummynet_task(), that is invoked on every timer tick. Managing its own timer queue provides
scalability at the price of some jitter in the output. The jitter seen in packets delayed by
dummynet is directly related to the clock-tick setting in the kernel. The default tick rate of 1000

(see Section 3.4) will give good results down to 1 millisecond. To achieve finer granularity would
require an increase in the kernel’s tick rate.

Packet Filter (PF)

Although packet filter (PF) provides similar functionality to IPFW, it has a different structure
and implementation. The PF system was originally developed under OpenBSD and then later
ported to FreeBSD, where it has remained popular for building firewalls and network address
translators. Like IPFW, PF uses pfil hooks to capture packets for examination. PF adds a hook in
each of the inbound and outbound directions for both IPv4 and IPv6. The pf_check_in(),
pf_check_out(), pf_check6_in(), and pf_check6_out() routines are the starting points for any
packet filtering carried out by PF.

The purpose of a firewall is to decide whether to drop a packet. PF has two enumerated values,
PF_PASS and PF_DROP, that control whether a packet will be allowed through a firewall. In
addition to the enumerated values that determine whether a packet is passed or dropped, PF
also uses a set of reason codes that explain the final disposition of the packet. The reason codes
are listed in Table 13.13.

Table 13.13 PF reason codes.

When a packet enters the system, it is subjected to a series of tests starting in the pf_test()
routine. Each of the test routines does some amount of work to dissect or reassemble the packet
before passing it along to a higher-layer protocol test. The process of validating a packet
proceeds in two phases. The first phase is called normalization and is where the contents are
compared against rules set by the administrator. The IPv4, IPv6, and TCP protocols each have
their   own     normalization     routine:    pf_normalize_ip(),      pf_normalize_ip6(),     and
pf_normalize_tcp() respectively. All the rules in PF are stored in pf_rule structures that are
linked together in a queue.

The second phase of packet processing happens after the packet has been normalized and
subjected to any matching rules. The pf_test() routine dissects the IP header of the packet into a
pf_desc descriptor structure. The pf_desc structure holds the state of the packet in a convenient
form for the rest of the test routines. IP packets are demultiplexed in the pf_test() routine in
much the same way that they are in ip_input(), except without the flexibility of the inetsw
protocol switch. Instead of a lookup table, packets are passed directly into predetermined test
functions based on their protocol type. Each transport-layer protocol, TCP, UDP, and ICMP is
handled by a matching pf_test() routine: pf_test_state_tcp(), pf_test_state_udp(), and
pf_test_state_icmp(). The test routines also handle all protocol specific state tracking.

Netgraph

The netgraph subsystem was designed to provide an easy way to develop new network protocols
in the FreeBSD kernel and was first released as part of FreeBSD 3. Since its addition to the
operating system, netgraph has been used to implement several protocols including the
point-to-point protocol (PPP), the asynchronous-transfer mode protocol (ATM), and Bluetooth.

The core idea behind netgraph is that network protocols can be built around a data-flow model.
In a data-flow model, packets flow between software modules, each of which does some small
amount of work on the packet before passing it on to the next module. In netgraph the modules
are referred to as nodes and the edges that connect the nodes are called hooks. The data flows
across the set of hooks between the nodes of the graph. Nodes can be connected somewhat
arbitrarily, although they may impose certain limitations on the number of connections they are
willing to accept. Encapsulating the processing of packets into sufficiently fine-grained nodes
can allow for greater software reuse than in a more monolithic design. A simple set of nodes can
more easily be built up into a complex protocol in an experimental plug-and-play scenario
similar to a set of childrens building blocks. A data-flow model also allows the possibility of
adding or removing processing elements at run time—for example, when a protocol needs to
attempt different types of encryption to establish a network connection with a peer. The

different types of encryption can be encapsulated as nodes and then added and removed from
the data path as needed at run time.

Nodes not only pass network packets across their hooks, but also respond to a set of control
messages defined by each node. A node is configured using control messages. It can also expose
counters and statistics to user-level programs via the control-message interface. Having a
well-defined set of APIs both for packet processing and configuration allows the programmer to
build a system that looks more like a traditional network router, with both a data plane and a
control plane. In netgraph, the data plane is where network packets pass along the hooks
between the nodes. The control plane is the set of messages that configures the nodes.

Netgraph, with its nodes and hooks, is an object-oriented design, where the nodes are objects
and the hooks are methods. The object-oriented approach used by netgraph has advantages
similar to other systems that create complex protocols out of smaller blocks, including
STREAMS [Ritchie, 1984] and The Click Modular Router framework [Kohler et al., 2000].
There are more than 50 netgraph nodes available as part of FreeBSD, ranging from the simple
ng_echo node that echos back every packet it receives, to those nodes that provide whole
protocols such as PPP, ATM, and Bluetooth.

To build anything with netgraph, a set of nodes must be selected that are useful to implementing
a protocol. The nodes are connected via their hooks into a graph. There are two main data
structures used by netgraph, the ng_node and ng_hook. Every node in the graph maintains
some basic information about itself, including a globally-unique name and details on how it is
connected to other nodes. Each node also has a type, reference count, a set of flags, and a private
data area in which the node can maintain statistics and internal state.

Nodes exist simultaneously on several lists in the system, including the global list of all nodes
and the list of nodes for which there is work to do. The global list of all nodes tracks down a
node when the user wants to send it a control message.

Each node exposes a set of functions via a function pointer table. Most nodes are written as
loadable kernel modules (see Section 15.3). The functions exposed by the node relate to the
different stages in a node’s existence. When a node is activated, it is loaded as a module,
initialized, and hooked to other nodes. While active, it receives and processes messages. When
deactivated, it is disconnected from the rest of the nodes in the system and shutdown.

When the node is initialized, its ng_constructor_t() function is called to do any housekeeping
chores required before the node can be used. When node A connects to a hook on node B, node
B’s ng_newhook_t() function is called. When a node is shut down, first the ng_close_t() and

then the ng_shutdown_t() functions will be called. Control messages are received by the
ng_rcvmsg_t() function while data arrives via the ng_rcvdata_t() entry point.

Each node has a set of associated hooks that dictate how the nodes are connected. The way in
which nodes are connected defines how packets will be processed by the graph and represents
the protocol being implemented. Hooks, like nodes, have textual names. Each hook is a
first-class object in the system, and has its own type, flags, references, and private data. Hooks
commonly record statistics about the data that cross them in their private-data area.

A simple example helps to understand how netgraph works. The example shown in Figure 13.25
uses two node types to build a simple network bridge. One is an Ethernet node, ng_ether, one of
which is attached to each Ethernet interface in the system when the ng_ether module is loaded.
The other is a bridge node, ng_bridge, that connects multiple Ethernet interfaces.

Figure 13.25 A simple network bridge.

A bridge operates at a lower level than the Internet protocols, covered in Section 13.4, taking any
Ethernet packet that arrives on one interface and forwarding it to one or more other interfaces.
Network-layer protocols such as IPv4 and IPv6 are at a higher layer than Ethernet and do not
come into play here. Packets are forwarded independent of their IPv4 or IPv6 addresses.

Our example bridge contains only two interfaces, cxgbe0 and cxgbe1. Every packet received on
cxgbe0 is sent unchanged out of cxgbe1 and every packet received on cxgbe1 is sent out of
cxgbe0. The bridge shown in Figure 13.25 is made up of three nodes. Each network interface is
represented by its own ng_ether node, and the ng_bridge node ties them together. The
ng_ether node has two hooks, upper() and lower() to which other nodes connect. The lower()
hook is where all Ethernet packets received by the underlying interface appear for consumption
by other nodes. Packets sent to the upper() hook are passed up into the network stack. When an
ng_ether node is first initialized, its upper() and lower() hooks are connected so that packets
flow from the underlying interface into the network stack.

To create a bridge, we must connect to the ng_ether node’s lower() hook so that all the packets
received on the underlying interface are sent to our bridge node and not into the network stack.

The ng_bridge node has a set of numbered link hooks that can be connected to the ng_ether
node’s lower() hooks.

Like all    netgraph    nodes, the     ng_bridge    node exposes      a set of     functions. The
ng_bridge_newhook() function is concerned with getting the name of the hook right. The code
that does the work of passing packets is implemented in the node’s ng_bridge_rcvdata()
function.

When the ng_bridge node receives a packet, it must make several checks before deciding what
to do with it. One of the more complex aspects of bridging a broadcast network like Ethernet is
detecting when a loop has occurred. Loops can happen for several reasons, such as
misconfiguration when adding new computers to the network or a piece of network equipment
being damaged. If the network develops a loop, then packets can wind up being forwarded
forever across a pair of interfaces, effectively destroying that segment of the network. To detect a
loop, the system must record the link being used by each host based on the host’s link-layer
(Ethernet) source address. The system detects a loop when it observes a host using more than
one link in a short period of time. When a loop is detected, the system outputs an error, drops
the packet, and briefly turns the link off.

The first time the ng_bridge node sees a packet from a host, the loop detection code inserts an
entry for the new host in the bridge’s host table. The host table is implemented as a hash table
indexed on the host’s link-layer source address. The host’s source address is stored as well as the
link on which it is first seen by the ng_bridge node. On each subsequent reception of a packet
from the same host, the packet will be found in the node’s host table. After a host is looked up in
the table, the code does the loop check. If the link on which this packet was received is not the
same as the one stored in the host table, the system checks the age of this host’s entry against
the allowed minimum stable age for a host (one second). If a host has moved links in less than a
second, the system considers the host to be in a loop condition. When a loop condition is
detected, the offending link is disabled and all the hosts on the link are dropped from the link’s
tables. Links do not remain in a loop state forever. They are returned to a normal state by a
timeout routine that is called once per second to do various house keeping duties for the
ng_bridge node.

Netgraph nodes not only pass packets along their hooks, but they also respond to a set of control
messages defined by the node. A small set of control messages are defined by the base class of
netgraph. The basic messages are required to have minimal control over the nodes and include
messages to instantiate, connect, control and shutdown the nodes. The set of base messages is
shown in Table 13.14.

Table 13.14 Netgraph base messages.

The ng_bridge nodes receive control messages on their rcvmsg() function. The receive-message
function of a node looks much like an ioctl() routine in a network driver. The
ng_bridge_rcvmsg() function takes an item_p structure and converts it into a message using
the NGI_GET_MSG macro. The function knows nothing of the internals of the item_p structure,
because it only knows how to interpret messages. The receive-message function decodes the
message via a switch statement. Control messages in netgraph are encapsulated into a
ng_mesghdr structure:

struct ng_msghdr {
  u_char   version;        /* NGM_VERSION number */
  u_char   spare;         /* pad to 4 bytes */
  u_int16_t spare2;
  u_int32_t arglen;         /* length of data */
  u_int32_t cmd;            /* command identifier */
  u_int32_t flags;         /* message status */
  u_int32_t token;          /* match with reply */
  u_int32_t typecookie;         /* node's type cookie */

  u_char     cmdstr[NG_CMDSTRSIZ]; /* cmd string + NULL */
} header;

All ng_mesghdr structures contain a generic header that describes the message being sent. Each
node must decode the message to take the action that the message is requesting. While the
header is standardized, the arbitrary node-specific data is contained in the data section
following the header.

Every netgraph message header contains two pieces of information needed for a node to decode
a message, the typecookie and the cmd. The typecookie is opaque data that identifies the type of
node to which the message is being sent. Each node has its own typecookie and this typecookie
is the first piece of data that is checked in processing an incoming control message. If the
typecookie does not match that of the node trying to decode the message, then the message is
invalid and an error is returned.

Once the ng_bridge_recvmsg() function has established that the message is for its consumption,
it decodes the command by looking at the cmd element of the ng_mesg structure. The choice of
messages is determined by the implementer of the node, but most nodes provide messages for
getting and setting the node configuration, retrieving and clearing statistics, and resetting the
node. Netgraph contains many convenience macros, such as NG_MKRESPONSE, to facilitate
building nodes without programmers needing to concern themselves with the internals of the
framework.

Netmap

The advent of networks and network interfaces that are capable of sustaining speeds of 1 and 10
gigabits per second has meant that the performance of some networking applications such as
routers, switches, firewalls, and intrusion detection systems is limited by the amount of data
that can be copied between the network interface and the user-level code that intends to operate
on the packets. Several approaches avoid the overhead of copying data into userspace by
running network applications in the kernel or bypassing the kernel completely and giving the
application direct access to the underlying network interface. Each of these approaches has its
drawbacks, including loss of generality, loss of virtual-memory protection, and higher
maintenance costs. The netmap framework [Rizzo, 2012] provides a uniform userspace API for
applications that require high-speed access to raw-packet data. Unlike a network protocol, the
netmap framework does not process the packets in any way other than to make them available
to userspace applications.

Applications using the netmap framework gain direct access to a network interface’s packet
rings. Packet rings were first described in Section 8.5 where the network-interface data
structures are discussed. Each network device has one or more pairs of ring structures that point
to memory buffers for receiving or transmitting packets. The rings normally pass packets into
and out of the operating system’s networking protocols. When an application starts using a
network interface via netmap, the rings are mapped to a region of memory that is shared by
both the application and the network interface. Packets that are received on the network
interface continue to be placed by the device’s DMA engine into the receive ring. Packets that
the application wishes to transmit are placed into buffers referenced by the transmit ring.
Proper synchronization between the kernel and userspace is maintained via the system-call
interface with calls to request packet transmission and to be notified of packet reception. Data
structure consistency is maintained because the kernel only manipulates the application’s
buffers while the application is blocked in a system call.

When an application wishes to use the netmap framework, it calls open on a special device,
/dev/netmap. The file descriptor returned by the open call is used for all subsequent
communication with the framework. Applications using netmap associate themselves with a
particular interface by issuing an ioctl call with the NIOCREGIF command, passing in the
textual name of the interface as the last argument to the system call. When an application
registers for access to a network interface, the kernel disconnects the device’s rings from the
networking subsystems and makes them available to the application. Disconnecting the rings
from the networking subsystems has the effect of stopping all traffic into and out of the normal
networking protocols. The netmap framework has one pair of software-based packet rings that
remain connected to the operating system’s network stack and can be used by an application to
pass packets into, and receive packets from, the operating system. An application using netmap
can choose to process some packets but allow others to pass into the kernel’s general networking
framework. Packets pass into the kernel when the application receives packets from one of the
hardware rings and places them into the software rings that are connected to the kernel. The
application allows packets to flow out from the host network stack by taking packets from the
software ring connected to the kernel and transmitting them on one of the hardware rings.
Alternatively, an application can choose to process all the packets itself, thus preventing any
packets from passing into the kernel’s general networking framework. When a netmap
application is using the device, any other program accessing the same network device through
the socket API will no longer be able to receive or transmit packets on the interface, unless the
application using the netmap framework allows packets to flow back into the kernel’s general
network framework.

An application using the netmap framework is responsible for updating and tracking the
changes it has made to the receive and transmit rings. Figure 13.26 shows three steps taken
when a netmap receive ring is updated by a userspace program:

1. The userspace program pointers shown after a netmap ring has been set up. The slots in the
ring between the “head” pointer and the “tail” pointer, minus a slot, contain packets received by
the device that have been passed to the userspace program. The userspace program processes
packets and advances the “head” pointer past the slots that it is ready to return to the kernel.
The “cur” pointer may be moved ahead of the “head” pointer if the program wants to wait for
more packets without returning all the previous slots to the kernel.

Figure 13.26 Netmap receive-ring processing. Key: *—slot with undefined contents; h—slot
held by the userspace program; R—packet ready for reception.

2. The program has read one packet from the ring and has updated the “head” and “cur”
pointers. The kernel does not yet know that the userspace program has read any packets, and so
its nr_hwcur pointer has not been updated. The device driver will update the nr_hwavail
counter as packets arrive in the ring.

3. The userspace program has called the ioctl system call with the NIOCRXSYNC command to
notify the kernel of its new “head” pointer and to be notified by the kernel of the updated “tail”
pointer position. The NIOCRXSYNC command does not read the packets into the userspace
program but simply synchronizes the locations of the userspace program’s pointers.

Writing packets to the ring is the opposite of reading them. Figure 13.27 shows three steps of a
userspace program transmitting packets:

1. The slots between the “head” pointer and the “tail” pointer, minus one, that are available for
transmission.

2. The program has filled two slots and advanced the “head” and “cur” pointers past the slots
that are ready for transmission. The “cur” pointer may be moved further ahead if the program
needs more slots before further transmissions.

3. The transmit ring following a NIOCTXSYNC command, which both notified the kernel of the
data to send and updated the userspace program’s pointers. The slots up to the “head” pointer,
minus one, have been handed to the device for transmission, and the “tail” pointer has been
advanced because more slots have become available.

Figure 13.27 Netmap transmit-ring processing. Key: *—slot with undefined contents;
a—available to place a packet; T—packet ready to transmit.

Netmap file descriptors support the same actions available via the ioctl system call using the
select, poll, and kevent system calls. These system calls rely on the polling framework or
interrupts to wake up the threads blocked on the system calls. The interrupt service routine does
not do any data processing. All accesses to the data occur in the context of the userspace
program. The netmap framework is not limited to accessing network interfaces. The same
functions can be used to access ports of the VALE virtual switch and dummynet pipes.

Exercises

13.1 Name two key data structures used in the networking subsystem that are important in
ensuring that the socket-layer software is kept independent of the networking implementation.

13.2 Which routines in the protocol switch are called by the socket layer? Explain why each of
these routines is called.

13.3 Assume that a reliably-delivered-message socket (SOCK_RDM) is a connectionless socket
that guarantees reliable delivery of data and that preserves message boundaries. Which flags
would a protocol that supported this type of socket have set in the pr_flags field of its
protocol-switch entry?

13.4 Why is the name or address of a socket kept at the network layer rather than at the socket
layer?

13.5 Why does FreeBSD not attempt to enforce a rigid protocol–protocol interface structure?

13.6 How does IPv4 identify the next-higher-level protocol that should process an incoming
message? How might this dispatching differ in other networking architectures?

13.7 How many hosts can exist in an IPv4 subnet with a mask of 255.255.255.0?

13.8 What is a broadcast message? How are broadcast messages identified in IPv4? How are
IPv6 broadcast messages identified?

13.9 Why does FreeBSD not forward broadcast messages?

13.10 Describe three ways in which IPv6 differs from IPv4.

13.11 In IPv6, what protocol replaces ARP for translating IP addresses to hardware addresses?

13.12 What does the networking code use the network mask, or prefix, of a link to determine?

13.13 What limitation of ARP does neighbor discovery overcome? How does it overcome this
limitation?

13.14 Which routing policies are implemented in the kernel?

13.15 Describe three types of routes that can be found in the routing table that differ by the type
of destination to which they apply.

13.16 What routing facility is designed mainly to support workstations?

13.17 What is a routing redirect? For what is it used?

13.18 Why are there separate protocols for authentication and encryption in IPSec?

13.19 Why is the cryptographic subsystem implemented using two queues and two kernel
threads?

13.20 How is the protection offered to packets by IPSec different in tunnel mode and transport
mode?

13.21 Name three different packet filtering systems included in FreeBSD. Which of the three
filtering systems you choose is at the lowest layer of the networking subsystem?

13.22 What effect does the kernel’s tick rate have on the packet-delay jitter in dummynet?

13.23 How are packets passed between nodes in the netgraph system?

13.24 Why are there no locks used between the kernel and userspace in the netmap system?

*13.25 Previous versions of FreeBSD stored ARP entries in the routing table. Give two reasons
why moving the ARP entries to their own table was an improvement over the previous
implementation.

*13.26 Why might a sender set the Don’t Fra gment flag in the header of an IP packet?

*13.27 What are three differences between how pf and ipfw filter packets?

*13.28 Explain why it is impossible to use the raw-socket interface to support parallel-protocol
implementations—some in the kernel and some in user mode. What modifications to the system
would be necessary to support this facility?

*13.29 Previous versions of the system used a hashed routing lookup for a destination as a host
or as a network. Name two ways in which the radix search algorithm in FreeBSD is more
capable.

*13.30 Compare the packet-processing overhead of BPF and netmap. Which is faster for
receiving packets and why?

**13.31 What are the trade-offs between frequent and infrequent transmission of router
advertisements in IPv6?

**13.32 Describe three paths that a packet can take through the networking code. How and
where is each path chosen?

**13.33 Since IPSec may call routines in the network stack recursively, what requirement does
this recursion place on the code?

**13.34 Support for multiple independent network stacks was added with the VIMAGE
subsystem. Without using the linker-set support used in the current implementation, describe

two other ways to provide similar support for independent stacks sharing a single kernel code
image. What are the tradeoffs made for each choice?

References

Cain et al., 2002.

B. Cain, S. Deering, I. Kouvelas, B. Fenner, & A. Thyagarajan, “Internet Group Management
Protocol, Version 3,” RFC 3376, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc3376.html, October
2002.

Checconi et al., 2013.

F. Checconi, L. Rizzo, & P. Valente, “QFQ: Efficient Packet Scheduling with Tight Guarantees,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 21, no. 3, June 2013.

Conta et al., 2006.

A. Conta, S. Deering, & M. Gupta, “Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMPv6) for the Internet
Protocol     Version     6    (IPv6)     Specification,”     RFC     4443,       available    from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc4443.html, March 2006.

DARPA, 1983.

DARPA, “A History of the ARPANET: The First Decade,” Technical Report, Bolt, Beranek, and
Newman, Cambridge, MA, April 1983.

Deering, 1989.

S.   Deering,    “Host   Extensions    for   IP   Multicasting,”   RFC   1112,    available   from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1112.html, August 1989.

Deering & Hinden, 1998.

S. Deering & R. Hinden, “Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6),” RFC 2460, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2460.html, December 1998.

Deering & Hinden, 2006.

S. Deering & R. Hinden, “IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture,” RFC 4291, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc4291.html, February 2006.

Fuller et al., 1993.

V. Fuller, T. Li, J. Yu, & K. Varadhan, “Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR): An Address
Assignment        and        Aggregation    Strategy,”         RFC        1519,      available    from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1519.html, September 1993.

Gilligan et al., 1999.

G. Gilligan, S. Thomson, J. Bound, & W. Stevens, “Basic Socket Interface Extensions for IPv6,”
RFC 2553, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2553.html, March 1999.

Gross & Almquist, 1992.

P. Gross & P. Almquist, “IESG Deliberations on Routing and Addressing,” RFC 1380, available
from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1380.html, November 1992.

Harkins & Carrel, 1998.

D. Harkins & D. Carrel, “The Internet Key Exchange (IKE),” RFC 2409, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2409.html, November 1998.

Hedrick, 1988.

C.    Hedrick,         “Routing   Information     Protocol,”     RFC        1058,     available   from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1058.html, June 1988.

Ishiguro, 2003.

K. Ishiguro, Quagga, available from www.quagga.net, August 2003.

ISO, 1984.

ISO, “Open Systems Interconnection: Basic Reference Model,” ISO 7498, International
Organization for Standardization, available from the American National Standards Institute,
1430 Broadway, New York, NY 10018, 1984.

KAME, 2003.

KAME,            Overview           of          KAME           Project,           available       from
http://www.kame.net/project-overview.html#overview, December 2003.

Kent & Atkinson, 1998a.

S. Kent & R. Atkinson, “Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol,” RFC 2401, available
from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2401.html, November 1998.

Kent & Atkinson, 1998b.

S. Kent &      R.      Atkinson, “IP   Authentication      Header,”     RFC 2402,      available   from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2402.html, November 1998.

Kent & Atkinson, 1998c.

S. Kent & R. Atkinson, “IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP),” RFC 2406, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2406.html, November 1998.

Kohler et al., 2000.

E. Kohler, R. Morris, B. Chen, J. Jannotti, & M. Kaashoek, “The click modular router,” ACM
Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 263–297, May 2000.

McCanne & Jacobson, 1993.

S. McCanne & V. Jacobson, “The BSD packet filter: A new architecture for user-level packet
capture,” Proceedings of the USENIX Winter 1993 Conference, pp. 259–269, January 1993.

McDonald et al., 1998.

D. McDonald, C. Metz, & B. Phan, “PF_KEY Key Management API, Version 2,” RFC 2367,
available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2367.html, July 1998.

McQuillan & Walden, 1977.

J. M. McQuillan & D. C. Walden, “The ARPA Network Design Decisions,” Computer Networks,
vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 243–289, August 1977.

Mogul, 1984.

J.   Mogul,        “Broadcasting    Internet     Datagrams,”          RFC    919,     available    from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc919.html, October 1984.

Mogul & Deering, 1990.

J.   Mogul     &    S.   Deering,   “Path      MTU      Discovery,”    RFC    1191,   available    from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1191.html, November 1990.

Mogul & Postel, 1985.

J. Mogul & J. Postel, “Internet Standard Subnetting Procedure,” RFC 950, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc950.html, August 1985.

Narten et al., 2007.

T. Narten, E. Nordmark, W. Simpson, & H. Soliman, “Neighbor Discovery for IP Version 6
(IPv6),” RFC 4861, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc4861.html, September 2007.

Nesser, 1996.

P. Nesser, “An Appeal to the Internet Community to Return Unused IP Networks (Prefixes) to
the IANA,” RFC 1917, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1917.html, February 1996.

Plummer, 1982.

D. Plummer, “An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol,” RFC 826, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc826.html, November 1982.

Postel, 1980.

J.    Postel,       “User     Datagram      Protocol,”          RFC     768,       available    from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc768.html, August 1980.

Postel, 1981a.

J. Postel, “Internet Protocol,” RFC 791, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc791.html,
September 1981.

Postel, 1981b.

J.   Postel,     “Internet   Control    Message         Protocol,”    RFC   792,    available   from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc792.html, September 1981.

Ritchie, 1984.

D. Ritchie, “A Stream Input-Output System,” AT&T Bell Laboratories Technical Journal, vol. 63,
no. 8-2, pp. 1897–1910, October 1984.

Rizzo, 2012.

L. Rizzo, “netmap: A Novel Framework for Fast Packet I/O,” USENIX Annual Technical
Conference, pp. 101–112, June 2012.

Sakane, 2001.

S.   Sakane,     Simple    Configuration    Sample       of    IPsec/Racoon,    available   from
http://www.kame.net/newsletter/20001119, September 2001.

Sedgewick, 1990.

R. Sedgewick, Algorithms in C, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1990.

Simpson, 1995.

W.     Simpson,      “IP     in    IP      Tunneling,”        RFC    1853,     available    from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1853.html, October 1995.

Sklower, 1991.

K. Sklower, “A Tree-Based Packet Routing Table for Berkeley UNIX,” USENIX Association
Conference Proceedings, pp. 93–99, January 1991.

Thaler & Hopps, 2000.

D. Thaler & C. Hopps, “Multipath Issues in Unicast and Multicast Next-Hop Selection,” RFC
2991, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2991.html, November 2000.

Thomson & Huitema, 1995.

S. Thomson & C. Huitema, “DNS Extensions to Support IP Version 6,” RFC 1886, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1886.html, December 1995.

