              Chapter 14. Transport-Layer Protocols

Chapter 13 covers network-layer protocols that are responsible for moving individual datagrams
across the Internet. This chapter moves up a layer in the network stack to discuss protocols that
handle end-to-end data movement. Unlike the network-layer protocols, IPv4 and IPv6,
transport-layer protocols have no knowledge of intermediate systems such as routers. They only
have knowledge of endpoints within the network, the senders and receivers of data.

The protocols at the network layer present data to applications as either individual messages or
streams of bytes. The UDP protocol handles data in discrete messages. The TCP protocol
handles data as streams of bytes. The SCTP protocol handles multiple streams of both data and
discrete messages.

14.1 Internet Ports and Associations

At the network layer, packets are addressed to a host rather than to a process or
communications port. As each packet arrives, its 8-bit protocol number identifies the
transport-layer protocol that should receive it. Thus, packets identified as IPv4 are passed to
ip_input(), while packets identified as IPv6 are passed to ip6_input().

Internet transport protocols use an additional identifier to designate the connection or
communications port on the host. Most protocols (including SCTP, TCP, and UDP) use a 16-bit
port number. Each transport protocol maintains its own mapping of port numbers to processes
or descriptors. Thus, an association, such as a connection, is fully specified by its transport
protocol and 4-tuple <source address, destination address, source port, destination port>.
When the local part of the address is set before the remote part, it is necessary to choose a
unique port number to prevent collisions when the remote part is specified. For example, two
applications on the same host might create a connection to the same service on a remote host,
such as a Web server. The port number used to contact the remote system is the well-known
web-port 80. For packets traveling from the server back to the applications to correctly reach
the right socket, they must have an unambiguous port number at the originating host. When a
connection is opened, FreeBSD picks an unused source port that is used for the duration of the
connection, which ensures that the 4-tuple of all connections is unique.

Protocol Control Blocks

For each TCP- or UDP-based socket, a protocol control block (PCB) stored in an inpcb structure
is created to hold network addresses, port numbers, routing information, and pointers to any
auxiliary data structures. TCP creates a TCP control block stored in a tcpcb structure to hold the
wealth of protocol state information necessary for its implementation. Internet control blocks
for use with TCP are maintained in a hash table of doubly linked lists private to the TCP protocol
module. Figure 14.1 shows the linkage between the socket data structure and these
protocol-specific data structures.

Figure 14.1 Internet-protocol data structures.

Internet control blocks for use with UDP are kept in a similar table private to the UDP protocol
module. Two separate tables are needed because each protocol in the Internet domain has a
distinct space of port identifiers. Common routines are used by the individual protocols to add
new control blocks to a table, record the local and remote parts of an association, locate a
control block by association, and delete control blocks. IP demultiplexes message traffic based

on the protocol identifier specified in the protocol header, and each higher-level protocol is then
responsible for checking its table of control blocks to direct a message to the appropriate socket.

14.2 User Datagram Protocol (UDP)

The user datagram protocol (UDP) [Postel, 1980] is a simple, unreliable datagram protocol
that provides both peer-to-peer and multicast addressing with optional data checksums. In
FreeBSD, checksums are enabled or disabled on a systemwide basis and cannot be enabled or
disabled on individual sockets. UDP protocol headers are extremely simple, containing only the
source and destination port numbers, the datagram length, and the data checksum. The host
addresses for a datagram are provided by the IP header.

Initialization

When a new datagram socket is created, the socket layer locates the protocol-switch entry for
UDP and calls the udp_attach() routine with the socket as a parameter. UDP uses in_pcballoc()
to create a new protocol control block in its table of current sockets. It also sets the default limits
for the socket send and receive buffers. Although datagrams are never placed in the send buffer,
the limit is set as an upper limit on datagram size; the UDP protocol-switch entry contains the
flag PR_ATOMIC, requiring that all data in a send operation be presented to the protocol at one
time.

If the application program wishes to bind a port number—for example, the well-known port for
some datagram service—it calls the bind system call. This request reaches UDP as a call to the
udp_bind() routine. The binding may also specify a specific host address, which must be an
address of an interface on this host. Otherwise, the address will be left unspecified, matching
any local address on input, and with an address chosen as appropriate on each output operation.
The binding is done by in_pcbbind(), which verifies that the chosen port number (or address
and port) is not in use and then records the local part of the association in the socket’s
associated PCB.

To send datagrams, the system must know the remote part of an association. A program can
specify this address and port with each send operation using sendto or sendmsg, or it can do the
specification ahead of time with the connect system call. In either case, UDP uses the
in_pcbconnect() function to record the destination address and port. If the local address was
not bound, and if a route for the destination is found, the address of the outgoing interface is
used as the local address. If no local port number was bound, one is chosen at the time of the
send.

Output

A system call that sends data reaches UDP as a call to the udp_send() routine, which takes a
chain of mbufs containing the data for the datagram. If the call provided a destination address,
the address is passed as well; otherwise, the address from a prior connect call is used. The actual
output operation is done by udp_output():

static int udp_output(
  struct inpcb *inp,
  struct mbuf *msg,
  struct mbuf *addr,
  struct mbuf *control,
  struct thread *td);

In this interface, inp is an IPv4 protocol control block, msg is a chain of mbufs that contain the
data to be sent, and addr is an optional mbuf containing the destination address. The
destination address could have been prespecified with a connect call; otherwise, it must be
provided in the send call. The control argument is meant to contain ancillary data that can be
passed to the protocol. The only allowable ancillary data for a UDP packet is a network-layer
source address, which udp_output() passes to the lower layer as a sockaddr_in structure. The td
argument is a pointer to a thread structure. Thread structures are discussed in Section 4.2 and
are used within the network stack to identify the sender of a packet. UDP simply prepends its
own header, fills in the UDP header fields and those of a prototype IP header, and calculates a
checksum before passing the packet on to the IP module for output.

Input

All transport protocols that are layered directly on top of network-layer protocols such as IPv4
and IPv6 use the following calling convention when receiving packets from either protocol:

(void) (*pr_input)(
  struct mbuf *m,
  int off);

Each mbuf chain passed is a single complete packet to be processed by the protocol module. The
packet includes the IP header at the front of the packet. The off parameter identifies offset at
which the UDP packet begins, which is the length of the IP header. The UDP input routine
udp_input() is typical of protocol input routines in that it first verifies that the length of the
packet is at least as long as the IP plus UDP headers, and it uses m_pullup() to make the header

contiguous. The udp_input() routine then checks that the packet is the correct length and
calculates a checksum for the data in the packet. If any of these tests fail, the packet is discarded
and the UDP error count is incremented. Finally, the protocol control block for the socket that is
to receive the data is located by in_pcblookup() using the addresses and port numbers in the
packet. There might be multiple control blocks with the same local port number but different
local or remote addresses; if so, the control block with the best match is selected. An exact
association matches best, but if none exists, a socket with the correct local port number but
unspecified local address, remote port number, or remote address will match. A control block
with unspecified local or remote addresses thus acts as a wildcard that receives packets for its
port if no exact match is found. If a control block is located, the data and the address from which
the packet was received are placed in the receive buffer of the indicated socket with
udp_append(). If the destination address is a multicast address, copies of the packet are
delivered to each socket with a matching address. If no receiver is found and if the packet was
not addressed to a broadcast or multicast address, an ICMP port unreachable error message is
sent to the originator of the datagram. The port unreachable error message normally has no
effect, as the sender typically connects to this destination only temporarily, and the kernel
destroys the association before new input is processed. However, if the sender still has a fully
specified association, it may receive notification of the error.

Control Operations

UDP supports no control operations and passes calls to its pr_ctloutput() entry directly to IP. It
has a simple pr_ctlinput() routine that receives notification of any asynchronous errors. Errors
are passed to any datagram socket with the indicated destination; only sockets with a
destination fixed by a connect call may be notified of errors asynchronously. Such errors are
simply noted in the appropriate socket, and socket wakeups are issued if the process is selecting
or sleeping while waiting for input.

When a UDP datagram socket is closed, the udp_detach() routine is called. The protocol control
block and its contents are simply deleted with in_pcbdetach(); no other processing is required.

14.3 Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)

The most used protocol of the Internet protocol suite is the Transmission Control Protocol
(TCP) [Cerf & Kahn, 1974; Postel, 1981]. TCP is a reliable connection-oriented stream-transport
protocol on top of which many application protocols are layered. It includes several features not
found in the other transport and network protocols described so far:

• Explicit and acknowledged connection initiation and termination

• Reliable, in-order, unduplicated delivery of data

• Flow control

• Out-of-band indication of urgent data

• Congestion avoidance and control

These features result in the TCP implementation being significantly more complicated than
those for UDP and IP. These complications, along with the prevalence of the use of TCP, make
the details of TCP’s implementation more critical and more complex than the implementations
of the simpler protocols.

A TCP connection is a bidirectional, sequenced stream of data transferred between two peers.
The data may be transported in packets of varying sizes and at varying intervals—for example,
when they support a login session over the network. The stream initiation and termination are
explicit events at the start and end of the stream, and they occupy positions in the sequence
space of the stream so that they can be acknowledged in the same way as data are. Sequence
numbers are 32-bit numbers from a circular space; that is, comparisons are made modulo 232,
so zero is the next sequence number after 232 - 1. The sequence numbers for each direction start
with an arbitrary value, called the initial sequence number, sent in the initial packet for a
connection. Following Bellovin [1996], the TCP implementation selects the initial sequence
number by computing a function over the 4-tuple local port, foreign port, local address, and
foreign address that uniquely identifies the connection, and then adding a small offset based on
the current time. The Bellovin algorithm prevents the spoofing of TCP connections by an
attacker guessing the next initial sequence number for a connection, and the algorithm must be
carried out while also guaranteeing that an old duplicate packet will not match the sequence
space of a current connection.

Each packet of a TCP connection carries the sequence number of its first byte and (except during
connection establishment) an acknowledgment of all contiguous data received thus far. A TCP
packet is known as a segment because it begins at a specific location in the sequence space and
has a specific length. Acknowledgments are specified as the sequence number of the next byte
not yet received. Acknowledgments are cumulative and thus may acknowledge data received in
more than one (or part of one) segment. A packet may or may not contain data, but it always
contains the sequence number of the next datum to be sent.

Flow control in TCP is done with a sliding-window scheme. Each packet with an
acknowledgment contains a window advertisement, which is the number of bytes of data that
the receiver is prepared to accept, beginning with the sequence number in the acknowledgment.

The window is a 16-bit field, limiting the window to 64 Kbyte by default; however, the use of a
larger window may be negotiated. Urgent data are handled similarly; if the flag indicating
urgent data is set, the urgent-data pointer is used as a positive offset from the sequence number
of the packet to indicate the extent of urgent data. Thus, TCP can send notification of urgent
data without sending all intervening data, even if the flow-control window would not allow the
intervening data to be sent.

The complete header for a TCP packet is shown in Figure 14.2. The flags include SYN and FIN,
denoting the initiation (synchronization) and completion of a connection. Each of these flags
occupies a sequence space of one. A complete connection thus consists of a SYN, zero or more
bytes of data, and a FIN sent from each peer and acknowledged by the other peer. Additional
flags indicate whether the acknowledgment field (ACK) and urgent fields (URG) are valid, a flag
to request that data be pushed (flushed) to the user (PSH), and include a connection-abort
signal (RST). Options are encoded in the same way as are IP options, either as a single byte or as
a type, length, and value. Only the no-operation and end-of-options options are single bytes. The
initial specification of TCP defined only one other option, which allows hosts to exchange the
maximum segment (packet) size that they are willing to accept and is used only during initial
connection establishment. Several other options have been defined and, to avoid confusion, the
protocol standard allows these options to be used in data packets only if both endpoints include
them during establishment of the connection.

Figure 14.2 TCP packet header.

TCP Connection States

The connection-establishment and connection-completion mechanisms of TCP are designed for
robustness. They serve to frame the data that are transferred during a connection so that not

only the data but also their extent are communicated reliably. In addition, the procedure is
designed to discover old connections that have not terminated correctly because of a crash of
one peer or loss of network connectivity. If such a half-open connection is discovered, it is
aborted. Hosts choose new initial sequence numbers for each connection to lessen the chances
that an old packet may be confused with a current connection.

The normal connection-establishment procedure is known as a three-way handshake. Each
peer sends a SYN to the other, and each in turn acknowledges the other’s SYN with an ACK. In
practice, a connection is normally initiated by a client attempting to connect to a server listening
on a well-known port. The client chooses a port number and initial sequence number, and uses
these selections in the initial packet with a SYN. The server creates a SYN cache entry for the
pending connection and sends a packet with its initial sequence number, a SYN, and an ACK of
the client’s SYN. The client responds with an ACK of the server’s SYN, completing connection
establishment. As the ACK of the first SYN is piggybacked on the second SYN, this procedure
requires three packets, leading to the term three-way handshake. The protocol still operates
correctly if both peers attempt to start a connection simultaneously, although the connection
setup would then require four packets.

FreeBSD includes up to four options along with the SYN when initiating a connection. One
contains the maximum segment size that the system is willing to accept [Jacobson et al., 1992].
The second of these options specifies a window-scaling value expressed as a binary shift value,
allowing the window to exceed 65535 bytes. If both peers include this option during the
three-way handshake, both scaling values take effect; otherwise, the window value remains in
bytes. The third option is a timestamp. If this option is sent in both directions during connection
establishment, it will also be sent in each packet during data transfer. The data field of the
timestamp option includes a timestamp associated with the current sequence number and also
echoes a timestamp associated with the current acknowledgment. Like the sequence space, the
timestamp uses a 32-bit field and modular arithmetic. The unit of the timestamp field is not
defined by the standard, although it must fall between 1 millisecond and 1 second. The value
sent by each system must increase monotonically during a connection. FreeBSD always uses a
value measured in milliseconds. These timestamps implement round-trip timing. They also
serve as an extension of the sequence space to prevent old duplicate packets from being
accepted; this extension is valuable when a large window or a fast path, such as an Ethernet, is
used. The fourth option indicates support for selective acknowledgments, which allow a receiver
to tell a sender if more than one packet has been lost in transit [Mathis et al., 1996].

After a connection is established, each peer includes an acknowledgment and window
information in each packet. Each may send data according to the window that it receives from
its peer. As data are sent by one end, the window becomes filled. As data are received by the peer,

acknowledgments may be sent so that the sender can discard the data from its send queue. If the
receiver is prepared to accept additional data, perhaps because the receiving process has
consumed the previous data, it will also advance the flow-control window. Data,
acknowledgments, and window updates may all be combined in a single message.

If a sender does not receive an acknowledgment within some reasonable time, it retransmits
data that it presumes were lost. Duplicate data are discarded by the receiver but are
acknowledged again if the retransmission was caused by loss of the acknowledgment. If the data
are received out of order, the receiver generally retains the out-of-order data for use when the
missing   segment    is   received.   Outof-order     data   cannot   be   acknowledged   because
acknowledgments are cumulative.

Each peer may terminate data transmission at any time by sending a packet with the FIN bit. A
FIN represents the end of the data (like an end-of-file indication). The FIN is acknowledged,
advancing the sequence number by 1. The connection may continue to carry data in the other
direction until a FIN is sent in that direction. The acknowledgment of the FIN terminates the
connection. To guarantee synchronization at the conclusion of the connection, the peer sending
the last ACK of a FIN must retain state long enough that any retransmitted FIN packets will
have reached it or have been discarded; otherwise, if the ACK were lost and a retransmitted FIN
were received, the receiver would be unable to repeat the acknowledgment. The interval is
arbitrarily set to twice the expected maximum segment lifetime, and is known as 2MSL.
The default value for the maximum segment lifetime is 30 seconds, meaning that FreeBSD
expects packets to exit the network after 1 minute.

The TCP input-processing module and timer modules must maintain the state of a connection
throughout that connection’s lifetime, meaning that in addition to processing data received on
the connection, the input module must process SYN and FIN flags, as well as other state
transitions. The list of states for one end of a TCP connection is given in Table 14.1. Figure 14.3
shows the finite-state machine made up by these states, the events that cause transitions, and
the actions during the transitions.

Table 14.1 TCP connection states. 2MSL—twice maximum segment lifetime.

Figure 14.3 TCP state diagram. Key: TCB—TCP control block; 2MSL—twice maximum
segment lifetime.

If a connection is lost because of a crash or timeout on one host, but is still considered
established by the other, then any data received by the host that still believes the connection to
be active will cause the half-open connection to be discovered. When a half-open connection is
detected, the receiving peer sends a packet with the RST flag and a sequence number derived
from the incoming packet to signify that the connection is no longer in existence.

Sequence Variables

Each TCP connection maintains a large set of variables in the TCP control block. The
information stored in the control block includes the connection state, timers, options and flags,
a queue that holds data received out of order, and several sequence-number variables. The
sequence-variables define the send and receive sequence space, including the current window
for each. The window is the range of data sequence numbers that are currently allowed to be

sent, from the first byte of data not yet acknowledged, up to the end of the range that has been
offered in the window advertisement. The variables defining the windows in FreeBSD are a
superset of those used in the protocol specification [Postel, 1981]. The send and receive windows
are shown in Figure 14.4. The meanings of the sequence variables are listed in Table 14.2.

Table 14.2 TCP sequence variables.

Figure 14.4 TCP sequence space.

The area between snd_una and snd_una + snd_wnd is known as the send window. Data for
the range snd_una to snd_max have been sent but not yet acknowledged and are kept in the
socket send buffer along with data not yet transmitted. The snd_nxt field indicates the next

sequence number to be sent and is incremented as data are transmitted. The area from snd_nxt
to snd_una + snd_wnd is the remaining usable portion of the window, and its size determines
whether additional data may be sent. The snd_nxt and snd_max values are normally
maintained together except when TCP is retransmitting. The area between rcv_nxt and rcv_nxt
+ rcv_wnd is known as the receive window. Whenever TCP updates the size of the receive
window, it stores the new advertised window in the rcv_adv variable.

These variables are used in the output module to decide whether data can be sent, and in the
input module to decide whether data that are received can be accepted. When the receiver
detects that a packet is not acceptable because the data are all to the left of the window, it drops
the packet but sends a copy of its most recent acknowledgment. If the packet contained old data,
the first acknowledgment may have been lost, and thus it must be repeated. The
acknowledgment also includes a window update, synchronizing the sender’s state with the
receiver’s state. As data are acknowledged by the receiver, the values contained in all the
variables increase, moving to the right in Figure 14.4.

If the TCP timestamp option is in use for the connection, the tests to see whether an incoming
packet is acceptable are augmented with checks on the timestamp. Each time that an incoming
packet is accepted as the next expected packet, its timestamp is recorded in the ts_recent field in
the TCP protocol control block. If an incoming packet includes a timestamp, the timestamp is
compared to the most recently received timestamp. If the timestamp is less than the previous
value, the packet is discarded as being an old duplicate and a current acknowledgment is sent in
response. Here, the timestamp serves as an extension to the sequence number, avoiding
accidental acceptance of an old duplicate when the window is large or sequence numbers can be
reused quickly. However, because of the granularity of the timestamp value, a timestamp
received more than 24 days ago cannot be compared to a new value, and this test is bypassed.
The current time is recorded when ts_recent is updated from an incoming timestamp to make
this test. Of course, connections are seldom idle for longer than 24 days.

14.4 TCP Algorithms

This section examines the implementation of the TCP protocol in FreeBSD. Several aspects of
the protocol implementation depend on the overall state of a connection. The state of a TCP
connection depends on external events and timers. TCP processing occurs in response to one of
three events:

1. A request from the user, such as sending data, removing data from the socket receive buffer,
or opening or closing a connection

2. The receipt of a packet for the connection

3. The expiration of a timer

These events are handled in the routines tcp_usr_send(), tcp_input(), and a set of timer
routines. Each routine processes the current event and makes any required changes in the
connection state. Then, for any transition that may require sending a packet, the tcp_output()
routine is called to do any output that is necessary.

The criteria for sending a packet with data or control information are complicated, making TCP
send policy the most interesting and important part of the protocol implementation. For
example, depending on the state- and flow-control parameters for a connection, any of the
following may allow data to be sent that could not be sent previously:

• A user send call that places new data in the send queue

• The receipt of a window update from the peer

• The expiration of the retransmission timer

• The expiration of the window-update (persist) timer

In addition, the tcp_output() routine may decide to send a packet with control information,
even if no data may be sent, for any of these reasons:

• A change in connection state (e.g., open request, close request)

• Receipt of data that must be acknowledged

• A change in the receive window because of removal of data from the receive queue

• A send request with urgent data

• A connection abort

The remainder of this section expands and explains these points.

Timers

Unlike a UDP socket, a TCP connection maintains significant state information and, because of
that state, some operations must be done asynchronously. For example, data might not be sent
immediately when a process presents them because of flow control. The requirement for reliable

delivery implies that data must be retained after they are first transmitted so that they can be
retransmitted if necessary. To prevent the protocol from hanging if packets are lost, each
connection maintains a set of timers used to recover from losses or failures of the peer. These
timers are stored in the protocol control block for a connection. The kernel provides a timer
service via a set of callout() routines. The TCP module can register up to five timeout routines
with the callout service, as shown in Table 14.3. Each routine has its own associated time at
which it will be called. In earlier versions of BSD, timeouts were handled by the tcp_slowtimo()
routine that was called every 500 milliseconds and would then perform timer processing when
necessary. Using the kernel’s timer service directly is more accurate since each timer can be
handled independently at the interval that works best for that timer.

Table 14.3 TCP timer routines.

Two timers are used for output processing. Whenever data are sent on a connection, the
retransmit timer (tcp_rexmt()) is started by a call to callout_reset(), unless it is already
running. When all outstanding data are acknowledged, the timer is stopped. If the timer expires,
the oldest unacknowledged data are resent (at most, one full-size packet), and the timer is
restarted with a longer value. The rate at which the timer value is increased (the timer backoff)
is determined by a table of multipliers that provides an exponential increase in timeout values
up to a ceiling of 64 seconds.

The other timer used for maintaining output flow is the persist timer (tcp_timer_persist()).
This timer protects against the other type of packet loss that could cause a connection to
constipate: the loss of a window update that would allow more data to be sent. Whenever data
are ready to be sent but the send window is too small to bother sending (zero, or less than a
reasonable amount), and no data are already outstanding (the retransmit timer is not set), the
persist timer is started. If no window update is received before the timer expires, the routine
sends as large a segment as the window allows. If that size is zero, it sends a window probe (a
single byte of data) and restarts the persist timer. If a window update was lost in the network, or
if the receiver neglected to send a window update, the acknowledgment will contain current

window information. On the other hand, if the receiver is still unable to accept additional data, it
should send an acknowledgment for previous data with a still-closed window. The closed
window might persist indefinitely; for example, the receiver might be a network-login client, and
the user might stop terminal output and leave for lunch (or vacation).

The third timer used by TCP is a keepalive timer (tcp_timer_keep()) The keepalive timer has
two different purposes at different phases of a connection. During connection establishment,
this timer limits the time for the three-way handshake to complete. If the timer expires during
connection setup, then the connection is closed. Once the connection completes, the keepalive
timer monitors idle connections that might no longer exist on the peer because of a network
partition or a crash. If a socket-level option, SO_KEEPALIVE, is set and the connection has
been idle since the most recent keepalive timeout, the timer routine will send a keepalive
packet designed to produce either an acknowledgment or a reset (RST) from the peer TCP. If a
reset is received, the connection will be closed; if no response is received after several attempts,
the connection will be dropped. This facility is designed so that network servers can avoid
languishing forever if the client disappears without closing the connection. Keepalive packets
are not an explicit feature of the TCP protocol. The packets used for this purpose by FreeBSD set
the sequence number to 1 less than snd_una, which should elicit an acknowledgment from the
peer if the connection still exists.

The fourth TCP timer is known as the 2MSL timer (“twice the maximum segment lifetime”).
TCP starts this timer when a connection is completed by sending an acknowledgment for a FIN
(from FIN_WAIT_2) or by receiving an ACK for a FIN (from CLOSING state, where the send
side is already closed). Under these circumstances, the sender does not know whether the
acknowledgment was received. If the FIN is retransmitted, it is desirable that enough state
remain that the acknowledgment can be repeated. Therefore, when a TCP connection enters the
TIME_WAIT state, the 2MSL timer is started; when the timer expires, the control block is
deleted. If a retransmitted FIN is received, another ACK is sent and the timer is restarted. To
prevent this delay from blocking a process closing the connection, any process close request is
returned successfully without the process waiting for the timer. Thus, a protocol control block
may continue its existence even after the socket descriptor has been closed. In addition,
FreeBSD starts the 2MSL timer when FIN_WAIT_2 state is entered after the user has closed; if
the connection is idle until the timer expires, it will be closed. Because the user has already
closed, new data cannot be accepted on such a connection in any case. This timer is set because
certain other TCP implementations (incorrectly) fail to send a FIN on a receive-only connection.
Connections to such hosts would remain in FIN_WAIT_2 state forever if the system did not
have a timeout. The final timer is the tcp_timer_delack(), which processes delayed
acknowledgments and is described in Section 14.6.

Estimation of Round-Trip Time

When connections must traverse slow networks that lose packets, an important decision
determining connection throughput is the value used to set the retransmission timer. If this
value is too large, data flow will stop on the connection for an unnecessarily long time before the
dropped packet is resent. Another round-trip interval is required for the sender to receive an
acknowledgment of the resent segment and a window update, allowing it to send new data.
(With luck, only one segment will have been lost, and the acknowledgment will include the other
segments that had been sent.) If the timeout value is too small, however, packets will be
retransmitted needlessly. If the cause of the network slowness or packet loss is congestion, then
unnecessary retransmission only exacerbates the problem. The traditional solution to this
problem in TCP is for the sender to estimate the round-trip time (rtt) for the connection path by
measuring the time required to receive acknowledgments for individual segments. The system
maintains an estimate of the round-trip time as a smoothed moving average, srtt [Postel, 1981],
using

srtt = (α × srtt) + ((1 - α) × rtt).

In addition to a smoothed estimate of the round-trip time, TCP keeps a smoothed variance
(estimated as mean difference, to avoid square-root calculations in the kernel). It employs an α
value of 0.875 for the round-trip time and a corresponding smoothing factor of 0.75 for the
variance. These values were chosen in part so that the system could compute the smoothed
averages using shift operations on fixed-point values instead of floating-point values because on
many hardware architectures it is expensive to use floating-point arithmetic. The initial
retransmission timeout is then set to the current smoothed round-trip time plus four times the
smoothed variance. This algorithm is substantially more efficient on long-delay paths with little
variance in delay, such as transoceanic links, because it computes the BETA factor dynamically
[Jacobson, 1988].

For simplicity, the variables in the TCP protocol control block allow measurement of the
round-trip time for only one sequence value at a time. This restriction prevents accurate time
estimation when the window is large; only one packet per window can be timed. However, if the
TCP timestamp option is supported by both peers, a timestamp is sent with each data packet
and is returned with each acknowledgment. Here, estimates of round-trip time can be obtained
with each new acknowledgment; the quality of the smoothed average and variance is thus
improved, and the system can respond more quickly to changes in network conditions.

Connection Establishment

There are two ways in which a new TCP connection can be established. An active connection is
initiated by a connect call, whereas a passive connection is created when a listening socket
receives a connection request.

When a process creates a new TCP socket, the tcp_attach() routine is called. TCP creates an
inpcb protocol control block and then creates an additional control block (a tcpcb structure), as
shown in Figure 14.1. Some of the flow-control parameters in the tcpcb are initialized at this
time. If the process explicitly binds an address or port number to the connection, the actions are
identical to those for a UDP socket. Then, a tcp_connect() call initiates the actual connection.
The first step is to set up the association with in_pcbconnect(), again identically to this step in
UDP. A packet-header template is created for use in construction of each output packet. An
initial sequence number is chosen using an MD5 hashing algorithm and is then advanced by a
substantial amount. The purpose of the hash is to make it hard for an attacker to guess the
sequence space of a connection. If parties external to the connection can guess sequence
numbers, then they can disrupt communication between the two peers using the connection, for
example, by injecting a packet into the data stream. The socket is then marked as
soisconnecting(), the TCP connection state is set to TCPS_SYN_SENT, the keepalive timer is set
(to 75 seconds) to limit the duration of the connection attempt, and tcp_output() is called for
the first time.

The output-processing routine tcp_output() uses an array of packet control flags indexed by the
connection state to determine which control flags should be sent in each state. In the
TCPS_SYN_SENT state, the SYN flag is sent. Because it has a control flag to send, the system
immediately sends a packet using the prototype just constructed and includes the current
flow-control      parameters.   The   packet   normally    contains   three    option   fields:   a
maximum-segment-size option, a window-scale option, and a timestamps option (see Section
14.3). The maximum-segmentsize option communicates the largest segment size that TCP is
willing to accept. To compute this value, the system locates a route to the destination. If the
route specifies a maximum transmission unit (MTU), the system uses that value after allowing
for packet headers. If the connection is to a destination on a local network, the maximum
transmission unit of the outgoing network interface is used, possibly rounding down to a
multiple of the mbuf cluster size for efficiency of buffering. If the destination is not local and
nothing is known about the intervening path, the default segment size (512 bytes) is used.

In earlier versions of FreeBSD, many of the important variables relating to TCP connections,
such as the MTU of the path between the two endpoints, and the data used to manage the
connection were contained in a set of route metrics within the route entry that described the

connection. The TCP host cache was developed to centralize all this information in one
easy-to-find place so that information gathered on one connection could be reused when a new
connection was opened to the same endpoint. The data that is recorded on a connection is
shown in Table 14.4. All the variables stored in a host cache entry are described in various parts
of later sections of this chapter when they are relevant to the discussion of how TCP manages a
connection. Notably missing from the host cache is a route-cache entry. Earlier versions of
FreeBSD cached the route used for the connection. The caching of routing and forwarding
information is currently in the process of being moved into the inpcb structure using the inp_rt
and inp_lle fields, but code to exploit these fields is not written in FreeBSD 10. Hence, the route
is not currently cached so every packet sent requires a routing-table lookup.

Table 14.4 TCP host-cache metrics.

Whenever a new connection is opened, a call is made to tcp_hc_get() to find any information on
past connections. If an entry exists in the cache for the target endpoint, TCP uses the cached
information to make better-informed decisions about managing the connection. When a
connection is closed, the host cache is updated with all the relevant information that was
discovered during the connection between the two hosts. Each host-cache entry has a default
lifetime of 1 hour. Anytime that the entry is accessed or updated, its lifetime is reset to 1 hour.
Every 5 minutes, the tcp_hc_purge() routine is called to clean out any entries that have passed
their expiration time. Cleaning out old entries ensures that the host cache does not grow too
large and that it always has reasonably fresh data.

TCP uses path MTU discovery, a process whereby the system probes the network to
determine the maximum transfer unit on a particular route between two nodes [Mogul &
Deering, 1990]. The discovery is done by sending packets with the IP flag don’t fragment set on
each packet. If the packet encounters a link on the path to its destination on which it would have
to be fragmented, then it is dropped by the intervening router and an error is returned to the

sender. The error message contains the maximum-size packet that the link will accept. This
information is recorded in the TCP host cache for the appropriate endpoint and transmission is
attempted with the smaller MTU. Once the connection is complete, because enough packets
have made it through the network to establish a TCP connection, the revised MTU recorded in
the host cache is confirmed. Packets will continue to be transmitted with the don’t fragment flag
set so that if the path to the node changes, and that path has an even smaller MTU, this new
smaller MTU will be recorded. FreeBSD currently has no way of upgrading the MTU to a larger
size when a route changes.

When a connection is first opened, the retransmit timer is set to the default value (3 seconds)
because no round-trip time information is available yet. With a bit of luck, a responding packet
will be received from the target of the connection before the retransmit timer expires. If not, the
packet is retransmitted and the retransmit timer is restarted with a greater value. If no response
is received before the keepalive timer expires, the connection attempt is aborted with a
“Connection timed out” error. If a response is received, however, it is checked for agreement
with the outgoing request. It should acknowledge the SYN that was sent and should include a
SYN. If it does both, the receive sequence variables are initialized and the connection state is
advanced to TCPS_ESTABLISHED. If a maximum-segment-size option is present in the
response, the maximum segment size for the connection is set to the minimum of the offered
size and the maximum transmission unit of the outgoing interface; if the option is not present,
the default size (512 data bytes) is recorded. The flag TF_ACKNOW is set in the TCP control
block before the output routine is called so that the SYN will be acknowledged immediately. The
connection is now ready to transfer data.

The events that occur when a connection is created by a passive open are different from those of
an active open. A socket is created and its address is bound as before. The socket is then marked
by the listen call as willing to accept connections. When a packet arrives for a TCP socket in
TCPS_LISTEN state, a new socket is created with sonewconn(), which calls the tcp_usr_attach()
routine to create the protocol control blocks for the new socket. The new socket is placed on the
queue of partial connections headed by the listening socket. If the packet contains a SYN and is
otherwise acceptable, the association of the new socket is bound, both the send and the receive
sequence    numbers     are   initialized,   and     the   connection   state   is   advanced    to
TCPS_SYN_RECEIVED. The keepalive timer is set as before, and the output routine is called
after TF_ACKNOW has been set to force the SYN to be acknowledged; an outgoing SYN is sent
as well. If this SYN is acknowledged properly, the new socket is moved from the queue of partial
connections to the queue of completed connections. If the owner of the listening socket is
sleeping in an accept call or does a select, the socket will indicate that a new connection is
available. Again, the socket is finally ready to send data. Up to one window of data may have
already been received and acknowledged by the time that the accept call completes.

SYN Cache

One problem in previous implementations of TCP was that it was possible for a malicious
program to flood a system with SYN packets, thereby preventing it from doing any useful work
or servicing any real connections. This type of denial-of-service attack became common
during the commercialization of the Internet in the late 1990s. To combat this attack, a
syn-cache was introduced to efficiently store, and possibly discard, SYN packets that do not lead
to real connections. The syn-cache handles the three-way handshake between a local server and
connecting peers.

When a SYN packet is received for a socket that is in the LISTEN state, the TCP module
attempts to add a new syn-cache entry for the packet using the syncache_add() routine. If there
are any data in the received packet, they are not acknowledged at this time. Acknowledging the
data would use up system resources, and an attacker could exhaust these resources by flooding
the system with SYN packets that included data. If this SYN has not been seen before, a new
entry is created in the hash table based on the packet’s foreign address, foreign port, the local
port of the socket, and a mask. The syn-cache module responds to the SYN with a SYN/ACK and
sets a timer on the new entry. If the syn-cache contains an entry that matches the received
packet, then it is assumed that the original SYN/ACK was not received by the peer initiating the
connection, and another SYN/ACK is sent and the timer on the syn-cache entry is reset. There is
no limit set on the number of SYN packets that can be sent by a connecting peer. Any limit
would not follow the TCP RFCs and might impede connections over lossy networks.

SYN Cookies

SYN cache was designed to reduce the amount of kernel resources required to handle potential
incoming connections by keeping a minimum amount of state for each nascent connection. The
goal of SYN cookies is for the kernel not to keep any state for a connection until the three-way
handshake has been completed. A SYN cookie is a cryptographically signed piece of data placed
into a SYN/ACK packet sent as the second packet in the standard three-way handshake. The
data encoded into the SYN cookie will allow a server to complete the setup of a TCP connection
on receipt of the final ACK from the remote system. In FreeBSD, SYN cookies are generated for
every received SYN packet as a way of protecting against the SYN cache overflowing. They only
need to be used when the rate of incoming requests overflows the SYN cache.

Two routines, syncookie_generate() and syncookie_lookup(), are used by the kernel to generate
and validate SYN cookies. When the kernel receives a SYN packet from a remote host, indicating
that the remote host wishes to initiate a connection, the syncookie_generate() routine computes

an MD5 hash that includes a secret, an index into a table of possible maximum segment sizes for
the connection, as well as the local and foreign network addresses and ports for the requested
connection. A table encodes the maximum-segment sizes to decrease the amount of space
required to store the MSS in the cookie to three bits. The MD5 hash is placed into the initial
sequence number of the SYN/ACK packet that will be sent back to the remote host. If the remote
host has indicated that it supports RFC1323 timestamps, then a second MD5 hash is calculated
containing the send and receive window scaling factors and a single bit indicating whether the
connection supports SACK. The second hash is placed into the timestamp field of the returning
SYN/ACK packet. Once the SYN/ACK packet is returned to the remote host, all the state
associated with the connection is freed. When an ACK is received from a remote host it is
checked to see if it contains valid syn-cookie data. A valid SYN cookie must be returned within
16 seconds of its having been generated. Packets that fall outside this 16 second boundary are
discarded. The MD5 hash is again calculated over the key, the returned sequence number, and
the connection information and then compared against the data received in the
acknowledgment field of the ACK packet. The remote host should send an acknowledgment that
is one greater than the sequence number it received. Subtracting 1 from the value in the
acknowledgment and comparing it to the MD5 hash generated in the syncookie_lookup()
routine is all that the kernel needs to do to verify that the cookie is valid. Valid ACK packets have
their ISN and timestamp fields unpacked into a SYN-cache entry that is then used to set up a
normal TCP connection.

Connection Shutdown

A TCP connection is symmetrical and full-duplex, so either side may initiate disconnection
independently. As long as one direction of the connection can carry data, the connection
remains open. A socket may indicate that it has completed sending data with the shutdown
system call, which results in a call to the tcp_usr_shutdown() routine. The response to this
request is that the state of the connection is advanced; from ESTABLISHED to FIN_WAIT_1.
The ensuing output call will send a FIN, indicating that the connection is being closed. The
receiving socket will advance to CLOSE_WAIT but may continue to send. The procedure may be
different if the process simply closes the socket. In that case, a FIN is sent immediately, but if
new data are received, they cannot be delivered. Normally, higher-level protocols conclude their
own transactions such that both sides know when to close. If they do not, however, TCP must
refuse new data. It does so by sending a packet with the RST flag set if new data are received
after the user has closed the connection. If data remain in the send buffer of the socket when the
close is done, TCP will normally attempt to deliver them. If the socket option SO_LINGER was
set with a linger time of zero, the send buffer is simply flushed; otherwise, the user process is
allowed to continue and the protocol waits for delivery to conclude. Under these circumstances,

the socket is marked with the state bit SS_NOFDREF (no file-descriptor reference). The
completion of data transfer and the final close can take place an arbitrary amount of time later.
When TCP finally completes the connection (or gives up because of timeout or other failure), it
calls tcp_close(). The protocol control blocks and other dynamically allocated structures are
freed at this time. The socket also is freed if the SS_NOFDREF flag has been set. The socket
remains in existence as long as either a file descriptor or a protocol control block refers to it.

14.5 TCP Input Processing

TCP input processing is considerably more complicated than UDP input handling, and the
preceding sections have provided the background needed to examine the the implementation of
the TCP input path. The input routine is called with parameters

void tcp_input(
  struct mbuf *msg,
  int off0);

The first few steps are similar to those of UDP:

1. Locate the TCP header in the received IP datagram. Make sure that the packet is at least as
long as a minimal-size TCP header, and use m_pullup() if necessary to make it contiguous.

2. Compute the packet length, set up the IP pseudo-header, and checksum the TCP header and
data. Discard the packet if the checksum is bad.

3. Check the TCP header length; if it is larger than a minimal header, make sure that the whole
header is contiguous.

4. Locate the protocol control block for the connection with the port number specified. If none
exists, send a packet containing the reset flag, RST, and drop the packet.

5. Check whether the socket is listening for connections; if it is, follow the procedure described
for passive connection establishment.

6. Process any TCP options from the packet header.

7. Clear the idle time for the connection and set the keepalive timer to its normal value.

Here, the normal checks have been made and the kernel is prepared to handle data and control
flags in the received packet. There are still many consistency checks that must be made during
normal processing; for example, the SYN flag must be present if a connection is still being

established and must not be present if the connection has been established. For simplicity, many
of these checks are not described below, but the tests are important to prevent wayward packets
from causing confusion and possible data corruption.

The next step in checking a TCP packet is to see whether the packet is acceptable according to
the receive window. It is important that this step be done before control flags—in particular
RST—are examined because old or extraneous packets should not affect the current connection
unless they are clearly relevant in the current context. A segment is acceptable if the receive
window has nonzero size and if at least some of the sequence space occupied by the packet falls
within the receive window. Portions of the data that precede the window are trimmed, since they
have already been received, and portions that exceed the window also are discarded, since they
have been sent prematurely. If the receive window is closed (rcv_wnd is zero), then only
segments with no data and with a sequence number equal to rcv_nxt are acceptable. If an
incoming segment is not acceptable, it is dropped after an acknowledgment is sent.

The processing of incoming TCP packets must be fully general, taking into account all the
possible incoming packets and possible states of receiving endpoints. However, the bulk of the
packets processed falls into two general categories. Typical packets contain either the next
expected data segment for an existing connection or an acknowledgment plus a window update
for one or more data segments, with no additional flags or state indications. Rather than
considering each incoming segment based on first principles, tcp_input() checks first for these
common cases, an algorithm known as header prediction. An incoming segment is one of
two common types if it meets these five criteria:

1. It matches a connection in the ESTABLISHED state.

2. It contains the ACK flag but no other flags.

3. Its sequence number is the next value expected (and its timestamp, if any, is nondecreasing).

4. Its window field is the same as in its previous segment.

5. Its connection is not in a retransmission state.

A segment that matches these five criteria and contains no data is a pure acknowledgment with
a window update. In the usual case, round-trip timing information is sampled if it is available,
acknowledged data are dropped from the socket send buffer, and the sequence values are
updated. The packet is discarded once the header values have been checked. The retransmit
timer is canceled if all pending data have been acknowledged; otherwise, it is restarted. The
socket layer is notified if any process is waiting to output data. Finally, tcp_output() is called

because the window has moved forward and that operation completes the handling of a pure
acknowledgment.

If a packet meeting the tests for header prediction contains the next expected data, and no
out-of-order data are queued for the connection, and if the socket receive buffer has space for
the incoming data, then this packet is a pure in-sequence data segment. The sequencing
variables are updated, the packet headers are removed from the packet, and the remaining data
are appended to the socket receive buffer. The socket layer is notified so that it can notify any
interested thread, and the control block is marked with a flag indicating that an
acknowledgment is needed. No additional processing is required for a pure data packet.

For packets that are not handled by the header-prediction algorithm, the processing steps are as
follows:

1. Process the timestamp option if it is present, rejecting any packets for which the timestamp
has decreased.

2. Check whether the packet begins before rcv_nxt. If it does, ignore any SYN in the packet and
trim any data that fall before rcv_nxt. If no data remain, send a current acknowledgment and
drop the packet. (The packet is presumed to be a duplicate transmission.)

3. If the packet still contains data after trimming, and the process that created the socket has
already closed the socket, send a reset (RST) and drop the connection. This reset is necessary to
abort connections that cannot complete; it typically is sent when a remote-login client
disconnects while data are being received.

4. If the end of the segment falls after the window, trim any data beyond the window. If the
window was closed and the packet sequence number is rcv_nxt, the packet is treated as a
window probe; TF_ACKNOW is set to send a current acknowledgment and window update, and
the remainder of the packet is processed. If SYN is set and the connection was in TIME_WAIT
state, this packet is really a new connection request and the old connection is dropped; this
procedure is called rapid connection reuse. Otherwise, if no data remain, send an
acknowledgment and drop the packet.

The remaining steps of TCP input processing check the following flags and fields, and take the
appropriate actions: RST, ACK, window, URG, data, and FIN. Because the packet has already
been confirmed to be acceptable, these actions can be done in a straightforward way:

5. If a timestamp option is present, and the packet includes the next sequence number expected,
record the value received to be included in the next acknowledgment.

6. If RST is set, close the connection and drop the packet.

7. If ACK is not set, drop the packet.

8. If the acknowledgment-field value is higher than that of previous acknowledgments, new data
have been acknowledged. If the connection was in SYN_RECEIVED state and the packet
acknowledges the SYN sent for this connection, enter ESTABLISHED state. If the packet
includes a timestamp option, use it to compute a round-trip time sample; otherwise, if the
sequence range that was newly acknowledged includes the sequence number for which the
round-trip time was measured, this packet provides a sample. Average the time sample into the
smoothed round-trip time estimate for the connection. If all outstanding data have been
acknowledged, stop the retransmission timer; otherwise, set it back to the current timeout value.
Finally, drop the data that were acknowledged from the socket’s send queue. If a FIN has been
sent and was acknowledged, advance the state machine.

9. Check the window field to see whether it advances the known send window. First, check
whether this packet is a new window update. If the sequence number of the packet is greater
than that of the previous window update, or the sequence number is the same but the
acknowledgment-field value is higher, or if both sequence and acknowledgment are the same
but the window is larger, record the new window.

10. If the urgent-data flag URG is set, compare the urgent pointer in the packet to the
last-received urgent pointer. If it is different, new urgent data have been sent. Use the urgent
pointer to compute so_oobmark, the offset from the beginning of the socket receive buffer to
the urgent mark (Section 14.3), and notify the socket with sohasoutofband(). If the urgent
pointer is less than the packet length, the urgent data have all been received. TCP normally
removes the final data byte sent in urgent mode (the last byte before the urgent pointer) and
places that byte in the protocol control block until it is requested with a PRU_RCVOOB request.
(The end of the urgent data is a subject of disagreement; the BSD interpretation follows the
original TCP specification.) A socket option, SO_OOBINLINE, may request that urgent data be
left in the queue with the normal data, although the mark on the data stream is still maintained.

11. Examine the data field in the received packet. If the data begin with rcv_nxt, then they can
be placed directly into the socket receive buffer with sbappendstream(). The flag TF_DELACK
is set in the protocol control block to indicate that an acknowledgment is needed, but should be
delayed in the hope that it can be piggybacked on any packets sent soon (presumably in
response to the incoming data) or combined with acknowledgment of other data received soon;
see the subsection on Delayed Acknowledgments and Window Updates in Section 14.6. If no
activity causes a packet to be returned before the next time that the tcp_delack() routine runs, it
will change the flag to TF_ACKNOW and call the tcp_output() routine to send the

acknowledgment. Acknowledgments can thus be delayed by no more than 100 milliseconds. If
the data do not begin with rcv_nxt, the packet is retained in a per-connection queue until the
intervening data arrive and an acknowledgment is sent immediately.

12. As the final step in processing a received packet, check for the FIN flag. If it is present, the
connection state machine may have to be advanced, and the socket is marked with
socantrcvmore() to convey the end-of-file indication. If the send side has already closed (a FIN
was sent and acknowledged), the socket is now considered closed and it is so marked with
soisdisconnected(). The TF_ACKNOW flag is set to force immediate acknowledgment.

Step 12 completes the actions taken when a new packet is received by tcp_input(). However, as
noted earlier in this section, receipt of input may require new output. In particular,
acknowledgment of all outstanding data or a new window update requires either new output or
a state change by the output module. Also, several special conditions set the TF_ACKNOW flag.
Here, tcp_output() is called at the conclusion of input processing.

14.6 TCP Output Processing

This section describes the implementation of the TCP send policy. A TCP packet contains an
acknowledgment, a window field, and data. A single packet may be sent if any of these three
fields change. A naive TCP send policy might send many more packets than necessary. Logically,
three packets are sent when a user types one character to a remote-terminal connection that
uses remote echo.

1. The server-side TCP receives a single-character packet.

2. It sends an immediate acknowledgment of the character.

3. Milliseconds later, the login server reads the character, removing the character from the
receive buffer. TCP immediately sends a window update, noting that one additional byte of send
window was available.

4. After another millisecond or so, the login server sends an echoed character back to the client,
necessitating a third packet sent in response to the single character of input.

A more efficient implementation will collapse the last three responses (the acknowledgment, the
window update, and the data return) into a single packet. However, if the server were not
echoing input data (for example, when the user is typing his or her password), the
acknowledgment cannot be withheld for too long or the client-side TCP would begin to
retransmit. The algorithms used in the send policy to minimize network traffic yet maximize

throughput are the most subtle part of a TCP implementation. The send policy used in FreeBSD
includes several standard algorithms, as well as a few approaches suggested by the network
research community. This section examines each part of the send policy.

Sending Data

The most common reason for calling the TCP output routine tcp_output() is that the user has
written new data to the socket. Write operations are done with a call to the tcp_usr_send()
routine. Recall that sosend() waits for enough space in the socket send buffer, if necessary, and
then copies the user’s data into a chain of mbufs that is passed to the protocol by the
tcp_usr_send() routine. The action in tcp_usr_send() is simply to place the new output data in
the socket’s send buffer with sbappendstream() and to call tcp_output(). If flow control permits,
tcp_output() will send the data immediately.

The actual send operation is not substantially different from that for a UDP datagram socket.
The differences are that the header is more complicated and additional fields must be initialized,
and the data sent are simply a copy of the user’s data. However, for send operations large
enough for sosend() to place the data in external mbuf clusters, the copy is done by creating a
new reference to the data cluster. A copy must be retained in the socket’s send buffer to use if
retransmission is required. Also, if the number of data bytes is larger than the size of a single
maximum-size segment, multiple packets will be constructed and sent in a single call.

The tcp_output() routine allocates an mbuf to contain the output packet header and copies the
contents of the header template into that mbuf. If the data to be sent fit into the same mbuf as
the header, tcp_output() copies them into place from the socket send buffer using the
m_copydata() routine. Otherwise, tcp_output() adds the data to be sent as a separate chain of
mbufs obtained with an m_copy() operation from the appropriate part of the send buffer. The
sequence number for the packet is set from snd_nxt and the acknowledgment is set from
rcv_nxt. The flags are obtained from an array containing the flags to be sent in each connection
state. The window to be advertised is computed from the amount of space remaining in the
socket’s receive buffer; however, if that amount is small (less than one-fourth of the buffer and
less than one segment), it is set to zero. The window is never allowed to end at a smaller
sequence number than the one in which it ended in the previous packet. If urgent data have
been sent, the urgent pointer and flag are set accordingly. One other flag must be set. The PSH
flag on a packet indicates that data should be passed to the user; it is like a buffer-flush request.
This flag is generally considered obsolete but is set whenever all the data in the send buffer have
been sent; FreeBSD ignores this flag on input. Once the header is filled in, the packet is
checksummed. The remaining parts of the IP header are initialized, including the type-of-service
and time-to-live fields, and the packet is sent with ip_output(). The retransmission timer is

started if it is not already running, and the snd_nxt and snd_max values for the connection are
updated.

Avoidance of the Silly-Window Syndrome

Silly-window syndrome is the name given to a potential problem in a window-based
flow-control scheme in which a system sends several small packets rather than waiting for a
reasonable-size window to become available [Clark, 1982]. For example, if a network-login
client program has a total receive buffer size of 4096 bytes, and the user stops terminal output
during a large printout, the buffer will become nearly full as new full-size segments are received.
If the remaining buffer space dropped to 10 bytes, it would not be useful for the receiver to
volunteer to receive an additional 10 bytes. If the user then allowed a few characters to print and
stopped output again, it still would not be useful for the receiving TCP to send a window update
allowing another 14 bytes. Instead, it is desirable to wait until a reasonably large packet can be
sent, since the receive buffer already contains enough data for the next several pages of output.
Avoidance of the silly-window syndrome is desirable in both the receiver and the sender of a
flow-controlled connection, as either end can prevent silly small windows from being used.
Receiver avoidance of the silly-window syndrome is described in the previous subsection; when
a packet is sent, the receive window is advertised as zero if it is less than one packet and less
than one-fourth of the receive buffer. For sender avoidance of the silly-window syndrome, an
output operation is delayed if at least a full packet of data is ready to be sent but less than one
full packet can be sent because of the size of the send window. Instead of sending, tcp_output()
sets the output state to persist state by starting the persist timer. If no window update has been
received by the time that the timer expires, the allowable data are sent in the hope that the
acknowledgment will include a larger window. If it does not, the connection stays in persist state,
sending a window probe periodically until the window is opened.

An initial implementation of sender avoidance of the silly-window syndrome produced large
delays and low throughput over connections to hosts using TCP implementations with tiny
buffers. Unfortunately, those implementations always advertised receive windows less than the
maximum segment size—a behavior that was considered silly by this implementation. As a
result of this problem, the FreeBSD TCP implementation keeps a record of the largest receive
window offered by a peer in the protocol-control-block variable max_sndwnd. When at least
one-half of max_sndwnd may be sent, a new segment is sent. This technique improved
performance when a BSD system was communicating with these limited hosts.

Avoidance of Small Packets

Network traffic exhibits a bimodal distribution of sizes. Bulk data transfers tend to use the
largest possible packets for maximum throughput, whereas interactive services (such as
network-login) tend to use small packets, often containing only a single data character. On a fast
local-area network, the use of single-character packets generally is not a problem because the
network bandwidth usually is not saturated. On long-haul networks interconnected by slow or
congested links, or on wireless LANs that are both slow and lossy, it is desirable to collect input
over some period and then send it in a single network packet. Various schemes have been
devised for collecting input over a fixed time—usually about 50 to 100 milliseconds—and then
sending it in a single packet. These schemes noticeably slow character echo times on fast
networks and often save few packets on slow networks. In contrast, a simple and elegant scheme
for reducing small-packet traffic (small-packet avoidance) was suggested by Nagle [1984].
This scheme allows the first byte output to be sent alone in a packet with no delay. Until this
packet is acknowledged, however, no new small packets may be sent. If enough new data arrive
to fill a maximum-size packet, another packet is sent. As soon as the outstanding data are
acknowledged, the input that was queued while waiting for the first packet may be sent. Only
one small packet may ever be outstanding on a connection at one time. The net result is that
data from small output operations are queued during one round-trip time. If the round-trip time
is less than the inter-character arrival time, as it is in a remote-terminal session on a LAN,
transmissions are never delayed and response time remains low. When a slow network
intervenes, input after the first character is queued and the next packet contains the input
received during the preceding round-trip time. This algorithm is attractive because of both its
simplicity and its self-tuning nature.

Nagle’s algorithm does not work well for certain classes of network clients that sent streams of
small requests that cannot be batched. One such client is the network-based X Window System
[Scheifler & Gettys, 1986], which requires immediate delivery of small messages to get real-time
feedback for user interfaces such as rubber-banding to sweep out a new window. Hence, the
TCP_NODELAY option was added to defeat this algorithm on a connection. This option can be
set with a setsockopt call, which reaches TCP via the tcp_ctloutput() routine.

Delayed Acknowledgments and Window Updates

TCP packets must be sent for reasons other than data transmission. On a one-way connection,
the receiving TCP must still send packets to acknowledge received data and to advance the
sender’s send window. In a bulk data transfer, the time at which window updates are sent is a
determining factor for network throughput. For example, if the receiver simply set the

TF_DELACK flag each time that data were received on a bulk-data connection,
acknowledgments would be sent every 100 milliseconds. If 8192-byte windows were used on a
1-Gbps Ethernet, this algorithm would result in a maximum throughput of 655 Kbit/s, or less
than 1 percent of the available network bandwidth. Clearly, once the sender has filled the send
window that it has been given, it must stop until the receiver acknowledges the old data
(allowing them to be removed from the send buffer and new data to replace them) and provides
a window update (allowing the new data to be sent).

Because TCP’s window-based flow control is limited by the space in the socket receive buffer,
TCP has the PR_RCVD flag set in its protocol-switch entry so that the protocol will be called (via
the tcp_usr_rcvd() routine) when the user has done a receive call that has removed data from
the receive buffer. The tcp_usr_rcvd() routine simply calls tcp_output(). Whenever tcp_output()
deter-mines that a window update sent under the current circumstances would provide a new
send window to the sender large enough to be worthwhile, it sends an acknowledgment and
window update. If the receiver waited until the window was full, the sender would already have
been idle for some time when it finally received a window update. Furthermore, if the send
buffer on the sending system was smaller than the receiver’s buffer—and thus smaller than the
receiver’s window—the sender would be unable to fill the receiver’s window without receiving an
acknowledgment. Therefore, the window-update strategy in FreeBSD is based on only the
maximum segment size. Whenever a new window update would move the window forward by at
least two full-size segments, the window update is sent. This window-update strategy produces a
twofold reduction in acknowledgment traffic and a twofold reduction in input processing for the
sender. However, updates are sent often enough to give the sender feedback on the progress of
the connection and to allow the sender to continue sending additional segments.

Note that TCP is called at two different stages of processing on the receiving side of a bulk data
transfer: it is called on packet reception to process input, and it is called after each receive
operation removing data from the input buffer. At the first call, an acknowledgment could be
sent, but no window update could be sent. After the receive operation, a window update also is
possible. Thus, it is important that the algorithm runs in the second half of this cycle.

Selective Acknowledgment

A long-running TCP connection over a lossy network path will have packets dropped in flight.
Once a connection has a sufficiently large transmission window open it can send several packets
at once and the dropped packet may occur in the middle of the set rather than at the end. TCP
normally acknowledges the last byte of the last segment that it received and which it could
correctly append to any previously received data. When a segment is dropped, TCP appends any
new segments that follow the dropped segment to the receive queue, but no indication is given

to the sender that one or more segments were dropped, only that the last received byte is at a
particular sequence number. Selective acknowledgments (SACK), are a mechanism whereby the
receiver can tell the sender when one or more segments were dropped, allowing the sender to
choose more efficiently the data to re-transmit [Mathis et al., 1996].

The use of SACK is negotiated at connection setup time. The inclusion of the SACK-permitted
option in a packet containing a SYN, such as the initial connection request, or the SYN/ACK
returned by a host receiving a connection request, indicates that the sender supports SACK.
Once the connection is sending data, the receiver can send a SACK option to the sender as part
of an ACK packet to indicate the data that it has already received. The receiver does not tell the
sender the segments were dropped. Rather, it tells the sender the data that it has received by
sending pairs of sequence numbers specifying the left and right hand sides of the received data.

SACK information is sent as an option rather than as part of the data section of the packet. The
amount of information that can be sent back to the sender from the receiver is limited because
the option field has a maximum size of 40 bytes. In a typical environment where other options
such as timestamps are already in use, a SACK enabled receiver can only indicate three regions
of data that it has received.

Figure 14.5 shows a receiver’s state with four segments and two holes. Each segment contains
500 bytes. The first segment containing bytes 0 to 499 has been received and acknowledged to
the sender. Three additional segments have been received but not yet acknowledged for byte
ranges 1000 to 1499, 1500 to 1999, and 3000 to 3499. Three segments are missing: those that
contain bytes 500 to 999, 2000 to 2499, and 2500 to 2999. The receiver tells the sender about
the segments it has successfully received, but not delivered to the application, by sending a
SACK option that includes the left- and right-hand sides of up to three sections of received data,
which are referred to as SACK blocks. In our current example, the receiver would send an option
with the SACK blocks 1000:2000 and 3000:3500. The right hand side of the SACK block is
defined to be the last received byte plus one. The SACK option has no effect on the
acknowledgment field of the TCP packet sent from the receiver back to the sender. The
acknowledgment field always contains the sequence value of the last correctly received byte (499
in this example). The sender does not depend on the receiver maintaining any extra state to
implement SACK. It is possible that because of memory pressure, the receiving host might drop
undelivered segments from its reassembly queues, thereby invalidating a previous report of data
via a SACK option. The sender cannot free any data it has sent until it receives an
acknowledgment for that data through an ACK with a proper acknowledgment number. The
SACK option is an optimization and not a fundamental change in how TCP works.

Figure 14.5 SACK receiver state.

The implementation of SACK in FreeBSD has two main data structures: One data structure for
the list of SACK blocks and the other for the list of holes that the sender believes to be present in
the receiver’s reassembly queue. The array of SACK blocks is used differently by the sender and
the receiver. On the receiver, the array of SACK blocks contains the information that the receiver
will send back to the sender with the next ACK. The sender’s array contains the blocks that have
arrived from the the receiver. The array, sackblks, is contained in the TCP control block and
holds a maximum of six entries because at most four sack blocks can be communicated in a
single SACK option. The two extra entries in the array store blocks that the sender has received
in previous updates. When a TCP connection has many packets in flight, several may be dropped
due to changing network conditions, resulting in several holes appearing in the receiver’s
reassembly queue. Being able to store six SACK blocks per socket at the sender was deemed a
reasonable compromise between memory usage and performance. Whenever a host receives
data on a TCP connection, the tcp_do_segment() routine places the data either into the socket’s
receive buffer or into the reassembly queue. When data is placed into the reassembly queue, it
indicates that packets were received out of order and that a hole may be present. The
tcp_update_sack_list() routine is used by the receiver to update its list of SACK blocks. Because
the receiver has had to use its reassembly queue, the TF_ACKNOW flag will be set on the TCP
control block. After updating its SACK blocks, the receiver will call tcp_output(), which adds a
SACK option containing as many SACK blocks as fit into the options field of the packet. SACK
options are processed last by the tcp_addoptions() routine so that the maximum number of
options can be stored in the 40 bytes available. A TCP connection with both timestamps and
signatures enabled has space for only one SACK block, since a timestamp takes 12 bytes and a
signature takes 18, leaving only 10 for SACK information. As most TCP connections do not use
signatures, it is more common to have space for up to three SACK blocks. The current design of
SACK does not allow space for any more SACK blocks since they can only be communicated
within the limited space allowed for TCP options.

A TCP sender receives SACK blocks in the options part of a packet with the ACK flag set. The
tcp_input() routine calls the tcp_sack_doack() routine to update the sender’s understanding of
the holes that are present in the receiver’s reassembly queue. The sender maintains a scoreboard
of the holes in a tail-queue structure and keeps the received SACK blocks in a per-socket array.

All the received blocks are placed into the array, which is then sorted into ascending order based
on the right-hand side of each block. With the SACK blocks sorted, the tcp_sack_doack()
routine walks the list of blocks and adjusts its scoreboard. Three possible adjustments to the
scoreboard can be made:

1. A SACK block may completely cover a hole, indicating that the receiver now has the data that
the sender believed was missing. Here, the hole is removed from the scoreboard.

2. A block can partially cover a hole. Here, the size of the hole is reduced.

3. A block may acknowledge data within a hole, requiring that the hole be split.

Once all of the blocks have been processed, the scoreboard is again in a consistent state and can
be used by the tcp_output() routine when it next transmits data.

The tcp_sack_output() routine is called when a sender wants to transmit data to a receiver and
the sender has holes present in the scoreboard. If more than one hole exists, only the next hole
is returned by the routine and not the complete set. The information from the scoreboard
adjusts the length of the data to be sent by TCP so that the next transmission will cover as much
as possible of the next hole in the scoreboard. The transmission of new data does not update the
scoreboard or the array of SACK holes maintained by the sender. SACK data structures on the
sender are only updated on the receipt of acknowledgments from the receiver. Once the receiver
has acknowledged data past all of the holes, the sender will clear both its scoreboard and its
sackblks array.

Retransmit State

When the retransmit timer expires while a sender is awaiting acknowledgment of transmitted
data, tcp_output() is called to retransmit. The retransmit timer is first set to the next multiple of
the round-trip time in the backoff series. The variable snd_nxt is moved back from its current
sequence number to snd_una. A single packet is then sent containing the oldest data in the
transmit queue. Unlike some other systems, FreeBSD does not keep copies of the packets that
have been sent on a connection; it retains only the data. Thus, although only a single packet is
retransmitted, that packet may contain more data than does the oldest outstanding packet. On a
slow connection with small send operations, such as a remote login, this algorithm may cause a
single-byte packet that is lost to be retransmitted with all the data queued since the initial byte
was first transmitted.

If a single packet was lost in the network, the retransmitted packet will elicit an
acknowledgment of all data transmitted thus far. If more than one packet was lost, the next

acknowledgment will include the retransmitted packet and possibly some of the intervening
data. It may also include a new window update. Thus, when an acknowledgment is received after
a retransmit timeout, any old data that were not acknowledged will be resent as though they had
not yet been sent, and some new data may be sent as well.

Slow Start

Many TCP connections traverse several networks between their source and destination. When
some of the networks are slower than others, the entry router to the slowest network often is
presented with more traffic than it can handle. It may buffer some input packets to avoid
dropping them because of sudden changes in flow, but eventually its buffers will fill and it must
begin dropping packets. When a TCP connection first starts sending data across a fast network
to a router forwarding via a slower network, it may find that the router’s queues are already
nearly full. In the original send policy used in BSD, a bulk-data transfer would start out by
sending a full window of packets once the connection was established. These packets could be
sent at the full speed of the network to the bottleneck router, but that router could transmit
them only at a much slower rate. As a result, the initial burst of packets was highly likely to
overflow the router’s queue and some of the packets would be lost. If such a connection used an
expanded window size in an attempt to gain performance—for example, when traversing a
transoceanic network link with a long round-trip time—this problem would be even more severe.
However, if the connection could once reach steady state, a full window of data often could be
accommodated by the network if the packets were spread evenly throughout the path. At steady
state, new packets would be injected into the network only when previous packets were
acknowledged and the number of packets in the network would be constant. Figure 14.6 shows
the desired steady state. In addition, even if packets arrived at the outgoing router in a cluster,
they would be spread out when the network was traversed by at least their transmission times in
the slowest network. If the receiver sent acknowledgments when each packet was received, the
acknowledgments would return to the sender with approximately the correct spacing. The
sender would then have a self-clocking means for transmitting at the correct rate for the
network without sending bursts of packets that the bottleneck could not buffer.

Figure 14.6 Acknowledgment clocking. There are two routers connected by a slow link between
the sender and the receiver. The thickness of the links represents their speed. The width of the
packets represents their time to travel down the link. Fast links are wide and the packets are
narrow. Slow links are narrow and the packets are wide. In the steady state shown, the sender
sends a new packet each time an acknowledgment is received from the receiver.

An algorithm named slow start brings a TCP connection to this steady state [Jacobson, 1988]. It
is called slow start because it is necessary to start data transmission slowly when traversing a
slow network. Figure 14.7 shows the progress of the slow-start algorithm. The scheme is simple:
A connection starts out with an initial-segment quota of one to four outstanding packets. A
one-block initial-segment quota is used for a connection with a small initial window size, while a
four-block initial-segment quota is used with a large initial window size. An increased initial
window size takes advantage of the greater bandwidth available from fast networks [Allman et
al., 2002]. Each time that an acknowledgement is received, the limit is increased by one packet.
If the acknowledgement also carries a window update, two packets are sent in response. This
process continues until the window is fully open. During the slow-start phase of the connection,
if each packet was acknowledged separately, the limit would be doubled during each exchange,
resulting in an exponential opening of the window. Delayed acknowledgments might cause
acknowledgments to be coalesced if more than one packet could arrive at the receiver within 100
milliseconds, slowing the window opening slightly. However, the sender never sends bursts of
more than two or three packets during the opening phase and sends only one or two packets at a
time once the window has opened.

Figure 14.7 The progression of the slow-start algorithm.

The implementation of the slow-start algorithm uses a second window, like the send window but
maintained separately, called the congestion window (snd_cwnd). The congestion window is
maintained according to an estimate of the data that the network is currently able to buffer for
this connection. The send policy is modified so that new data are sent only if allowed by both the
normal-and congestion-send windows. The congestion window is initialized to the size of the
initial-segment quota, causing a connection to begin with a slow start. Whenever transmission
stops, the congestion window is reset back to the same value as that used in the initial window.
Otherwise, once a retransmitted packet was acknowledged, the resulting window update might
allow a full window of data to be sent, which would once again overrun intervening routers. The
use of slow start after a retransmission timeout prevents the sender from overrunning a
congested network. The timeout may indicate that the network has become slower because of
congestion, a temporary reduction of the window may help the network to recover from this
condition. The connection is forced to reestablish its clock of acknowledgments after the
connection has come to a halt and slow start has this effect as well. A slow start is also forced if a
connection begins to transmit after an idle period of at least the current retransmission value (a
function of the smoothed round-trip time and variance estimates).

Buffer and Window Sizing

The throughput of a TCP connection is limited by the bandwidth of the path that the connection
must transit. Performance is also affected by the round-trip time for the path. For example,
paths that traverse any of the major transoceanic links have a long intrinsic delay, even though
the bandwidth may be high, but the throughput is limited to one window of data per round-trip
time. After filling the receiver’s window, the sender must wait for at least one round-trip time for
an acknowledgment and window update to arrive. To take advantage of the full bandwidth of a
path, both the sender and receiver must use buffers at least as large as the bandwidth-delay
product to allow the sender to transmit during the entire round-trip time. In steady state, this
buffering allows the sender, receiver, and intervening parts of the network to keep the pipeline
filled at each stage. For some paths, using slow start and a large window can lead to much better
performance than could be achieved previously.

The round-trip time for a network path includes two components: transit time and queueing
time. The transit time comprises the propagation, switching, and forwarding time in the
physical layers of the network, including the time to transmit packets bit by bit after each
store-and-forward hop. Ideally, queueing time would be negligible, with packets arriving at each
node of the network just in time to be sent after the preceding packet. This ideal flow is possible
when a single connection using a suitable window size is synchronized with the network.
However, as additional traffic is injected into the network by other sources, queues build up in
routers, especially at the entrance to the slower links in the path. Although queueing delay is

part of the round-trip time observed by each network connection that is using a path, it is not
useful to increase the operating window size for a connection to a value larger than the product
of the limiting bandwidth for the path times the transit delay. Sending additional data beyond
that limit causes the additional data to be queued, which increases queueing delay without
increasing throughput.

Avoidance of Congestion with Slow Start

The slow-start algorithm prevents TCP from overloading a network when packet transmission
first begins, or when it resumes after a long idle period. A single connection may reasonably use
a large window without flooding the entry router to the slow network on startup. As a
connection opens the window during a slow start, it injects packets into the network until the
network links are kept busy. During this phase, it may send packets at up to twice the rate at
which the network can deliver data because of the exponential opening of the window. If the
window is chosen appropriately for the path, the connection will reach steady state without
flooding the network. However, with multiple connections sharing a path, the bandwidth
available to each connection is reduced. If each connection uses a window equal to the
bandwidth-delay product, the additional packets in transit must be queued, which increases
delay. If the total offered load is too high, routers must drop packets rather than increasing the
queue sizes and delay. Thus, the appropriate window size for a TCP connection depends not only
on the path, but also on competing traffic. A window size large enough to provide good
performance when a long-delay link is in the path will overrun the network when most of the
round-trip time is in queueing delays. It is highly desirable for a TCP connection to be
self-tuning, as the characteristics of the path are seldom known at the endpoints and may
change with time. If a connection expands its window to a value too large for a path, or if
additional load on the network collectively exceeds the capacity, router queues will build until
packets must be dropped. Here, the connection will close the congestion window to the
maximum segment size calculated for the link and will initiate a slow start. If the window is
simply too large for the path, however, this process will repeat each time that the window is
opened too far.

The connection can learn from this problem and can adjust its behavior using another algorithm
associated with the slow-start algorithm. This algorithm keeps a state variable for each
connection, snd_ssthresh (slow-start threshold), which is an estimate of the usable window for
the path. When a packet is dropped, as evidenced by a retransmission timeout, this window
estimate is set to a maximum of either two maximally size segments (MSS), or half of the
current amount of data in flight (FlightSize):

ssthresh = max(FlightSize / 2, 2 × MSS)

Further details about the slow start algorithm are given in [Allman et al., 2009]. The current
window is obviously too large at the moment, and the decrease in window utilization must be
large enough that congestion will decrease rather than stabilizing. At the same time, the
slow-start window (snd_cwnd) is set to the initial-segment quota to restart. The connection
starts up as before, opening the window exponentially until it reaches the snd_ssthresh limit.
Here, the connection is near the estimated usable window for the path. It enters steady state,
sending data packets as allowed by window updates. To test for improvement in the network, it
continues to expand the window slowly; as long as this expansion succeeds, the connection can
continue to take advantage of reduced network load. The expansion of the window in this phase
is linear, with one additional full-size segment being added to the current window for each full
window of data transmitted. This slow increase allows the connection to discover when it is safe
to resume use of a larger window while reducing the loss in throughput because of the wait after
the loss of a packet before transmission can resume. Note that the increase in window size
during this phase of the connection is linear as long as no packets are lost, but the decrease in
window size when signs of congestion appear is exponential (it is divided by 2 on each timeout).
With the use of this dynamic window-sizing algorithm, it is possible to use larger default
window sizes for connection to all destinations without overrunning networks that cannot
support them.

Fast Retransmission

Packets can be lost in the network for many reasons, two of which are congestion and corruption.
TCP detects lost packets by a timeout, which causes a retransmission. When a packet is lost, the
flow of packets on a connection comes to a halt while waiting for the timeout. Depending on the
round-trip time and variance, this timeout can result in a substantial period during which the
connection makes no progress. Once the timeout occurs, an initial-segment quota of segments is
retransmitted as the first phase of a slow start and the slow-start threshold is set as shown in the
previous section. If later packets are not lost, the connection goes through a slow startup to the
new threshold and it then gradually opens the window to probe whether any congestion has
disappeared. Each of these phases lowers the effective throughput for the connection. The result
is decreased performance, even though the congestion may have been brief.

When a connection reaches steady state, it sends a continuous stream of data packets in
response to a stream of acknowledgments with window updates. If a single packet is lost, the
receiver sees packets arriving out of order. Most TCP receivers, including FreeBSD, respond to
an out-of-order segment with a repeated acknowledgment for the in-order data. If one packet is
lost while enough packets to fill the window are sent, each packet after the lost packet will
provoke a duplicate acknowledgment with no data, window update, or other new information.
The receiver can infer the out-of-order arrival of packets from these duplicate acknowledgments.

Given enough evidence of reordering, the receiver can assume that a packet has been lost.
FreeBSD TCP implements fast retransmission based on this signal. Figure 14.8 shows the
sequence of packet transmissions and acknowledgments when using the fast-retransmission
algorithm during the loss of a single packet. After detecting three identical acknowledgments,
the tcp_input() function saves the current connection parameters, simulates a retransmission
timeout to resend one segment of the oldest data in the send queue, and then restores the
current transmit state. Because this indication of a lost packet is a congestion signal, the
estimate of the network buffering limit, snd_ssthresh, is set to one-half of the current window.
However, because the stream of acknowledgments has not stopped, a slow start is not needed. If
a single packet has been lost, performing fast retransmission fills in the gap more quickly than
would waiting for the retransmission timeout. An acknowledgment for the missing segment,
plus all out-of-order segments queued before the retransmission, will then be received and the
connection can continue normally.

Figure 14.8 Fast retransmission. Packet with sequence number 3 is lost. Receiver returns
duplicate acknowledgements for the last good packet, sequence number 2. Transmitter
retransmits packet number 3 after receiving three duplicate acknowledgements.

Even with fast retransmission, it is likely that a TCP connection that suffers a lost segment will
reach the end of the send window and be forced to stop transmission while awaiting an
acknowledgment for the lost segment. However, after the fast retransmission, duplicate
acknowledgments are received for each additional packet received by the peer after the lost
packet. These duplicate acknowledgments imply that a packet has left the network and is now
queued by the receiver. In that case, the packet does not need to be considered as within the
network congestion window, possibly allowing additional data to be sent if the receiver’s
window is large enough. Each duplicate acknowledgment after a fast retransmission thus causes
the congestion window to be moved forward artificially by the segment size. If the receiver’s
window is large enough, it allows the connection to make forward progress during a larger part
of the time that the sender awaits an acknowledgment for the retransmitted segment. For this
algorithm to have effect, the sender and receiver must have additional buffering beyond the
normal bandwidth-delay product; twice that amount is needed for the algorithm to have full
effect.

Modular Congestion Control

During the 30 years that TCP has been deployed for use on the Internet, there has been a great
deal of research into tuning its algorithms so that they perform well in many different
environments. While it is desirable that a single set of algorithms could handle all types of
network environments from reliable, high-bandwidth, low-latency local-area networks to
unreliable low-bandwidth high-latency wide-area networks, a single algorithm covering all of
the possible combinations of network variables has proved elusive.

Ever since the release of 4.2BSD with its inclusion of TCP, the congestion-control algorithm has
been periodically changed to share bandwidth more fairly and to improve overall performance.
The default congestion-control algorithm in FreeBSD is referred to as New Reno because it was
inherited from the final Reno release from 4.4BSD. Until the inclusion of modular congestion
control in FreeBSD 7, each change to the congestion-control algorithm required a new release of
the operating system [Stewart & Healy, 2007].

Modular congestion control is a system whereby any TCP or SCTP connection can choose the
congestion-control algorithm that will give it the best performance. Each congestion-control
algorithm, including the default, New Reno, is contained in a loadable kernel module and every
TCP protocol control block contains a pointer to a cc_algo and cc_var structure. The cc_algo
structure contains a set of function pointers that are called by TCP whenever an event occurs
that indicates a change in the state of the connection related to congestion in the network. All of
the variables that contain information about connection congestion are stored in the cc_var
structure. Five congestion-control algorithms are now available in FreeBSD’s TCP
implementation: Hamilton Institute’s delay-based congestion control [Budzisz et al., 2009],
CUBIC [Ha et al., 2008], H-TCP [Leith et al., 2005], Vegas [Brakmo & Peterson, 1995], and the
default New Reno [Henderson et al., 2012].

The goal of all TCP congestion-control algorithms is to prevent one or more hosts from
overloading the network to the detriment of all network participants. All the algorithms
provided in FreeBSD avoid congestion by controlling two variables within TCP: the congestion
window snd_cwnd and the slow-start threshold snd_ssthresh. The algorithms also carefully
track the round-trip time measured between the communicating hosts. These variables have
already been described in the previous sections that covered the default slow start and fast
retransmit behavior of FreeBSD. The following sections describe how the various
congestion-control algorithms now supplied with FreeBSD treat these variables differently from
the default. Each algorithm differs in how aggressively it opens the congestion window once the
slow-start algorithm has completed its work, and how it reacts in the face of network congestion.
All the algorithms supported by FreeBSD are encapsulated within loadable kernel modules and

share a common kernel API. The cc_algo structure expresses the kernel API that
congestion-control algorithms expose to the rest of TCP. Each of the entry points in the cc_algo
structure, shown in Table 14.5, is used during a different part of a connection’s lifetime. When a
connection is first established, the conn_init function is called to initialize per connection state
that is privately held by the congestion-control module. Each acknowledgment received triggers
a call into the ack_received function, which usually results in an increase in the size of
snd_cwnd, the sender’s congestion window. When congestion is discovered in the network by
the receipt of a duplicate ack, the expiration of the round-trip timeout, or explicit notification by
receipt of a packet with an explicit congestion-notification (ECN) flag, the cong_signal function
is called, with the type of congestion indicated in the type field. Any congestion-control
algorithm receiving a congestion signal is going to take action to change the size of the
congestion window.

Table 14.5 TCP congestion-control module methods.

Congestion-control algorithms can be characterized by how they detect congestion in the
network. The first TCP algorithms, including New Reno, detect congestion using a timeout that
indicates a lost packet. More recently developed congestion-avoidance algorithms designed for
high-speed high-latency networks, such as 1 Gbit per second WAN links with more than 50
milliseconds of round-trip time, detect congestion in the network by monitoring changes in the
round-trip time of packets. A timing-based approach can improve TCP’s ability to react to
congestion since data on the connection’s round-trip time is updated with each ACK received.

The Vegas Algorithm

The Vegas congestion-control algorithm is a logical extension of the Reno and New Reno work
that came before it. The two main innovations of the Vegas algorithm are a new system for
handling retransmissions and a novel form of congestion avoidance based on measuring the
bandwidth between the two communicating endpoints. Unlike the Reno and New Reno
algorithms, Vegas is more aggressive about anticipating losses in the network and therefore is
more aggressive about retransmitting packets. The new retransmission mechanism was
introduced to ameliorate problems inherent in the original BSD TCP implementation. The
problem was that the timers used by TCP were too coarse grained to react properly to lost
packets sometimes taking over a second to realize that a retransmission was necessary.
Improvements in the FreeBSD timer system and the implementation of New Reno made the
changes introduced in Vegas moot, so they are not further described.

The main contribution of Vegas is a congestion-avoidance algorithm based on estimating the
bandwidth between two communicating endpoints that attempts to keep a connection’s
bandwidth utilization within an acceptable range. Vegas defines two values, alpha and beta, that
it uses to control the congestion window. Although the literature on Vegas describes its network
utilization mechanism as working in terms of bandwidth, the alpha and beta values are
measured in segments. In FreeBSD, the alpha and beta values are controlled via a pair of sysctl
variables, net.inet.tcp.cc.vegas.alpha and net.inet.tcp.cc.vegas.beta, and are set to 1 and 3
segments respectively. Every time an ACK is received, it is processed by the module’s
vegas_ack_received function. The vegas_ack_received function calculates the expected and
actual transmitting rate and then takes one of three actions:

1. If the difference between the expected rate and the actual rate is less than the alpha value,
Vegas will increase the congestion window by one on the next round trip.

2. If the difference is greater than the beta value, Vegas will decrease the congestion window by
one on the next round trip.

3. If the difference is between alpha and beta, then no action is taken.

Using alpha and beta acts as a damping function, preventing oscillations in the congestion
window that could occur due to minor but noncatastrophic changes in the condition of the
network.

The Cubic Algorithm

The Cubic algorithm is one of a new family of congestion-control algorithms designed to
ameliorate problems with underutilization of network links. For most of the history of TCP,
congestion-control algorithms operated in an environment where high bandwidth links also had
low latency, such as in a local-area network. Since the late 1990s, companies commonly
acquired their own private high-bandwidth links between remote locations. A typical example is
a company that operates in the United States as well as Japan. It is common to have a 1-Gbit per
second link between Tokyo and San Francisco with a round-trip time of about 110 milliseconds.
Using the traditional methods of increasing the congestion window found in New Reno and
Vegas, a single connection would take almost 10 minutes to discover the available bandwidth
because the window only increases once per round trip. Trying to address the problem of
underutilizing the link by simply making TCP more aggressive does not work because that leads
to all the connections fighting each other over the available bandwidth, causing drops and
eventually leading to congestion collapse typical in the early days of the Internet [Jacobson,
1988].

The CUBIC congestion-control algorithm works in two phases to find the correct congestion
window. The names for the phases relate to the shape of the CUBIC function that has two areas,
one concave and the other convex. When CUBIC is aggressively increasing the congestion
window, it is in the concave region, but as the congestion window approaches the targeted
maximum value it switches into the concave region so that the congestion window grows more
slowly and does not accidentally overshoot the theoretical maximum size.

14.7 Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)

For most of the history of the TCP/IP protocol suite, there have been two main transport
protocols. Network application designers were forced to choose between a reliable, ordered,
byte-stream protocol, TCP, and an unreliable, unordered protocol with clear message
boundaries, UDP. The socket API was designed to also handle a reliable message-oriented
transport protocol that could be selected by supplying SOCK_SEQPACKET as the type
argument to the socket system call. Sequential-packet protocol sockets were originally added to
4.2BSD to support the Sequenced-Packet Protocol (SPP) from the Xerox Network System
[Xerox, 1981] and the Delta-t protocol from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories [Watson,
1989].

The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) was designed to provide a reliable
message-oriented transport protocol [Stewart et al., 2000; Stewart et al., 2011]. SCTP is a direct

replacement for TCP, but this section concentrates on the qualities that make it useful as a
sequenced-packet protocol and also discusses some of the novel features that are not present in
other transport protocols.

A sequential-packet protocol differs from a byte-stream protocol in one important way: each
message is always sent and received by the application as a whole unit. A message may be
broken up into smaller packets for transmission on the network. When an application sends the
data, it is guaranteed that all the data passed into the sendto call is received at the destination in
a single call to recvfrom, so long as the buffer passed to the recvfrom routine is capable of
holding the entire message. When an application tries to receive a message that is larger than
the buffer supplied in the recvfrom call, the kernel fills the buffer, discards the rest of the
message, and returns without the MSG_EOR flag set. The only way to know that a message
received is complete is to check for the MSG_EOR flag on return from the recvfrom routine.

In addition to support for a message-based protocol, SCTP has several features that are
improvements on the work done in TCP including enhanced security, multihoming,
multistreaming, and heartbeats that track the health of a connection.

When applications use TCP, each connection stands on its own and is unrelated to other streams
of data that might be moving between the same hosts. SCTP implements associations to
uniquely identify the endpoints of communication using source and destination network
addresses as well as ports to differentiate one association from another. Within an association
there can be multiple streams of data, each with its own set of performance parameters. Much
like TCP, an association may contain one or more streams that are reliable ordered byte streams.
The association may also contain one or more streams in which the data is ordered but has
message boundaries. Each association can support up to 65,536 independent streams.

Chunks

Every SCTP packet begins with a common packet header as shown in Figure 14.9. The only
information encoded in the header is the source and destination port, verification tag, and a
checksum over the rest of the data contained in the packet. The header is followed by one or
more chunks that are encoded as type / length / value tuples with an embedded set of flags, as
shown in Figure 14.10. All the fields in SCTP packets are encoded so that they fall on 32-bit
boundaries, making them easier to work with on commonly available 32- and 64-bit processors.

Figure 14.9 SCTP packet header.

Figure 14.10 SCTP chunk.

The minimum required set of the SCTP chunk types is shown in Table 14.6. Extensions to the
SCTP protocol have defined new types but they are beyond the scope of this book. A more
complete discussion of the SCTP protocol and extensions can be found in Stewart & Xie [2002].

Table 14.6 SCTP chunk types.

Association Setup

SCTP sets up an association between two endpoints using a four-way handshake. Setting up a
TCP connection only requires three packets, SYN, SYN/ACK, and ACK, but this approach has
left TCP vulnerable to denial-of-service attacks, called SYN floods. A SYN attack works because
TCP has no built-in mechanism for deciding whether a connection is meant to succeed or if it is
meant purely to exhaust the kernel’s resources. The syn-cache and syn-cookies described in
Section 14.4 were designed to overcome the problems caused by using a three-way handshake.
The association setup phase of SCTP is designed to foil denial-of-service attacks.

Association setup begins with a client sending a packet with an INIT chunk to a server on the
network. The INIT packet contains a 32-bit random number in the verification tag that is used
during the remainder of the four-way handshake. When the server receives an INIT packet it
generates its own verification tag as well as a state cookie. The state cookie contains the
minimum amount of state required by a host to re-create a valid protocol control block, a
timeout that limits the lifetime of the cookie, and a verification tag generated using the cookie
data and a private key. The verification tag is protected using a message authentication code as
described in Krawczyk et al. [1997]. The private key does not need to be shared between hosts. It
is used only to verify that the cookie that was generated by the server is the same cookie that is
returned by the client at the end of the association process. The server now creates a packet with
an INIT-ACK chunk containing the verification tag created by the client, the new verification tag
from the server, and the state cookie. When the client receives the INIT-ACK packet, it
immediately creates a packet with a COOKIE-ECHO chunk and transmits the cookie back to the
server. When the server receives the COOKIE-ECHO chunk from the client, it validates the state
cookie and if the signature and data are correct and the cookie has arrived within the requisite
timeout, the association is instantiated. The final step in association setup is for the server to
send a packet with a COOKIE-ACK chunk back to the client. Once the client has received the
packet containing the COOKIE-ACK chunk, the association is complete. To ameliorate the
overhead involved in setting up an association with a four-way handshake, SCTP can transmit
data in the packets that contain the COOKIE-ECHO and COOKIE-ACK chunks, thereby
reducing the time between association initiation and the initial data transfer. Any host that
attempts to flood another host on the network with INIT packets, similar to a SYN flood, does
not cause the kernel to set up or maintain any state as no state is required until the
COOKIE-ECHO is received. At the point in the handshake at which the COOKIE-ECHO has
been received, the kernel has confirmed the legitimacy of the connection by decoding a packet
that it cryptographically signed with its own key.

Data Transfer

Once an association has been set up between two endpoints, SCTP can start transferring data.
All data transferred with SCTP are part of a distinct stream within the association. Each stream
has a unique stream identifier. Two different sequence numbers are tracked by SCTP while
transferring data. The stream sequence number tracks where data are in a particular stream and
ensures the correct ordering of messages within a stream. The transmission sequence number
(TSN) tracks chunks for the whole association, and is responsible for guaranteeing reliable
delivery of chunks. Mechanisms such as selective acknowledgment are applied to the entire
association using the TSN to track chunks and to ensure that any missing chunks are eventually
retransmitted and delivered.

When an application is using SCTP as a sequenced-packet transport, the program receiving the
data checks for the MSG_EOR flag to be set in the struct msghdr returned by the recvmsg
routine. To provide a message-oriented service, SCTP has several functions that work together
to take an arbitrary-size message and ensure that either it all arrives at the other end of the
association or that an error is returned to the caller of sendto.

A program using TCP to send distinct records between two endpoints needs to introduce a
marker into the stream of data to identify record boundaries. Even with these record markers, it
is impossible to force TCP to transmit data as records because TCP does not identify the
application-level boundaries. Programs using SCTP do not need to introduce record boundaries
because the basic unit of data transfer is the data chunk. As shown in Figure 14.11, a data chunk
is the abstraction used by SCTP to encapsulate application data for transmission on the network.
All chunks in SCTP have a common header that includes a type, a set of flags, and a length. The
length field is 16 bits. Hence, the maximum amount of data that can be described by a chunk is
64 Kbyte. The length-field’s value must include the size of the header and any user data making
the effective maximum size of a single chunk 64 Kbyte minus 16 bytes or 65520 bytes. Messages
built from chunks can be much larger than 64 Kbyte because SCTP uses the TSN to keep all the
chunks in sequence. On FreeBSD systems with the default socket buffer size, the effective size of
a message passed to a single send call is limited to 225 Kbyte. With larger socket buffers, a single
message could span several megabytes.

Figure 14.11 SCTP data chunk. TSN–transmission sequence number.

When a program calls the sendto system call on a socket opened with SOCK_SEQPACKET, the
data eventually arrive in the sctp_sosend() routine as a uio structure. After a small amount of
processing to extract any control data, the uio structure is passed to sctp_lower_sosend() where
the real work of transmitting SCTP data begins. Data in SCTP is placed on one or more
associations that are stored in the sctp_inpcb structure, the network-layer protocol control
block for SCTP. One feature of SCTP is the ability to send a chunk of data on all the associations
that are currently active for a socket. The code that handles one-to-many style of
communication adds considerable complexity to the system and is not described here.

Sending data to a new unconnected address is considered an implicit send and requires the
protocol to set up a new association, holding the data chunk until association setup is complete.
After the the correct association is found, the data are queued for transmission by a call to
sctp_chunk_output(). The data passed into the kernel are converted into a chunk structure by
the sctp_move_to_outputqueue() routine. Each association has its own send-queue structure
on which chunks are placed before they are transmitted. Chunks are kept in one of two queues,
either the send_queue or the sent_queue queue, until they are properly acknowledged by the
system receiving the data. With the chunks now correctly placed on the send_queue, a call is
made to sctp_med_chunk_output() that checks to see if it is possible to send any data for the
association. Like TCP, SCTP must maintain a good understanding of network conditions
including any possible congestion. The sctp_med_chunk_output() routine is responsible for
checking the congestion window before deciding whether any data may be output. If there is
enough    remaining    space   in   the   congestion    window       to   send    a   packet,   then
sctp_med_chunk_output()         creates     an     mbuf      chain        to     be    output    by
sctp_lowlevel_chunk_output(). It is sctp_lowlevel_chunk_output() that places proper IP or
IPv6 headers onto the packets and transmits the packets by calling the appropriate
network-layer output routine, ip6_output() or ip_output().

The handling of received packets in SCTP is easier than transmission because most of the
interesting features of SCTP have to do with where packets are sent. When a network-layer
protocol recognizes an SCTP packet, sctp_input() is called with the mbuf that was received from
the network. It immediately calls sctp_input_with_port() whose task is to tear the packet down
into a set of internal structures for use in determining where the packet should be delivered. The
bulk of the work done by SCTP when processing an incoming packet is handled by
sctp_common_input_processing(). This routine handles input from all the lower-layer network
sources. Data chunks are handled by the code in the sctp_process_data() routine. Each chunk is
checked to make sure that it is within the expected receive window and is then reassembled and
added to a read queue by a call to the sctp_add_to_reqdq() routine. Once the data are on the
read queue, it is the application’s responsibility to retrieve it through a system call such as
recvfrom. A call to recvfrom on a SEQPACKET socket will call into the sctp_soreceive() routine
and then into the sctp_sorecvmsg() routine, which is the final destination of all routines that
read data from an SCTP socket. If there is no data to be read when sctp_sorecvmsg() is called, it
will block in the sbwait state until data arrives or the socket is closed. With data available on the
read queue, the sctp_sorecvmsg() will copy the mbufs from the read queue. As data are being
received from the read queue, the sctp_user_rcvd() routine is called to calculate whether
enough space has been freed in the receiving socket to warrant signalling the sender with an
ACK that more data can now be sent. Once some amount of data has been read, the call to
sctp_sorecvmsg() will return control to the caller of the recvfrom system call with the data and
any ancillary or control information placed into the buffers passed in by the application.

Association Shutdown

Shutting down an association is a multistep process that can be started by either of the involved
hosts. When an application directs that an association is to be shut down, the sender puts the
association into the SHUTDOWN_PENDING state and sets the PCB so that no more data may
be sent. The sending host then waits until all the previously sent data has been acknowledged.
Once all the outstanding data has been acknowledged, the client sends a packet with a
SHUTDOWN chunk to the server. The host receiving the packet with the SHUTDOWN will set a
flag in its own PCB that is part of the association so that user-level programs can no longer send
more data. It then checks to see if it has any outstanding data to send to the client. If there are
outstanding data, the server will not continue the shutdown process until all the remaining data
have been acknowledged. Once all the previously sent data have been acknowledged by the
client, the server will send a packet with a SHUTDOWN-ACK packet. When the client receives
the packet with the SHUTDOWN-ACK chunk, it will reply with a packet with a
SHUTDOWN-COMPLETE chunk. When done, the association has been shut down.

Multihoming and Heartbeats

A goal of SCTP is to provide applications with a high-availability communication channel over
the Internet. Unlike a TCP connection, an SCTP association can have multiple network
addresses. Should an address become unreachable because of a network partition or other
failure, the association can choose to use another address to try to reach the endpoint.

Figure 14.12 shows an example of a multihomed host. A multihomed system is one that has two
or more interfaces on two or more networks. Each path through the network between the two
systems should be unique to provide complete protection against the loss of a single path. In the
public Internet, hosts do not have control over the path that their packets traverse and so the
protection from multi-homing an association is probabilistic. A corporate network, where an
administrator knows the full paths of all the underlying network links has a higher probability of
being able to use multi-homing effectively. Two multihomed hosts that shared the same network
would be no better than two hosts each with a single interface sharing the same network. Any
disruption in the shared path would break the association and the two hosts would be
disconnected.

Figure 14.12 Multihomed hosts.

User-level code communicating over SCTP indicates to the kernel that it will use a set of
addresses by calling the sctp_bindx() or sctp_connectx() (wrappers on the bind and connect
system calls respectively) depending on whether the program is receiving or initiating the
connection.

When a stream of data is traversing an association, problems such as network partitions are
immediately obvious because the flow of acknowledgment from the other end of the association
cease. An association that contains several network addresses needs a way to ensure that all of
the addresses that make up the association are still reachable. SCTP maintains reachability
information for every network address that is a part of an association by sending periodic
heartbeat requests to any address that is part of an association but which is not the active
participant in current communication. When SCTP is communicating to a foreign host, there is

one primary address and one or more addresses that can be used if the primary fails. When
there is no data flowing across an association, heartbeat requests are sent to all the addresses to
ensure that they are all reachable. A host that receives a heartbeat request immediately sends
back a heartbeat response. When a host receives a heartbeat response for a previously
transmitted request, the kernel updates the state of the association and then sets a timeout using
the callout subsystem so that another heartbeat request will be sent at the next timeout interval
in the future. The default timeout interval is 30 seconds plus the estimated retransmission
timeout between the source and destination addresses, with a small amount of jitter added so
that heartbeat packets do not become closely synchronized with each other.

The initial heartbeat timeout is set when the protocol control block is created in the
sctp_inpcb_alloc() routine. All the timers in SCTP are handled by a centralized routine,
sctp_timer_handler(), that calls various helper routines depending on the type of the timer that
has expired. When the heartbeat timer expires, a call to sctp_heartbeat_timer() figures out
whether a heartbeat acknowledgment has been received. If a heartbeat acknowledgment has
been received, then the timer is simply re-armed and another heartbeat request is sent. When a
heartbeat acknowledgment has not been received, then the address is considered to be partially
failed. The kernel will continue to contact a partially failed address up to five times before that
address is removed from use.

Heartbeat    requests   are    handled    directly    during   packet   input    by   a   call   to
sctp_send_heartbeat_ack() that immediately packs up and sends a heartbeat acknowledgment
back to the sender of the request. No other processing is required on reception of a heartbeat
request.

Exercises

14.1 What might cause a connection to linger forever when closing?

14.2 Is TCP a transport-, network-, or link-layer protocol?

14.3 Why are TCP and UDP protocol control blocks kept on separate lists?

14.4 Why does the output routine, rather than the socket-layer send routine (sosend()), check
the destination address of an outgoing packet to see whether the destination address is a
broadcast address?

14.5 Why does the TCP header include a header-length field even though it is always
encapsulated in an IP packet that contains the length of the TCP message?

14.6 What is the flow-control mechanism used by TCP to limit the rate at which data are
transmitted?

14.7 How does TCP recognize messages from a host that are directed to a connection that
existed previously but has since been shut down (such as after a machine is rebooted)?

14.8 When is the size of the TCP receive window for a connection not equal to the amount of
space available in the associated socket’s receive buffer? Why are these values not equal at that
time?

14.9 What are keepalive messages? For what does TCP use them? Why are keepalive messages
implemented in the kernel rather than, say, in each application that wants this facility?

14.10 Why is calculating a smoothed round-trip time important, rather than, for example, just
averaging calculated round-trip times?

14.11 Why does TCP delay acknowledgments for received data? What is the maximum time that
TCP will delay an acknowledgment?

14.12 Explain what the silly-window syndrome is. Give an example in which its avoidance is
important to good protocol performance. Explain how the FreeBSD TCP avoids this problem.

14.13 What is meant by “small-packet avoidance?” Why is small-packet avoidance bad for
clients (e.g., the X Window System) that exhibit one-way data flow and that require low latency
for good interactive performance?

14.14 Name two features that are in SCTP but are not in TCP.

14.15 What is an SCTP association?

14.16 How does the four-way handshake in SCTP defend against denial of service attacks?

*14.17 Why is the initial sequence number for a TCP connection selected at random, rather than
being, say, always set to zero?

*14.18 In the TCP protocol, why do the SYN and FIN flags occupy space in the
sequence-number space?

*14.19 Describe a typical TCP packet exchange during connection setup. Assume that an active
client initiated the connection to a passive server. How would this scenario change if the server
tried simultaneously to initiate a connection to the client?

*14.20 Sketch the TCP state transitions that would take place if a server process accepted a
connection and then immediately closed that connection before receiving any data. How would
this scenario be altered if FreeBSD TCP supported a mechanism where a server could refuse a
connection request before the system completed the connection?

*14.21 How does UDP match the completely specified destination addresses of incoming
messages to sockets with incomplete local and remote destination addresses?

*14.22 The maximum segment lifetime (MSL) is the maximum time that a message may exist in
a network—that is, the maximum time that a message may be in transit on some hardware
medium or queued in a gateway. What does TCP do to ensure that TCP messages have a limited
MSL? What does IP do to enforce a limited MSL? See Fletcher & Watson [1978] for another
approach to this issue.

*14.23 Why does TCP use the timestamp option in addition to the sequence number in
detecting old duplicate packets? Under what circumstances is this detection most desirable?

**14.24 Describe a protocol for calculating a bound on the maximum segment lifetime of
messages in an Internet environment. How might TCP use a bound on the MSL (see exercise
14.22) for a message to minimize the overhead associated with shutting down a TCP
connection?

**14.25 Describe path MTU discovery. When the MTU of a path has suddenly increased, can
FreeBSD take advantage it? Why or why not?

References

Allman et al., 2002.

M. Allman, S. Floyd, & C. Partdrige, “Increasing TCP’s Initial Window,” RFC 3390, available
from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc3390.html, October 2002.

Allman et al., 2009.

M. Allman, V. Paxson, & E. Blanton, “TCP Congestion Control,” RFC 5681, September 2009.

Bellovin, 1996.

S. Bellovin, “Defending Against Sequence Number Attacks,” RFC 1948, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1948.html, May 1996.

Brakmo & Peterson, 1995.

L. Brakmo & L. Peterson, “TCP Vegas: End to end congestion avoidance on a global Internet,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 1465–1480, August
1995.

Budzisz et al., 2009.

L. Budzisz, R. Stanojevic, R. Shorten, & F. Baker, “A strategy for fair coexistence of loss and
delay-based congestion control algorithms,” IEEE Comm Lett, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 555–557, July
2009.

Cerf & Kahn, 1974.

V. Cerf & R. Kahn, “A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication,” IEEE Trans. on
Communications, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 637–648, May 1974.

Clark, 1982.

D. D. Clark, “Window and Acknowledgment Strategy in TCP,” RFC 813, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc813.html, July 1982.

Fletcher & Watson, 1978.

J. Fletcher & R. Watson, “Mechanisms for a Reliable Timer-Based Protocol,” in Computer
Networks 2, pp. 271–290, North-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1978.

Ha et al., 2008.

S. Ha, I. Rhee, & L. Xu, “CUBIC: A new TCP-friendly high-speed TCP variant,” ACM SIGOPS
Operating Systems Review, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 64–74, July 2008.

Henderson et al., 2012.

T. Henderson, S. Floyd, A. Gurtov, & Y. Nishida, “The NewReno Modification to TCP’s Fast
Recovery Algorithm,” RFC 6582, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc6582.html, April
2012.

Jacobson, 1988.

V. Jacobson, “Congestion Avoidance and Control,” Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM
Conference, pp. 314–329, August 1988.

Jacobson et al., 1992.

V. Jacobson, R. Braden, & D. Borman, “TCP Extensions for High Performance,” RFC 1323,
available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1323.html, May 1992.

Krawczyk et al., 1997.

H. Krawczyk, M. Bellare, & R. Canetti, “HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication,”
RFC 2104, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2104.html, February 1997.

Leith et al., 2005.

D. Leith, R. Shorten, & Y. Lee, “H-TCP: A framework for congestion control in high-speed and
long-distance networks,” PFLDnet Workshop, February 2005.

Mathis et al., 1996.

M. Mathis, J. Mahdavi, S. Floyd, & A. Romanow, “TCP Selective Acknowledgment Options,”
RFC 2018, available from http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2018.html, October 1996.

Mogul & Deering, 1990.

J.   Mogul       &    S.   Deering,   “Path   MTU         Discovery,”   RFC     1191,     available   from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1191.html, November 1990.

Nagle, 1984.

J. Nagle, “Congestion Control in IP/TCP Internetworks,” RFC 896, available from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc896.html, January 1984.

Postel, 1980.

J.     Postel,        “User     Datagram         Protocol,”      RFC      768,          available     from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc768.html, August 1980.

Postel, 1981.

J.    Postel,        “Transmission     Control      Protocol,”      RFC       793,      available     from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc793.html, September 1981.

Scheifler & Gettys, 1986.

R. W. Scheifler & J. Gettys, “The X Window System,” ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 5, no.
2, pp. 79–109, April 1986.

Stewart & Xie, 2002.

Stewart, R & Xie, Q, Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP): A Reference Guide,
Addison-Wesley Longman, Reading, MA, 2002.

Stewart et al., 2000.

Stewart, R, Xie, Q, Morneault, K, Sharp, C, Schwarzbauer, H, Taylor, T, Rytina, I et al., M,
“Stream        Control    Transmission    Protocol,”    RFC      2960,     available    from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2960.html, October 2000.

Stewart & Healy, 2007.

L. Stewart & J. Healy, Light-weight modular TCP congestion control for FreeBSD 7, available
from http://caia.swin.edu.au/reports/071218A/CAIATR-071218A.pdf, December 2007.

Stewart et al., 2011.

R. Stewart, M. Tuexen, K. Poon, P. Lei, & V. Yasevich, “Sockets API Extensions for the Stream
Control        Transmission    Protocol   (SCTP),”      RFC     6458,      available    from
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc6458.html, December 2011.

Watson, 1989.

R. W. Watson, “The Delta-t transport protocol: features and experience,” Proceedings of the
14th Conference on Local Computer Networks, pp. 399–407, October 1989.

Xerox, 1981.

Xerox, “An Internetwork Architecture,” XSIS 028112, Xerox Corporation, Stamford, CT,
December 1981.

