                     Part V: System Operation

             Chapter 15. System Startup and Shutdown

Most of this book focuses on the FreeBSD kernel’s steady state: the invariants maintained
during operation and the kernel services provided to local processes or, for network services, to
remote systems. In this chapter, we describe how the kernel is bootstrapped and shut down. The
details of the boot process vary significantly by hardware type and anticipated deployment but
share a common structure involving the system firmware, its basic input-output system (BIOS),
a variable number of stages of FreeBSD-provided boot loaders, the kernel boot, and finally
userspace.

System operation begins, and often ends, with vendor-provided firmware that abstracts away
low-level variations in the hardware environment. The firmware also provides information on
processor, memory, bus, and peripheral device configuration to the kernel, and may provide
power-management services. The interfaces to system firmware differ substantially across
platforms, vendors, and deployment environments: workstations and servers have different
operational models than embedded devices, all of which must be taken into account by the
FreeBSD kernel. Higher-end systems often have firmware support for remote management
features and network booting, over which FreeBSD layers multiple stages of scripted boot
loaders, the kernel, and optionally loaded kernel modules. By contrast, embedded and small
personal devices tend to have more constrained boot processes in which a simple firmware
copies a statically linked kernel out of flash to main memory and then jumps to its starting
address to begin execution. In lower-end environments, FreeBSD may boot from a read-only
filesystem image in flash and run a single specialized application.

Kernel boot and shutdown are complex processes that depart from normal execution paths and
hence require careful attention to detail. A key concern during boot is the set of dependencies
between components: filesystems cannot be mounted until storage devices have been
enumerated. In turn, storage device drivers depend on initialization of lower-level features such
as scheduling and virtual memory. Historically, system shutdown has required somewhat less
finesse: freeing each allocated piece of memory is unnecessary as the contents of memory will be
lost on powerdown or reinitialized on reboot. The introduction of virtual network stacks has,
however, forced increasing numbers of subsystems to provide explicit and carefully designed
destructors. Dependencies remain important: user processes must be safely shut down before
filesystems can be unmounted, which in turn depends on draining I/O queues to storage devices

before power is turned off. The kernel defines linker-based frameworks to manage these
complex dependencies: the frameworks allow components to register functions for ordered
execution during the boot and shutdown processes. The frameworks also allow code to have a
common structure independent of whether the code is linked into the kernel itself or loaded via
a module at boot or run time.

This chapter traces the boot process starting with the firmware and boot loaders, then the kernel
startup, and finally the startup and shutdown of userspace. The final section examines topics
that are related to the startup procedure. These topics include configuring the kernel load image,
shutting down a running system, and debugging system failures.

15.1 Firmware and BIOSes

The boot process begins with the initial hardware reset as power is turned on, but can also be
triggered following a system-administrator-requested reboot, or a system crash and reset.
Processors begin execution in vendor-provided firmware stored in ROM or memory-mapped
flash referred to as the BIOS. The firmware performs several functions, depending on the device
and vendor, including:

• Initializing low-level hardware features such as CPU caches, programmable interrupt
controllers, bridges, and memory controllers.

• Running a set of boot-time diagnostics, checking CPU and memory functionality, and issuing
warnings if the system may not be able to operate in production. The firmware may maintain a
log of past failures—for example, a list of ECC-memory error recoveries.

• Providing pre-boot administrative services to configure RAID, remote management, and
boot-device choice.

• Coordinating multiprocessor startup; a boot processor will be nominated, and other processors
put in a suspended state awaiting operating-system initialization.

• Performing boot-time hardware discovery to identify and initialize devices from which an
operating system may be loaded; for example, the firmware will enumerate locally attached
media such as USB devices, CD-ROMs, and hard disks suitable for local booting, and it will
identify Ethernet devices suitable for network booting.

• Loading and updating manufacture-time hardware descriptions based on the firmware’s
knowledge of the processor, chipset, and peripherals on the integrated device. This information
will be exported to the boot loader and operating system via a scheme such as the advanced

configuration and power interface (ACPI) on X86 systems or Flattened Device Trees (FDT) on
many embedded systems.

• Continuing, optionally, to provide run-time services via a system management mode on the
main processor or an embedded management processor, even as the operating system runs.
These run-time services may include features such as power management and remote-console
access (e.g., serial-over-LAN).

• Providing both I/O services and device-enumeration services to support the bootstrap of
standalone programs.

• Loading and executing code from the selected boot device.

After a variety of boot-time diagnostics, handling any administrative requests, and selecting a
target boot device, the BIOS’s next responsibility is to start bootstrapping the operating system
by loading and executing the initial code. It also provides continuing early I/O and
system-configuration services for the nascent operating-system loader and kernel. Firmware
such as the PC BIOS, U-Boot, and Open Firmware will provide operating-system-like disk and
network I/O routines until the kernel’s device drivers are in operation, as well as descriptions of
hardware devices that cannot be automatically enumerated, such as PCI root bridges.

In the past, PC firmware has rarely understood the filesystems of the operating systems that
they must load; instead, the startup procedure read a program from a reserved area of the boot
disk. The recent Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) standard requires that new
BIOSes support the FAT filesystem as an origin for later boot stages, a feature long supported in
embedded and server firmware such as U-Boot and Open Firmware [Forum, 2013]. UEFI also
brings security features such as cryptographically verified boot loading to X86, which will see
increasing support in forthcoming FreeBSD versions.

15.2 Boot Loaders

The role of the operating-system boot-loader sequence is similar to that of the firmware:
bootstrap the higher-level operating system using a restricted set of lower-level facilities. It also
facilitates security, management functions, and failure recovery. Multiple stages are often used
as each successive stage is able to have a larger code footprint and can rely on services and
accumulated configuration state provided by the previous stage.

The first-stage boot loader on a conventional X86 system is limited to a single 512-byte sector,
which is insufficient space for code that can interpret filesystems. Hence, the first-stage boot
loader’s only job is to determine a boot-partition and load a larger and more comprehensive

boot phase from a specified sector. Later boot phases are more complete execution
environments that include filesystem and networking support, allow preloading of
cryptographic keys, can be scripted in a high-level language, and support an interactive menu to
allow recovery from a failed upgrade.

Embedded systems trade off boot-loader size and complexity, depending on the capabilities of
the physical platform and maturity of the integrated firmware. At one extreme, boot loaders
from operating-system vendors are entirely avoided for reasons of space; at the other, the
complete X86-like boot sequence, including scriptable loader, will be present and will offer
greater flexibility.

Master Boot Record and Globally Unique Identifier Partition Table

When the X86 BIOS has selected a disk device for booting, the BIOS loads the first sector into
memory at a fixed location and executes it. On most disk devices, this first sector will contain a
master boot record (MBR). The 512-byte sector, illustrated in Figure 15.1, contains a fragment of
boot code, disk layout information, a four-entry partition table, and a magic number (signature)
that will be checked to confirm a valid boot sector is present. To continue the boot, the BIOS
jumps into the operating system’s boot code once it has been loaded into RAM. FreeBSD
supports two different partitioning schemes on X86: mbr, the default prior to FreeBSD 9.0,
implements the fdisk partitioning scheme from MS-DOS; and pmbr, the default in FreeBSD 9.0
and later, implements the more recent globally unique identifier partition table (GPT) scheme,
which supports greater numbers of partitions and larger disk sizes.

Figure 15.1 X86 boot-time-partition data structures: master boot record (MBR) and globally
unique identifier partition table (GPT).

GPT is a multisector successor to MBR that provides an additional header in sector 1, described
by the gpt_hdr structure, and further sectors containing a variable-length table of partition
entries, described by gpt_ent structures. FreeBSD 9.0 and later use GPT via the pmbr boot
loader written to the first sector by the installer, although these versions continue to support
optional use of fdisk partitions if required for compatibility. When GPT is used, the boot sector
contains a special variant of the MBR called a protective MBR (PMBR). The PMBR describes a
single partition of the GPT type, causing pmbr to load the GPT and scan it for a freebsd-boot
partition (typically sized at 64 Kbyte). If found, pmbr will load the first 545 Kbyte of that
partition into memory, which will contain gptboot, the next-stage boot loader. The final action
for pmbr is to jump into the loaded code.

The Second-Stage Boot Loader: gptboot

The second-stage boot loader, gptboot, can be a substantially larger multisector program as it
is loaded from a partition and is not limited by the space constraints of the PMBR. This
additional space allows for significantly more functionality, including support for loading
configuration data and later boot code from filesystems rather than simply disk sectors. The
gptboot boot loader has several tasks:

1. Transition to protected mode so that the boot loader can access more than the 1 Mbyte
available to the 16-bit X86 MBR execution environment. This transition is done by the i386 boot
extender (BTX) library against which gptboot is linked. BTX is a protected-mode monitor that
executes the majority of the boot loader with access to a larger virtual address space, but is still
able to forward requests to the BIOS by temporarily switching back to 16-bit real mode.

2. Accept a set of boot flags, which may be entered interactively on a video or serial console, or
loaded from the configuration file /boot.config. The flags will be passed to the next boot stage
via an instance of the bootinfo structure. Boot flags select features such as single-user mode,
verbose logging, or immediate entry to the kernel debugger on start.

3. Load and start the ELF-formatted next-stage boot loader /boot/loader or a kernel from a
filesystem in a GPT partition type of freebsd-ufs using read-only UFS support. A variation of
gptboot named gptzfsboot will likewise search for a ZFS filesystem stored in a GPT partition
of type freebsd-zfs; for RAIDZ, multiple partitions may be used.

The Final-Stage Boot Loader: /boot/loader

The final-stage loader, /boot/loader, is a scriptable, interactive boot environment that can:

• Prompt the user for input via a boot menu or command line;

• Offer a choice of kernels to load;

• Inspect and modify kernel environment variables that will be passed to the next phase of the
boot;

• Preload kernel modules; and

• Preload filesystem data such as GELI keys or memory-disk images.

The /boot/loader’s menu-driven user interface is implemented via scripts executed by a
built-in   Forth   interpreter,   libficl,   making    more   complex   boot-time   customization
straightforward. The interpreter has access to a broad set of system APIs provided by libstand,
a bare-metal system library. The libstand library implements POSIX-like APIs used by libficl,
as well as filesystem access to UFS, ZFS, CD9660, and NFS. As with gptboot, /boot/loader is
linked against BTX, and so has access to BIOS services while running in protected mode.

When the loader starts, it will execute the script /boot/loader.4th, which will then load
/boot/kernel/kernel and any modules enabled in /boot/loader.conf. The loader then
presents a boot menu and begins a countdown that can be interrupted by the user. If requested
by the user, the loader will drop to a command-line interpreter on the console and await input; a
list of commands is shown in Table 15.1. The most commonly used commands are the “unload”
command, to remove the default kernel, followed by the “load” command, to load an alternative
kernel. Typically, the alternative kernel being loaded is /boot/kernel.old/kernel, saved by
the kernel build system when installing a new kernel, in case the new kernel proves to be faulty.

Table 15.1 /boot/loader user commands on X86.

The kernel is started by issuing the “boot” command, either by the user or because the
countdown has reached 0. The details of the boot command are machine dependent, but for
systems without a hardware-provided mapping of physical addresses into the virtual-address
space, may include setting up initial memory mappings for physical memory.

As with gptboot, /boot/loader expects the next-stage binary to be an ELF file, and will pass a
bootinfo structure pointer as an argument to the kernel, illustrated in Figure 15.2. As with
/boot/loader before it, gptboot will pass on boot flags such as that for single-user mode.
Unlike gptboot, it will also pass kernel-environment variables set during the boot, preloaded
module data, memory-size information, memory-filesystem images, and ACPI table references,
which will be used early in kernel boot by the virtual memory system and kernel linker.

Figure 15.2 The bootinfo structure passed by the boot-loader to the kernel.

Boot Loading on Embedded Platforms

Whereas X86 workstations and servers are resource-rich platforms intended to be maximally
flexible in terms of deployment environments and workloads, embedded systems are often
resource-poor environments tuned to reduce cost, size, and energy use to the minimum required
for their specific function. The firmware, boot loader, and operating system may all be tuned for
small size or reduced functionality, and hence vary significantly in terms of the software features
present.

Very low-end devices such as network switches may have a small firmware that directly loads
and begins execution of the FreeBSD kernel without any further boot-loader stages. Where the
operating-system boot loaders are present, they may be stripped of features to reduce their size,
compared to similar code on server-class platforms. This is the case for the ARM version of
FreeBSD’s boot2, a predecessor to gptboot; in contrast, the MIPS port of boot2 is a full
adaptation of the feature-rich X86 code.

Higher-end embedded devices may provide sufficiently mature and scriptable loader
environments, such as U-Boot, with the result that the flexibility gained from /boot/loader

offers little additional benefit. Other devices use both U-Boot and ubldr, a version of
/boot/loader customized to run over U-Boot’s firmware services. Some MIPS targets also use
the /boot/loader. On systems where FreeBSD provides a boot loader but firmware is unable to
provide I/O abstractions, the boot loader may need to incorporate device drivers [Davis et al.,
2014]. Embedded environments also benefit from industry-wide reduction in size and energy
use in integrated circuits, and so are becoming more capable over time. Multistage, feature-rich
boot loaders will likely see increasing deployment to facilitate security, customizability, field
upgrade, and recovery.

15.3 Kernel Boot

After the firmware or boot loader has started the FreeBSD kernel, the kernel must initialize both
the hardware and its own data structures in preparation for the execution of application
programs. The initialization process is divided into four stages. In the first stage, handcrafted
assembly-language code will set up the hardware to allow more generic C-language code to
operate. The second stage continues machine-dependent initialization of hardware and core
data structures, but in the C language. After this stage’s completion, memory size will be known,
virtual addressing will be enabled, and features such as printf() and the kernel debugger will be
available. The third stage initializes a broader set of basic kernel services such as virtual memory,
scheduling, and synchronization. The fourth stage initializes higher-level services such as
filesystems and the network stack, starts kernel processes, and creates the first user-level
process to execute the init binary and user-level startup scripts.

The FreeBSD kernel attempts to rely on only limited aspects of machine state. At the point of
handoff from the boot loader, the following three conditions will be in effect:

1. All interrupts are blocked.

2. The memory management unit is configured so that a range of virtual addresses corresponds
directly to physical memory locations; for some architectures, this mapping requires specific
configuration actions such as the boot loader setting up suitable page tables and flushing the
TLB; for others, a hardware-supported, physically mapped region provides this mapping
automatically in kernel mode (e.g., MIPS).

3. The in-memory location of any firmware-provided configuration state, such as memory
configuration via the X86 ACPI or FDT tables, has been identified and passed to the kernel via
bootinfo.

The boot loader passes to the kernel the identity of the boot device, boot flags, and an initialized
kernel environment consisting of name and value pairs. In addition, it will pass on information

about preloaded modules including loadable kernel modules, memory images, and keying
material for cryptographically protected storage.

The kernel is loaded into physical memory at a known location—for many architectures this
location will be at a low physical address just above the location of interrupt-vector tables or
handlers. In normal operation, the kernel image is mapped into virtual memory at an address
near the top of the address space. For platforms without directly mapped regions, the kernel
image may initially appear at the bottom of the virtual address space. Until the kernel is mapped
to its permanent location, it requires assembly-language startup code to manually convert
between its initial temporary mapping and its eventual permanent mapping. The kernel is
usually loaded into contiguous physical memory, so the translation is simply a constant offset
that can be saved in an index register.

An early task of the startup code is to identify the type of CPU on which the system is executing.
Often, older versions of the CPU support only a subset of the complete instruction set. For these
machines, the kernel must emulate the missing hardware instructions in software. For
workstation and server architectures, FreeBSD can be configured such that a single kernel load
image can support all the models in an architecture family. For embedded systems, it is common
to have a kernel configuration tuned for each board or device, either because of space and
performance limitations, or because of a lack of common conventions for an instruction set,
hardware configuration, and boot-loader behavior. The early startup code may also call
machine-dependent code to initialize the CPU or virtual-memory subsystem.

Assembly-Language Startup

The first steps taken during initialization are carried out by assembly-language code in locore.S.
The goal of this code is to create a run-time environment that meets the expectations of the C
code that is to follow, primarily by providing a conformant stack frame (sometimes on a fresh
stack), and by initializing the register file to the C ABI that will be used by the kernel. It may also
initialize low-level processor features that affect memory management and addressing, so that C
code executes in a uniform and easily understood environment. Assembly code is minimized in
favor of C to the greatest extent possible. The work of locore.S is highly machine dependent
and includes the following:

• Identifying the CPU and its features

• Placing the processor into a known state; for example, by clearing the error flags on X86 and
clearing or setting coprocessor-enable bits on MIPS

• Creating an initial stack or stack frame for the early boot

• Clearing the bss area (pre-zeroed C-language global variables)

• Probing the physical-memory size

• Enabling virtual addressing

• Invoking platform-specific C-language startup code

• Handing over control to machine-independent C-language startup code

In ports to more recent architectures, locore.S has become increasingly minimal: whereas the
32-bit X86 code is several hundred lines of assembly, the 64-bit version is less than 20. The size
reduction reflects not only simplifications made by AMD in the 64-bit ISA design, but also
initialization functions shifting to the boot loader or platform-specific C-language startup code.

Platform-Specific C-Language Startup

Two C-language functions are called by locore.S: one for platform-specific initialization and a
second to proceed with the machine-independent boot (which will not return). The split allows
the machine-independent boot sequence to be done in a well-defined environment. The name of
the platform-specific initialization function varies by architecture; for 64-bit X86, it is
hammer_time; for embedded architectures such as ARM and MIPS, it is typically
platform_start. Platform-specific initialization will include most of the following steps:

• Further characterization of the CPU and configuration of its features, including caches,
memory-management unit, and floating-point unit

• Initialize and enable memory-management hardware, such as virtual-address translation or
caching for a hardware-supported directly mapped regions

• Set up interrupt, trap, exception vectors or handlers, and on architectures that require it,
segment registers and system calls

• Process data passed from the boot loader such as the kernel environment and preloaded
modules

• Tune kernel parameters—especially resource limits such as address-space and process
limits—based on environment variables and compile-time defaults

• Interpret firmware-provided data such as FDT hardware descriptions

• Calculate the amount of physical memory on the machine if the architecture does not provide
this information reliably via the firmware

• Set up the first kernel process and thread

• Initialize static and dynamic per-CPU storage for the boot processor

• Set up tables for multiprocessor or multithreaded operation, if necessary

• Initialize the kernel message buffer and console (enabling kernel printf())

• Initialize global locks such as Giant and the machine-dependent IPI lock

• Initialize the kernel debugger

• Invoke pmap_bootstrap to do early virtual-memory system initialization

Although the details of these steps vary from architecture to architecture, the broad outline
described here is applicable to any machine on which FreeBSD runs.

Modular Kernel Design

The kernel is a multimillion-line C program that runs on ‘bare metal,’ and hence must provide
its own run-time linker, memory allocator, threading model, synchronization primitives, work
models, and debugging tools. Higher-level kernel services such as device drivers, filesystems,
and network protocols depend on these lower-level primitives, providing facilities to one
another and to user processes via the system-call interface. To manage this complexity, most
kernel components are encapsulated in kernel modules that consume core-kernel primitives,
register services they offer via common frameworks (such as the device-driver framework), and
specify boot-order dependencies so that the kernel can ensure that any requirements are met
before any code is executed.

Modules can be compiled into the kernel binary itself, or as loadable kernel modules
compiled into separate ELF binaries that can be preloaded by the boot loader or loaded
dynamically. Loadable modules make it possible to extend the kernel at run time as new
requirements become apparent, adding significant flexibility. For example, device drivers can be
loaded when a new peripheral is plugged into a USB hub, and firewall command-line tools can
automatically load their corresponding kernel modules. In practice, many parts of the FreeBSD
kernel source can be compiled either into the kernel or into loadable modules without
source-code modification, depending on the kernel configuration used.

A key design goal in the kernel is to avoid differentiating between modules that are linked into
the kernel and modules that are loaded dynamically. The same kernel programming interfaces
(KPIs) declare startup and stop functions, register with kernel frameworks, and so on. This
approach provides modularity without inhibiting practical deployment.

Module Initialization

In earlier versions of BSD, the kernel was brought up using handcrafted C code that implicitly
(and often correctly) encoded the dependencies of each subsystem by virtue of the order in
which subsystem initialization routines were invoked. An intimate understanding of the entire
operating system was needed for someone to add a new service or subsystem, which slowed the
evolution of the kernel and made it more difficult to customize the kernel for incorporation into
larger integrated products. A significant part of the extensibility benefit of kernel modules rests
on the core kernel being unaware of the specifics of modules until they are loaded. The SYSINIT
framework allows modules, whether compiled into the kernel, preloaded by the boot loader, or
loaded at run time, to declare a common set of ordered startup and shutdown functions.
Modules register startup functions via the static SYSINIT macro, and stop functions via
SYSUNINIT:

SYSINIT(name, subsystem, order, function, identifier)

SYSUNINIT(name, subsystem, order, function, identifier)

Module startup and stop functions are organized into a two-level hierarchy that determines the
order in which the function should be called during boot, module load, module unload, and
system shutdown. The subsystem argument is the first level of the hierarchy. Each subsystem is
assigned a particular numeric constant that creates the first-level ordering of the modules to be
loaded; an ordered list of subsystem identifiers is in the /sys/sys/kernel.h include file. The
second level of the hierarchy is handled by the order argument. If two modules are in the same
subsystem, the order determines which comes first.

The function argument is a pointer to the function that the kernel will invoke, and the identifier
argument is passed to the invoked function as its sole parameter. The identifier is often a
pointer to a data structure; this parameter allows a single function to be reused in multiple
contexts. For example, the function kproc_start() is used with several SYSINITs to start kernel
processes with varying names and is used for multiple subsystems.

The SYSINIT framework is implemented using linker sets: each use of one of its macros creates
a static data structure describing the specific startup or stop function and its properties. The
structure is tagged with a request that the compiler place its symbol in a special named section
in the ELF binary indicating whether it is to be run at startup or stop. After the
assembly-language startup code has completed its work, it calls the machine-independent
kernel start, mi_startup(). The kernel binary is scanned for symbols in the startup section,
whose target data structures are sorted and their function pointers called. This process will be
repeated later in the boot when preloaded kernel modules are runtime linked, as modules are
dynamically loaded and unloaded, and on system shutdown, using the corresponding named
section.

A similar technique allows modules to declare startup and stop functions to be run each time a
virtual    network   stack   is   instantiated   or     destroyed.   Macros   VNET_SYSINIT   and
VNET_SYSUNINIT take identical arguments, but use different ELF sections, allowing modules
to easily perform per-network-stack setup and teardown.

Basic Kernel Services

Before higher-level services such as device drivers and filesystems can do any useful work,
FreeBSD must set up its basic kernel services, including virtual memory, the general-purpose
memory allocator, and the kernel linker. These services are shown in Table 15.2 in the order in
which they are done. All these services are initialized early in the machine-independent startup
sequence so that they can be used by the remainder of the kernel.

Table 15.2 Basic kernel services.

SI_SUB_TUNABLES retrieves configuration values from the boot-time kernel environment and
installs them in global variables. Tunables are processed early in the boot as they override
compile-time defaults. Some may be adjusted at run time via sysctl, such as resource limits on
the number of TCP connections. Others commit the kernel to difficult-to-change resource
allocation choices, such as the size of the kernel address space, and so can be set only at boot
time.

SI_SUB_VM and SI_SUB_KMEM initialize the virtual-memory system and general-purpose
kernel memory allocator. The virtual-memory system is initialized by a call to vm_mem_init().
Once the vm_mem_init() routine has completed its work, all memory allocations by the kernel
or processes are for virtual addresses that are translated by the memory-management hardware
into physical addresses. The kernel’s malloc(), wrapped around the slab allocator for small

allocations, and the virtual-memory system directly for larger allocations, is initialized by a call
to mallocinit(). These subsystems are described in greater detail in Section 6.3.

SI_SUB_HYPERVISOR detects whether FreeBSD is running under Xen HVM, and if so, sets up
paravirtualized features such as Xen hypercall stubs and Xen-aware virtual-memory operations,
and disables emulated devices in favor of paravirtualized ones. Xen support is discussed in
greater detail in Section 8.10.

SI_SUB_WITNESS initializes the optionally compiled witness deadlock-prevention facility
described in Section 4.3. Witness tracks nested lock acquisitions, building a lock-order graph
that will provide debugging information to the developer if the possibility of deadlock arises.
The witness_initialize() routine allocates memory to hold lock-acquisition data used for
deadlock detection, and also installs any statically declared graph edges.

SI_SUB_MTX_POOL_DYNAMIC initializes the system’s pool of mutexes described in Section
4.3. Mutexes are generally allocated as global variables or embedded within data structures
allocated from the heap, keeping locks close to the data they protect. The pool of mutexes is an
array of mutexes looked up by hashing the pointer of an object that will return a
deterministically selected leaf lock for the object. The pool of mutexes is allocated early in the
boot so that it can be used by higher-level kernel subsystems.

SI_SUB_LOCK indicates the point in the boot at which it is safe for kernel modules to allocate
and initialize locks; it is used both directly by module functions registered with SYSINIT, and
indirectly through static-wrapper macros such as MTX_SYSINIT, RM_SYSINIT, RW_SYSINIT,
and SX_SYSINIT, which as arguments will take a pointer to a global lock, its flags, and its
description. Lock initialization occurs after SI_SUB_WITNESS in the boot so that storage is
available to track new lock classes from inception. Initialization must also occur before any
potential use of the locks in other subsystem code paths.

SI_SUB_EVENTHANDLER initializes the event-handler system, which allows the kernel and
its modules to register functions to be called when events of interest occur elsewhere in the
kernel. Event handlers are used to expose events such as network-interface arrival, departure,
and address changes, routing changes, the creation and destruction of processes, execution of
binaries, the creation and destruction of threads, system-shutdown stages, the filesystem mount
and unmount events, power events, kernel-module load and unload, watchdog timeouts, and
low-memory      conditions.       Event   handlers     may   be   declared   statically   using   the
EVENTHANDLER_REGISTER macro, which uses SYSINIT to initialize the event handler early
in boot before any of the events it describes can occur.

SI_SUB_VNET_PRELINK, used only for vnet_init_prelink(), performs early initialization of
virtual network-stack support and runs before most kernel modules have executed any code.

SI_SUB_KLD is complex as it calls many kernel functions associated with modules, linkage, and
memory allocation:

1. In the first phase, the kernel prepares for the linking and initialization of kernel modules. The
module registry is initialized by module_init() and will maintain administrative information on
modules such as their reference counts and descriptions suitable for export to userspace. The
kernel-linker framework is initialized, preparing lists and other data structures that will track
preloaded and dynamically loaded modules. Two special memory allocators are also initialized
before module events that will allocate memory: the dynamic per-CPU allocator by
dpcpu_startup(), and the virtual-network stack allocator by vnet_data_startup(). The
allocators have similar structures, providing frameworks for scoped global-memory allocation.

2. Next, individual linker classes will be initialized—in practice, they will consist of the
ELF-specific linker code, found in link_elf_init(), on all systems.

3. In the next phase, the ELF linker code will search the list of modules preloaded by the boot
loader for ELF kernel modules, process the symbols for each, and register them with the kernel
linker for later processing and initialization.

4. In the final stage, the registration of new linker classes is halted by linker_stop_class_add(),
and then modules linked into the kernel and those preloaded by the boot loader will be
registered and initialized by linker_init_kernel_modules() and linker_preload(). This
registration and initialization must sort the modules so that dependencies are taken into
account when invoking the module constructors. Loadable kernel module SYSINITs with
subsystems prior to SI_SUB_KLD will have those startup functions invoked only after module
linking and registration have taken place. Modules are able to register optional command-line
extensions to the kernel debugger, such as data-structure pretty printers. These extensions are
also processed in this phase.

SI_SUB_CPU is responsible for initializing several CPU-related services, including time-counter
synchronization that is required to implement kernel callouts. It is also responsible for starting
execution of additional processors in multiprocessor configurations. Starting additional
processors requires a blend of machine-dependent and machine-independent code performed
as a series of phases:

1. The first phase is done by a set of machine-dependent cpu_startup() functions. Kernel
virtual-memory configuration is completed by calling vm_ksubmit_init(), which allocates

virtual address space for paging and I/O, swap, and transition bio storage. In general, kernel
memory is not pageable, but two pageable submaps are initialized to hold arguments to execve
and for pipe storage. The buffer cache will be initialized by bufinit(), including data structures,
current and running resource limits, and reserved memory to use in low-memory situations.
Swap buffers are set up by vm_pager_bufferinit(). Certain machine-dependent initialization
will also be done. On 64-bit X86, for example, the timestamp counter (TSC) is calibrated with
wall-clock time and registered as a source of timer ticks, CPU and hyperthread information is
printed, and additional CPU registers associated with floating point will also be configured. The
X86 local APIC will be initialized, which allows interrupts to be configured and routed to—and
between—multiple CPUs in a multiprocessor system.

2. In the second phase, the machine-independent mp_start() function will start additional
processors using machine-dependent start functions. On many architectures, starting additional
processors requires some additional interrupt configuration (e.g., setting up interrupt vectors to
receive interprocessor interrupts (IPIs) and then sending an IPI to each additional CPU to
begin execution). On other architectures, such as SPARC64, the firmware may instead provide
interfaces to start the additional CPUs. After the additional CPUs are started, information about
them will be printed on the console by cpu_mp_announce().

3. In the final phase, callout_callwheel_init() will configure the callout wheel for the boot CPU,
making it possible to register callouts without specific CPU affinity (timers are described in
Section 3.4). Additional per-CPU callout wheels will be initialized later in the boot.

Several other machine-dependent CPU-related initialization functions will also run in this phase
of the boot, setting up access to the PC BIOS, allocating space for coprocessor-2 contexts for
certain MIPS processors, and setting up virtual-CPU state for Xen.

SI_SUB_RACCT is responsible for initializing the kernel’s resource-accounting system, used to
limit and balance CPU, memory, IPC, and other resource utilization by competing processes,
users, login classes, and jails. Two routines are run in this subsystem: racct_init(), which creates
a new kernel-memory zone for accounting state, and configures prison0’s accounting state; and
rctl_init(), which sets up kernel-memory zones for resource-accounting policy.

SI_SUB_RANDOM          is   responsible    for   initializing   the   kernel’s   noncrypto-graphic
pseudo-random number generator from the timestamp counter via the routine random_init().
It also initializes random-number generation for kernel stack protection via __stack_chk_init().

SI_SUB_KDTRACE initializes software-trace functions relating to two frameworks: DTrace,
described in Section 3.8, and processor hardware performance monitoring counters (HWPMC),
which provide access to CPU performance-sampling functions. DTrace first registers with

thread- and process-creation event handlers in init_dtrace(), which manage storage for each
thread or process that might be used with DTrace. DTrace then initializes its per-CPU debugging
output buffers in dtrace_debug_init(). HWPMC initializes storage for “soft” events in
init_hwpmc (), to be triggered by software sources such as locking events, page faults, and clock
ticks. It accepts registrations using the macro PMC_SOFT_DEFINE via pmc_soft_ev_register(),
which likewise uses SYSINIT. Many later-configured modules implement DTrace events, or
“probes,” relying on the results of this phase.

SI_SUB_MAC, SI_SUB_MAC_POLICY, and SI_SUB_MAC_LATE initialize mandatory access
control (MAC), described in Section 5.10. In the first phase, implemented in mac_init(), data
structures, locks, and kernel-memory zones are initialized. In the second phase, policy modules
that   have   declared    themselves    using     the    MAC_POLICY_SET       macro   will   invoke
mac_policy_register() to attach to entry points and optionally allocate label storage. In the final
phase, mac_init_late() sets the mac_late flag, which indicates to the framework that policy
modules loaded after this point must be registered as “dynamic” policies requiring full
synchronization when entry points are invoked. Until this point, policies that register with flags
that prevent unload can be added to a linked list that does not require locks to iterate over,
avoiding overhead if all policies are “static.” This initialization must be completed before any
operations requiring MAC authorization, such as operations involved in mounting the root
filesystem as well as creation of the first process, can proceed.

SI_SUB_VNET is implemented by vnet0_init(), which allocates the first virtual network stack
and associates it with prison0. This network-stack instance will be used for all processes unless
further stacks are explicitly configured by the system administrator.

SI_SUB_VM_CONF           completes     initialization    of   kernel-memory   zones    by    calling
uma_startup3(), which starts up a callout, uma_timeout(), to run every 20 seconds. The
timeout walks the list of kernel-memory zones performing routine activities such as updating
statistics and, as required, resizing hash tables. The timeout also performs machine-dependent
functions such as tuning limits on X86 local descriptor table segments.

SI_SUB_DDB_SERVICES completes initialization of the DDB in-kernel debugger by setting up
its capture buffer in db_capture_sysinit(). The capture facility logs text output from debugger
scripts to a crash partition to create textdumps, a more compact alternative to a full
kernel-memory crash dump.

SI_SUB_RUN_QUEUE initializes the scheduler’s run queues, CPU groups, and initial load
calculations, at boot. Both the ULE and 4BSD schedulers are initialized by routines named
sched_setup(). The system scheduler is described in greater detail in Section 4.4.

Finally, SI_SUB_KTRACE initializes the userspace kernel-trace facility, ktrace, by calling
ktrace_init(), which must initialize locks and data structures, but also pre-allocate a set of
trace-entry structures. These trace-entry structures will log kernel events such as system calls,
data copied in and out of the user address space, signal delivery, and context switches as
requested by user processes. This initialization must occur before any user process requests
enabling of tracing. Section 3.8 describes ktrace in greater detail.

From this point onward, the bulk of basic kernel services required to support the launching of
kernel threads, device-driver discovery, and the remainder of the high-level boot are now
present.

Kernel-Thread Initialization

Kernel-module code enters execution in several ways—most frequently by direct function
invocation from another subsystem. For example, code might be invoked as a system-call
implementation by the system-call trap-handling code in user threads, as an interrupt handler
in an interrupt thread, as a task function in a task thread, or as a timeout function from a
per-CPU callout thread. In other cases, subsystems will start kernel threads to embody portions
of their activities.

Sometimes, subsystems will create threads to provide asynchronous execution opportunities for
other modules. For example, the interrupt-thread framework calls device-driver interrupt
handlers in interrupt threads when it receives hardware interrupts for the corresponding device.
In other cases, kernel modules create threads to allow the modules to defer blocking filesystem
I/O to an asynchronous context. For example, the virtual-memory and security-audit
subsystems create threads to perform disk I/O asynchronously from the process that triggered
the I/O. A few threads are intrinsic to system functionality, such as idle threads required by the
scheduler, as well as the first user process from which all later user processes will descend.
Threads may be created on demand, as happens for iSCSI worker threads, which are
instantiated when new sessions are configured; others are created unconditionally in boot, such
as the GEOM worker threads that process upward and downward I/O requests. The modules
that start kernel threads or processes during the boot are shown in Table 15.3.

Table 15.3 Kernel threads and processes started by default on X86.

SI_SUB_INTRINSIC begins the creation of the process hierarchy by executing p0init(). The
function creates process0, the first process, pgrp0, its process group, and thread0, the first
thread within that process. The first process is named kernel and its first thread is named
swapper. Then, p0init() calls pmap_pinit0() to initialize the process’s virtual-memory space
and memory map. For all later processes, the kernel-memory zone allocator will automatically
invoke thread- and process-creation event handlers; however, since process0 and thread0 are
statically allocated, p0init() must invoke them manually. The function also charges the root user
for the resources associated with this first process.

SI_SUB_AUDIT creates a kernel process and thread to support the kernel’s audit subsystem,
described in Section 5.11. The separate thread allows the audit process to write records to the
filesystem asynchronously from the process that performed the event. The audit_init() function
initializes the audit subsystem and then creates audit_worker by calling audit_worker_init().
The thread executes a loop that alternately awaits further events to write to the audit trail or
blocks on filesystem I/O while writing records to the disk. The thread will also detect low-space
conditions, which will be signalled to userspace by means of a special-device node.

SI_SUB_CREATE_INIT is responsible for forking the first userspace process, init. This process
will execute /sbin/init and implement the userspace boot. The create_init() function uses the
kernel-internal fork1() function to create the new process; subsystems such as MAC and audit
then customize init’s process credential with properties that will be inherited by all other user
processes. The final action of create_init() is to call cpu_set_fork_handler() to set the function
that the newly created kernel thread will call to start_init(). The init process will not
immediately run, as it has not yet been placed in a runnable state.

SI_SUB_SCHED_IDLE creates an idle process containing a set of per-CPU idle threads. Idle
threads provide a default thread context that can always run, at the idle priority, on each CPU.
This context ensures that interrupts delivered to an idle CPU always have a thread suitable to
preempt and, therefore, a stack to borrow.

SI_SUB_INTR, SI_SUB_SOFTINTR, and SI_SUB_DRIVERS create a variety of kernel
processes and threads in service of device drivers, including interrupt threads and GEOM’s up,
down, and event threads created by g_init(). Device drivers may create further threads; for
example, the random device described in Section 5.12 creates a thread that intermittently
extracts entropy harvested around the system from queues and feeds it into Yarrow. Interrupt
threads serve not only devices fielding hardware interrupts, but also soft-interrupt handlers
such as the callout thread and network-stack netisr threads.

Four subsystems initialize threads supporting virtual memory, the buffer cache, and filesystems:
SI_SUB_KTHREAD_PAGE,            SI_SUB_KTHREAD_VM,             SI_SUB_KTHREAD_BUF,            and
SI_SUB_KTHREAD_UPDATE.             These     subsystems    incorporate    functions    that   run
asynchronously from user threads, such as write-behind flushes of the buffer cache to disk,
managing the vnode LRU cache, and paging activity. They also perform tasks that must occur at
differing priorities. The virtual-memory subsystem and its threads are discussed in detail in
Chapter 6.

SI_SUB_KTHREAD_INIT completes creation of the init process by calling kick_init(), which
schedules init’s kernel thread. When the thread starts, it will execute start_init(), which
performs a series of activities to bring up the filesystem and userspace environment. First, init
calls vfs_mountroot() to await completion of any device initialization that may be required to
mount the root filesystem. Kernel modules such as the device-driver framework, GEOM RAID
storage classes, and ZFS can request that the boot process be suspended to allow device probes
to continue, and higher-level storage constructs to be discovered, before the root filesystem is
mounted. Each component will invoke root_hold_token(), which returns a reference that must
later be released using root_mount_rel(). Once devices have settled, the kernel must now
identify and mount a suitable root filesystem by means of the following four steps:

1.   First,    kernel    environmental      variables     such     as    vfs.root.mountfrom       and
vfs_root.mountfrom.options are inspected to determine how root filesystem mounting should
proceed. This inspection may update the rootdevnames array whose entries will be tried in the
search for a viable mount.

2. Next, vfs_mountroot_devfs() mounts a devfs instance as the initial root filesystem. Because
it requires no source device, devfs can be mounted before /dev is available. Once devfs is
mounted, then disk-based filesystems can use the same model for root filesystems as they do for
later filesystems, reducing special casing in the root mount path.

3. In the next phase, vfs_mountroot_devfs() will parse each device name, look up a suitable
filesystem in the kernel’s filesystem-module list, and attempt to mount it by calling
kernel_mount().

4. In the final phase, vfs_mountroot_shuffle() will rearrange the two mounted filesystems so
that the newly mounted root is available as /, and the earlier devfs mount can be found under its
/dev.

If a failure occurs, then the next possible filesystem root will be tried. Once the root filesystem is
mounted, prison0 is updated, and the mountroot event handler is called to notify other kernel
modules that the filesystem is now available. Creation of the userspace process is completed by
start_init() searching for a suitable init binary, copying out boot-flag arguments, and issuing
execve to load the binary. Execution will begin when the thread returns to userspace returning
from execve.

Device-Module Initialization

With all the kernel’s basic services in place, and the basic processes created, it is now possible to
initialize the rest of the devices in the system including the disks, network interfaces, and clocks.
Table 15.4 shows the main components used to initialize the device modules.

Table 15.4 Device modules.

Before any devices can be initialized—in particular, network interfaces—the mbuf subsystem
must be set up so that the network interfaces have a set of buffers they can use for their own
initialization. The mbuf subsystem initialization is handled by the SI_SUB_MBUF module and
its mbuf_init() routine (mbufs are described in Section 12.3).

At this point in the startup sequence, hardware interrupts are not enabled on the system. The
kernel now sets up all the interrupt threads that will handle interrupts when the system begins
to run. The interrupts are setup by two modules: SI_SUB_INTR, which sets up the interrupt
threads that handle device interrupts, and SI_SUB_SOFTINTR, which creates soft-interrupt
threads. Soft-interrupt threads are used by services that handle asynchronous events that are
not generated by hardware. Soft-interrupt threads provide the soft clock, which supports the
callout subsystem. They also provide the network thread that dequeues inbound packets from
the network-interface queues and moves them through the network stack.

As part of bringing up real hardware devices, the kernel first initializes the device filesystem and
then readies the network stack to handle devices with a call to the if_init() routine. The if_init()
routine does not initialize any network interfaces; it only sets up the data structures that will
support them. Finally, the devices themselves are initialized by the SI_SUB_DRIVERS and
SI_SUB_CONFIGURE modules. All devices in the system are initialized by autoconfiguration as
described in Section 8.9.

Once the devices are configured, the virtual filesystem (VFS) is initialized. Bringing up the VFS
is a multistage process that entails initializing the VFS itself, the vnode subsystem, and the name
cache and pathname-translation subsystem that maps pathnames to vnodes.

The next systems to be set up are those relating to the real-time clock provided by the hardware.
The initclocks() routine, which is a part of the SI_SUB_CLOCKS module, calls the architecture’s
specific cpu_initclocks() routine to initialize the hardware clock on the system and start it
running. Once the hardware clock is running, other services such as support for the Network
Time Protocol (NTP), device polling, and the time counter are started.

Loadable Kernel Modules

Some kernel modules can be loaded and started or shut down and unloaded while the system is
running. Providing a system where kernel services can be loaded and unloaded at run time has
several advantages over a system where all kernel services must be linked in at build time. For
systems programmers, being able to load and unload modules at run time means that they are
able to develop their code more quickly. Only those modules absolutely necessary to the system,
such as the memory manager and scheduler, need to be directly linked into the kernel. A kernel
module can be compiled, loaded, debugged, unloaded, modified, compiled, and loaded again
without having to link it directly into the kernel or having to reboot the system. When a system
is placed in the field, the use of kernel modules makes it possible to upgrade only selected parts
of the system, as necessary. Upgrading in the field is absolutely necessary in embedded
applications where the system may be physically unreachable, but it is also convenient in more
traditional environments where many systems might have to change at the same time—for
instance, in a large server farm.

Loadable kernel modules are declared in the following way:

DECLARE_MODULE(name, moduledata, subsystem, order)

Each module has a name, subsystem, and order that serve the same purposes here as they do in
the SYSINIT macro. The key difference is the use of the moduledata argument, which is a data
structure that is defined in the following way:

int (*modeventhand_t)(
    struct module *module,
    int command,
    void *argument);

typedef moduledata = {
    const char *name;
    modeventhand_t event_handler;
    void *data;
} moduledata_t;

All modules have an associated version that is declared with the MODULE_VERSION macro.
Without a version, it would be impossible to differentiate between different revisions of the
same module, making field upgrades difficult. One last macro used by kernel modules is the
SYSCALL_MODULE_HELPER that developers use to add new system calls to the kernel.

To have kernel modules that can be loaded both at boot time and at run time, two different cases
must be handled. When a module is loaded at boot time, it has already been processed by the
kernel’s build process, which means that its system-call entry points and other data are already
known to the kernel. This knowledge simplifies the loading process. All that needs to be done is
to call the module’s event handler with the MOD_LOAD command. At run time, the module
needs to be loaded into memory, registered with the kernel, and its system calls dynamically
added to the system-call table. Once all that work is done, it can be initialized by calling its event
handler. All the run-time loading is handled by the kldload system call and the
module_register() routine. To keep the interface that programmers use simple, all this
functionality is hidden by the DECLARE_MODULE macro and the use of the single
event-handler routine. When creating a kernel module, a programmer needs to be concerned
only with writing the module event handler and exporting the module-handler’s system calls via
the macros.

A key consideration in the use of loadable kernel modules is that they are a double-edged sword
with respect to security and reliability. On the one hand, loadable modules allow field upgrade of
kernel components without binary patching, which can be used to correct stability defects
discovered after a product is shipped. Loadable modules can likewise adapt the kernel’s security
model to protect against discovered vulnerabilities. On the other hand, the kernel is a critical
part of the system’s trusted computing base (TCB). Attackers that can load kernel modules
can bypass the system’s security policies, install subtle back doors, and mask their presence in
the system by modifying the behavior of monitoring interfaces.

In practice, loadable modules have little concrete effect on the integrity of the TCB for several
reasons. Integrity of the kernel depends on a secure boot process, which currently depends on
correct configuration of userspace-managed protections in the filesystem. Further, userspace
interfaces to system memory and I/O devices allow privileged users the ability to modify kernel
memory even without an explicit loading interface. Jail and MAC policies such as Biba can be

used to provide stronger integrity protection for the TCB, which includes controls on
low-integrity manipulation of the kernel either by module loading or access to virtual and
physical memory via /dev nodes.

As secure boot features such as UEFI’s boot-chain signature-verification support become more
widely deployed, the initial boot chain will become increasingly secure against attacks that
might damage TCB integrity. A sensible future direction would be to extend these facilities into
cryptographic protection of loadable kernel modules using digital signatures and other
security-critical portions of the filesystem and userspace. These extensions will need to address
not just kernel modules, but also configuration files and system maintenance tools. One key
concern in the adoption of such techniques will be increased complexity and fragility:
maintenance operations that previously required root access may now require management of
cryptographic keys; similarly, administrators might be forced to choose between the
performance or functionality benefits derived from kernel customization and boot-time integrity
protection.

15.4 User-Level Initialization

With the start of the init process, the kernel is operating and functional, and userspace is in
execution. There are several additional steps that must be taken before users can log in and
network services are available. All these actions are driven by user-level programs that use the
standard FreeBSD system-call interface that has been described in previous chapters. We shall
briefly examine the steps that take place in a typical system.

/sbin/init

The /sbin/init program is invoked as process 1 in the final step of the kernel bootstrapping
procedure. The parameters specified at the time FreeBSD was bootstrapped are passed to init in
a machine-dependent fashion. The init program uses the values of these flags to determine
whether it should bring up the system to single-user or to multiuser operation and whether it
should check the consistency of its disks with the fsck program. In single-user operation, init
forks a process that invokes the standard shell, /bin/sh. The standard input, output, and error
descriptors of the process are directed to the system’s console terminal, /dev/console. This
shell then operates normally but with superuser privileges until it terminates.

In multiuser operation, init first spawns a shell to interpret the commands in the file /etc/rc,
which is the root of a set of system startup scripts that do all the user-level initialization of the
system. If the /etc/rc script completes successfully, init then forks a copy of itself for each
terminal device that is marked for use in the file /etc/ttys. These copies of init invoke other

system programs, such as /usr/libexec/getty, to manage the standard sign-on procedure.
Process 1 always acts as the master coordinating process for system operation. It is responsible
for spawning new processes as terminal sessions are terminated and for managing the shutdown
of a running system.

System Startup Scripts

The /etc/rc file is mostly empty and simply serves to order and execute the various system
startup scripts contained in the /etc/rc.d directory. It will also search for third-party startup
scripts in /usr/local/etc/rc.d, where they may be installed by the FreeBSD ports system or
package system. The /etc/rc.conf, /etc/rc.conf.d, and /etc/defaults/rc.conf files control
which user-level services are started at boot time and some aspects of their configuration. Each
of these files is loaded by the system startup scripts when they execute. The
/etc/defaults/rc.conf file contains the default values for various shell variables that control
whether a service is to be started. Administrators override the defaults by placing different
values for the same shell variables into /etc/rc.conf. For example, to enable the use of the
secure shell (ssh) at boot time, the following line would be placed into /etc/rc.conf:

sshd_enable="yes"

The heart of the rc script system is a program called rcorder that takes a set of shell scripts as
input, works out their interdependencies, and then outputs an ordered list of names. Each
startup script declares the modules that it requires as well as those it provides. The rcorder
programs uses these REQUIRE and PROVIDE statements to determine the proper order in
which to run the startup scripts.

One housekeeping task is to check the local filesystems after a system crash. If the system is not
booted with the fastboot option, then the /etc/rc.d/fsck script carries out filesystem checks. In
versions of BSD before FreeBSD, the filesystem checks were absolutely necessary and had to be
carried out before any other work, but with the advent of soft updates and journaling in UFS
(Sections 9.6 and 9.8) and ZFS (Chapter 10), that is required only if the system has shut down
uncleanly (e.g., because of unexpected power loss). The program /sbin/fsck checks filesystem
consistency and repairs damaged filesystems. Normally, fsck is invoked from the
/etc/rc.d/fsck script to examine and repair each filesystem before it is mounted. When the
system is initially booted, the root filesystem is mounted read-only. If the root filesystem
requires repairs, FreeBSD does a variant of the mount system call that requests the kernel to
reload all its root-filesystem data structures. Reloading ensures consistency between the data in
the kernel memory and any data in the filesystem that were modified by fsck. Having the root

filesystem mounted read-only ensures that the kernel will not have any modified data in
memory that cannot be reloaded.

Following the filesystem checks, the filesystems are mounted, the root filesystem is updated to
be writable, and any devices that are to be used for swapping and paging are enabled. Disk
quotas are then checked and enabled, and the system starts the background processes that
implement various system services. These processes include /usr/sbin/cron, the program that
executes commands at periodic intervals; /usr/sbin/accton, the program that enables system
accounting; /usr/sbin/syslogd, the system error-logging process; and /usr/sbin/sshd,
which implements encrypted remote access to the shell. Each of these processes is started from
its own startup script in /etc/rc.d.

/usr/libexec/getty

Historically, the /usr/libexec/getty program was spawned by init to open and initialize
terminal lines—most frequently, serial terminals or modems. Today, the primary obligation of
getty is to launch the /usr/bin/login sessions on the video or serial console (if any). It is
sometimes used to launch X Display Manager (xdm) sessions to enable login via graphical user
interfaces, although many systems will instead be configured to start the window system via
rc.d. The getty program reads a login name and invokes the /usr/bin/login program to
complete a login sequence.

/usr/bin/login

The login program is responsible for signing a user in to the system; it is usually invoked by
/usr/libexec/getty with the name of the user who wishes to log in to the system. Login will
then authenticate the user using the pluggable authentication modules (PAM) mechanism. PAM
supports diverse authentication mechanisms including local passwords (stored in the
/etc/master.passwd file), Kerberos distributed authentication, one-time password in
everything (OPIE) onetime passwords, and a range of third-party modules supporting other
distributed or hardware-token-based authentication schemes. If a secret is requested from the
user—for example, a password—then login will disable terminal echoing. After successful
authentication, login is responsible for performing a variety of accounting functions including
adding entries to the system lastlog and utmpx files, as well as auditing the login via the audit
facility described in Section 5.11.

The process credential, described in Section 5.3, must be configured to represent the user and
group identifiers of the authenticated user, as well as audit properties, MAC labels, and resource
limits. The login program must also change the current working directory to the user’s home

directory. The user’s login name is stored in the session structure using the setlogin system call
so that it can be obtained reliably via the getlogin system call by programs that want to know the
login name associated with a given process. Finally, login uses execve to overlay itself with the
user’s shell.

The login program may also be invoked when a user enters the system through a network
connection. For such connections, getty and init are bypassed; their functionality is subsumed
by the daemon spawned when the network connection is established.

15.5 System Operation

In this section, we consider topics that are related to the system-startup procedure.

Kernel Configuration

The software that makes up a FreeBSD kernel is defined by a configuration file that is
interpreted by the /usr/sbin/config program invoked as part of the kernel build process. The
kernel build process has become considerably more complex in FreeBSD and is now controlled
by a set of Makefile targets. To build a kernel, the administrator invokes make in the following
way:

make buildkernel KERNCONF=<kernel_config_file>

The buildkernel argument is a Makefile target that tells make to build a kernel but not to install
it. KERNCONF is a Makefile variable that is set to the name of the kernel configuration. Once a
kernel has been properly built, it is installed by running make in the following way:

make installkernel KERNCONF=<kernel_config_file>

One reason for this new build process is the need to build and install the necessary kernel
modules that were discussed in Section 15.3. The configuration file specifies the hardware and
software components that should be supported by a kernel. The build process generates several
output files, some of which are compiled and linked into the kernel’s load image. It also creates a
directory into which all the loadable kernel modules will be built. When the kernel is installed,
its modules are installed as well. A complete description of the kernel build process is given in
Hamby & Mock [2014].

System Shutdown and Autoreboot

FreeBSD provides several utility programs to halt, reboot, or power off a system, or to bring a
system from multiuser to single-user operation. Safe halting, rebooting, and powering down of a
system require support from the kernel. This support is provided by the reboot system call.

The reboot system call is a privileged call. A parameter specifies how the system should be shut
down and rebooted. This parameter is a superset of the flags passed by the boot program to the
system when the latter is initially bootstrapped. A system can be brought to a halt (typically by
forcing it to execute an infinite loop), it can be rebooted to single-user or multiuser operation, or
powered off, which causes the kernel to first halt the system and then (if supported by the
architecture) request a poweroff. There are additional controls that can be used to force a crash
dump before rebooting (see the next subsection for information about crash dumps) and to
disable the writing to disk of data that are in the buffer cache if the information in the buffer
cache is wrong.

Automatic rebooting is usually done when a catastrophic failure is recognized. The system will
reboot itself automatically if it recognizes an unrecoverable failure during normal operation.
Failures of this type, termed panics, are all handled by the panic() subroutine.

When the system is shutting down, it goes through three separate phases:

• Shutdown of all services that depend on the filesystem to store data

• Shutdown of the filesystem itself

• Shutdown of services that do not depend on the filesystem

These three phases are necessary because some services will want to write some final data to the
filesystem before it is turned off and may not be able to restart cleanly if they cannot do so.

Services register event handlers with the kernel to provide an orderly shutdown of the system.
Each event handler is declared with the following macro:

EVENTHANDLER_REGISTER(name, function, argument, priority)

Table 15.5 lists the names of the shutdown phases. In the EVEN-THANDLER_REGISTER
macro, the name parameter identifies in which phase of the shutdown sequence the event
handler’s function will be called. The argument allows the module to pass itself any private data

necessary for it to turn off. The priority orders the shutdown routines within a phase. The
priority serves the same purpose here as the order argument does in the SYSINIT macro in
creating an orderly startup sequence. The priority is necessary to make sure that services do not
go away while other services depend on them.

Table 15.5 Shutdown phases.

The kernel shutdown routine first walks the list of shutdown_pre_sync functions and calls each
in turn, and then it shuts down the filesystems on the local disks. With the filesystems in a
quiescent state, it invokes all the shutdown_post_sync functions. A kernel core dump is made if
requested—for example, if it was called because of a kernel panic. Kernel core dumps are written
directly to the swap partition and not to a normal filesystem, which is why this step can come
after the filesystems have been shut down. Finally, the kernel shutdown routine invokes all the
functions registered in the shutdown_final group. The machine then powers down if it has been
directed to do so and the hardware supports software-based power-off. Otherwise, it goes into
an infinite loop awaiting a reset by the user.

System Debugging

FreeBSD provides several facilities for debugging system failures. The most commonly used
facility is the crash dump: a copy of memory that is saved on secondary storage by the kernel
when a catastrophic failure occurs. Crash dumps are created by the doadump() routine. They
occur if a reboot system call is made in which the RB_DUMP flag is specified or if the system
encounters an unrecoverable—and unexpected—error.

The doadump() saves the current context with a call to the savectx() routine and then invokes
the dumpsys() routine to write the contents of physical memory to secondary storage. The
precise location of a crash dump is configurable; most systems place the information in a
primary swap partition. This operation is done by the dump entry point of the configured disk
driver.

A crash dump is retrieved from its location on disk by the /sbin/savecore program after the
system is rebooted and the filesystems have been checked. It creates a file into which the

crash-dump image is copied. The system administrator can examine crash dumps with the
standard FreeBSD debugging program, kgdb. The kernel is also set up so that a kgdb debugger
running on one machine can attach itself across a serial line to a kernel running on another
machine. Once attached, it can set breakpoints, examine and modify kernel data structures, and
invoke kernel routines on the machine being debugged. This form of source-level debugging is
particularly useful in developing kernel device drivers, as long as the driver being developed is
not the serial-line driver itself.

Passage of Information To and From the Kernel

In 4.3BSD and earlier systems, utilities that needed to get information from the kernel would
open the special device /dev/kmem, which gave access to the kernel’s memory. Using the
name list from the kernel binary, the utility would seek to the address of the desired symbol and
read the value at that location. Utilities with superuser privilege could also use this technique to
modify kernel variables. Although this approach worked, it had six problems:

1. Applications did not have a way to find the binary for the currently running kernel reliably.
Using an incorrect binary would result in looking at the wrong location in /dev/kmem,
resulting in wildly incorrect output. For programs that modified the kernel, using the wrong
binary would usually result in crashing the system by trashing some unrelated data structure.

2. Reading and interpreting the kernel name list is time consuming. Thus, applications that had
to read kernel data structures ran slowly.

3. Applications given access to the kernel memory could read the entire kernel memory.
Malicious (or vulnerable) programs could snoop the terminal or network input queues looking
for users who were typing sensitive information such as passwords.

4. It is desirable to provide unprivileged access to a subset of monitoring information: for
example, to a user’s own processes or sockets. This policy is not only difficult to enforce
correctly in userspace, which does not have race-free access to kernel data structures such as the
user credential, but it also violates the design goals laid out in Section 5.5 to centralize policy
implementation as an aid to security extensibility. Controlling access to kernel-originated data is
substantially easier within the kernel than it is when a userspace program is given access to all
of kernel memory.

5. As more of the kernel data structures became dynamically allocated, it became difficult to
extract the desired information reliably. For example, in 4.3BSD, the process structures were all
contained in a single, statically allocated table that could be read in a single operation. In
FreeBSD, process structures are allocated dynamically and are referenced through a linked list.

Thus, they can be read out only one process entry at a time. Because a process entry is
subdivided into many separate pieces, each of which resides in a different part of the kernel
memory, every process entry takes several seeks and reads to extract through /dev/kmem.

6. With an increased focus on long-term binary compatibility, especially with not just individual
userspace binaries but whole userspace installations running in a jail, userspace interpretation
of internal kernel data structures proves extremely fragile. A more explicit monitoring interface
allows userspace monitoring tools to be more robust to internal kernel changes.

To resolve these problems, 4.4BSD introduced the sysctl system call. This extensible kernel
interface allows controlled access to kernel data structures. The problems enumerated
previously are resolved as follows:

1. Applications do not need to know which kernel binary they are running. The running kernel
responds to their requests and knows where their data structures are stored. Thus, the correct
data structure is always returned or modified.

2. No time is spent reading or interpreting name lists. Accessing kernel data structures takes
only a few system calls.

3. Sensitive data structures cannot be accessed. The kernel controls the set of data structures
that it will return. Nothing else in the kernel is accessible. The kernel can impose its own set of
access restrictions on each set of data structures that it returns.

4. Kernel sysctl handlers are able to invoke security policies such as MAC and jails, allowing
limits to be placed on monitoring processes, network connections, and so on. Each user process
is limited to an appropriate view of the system.

5. The kernel can use its standard mechanisms for ensuring consistent access to distributed data
structures. When requesting process entries, the kernel can acquire the appropriate locks to
ensure that a coherent set of data can be returned.

6. The kernel is able to export well-defined and carefully managed versions of data structures to
userspace; for example, rather than exporting the proc structure, which changes frequently as
new kernel features are added, a separate kinfo_proc structure is exported from the kernel,
which includes version information and padding to allow userspace to detect and adjust to
changes. Userspace libraries such as libprocstat and libmemstat provide higher-level APIs
used by monitoring applications such as procstat and memstat.

Additional benefits of the interface include the following:

• Values to be changed can be validated before the data structure is updated. If modification of
the data structure requires exclusive access, an appropriate lock can be obtained before the
update is done. Thus, an element can be added to a linked list without danger of another process
traversing the list while the update is in progress.

• Information can be computed only on demand. Infrequently requested information can be
computed only when it is requested, rather than being computed continually. For example,
many of the virtual-memory statistics are computed only when a system-monitoring program
requests them.

• The interface allows monitoring tools to run without the privilege to access kernel memory,
removing them from the TCB; likewise, user processes can manipulate system settings subject to
kernel policy without general write access to the kernel address space. This isolation from access
to kernel memory is important for jails and virtual network stacks, in which guest superusers
must be able to modify settings for their local environments, but not those of other jails or
virtual stacks.

The sysctl system call describes the kernel namespace using a management information base
(MIB). A MIB is a hierarchical namespace much like the filesystem namespace, except that each
component is described with an integer value rather than with a string name. A hierarchical
namespace has several benefits:

• New subtrees can be added without existing applications being affected.

• If the kernel omits support for a subsystem, the sysctl information for that part of the system
can be omitted.

• Each kernel subsystem can define its own naming conventions. Thus, the network can be
divided into protocol families. Each protocol family can be divided into protocol-specific
information, and each protocol can describe its own state.

• The namespace can be divided into those parts that are machine independent and are available
on every architecture, and those parts that are machine dependent and are defined on an
architecture-by-architecture basis.

Since the addition of the sysctl system call in 4.4BSD, the number of variables it controls has
been expanded to include about 3000 values that control the virtual memory system,
filesystems, networking stacks, and the underlying hardware, as well as the kernel itself.

Exercises

15.1 What is the purpose of each stage in the boot-loader sequence?

15.2 What is the job of the assembly-language startup? Why is this program written in assembly
language?

15.3 What processes are started when the system is booted?

15.4 How are kernel modules loaded into the system at boot time? Give an example of a kernel
module.

15.5 The reboot system call causes the system to halt or reboot. Give two reasons why this
system call is useful.

15.6 Give two reasons why loadable kernel modules are useful in developing kernel services.
Give one reason not to use them.

15.7 Why is it necessary to have a particular order in which kernel services are loaded and
initialized? Why is it also necessary to have a particular order in which kernel services are shut
down?

*15.8 Suppose that a machine does not have a battery-backup time-of-day clock. Propose a
method for determining that the time-of-day clock is incorrect. Describe a way to initialize the
clock’s time of day. What are the limitations of your method?

**15.9 What are the necessary macros to create a loadable kernel module? How would you test
your module without linking it directly into the kernel?

References

Davis et al., 2014.

B. Davis, R. Norton, J. Woodruff, & R. Watson, “How FreeBSD Boots: a Soft-Core MIPS
Perspective,” Proceedings of AsiaBSDCon 2014, March 2014.

Forum, 2013.

Unified     EFI       Forum,   Inc.,   UEFI   Specification     Version   2.4,   available   from
http://www.uefi.org/specifications, July 2013.

Hamby & Mock, 2014.

J. Hamby & J. Mock, FreeBSD Handbook, Chapter 9, Configuring the FreeBSD Kernel,
available                                                                       from
http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/kernelconfig.html,   March
2014.

