                                          Glossary

absolute pathname See pathname.

access control list (ACL) A form of discretionary access control that replaces the group
permissions for a file with a more specific list of the users that are permitted to access the files.
The ACL also includes a list of the permissions that each user is granted. These permissions
include the traditional read, write, and execute permissions along with other properties such as
the right to rename or delete the file. See also discretionary access control; file permissions.

ACL See access control list.

address family A collection of related address formats, as found in a single communication
domain. For example, the IPv4 domain uses the Internet address family.

address-resolution protocol (ARP) A communication protocol used to map one network
address to another dynamically. For example, ARP is used in FreeBSD to map Internet
addresses into Ethernet addresses dynamically. See also neighbor discovery.

address translation A mechanism, typically implemented in hardware, that translates
memory addresses supplied by a program into physical memory addresses. This facility is
important in supporting multiprogramming because it allows an operating system to load
programs into different areas of memory and yet have each program execute as though it were
loaded at a single, fixed memory location. See also memory-management unit.

advisory lock A lock that is enforced only when a process explicitly requests its enforcement.
An advisory lock is contrasted with a mandatory lock, which is always enforced. See also
mandatory lock.

ambient authority Refers to the right to name objects via global namespaces such as the
filesystem root or TCP/IP port namespace. Processes in Capsicum’s capability mode are denied
ambient authority, and hence are able to operate only on objects to which they have been
delegated capabilities. See also capability system; Capsicum; sandbox.

ancillary data Specially interpreted data sent on a network connection. Ancillary data may
include protocol-specific data, such as addressing or options.

anonymous object Represents a region of transient backing storage. Pages of an anonymous
object are zero-filled on first reference and modified pages will be stored in the swap area if
memory becomes tight. The object is destroyed when no references remain.

application compartmentalization Sometimes referred to as privilege separation, this
technique decomposes applications into a set of sandboxed processes, each delegated narrow
sets of rights necessary to perform their specific function. This technique, implemented using
Capsicum in FreeBSD, helps to mitigate security vulnerabilities: successful attacks gain only
limited rights in the system. See also ambient authority; Capsicum; sandbox.

ARP See address-resolution protocol.

association In the interprocess-communication facilities, a logical binding between two
communication endpoints that must be established before communication can take place.
Associations may be long lived, such as in stream-based communication, or short lived, such as
in a datagram-based communication paradigm.

AST See asynchronous system trap.

asymmetric cryptography A cryptographic system that does not use the same key for
decrypting data as it does for encrypting data; sometimes referred to as public-key cryptography.
See also symmetric cryptography.

asynchronous An asynchronous thread usually has nothing to do with the currently running
process. Examples are unrelated hardware interrupts.

asynchronous system trap (AST) A software-initiated interrupt to a service routine. ASTs
enable a process to be notified of the occurrence of a specific event asynchronously with respect
to its execution. In FreeBSD, ASTs are used to initiate thread rescheduling.

autoconfiguration The probing and identification of hardware attached to the system.
Successfully identified hardware is attached to the I/O subsystem. Autoconfiguration is
performed when the kernel bootstraps itself into operation and any time that a new piece of
hardware is attached to the system. In a network protocol, the process by which a system
discovers important information about itself and the network (such as its network address and
default router) without any help from a user.

background process In job-control-oriented process-management systems, a process whose
process group is different from that of its controlling terminal; thus, this process is currently
blocked from most terminal access. Otherwise, a background process is one for which the

command interpreter is not waiting—that is, the process was set running with the “&” operator.
The opposite of a background process is a foreground process.

backing storage Storage that holds objects that are removed from main memory during
paging and swapping operations. See also secondary storage.

black-hole route Used to temporarily block packets from moving through the network. A
packet with a destination address that matches a black-hole route is dropped before it can be
routed or forwarded.

block In the filesystem, a unit of allocation. The filesystem allocates space in block-size units or
in fragments of block-size units.

block accounting The process of maintaining a count of the number of disk blocks available
for the storage of new data in the fast filesystem.

block size The natural unit of space allocated to a file (filesystem block size) or the smallest
unit of I/O that a character device can do (for disk devices, usually the sector size). In FreeBSD,
the filesystem block size is a parameter of the filesystem that is fixed at the time that the
filesystem is created.

bootstrapping The task of bringing a system up into an operational state. When a machine is
first powered on, it is typically not running any program. Bootstrapping initializes the machine,
loads a program from secondary storage into main memory, and sets that program running.

bottom half With regard to system operation, the collection of routines in the kernel that is
invoked as a result of interrupts. These routines cannot depend on any per-process state. See
also top half.

breakpoint fault A hardware trap that is generated when a process executes a breakpoint
instruction.

broadcast A transmission to all parties. In a network, a broadcast message is transmitted to all
stations attached to a common communication medium.

broadcast storm Occurs when a router is misconfigured such that it forwards all broadcast
packets to its adjacent networks. A broadcast storm can be caused by a single broadcast packet
being copied and transmitted multiple times throughout the network resulting in a waste of
bandwidth and high levels of network congestion, degrading the overall quality of network
services.

bss segment The portion of a program that is to be initialized to zero at the time the program
is loaded into memory. The name bss is an abbreviation for “block started by symbol.” See also
data segment; stack segment; text segment.

buffer bloat A problem caused by overly large buffers present in many network routers. A
network path with too much buffering can cause unnecessarily high packet delays, reducing
overall network performance.

buffer cache A cache of recently used disk blocks. In FreeBSD, the buffer cache has been
merged with the virtual-memory cache.

bus A standardized electrical and mechanical interconnection for components of a computer.

byte A unit of measure applied to data. A byte is almost always 8 bits.

callback In the kernel, a mechanism to notify a subsystem that an asynchronous operation has
completed. In NFS, a scheme where a server keeps track of all the objects that each of its clients
has cached. When a cached object is held by two or more clients and one of them modifies it, the
server sends a notice to all the other clients holding that object so that they can purge it from
their cache. See also lease.

callout queue The kernel data structure that describes waiting events. Each event in the queue
is described by a structure that contains a function to be called, a pointer to be passed as an
argument to the function, and the number of clock ticks until the event should occur.

canonical mode A terminal mode. Characters input from a terminal or a pseudo-terminal that
is running in canonical mode are processed to provide standard line-oriented editing functions,
and input is presented to a process on a line-by-line basis. When the terminal is processing in
noncanonical mode, input is passed through to the reading process immediately and without
interpretation. Canonical mode is also known as cooked mode, and noncanonical mode is also
known as raw mode.

capability A communicable, unforgeable token of authority. In FreeBSD, capabilities are file
descriptors whose permissible operations have been “refined,” or limited to a specific set of
operations. Capabilities are unforgeable as the kernel prevents improper modification.
Capabilities are communicable as they are inherited across fork and exec, and can be delegated
via local-domain sockets. See also capability system; Capsicum; descriptor.

capability system Permits access to underlying objects only via capabilities. Capability mode
prevents processes from acquiring new capabilities via global namespaces. Applications
selectively delegate capabilities to sand-boxed processes to enforce access-control policies and

mitigate vulnerabilities by minimizing unnecessary rights. See also ambient authority;
capability; Capsicum; sandbox.

Capsicum A lightweight, kernel-based sandboxing framework based on the idea of a capability
system. Capsicum’s primary use is in limiting the impact of vulnerabilities via application
compartmentalization: sandboxed processes execute without ambient authority and have access
only to objects for which they have been granted capabilities. See also ambient authority;
application compartmentalization; capability; capability system; sandbox.

caught signal A signal that, when delivered to a process, results in a signal-handler procedure
being invoked. A signal handler is installed by a process with the sigaction system call.

central processing unit (CPU) The primary computational unit in a computer. The CPU is
the processing unit that executes applications. A multiprocessor will have more than one CPU.
Other processing units may be present in a computer—for example, for handling I/O.

character-at-a-time mode A mode of operation for a pseudo-terminal device whereby
processes reading from the pseudo-terminal receive input immediately as it is typed. This mode
differs from raw mode in that certain input processing, such as interpreting the interrupt
character, is still performed by the system. See also canonical mode.

character device A device that provides either a character-stream-oriented I/O interface or,
alternatively, an unstructured (raw) interface. All devices in FreeBSD use the character-device
interface.

checksum The value of a mathematical function computed for a block of data; used to detect
corruption of the data block.

child process A process that is a direct descendant of another process as a result of being
created with a fork system call.

client ID In NFS, a client identifier uniquely identifies a client to a single server. The client ID
is generated by the server and assigned to the client as part of the exchange ID operation.

client process In the client–server model of communication, a process that contacts a server
process to request services. A client process is usually unrelated to a server process; the client’s
only association with the server is through a communication channel. See also server process.

cluster The logical grouping of contiguous pages of virtual memory or a file. In FreeBSD, this
grouping is used by the kernel to aggregate pages when writing or reading them to or from the
disk to reduce the number of I/O operations needed to move data in and out of memory.

cold start The initial phase of a bootstrap procedure. The term is derived from the fact that the
software assumes nothing about the state of the machine—as though the machine had just been
turned on and were cold.

communication domain An abstraction used by the interprocess-communication facilities to
organize the properties of a communication network or similar facility. A communication
domain includes a set of protocols, termed the protocol family; rules for manipulating and
interpreting names; the address family; and, possibly, other intrinsic properties. The facilities
provided by the system for interprocess communication are defined such that they are
independent of the communication domains supported by the system. This design makes it
possible for applications to be written in a communication-domain-independent manner.

communication protocol A set of conventions and rules used by two communicating
processes. Communication protocols are most often associated with networking.

configuration file A file that contains parameters for the system-configuration program

/usr/sbin/config. This file describes the device drivers that should be configured into the
kernel and other basic kernel functionality such as the enabling of symmetric multiprocessing
support.

connect request A request passed to the user-request routine of a communication-protocol
module as a result of a process making a connect system call on a socket. The request causes the
system to attempt to establish an association between a local and a remote socket.

context switching The action of interrupting the currently running thread and switching to
another thread. Context switching occurs as one thread after another is scheduled for execution.
An interrupted thread’s context is saved in that thread’s thread control block, and another
thread’s context is loaded.

continuation style A style of programming where two or more functions operate
cooperatively by calling each other instead of returning directly at the end of execution. When
the currently executing function is done with its work, it calls another function, which was
passed as one of the first function’s arguments, as part of its return() call. Programming with
continuations has the effect of creating a function chain and is often used when a system wants
to submit work to a hardware coprocessor but wishes to have a cleanup routine called by the
hardware coprocessor when the coprocessor has completed the job.

continue signal Signal 19 (SIGCONT). A signal that, when delivered to a stopped or sleeping
process, causes that process to resume execution.

controlling process The session leader that established the connection to the controlling
terminal. See also session leader.

controlling terminal The pseudo-terminal associated with a process’s session from which
keyboard-related signals may be generated. The controlling terminal for a process is normally
inherited from the process’s parent.

control request A request passed to a communication-protocol module as a result of a process
making an ioctl or setsockopt system call on a socket.

cooked mode See canonical mode.

copy-on-write A technique whereby multiple references to a common object are maintained
until the object is modified (written). Before the object is written, a copy is made; the
modification is made to the copy rather than to the original. In virtual-memory management,
copy-on-write is a common scheme that the kernel uses to manage pages shared by multiple
processes. All the page-table entries mapping a shared page are set such that the first write
reference to the page causes a page fault. When the page fault is serviced, the faulted page is
replaced with a private copy, which is writable.

core file A file (named procname.core) that is created by the system when certain signals are
delivered to a process. The file contains a record of the state of the process at the time the signal
occurred. This record includes the contents of the process’s virtual address space and, on most
systems, the user structure.

CPU See central processing unit.

crash Among computer scientists, an unexpected system failure.

crash dump A record of the state of a machine at the time of a crash. This record is usually
written to a place on secondary storage that is thought to be safe so that it can be saved until the
information can be recovered.

credential See user credential.

current working directory The directory from which relative pathnames are interpreted for
a process. The current working directory for a process is set with the chdir or fchdir system call.

cylinder group In the fast filesystem, a collection of blocks on a disk drive that is grouped and
managed together. The filesystem allocates inodes and data blocks on a per-cylinder-group basis.
Cylinder group is a historic name from the days when the geometry of disks was known.

DAC See discretionary access control.

daemon A long-lived process that provides a system-related service. There are daemon
processes that execute in kernel mode (e.g., the pageout daemon) and daemon processes that
execute in user mode (e.g., the routing daemon). The Old English term daemon means “a
deified being,” as distinguished from the term demon, which means “an evil spirit.”

DARPA Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. An agency of the US Department of
Defense that is responsible for managing defense-sponsored research in the United States.

datagram socket A type of socket supporting an unreliable message transport that preserves
message boundaries.

datalink layer The network software component responsible for handling packets for a
particular media protocol such as Ethernet. It normally resides above the physical layer and
beneath the network layer in the ISO model of layered network protocols.

data segment The segment of a process’s address space that contains the initialized and
uninitialized data portions of a program. See also bss segment; stack segment; text segment.

decapsulation In network communication, the removal of the outermost header information
from a message. See also encapsulation.

delegation In NFS, the process by which a server can allow a client to perform operations, such
as reading and writing data, for a period of time without contacting the server. The server
delegates responsibility for the reading and writing of data cached at the client.

demand paging A memory-management technique in which memory is divided into pages
and the pages are provided to processes as needed—that is, on demand. See also pure demand
paging.

demon See daemon.

denial-of-service attack Any attempt to overload a system such that it is unable to do work
for legitimate users of the system. For example, sending a system so many packets that it runs
out of mbufs and thus cannot process any other network traffic.

descriptor An integer assigned by the system when a file is referenced by the open system call
or when a socket is created with the socket, pipe, or socketpair system calls. The integer
uniquely identifies an access path to the file or socket from a given process or from any of that
process’s children. Descriptors can also be duplicated with the dup and fcntl system calls.

descriptor table A per-process table that holds references to objects on which I/O may be
done. I/O descriptors are indices into this table.

device In UNIX, a peripheral connected to the CPU.

device driver A software module that is part of the kernel and supports access to a peripheral
device.

device special file A file through which processes can access hardware devices on a machine.
For example, a sound card is accessed through such a file.

direct memory access (DMA) A facility whereby a peripheral device can access main
memory without the assistance of the CPU. DMA is typically used to transfer contiguous blocks
of data between main memory and a peripheral device.

directory In UNIX, a special type of file containing entries that are references to other files. By
convention, a directory contains at least two entries: dot (.) and dot-dot (..). Dot refers to the
directory itself; dot-dot refers to the parent directory.

directory entry An entry that is represented by a variable-length record structure in the
directory file. Each structure holds an ASCII string that represents the filename, the number of
bytes of space provided for the string, the number of bytes of space provided for the entry, the
type of the file referenced by the entry, and the number of the inode associated with the
filename. By convention, a directory entry with a zero inode number is treated as unallocated,
and the space held by the entry is available for use.

directory table The top level of a two-level hierarchy of data structures used by a
forward-mapped page-table algorithm to describe the virtual address space of a process. Each
entry in a directory table points to a page of page-table pages. A two-level mapping hierarchy is
used on the PC architectures. See also forward-mapped page table; page-table entry;
page-table pages.

dirty In computer systems, modified. A system usually tracks whether an object has been
modified—is dirty—because it needs to save the object’s contents before reusing the space held
by the object. For example, in the virtual-memory system, a page in the virtual-memory cache is
dirty if its contents have been modified. Dirty pages must be written to the swap area or
filesystem before they are reused.

discretionary access control (DAC) Refers to forms of access-control policy in which object
owners control access by other users; for example, file permissions and access control lists
(ACLs). See also access control list; file permissions; mandatory access control.

disk partition A software scheme that divides a disk drive into one or more linear extents or
partitions. Each partition is a contiguous region of a disk drive that is used as a swap area or to
hold a filesystem.

distributed program A program that is partitioned among multiple processes, possibly
spread across multiple machines.

DMA See direct memory access.

dnode A data structure used by the Zettabyte filesystem to describe objects that may change in
size from tiny to huge. Dnodes describe filesystems, snapshots, clones, ZVOLs, space maps,
property lists, and dead-block lists. When used to describe objects like files and directories, a
dnode is embedded with a znode.

domain Defines a set of related network protocols. The IPv4 protocols, including TCP, UDP,
SCTP, and ICMP, are all members of the Internet domain, while the IPX and SPX protocols are
members of the netipx domain. The network protocols defined for IPv6 are likewise members of
their own, Internet version 6, domain.

double indirect block See indirect block.

effective GID See effective group identifier.

effective group identifier (effective GID) The first entry in the groups array. The effective
GID, along with the other GIDs in the groups array, is used by the filesystem to check group
access permission. The effective GID is set when a set-group-identifier program is executed. See
also credential; group identifier; real group identifier; saved group identifier.

effective UID See effective user identifier.

effective user identifier (effective UID) The UID that the system uses to check many user
permissions. For example, the effective UID is used by the filesystem to check owner-access
permission on files. The effective UID is set when a set-user-identifier program is executed. See
also credential; real user identifier; saved user identifier; user identifier.

elevator sorting algorithm An algorithm used by the device drivers for I/O requests to move
disk heads. The algorithm sorts requests into a cyclic ascending order based on the block
number of the request. The name is derived from the fact that the algorithm orders disk requests
in a manner similar to the way ride requests for an elevator would be handled most efficiently.

emulate FreeBSD can emulate the system-call interface of other variants of the UNIX
operating system. For example, FreeBSD can run binaries compiled for Linux.

encapsulation In network communication, the procedure by which a message is created that
has an existing message enclosed in it as data. A protocol normally encapsulates a message by
crafting a leading protocol header that indicates the original message is to be treated as data.
See also decapsulation.

erase character The character that is recognized by the terminal handler, when the latter is
running in canonical mode, to mean “delete the last character in the line of input.” Each
terminal session can have a different erase character, and that erase character can be changed at
any time with a tcsetattr system call. The terminal handler does not recognize the erase
character on terminals that are in noncanonical mode. See also kill character; word-erase
character.

errno The global variable in C programs that holds an error code indicating why a system call
failed. The value to be placed in errno is returned by the kernel in the standard return register;
it is moved from this return register to errno by code in the C run-time library.

event handler A function, registered with a software system, that is to be called at a later time
when a particular event occurs. See also callout queue; kqueue.

exactly once semantics A distributed system, built in such a way that certain client
operations can be serialized and can occur only once, is said to provide exactly once semantics.
Remote locking operations are one instance where exactly once semantics are desirable.

extension header Message header that can be easily added and removed from a packet
because it contains the header’s length and some indication of where and how to begin
processing the next header, if such exists.

fault rate The rate at which a process generates page faults. For a reference string, the fault
rate is defined to be time independent by its being specified as the number of page faults divided
by the length of the reference string.

fetch policy The policy used by a demand-paged, virtual-memory-management system in
processing page faults. Fetch policies differ primarily in the way that they handle prepaging of
data.

fifo file In the filesystem, a type of file that can be used for interprocess communication. Data
written by one process to a fifo are read by another in the order in which they were sent. The
name refers to the fact that data are transferred in a first-in, first-out fashion.

file An object in the filesystem that is treated as a linear array of bytes. A file has at least one
name and the file exists until all its names are deleted explicitly.

file entry See file structure.

file handle A globally unique token created by an NFS server and passed back to an NFS client.
The client can then use the file handle to refer to the associated file on the server. A handle is
created when a file is first opened; it is passed to the server by the client in later operations, such
as read and write, that reference the open file.

filename A string of ASCII characters that names an ordinary file, special file, or directory. The
characters in a filename cannot include null (0) or the ASCII code for slash (/).

file offset A byte offset associated with an open file descriptor. The file offset for a file
descriptor is set explicitly with the lseek system call, or implicitly as a result of a read or write
system call.

file permissions A bitmask associated with each file or directory that limits how the owner,
group, and other users in the system are able to access the object. Each can be granted read,
write, or execute access; in addition, file permissions include the sticky, setuid, and setgid bits.
Permissions may be managed by the file’s owner, or the root user. See also access control list;
discretionary access control.

file structure The data structure used by the kernel to hold the information associated with
one or more open file descriptors that reference a file. Usually, each open file descriptor
references a unique file structure. File structures may be shared, however, when open
descriptors are duplicated with the dup and dup2 system calls, inherited across a fork system
call, or received in a message through the interprocess-communication facilities.

filesystem A collection of files. The UNIX filesystem is hierarchical, with files organized into
directories. Filesystems include facilities for naming files and for controlling access to files. A
filesystem resides on a single, logical device that may be built from part of a single disk drive or
from a set of disk drives that have been aggregated together.

fill-on-demand page fault The first page fault for an individual page; it must be resolved by
retrieval of data from the filesystem or by allocation of a zero-filled page.

first-level bootstrap The initial code that is executed in a multilevel bootstrapping operation.
Usually, the first-level bootstrap is limited in size and does little more than bootstrap into
operation a larger, more intelligent program. Typically, the first-level bootstrap loads the /boot
program so that /boot can, in turn, bootstrap the kernel.

foreground process In job-control-oriented process-management systems, a process whose
process group is the same as that of its controlling terminal; thus, the process is allowed to read
from and to write to the terminal. Otherwise, a foreground process is one for which the
command interpreter is currently waiting. The opposite of a foreground process is a background
process.

fork file A directory containing named files for NFSv4 attributes. Each file in the directory
names an attribute and each file’s contents are the value associated with that attribute.

forward The direction a network packet takes through a system if it is received by a host for
which it is not, ultimately, destined. See also inbound; router.

forward-mapped page table A large, contiguous array indexed by the virtual address that
contains one element, or page-table entry, for each virtual page in the address space. This
element contains the physical page to which the virtual page is mapped, as well as access
permissions and status bits telling whether the page has been referenced or modified, and a bit
showing whether the entry contains valid information. Most current memory-management-unit
designs for architectures with 32-bit address spaces use some variant of a forward-mapped page
table. See also reverse-mapped page table; memory-management unit.

fragment In the filesystem, a part of a block. The filesystem allocates new disk space to a file as
a full block or as one or more fragments of a block. The filesystem uses fragments, rather than
allocating space in only full block-size units, to reduce wasted space when the size of a full block
is large.

fragment-descriptor table A data structure in the fast filesystem that describes the
fragments that are free in an entry of the allocation map. The filesystem uses the
fragment-descriptor table by taking a byte in the allocation map and using the byte to index into
the fragment-descriptor table. The value in the fragment-descriptor table indicates how many
fragments of a particular size are available in the entry of the allocation map. By doing a logical
AND with the bit corresponding to the desired fragment size, the system can determine quickly
whether a desired fragment is contained within the allocation-map entry.

free list In the memory-management system, the list of available pages of physical memory
(also called the memory free list). There is a similar free list in the system for dynamically
allocated kernel memory. Many kernel data structures are dynamically allocated, including
vnodes, file-table entries, and disk-quota structures.

free-space reserve A percentage of space in a filesystem that is held in reserve to ensure that
certain allocation algorithms used by the filesystem will work well. By default, 8 percent of the
available space in the fast filesystem is held in reserve.

gateway See router.

generation number The number assigned to an inode each time that the latter is allocated to
represent a new file. Each generation number is used only once. To make file handles harder to
guess, most NFS implementations, including FreeBSD, use a random-number generator to
select a new generation number.

GID See group identifier.

global page-replacement algorithm An algorithm that does page replacement according to
systemwide criteria. A global-page-replacement strategy tends to make the most efficient use of
the system memory. However, a single process can thrash the entire system by trying to use all
the available memory.

group identifier (GID) An integer value that uniquely identifies a collection of users. GIDs
are used in the access-control facilities provided by the filesystem. See also credential; effective
group identifier; real group identifier; saved group identifier; set-group-identifier program.

half-open connection A connection that is open for communication in one direction between
two endpoints. For example, a client may close its sending side of a stream connection because it
has no more data to send but leave its receiving half of the connection open so that it can
continue to receive data from the server.

handler A procedure that is invoked in response to an event such as a signal.

hard limit A limit that cannot be exceeded. See also soft limit.

hard link A directory entry that directly references an inode. If there are multiple hard links to
a single inode and if one of the links is deleted, the remaining links still reference the inode. By
contrast, a symbolic link is a file that holds a pathname referencing a file. See also symbolic link.

header prediction A heuristic used by TCP on incoming packets to detect two common cases:
the next expected data segment for an existing connection or an acknowledgment plus a window
update for one or more data segments. When one of these two cases arises, and the packet has
no additional flags or state indications, the fully general TCP input processing is skipped.

heap The region of a process that can be expanded dynamically with the sbrk system call (or
malloc() C library call). The name is derived from the disorderly fashion in which data are
placed in the region.

high watermark An upper bound on the number of data that may be buffered. In the
interprocess-communication facilities, each socket’s data buffer has a high watermark that
specifies the maximum number of data that may be queued in the data buffer before a request to
send data will block the process (or will return an error if nonblocking I/O is being used). See
also low watermark.

hole In a file, a region that is part of the file but has no associated data blocks. The filesystem
returns zero-valued data when a process reads from a hole in a file. A hole is created in a file
when a process positions the file pointer past the current end-of-file, writes some data, and then
closes the file. The hole appears between the previous end-of-file and the beginning of the newly
written data.

home directory The current working directory that is set for a user’s shell when the user logs
into a system. This directory is usually private to the user. The home directory for a user is
specified in a field in the password-file entry for the user.

hop limit The number of routers through which a network packet may be forwarded before it is
dropped. See also router.

host-unreachable message A network-layer error message indicating that the host to which
a previous message was directed is unavailable because there is no known path to the desired
host.

ICMP See Internet control message protocol.

ICV See integrity-check value.

idempotent An operation that can be repeated several times without changing the final result
or causing an error. For example, writing the same data to the same offset in a file is idempotent
because it will yield the same result whether it is done once or many times. However, trying to
remove the same file more than once is nonidempotent because the file will no longer exist after
the first try.

idle loop The block of code inside the kernel that is executed when there is nothing else to run.
In FreeBSD, the idle loop zeros pages on the free list while it waits for a thread to be added to
the run queue.

idle queue The queue where all idle threads are stored. An idle thread is run only when a CPU
has nothing else to do. See also run queue; sleep queue; turnstile queue.

IKE See Internet key exchange.

inbound The direction a network packet is traveling if it has reached the system for which it is
destined. An inbound network packet is delivered to an application on a system or causes an
error if no appropriate application is found. See also forward.

indirect block In the filesystem, an auxiliary data block that holds the number of a data block.
The first 12 blocks of a file are pointed to directly by the inode. Additional data blocks are
described with a pointer from the inode to an indirect block; the system must first fetch the
indirect block that holds the number of the data block. In FreeBSD, the kernel may have to fetch
as many as three indirect blocks to locate the desired data block. An indirect block that contains
data-block numbers is termed a single indirect block; an indirect block that contains block
numbers of single indirect blocks is called a double indirect block; an indirect block that
contains block numbers of double indirect blocks is called a triple indirect block.

init The first user program (/sbin/init) that runs when the system is booted.

initial sequence number See sequence space.

inode A data structure used by the filesystem to describe a file. The contents of an inode
include the file’s type and size, the UID of the file’s owner, the GID of the directory in which it
was created, and a list of the disk blocks and fragments that make up the file. Note that inodes
do not have names; directory entries are used to associate a name with an inode.

input/output (I/O) The transfer of data between the computer and its peripheral devices.

integrity-check value (ICV) A value computed over a range of data by a sender that is used
by a receiver to ensure that data transmitted across a network was not corrupted. See also
checksum.

interactive program A program that must periodically obtain user input to do its work. A
screen-oriented text editor is an example of an interactive program.

Internet control message protocol (ICMP) A communication protocol used for reporting
errors and controlling the operation of the Internet protocols. Each of IPv4 and IPv6 includes its
own version of ICMP, called ICMPv4 and ICMPv6, respectively.

Internet key exchange (IKE) A network protocol for exchanging keys used in the IPSec
security protocols.

Internet protocol See IPv4 domain.

interpreter A program that parses and executes a descriptive language in a single step, rather
than using the more common two-stage process of compiling the language and executing the
resulting binary. The shell is an example of an interpreter; it parses and executes a shell script
rather than first compiling it.

interprocess communication (IPC) The transfer of data between processes. Most facilities
for interprocess communication are designed such that data are transferred between objects
other than processes. An interprocess-communication model that is not directly process
oriented is advantageous because it is possible to model scenarios in which communication
endpoints are location independent and, possibly, are migrated dynamically. For example, in
FreeBSD, communication is between sockets rather than between processes.

interprocessor interrupt (IPI) A special type of interrupt by which one processor may
interrupt another processor in a multiprocessor system if the interrupting processor requires
action from the other processor.

interrupt In computer systems, an event external to the currently executing process that
causes a change in the normal flow of instruction execution. Interrupts usually are generated by
hardware devices that are external to the CPU.

inverted page table See reverse-mapped page table.

I/O See input/output.

I/O redirection The redirection of an I/O stream from the default assignment. For example,
all the standard shells permit users to redirect the standard output stream to a file or process.
I/O redirection is implemented in the shell by first closing the descriptor associated with the I/O
stream and then opening or duplicating another descriptor in its place.

I/O stream A stream of data directed to, or generated from, a process. Most I/O streams in
UNIX have a single common data format that permits users to write programs in a tool-oriented
fashion and to combine these programs in pipelines by directing the standard output stream of
one program to the standard input stream of another.

iovec A data structure used to specify user I/O requests made to the kernel. Each structure
holds the address of a data buffer and the number of bytes of data to be read or written. Arrays

of such structures are passed to the kernel in readv and writev system calls. See also
scatter-gather I/O.

I/O vector See iovec.

IPC See interprocess communication.

IPI See interprocessor interrupt.

IPSec The set of protocols that implement network layer security in the Internet protocols,
versions 4 and 6.

IPv4 domain Version 4 of the Internet protocols. IPv4 used to be called the Internet protocols
until version 6 was developed. See also IPv6 domain.

IPv6 domain Version 6 of the Internet protocols. The newest version of the Internet protocols
with support for larger addresses, security, and autoconfiguration. See also IPv4 domain.

job In UNIX, a set of processes that all have the same process-group identifier. Jobs that have
multiple processes are normally created with a pipeline. A job is the fundamental object that is
manipulated with job control.

job control A facility for managing jobs. With job control, a job may be started, stopped, and
killed, as well as moved between the foreground and the background. The terminal handler
provides facilities for automatically stopping a background job that tries to access the
controlling terminal and for notifying a job’s controlling process when such an event occurs.

keepalive packet A type of packet used by TCP to maintain information about whether a
destination host is up. Keepalive packets are sent to a remote host, which, if it is up, must
respond. If a response is not received in a reasonable time to any of several keepalive packets,
then the connection is terminated. Keepalive packets are used on only those TCP connections
that have been created for sockets that have the SO_KEEPALIVE option set on them.

keepalive timer A timer used by the TCP protocol when using keepalive packets. The timer is
set when a keepalive packet is transmitted. If a response to the packet is not received before the
timer expires several times, then the connection is shut down.

kernel The central controlling program that provides basic system facilities. The FreeBSD
kernel creates and manages processes, provides functions to access the filesystem, and supplies
communication facilities. The FreeBSD kernel is the only part of FreeBSD that a user cannot
replace.

kernel-event polling A generic method of notifying a process when an event happens or a
condition holds based on the results of small pieces of kernel code termed filters. The process
describes a set of events for which the process referencing the descriptor wants to be notified.
Events include both dynamic transitions, such as the arrival of data to read, and state transitions,
such as a rename of the file associated with the descriptor. See also nonblocking I/O; polling
I/O; signal-driven I/O.

kernel mode The most privileged processor-access mode. The FreeBSD kernel operates in
kernel mode. See also user mode.

kernel process A process that executes with the processor in kernel mode. The pageout
daemon and swapper processes are examples of kernel processes.

kernel state The run-time execution state for the kernel. This state, which includes the
program counter, general-purpose registers, and run-time stack, must be saved and restored on
each context switch.

key In the kernel, a piece of data that uniquely identifies some resource in the system. When
used by an interprocess communication system, it identifies an endpoint of communication such
as a message queue or a shared facility like a region of shared memory.

kill character The character that is recognized by the terminal handler in canonical mode to
mean “delete everything typed on this terminal after the most recent end-of-line character.”
Each terminal session can have a different kill character, and the user can change that kill
character at any time with an tcsetattr system call. The terminal handler does not recognize the
kill character on terminals that are in noncanonical mode. See also erase character; word-erase
character.

kqueue A kernel data structure associated with a file descriptor that describes a set of events
for which the process referencing the descriptor wants to be notified. Events include both
dynamic transitions, such as the arrival of data to read, and state transitions, such as a rename
of the file associated with the descriptor.

lease A ticket permitting an activity that is valid until a specified expiration time. In the NQNFS
protocol, a client gets a lease from its server to read, write, or read and write a file. As long as the
client holds a valid lease, it knows that the server will notify it if the file status changes. Once the
lease has expired, the client must contact the server to request a new lease before using any data
that it has cached for the file. See also callback.

least recently used (LRU) A policy of reuse whereby the least recently used items are reused
first. For example, in the filesystem, there is a fixed number of vnodes available for accessing

files. Vnodes that hold valid file data are reallocated in an LRU order, in the hope that the file
referenced by the vnode may be reused by a later open request.

line discipline A processing module in the kernel that provides semantics for an asynchronous
serial interface or for a software emulation of such an interface. Line disciplines are described by
a procedural interface whose entry points are stored in the linesw data structure.

line mode See canonical mode.

link layer Layer 2 in the ISO Open Systems Interconnection Reference Model. In this model,
the link layer is responsible for the (possibly unreliable) delivery of messages within a single
physical network. The link layer corresponds most closely to the network-interface layer of the
FreeBSD network subsystem. See also network-interface layer.

listen request A request passed to a communication-protocol module as a result of a process
making a listen system call on a socket. This request indicates that the system should listen for
requests to establish a connection to the socket. Otherwise, the system will reject any connection
requests that it receives for the socket.

loadable kernel modules A collection of software that implements a kernel service but that is
not statically linked into the kernel’s image. Loadable kernel modules are brought into the
system dynamically, possibly at run time, by actions initiated either by the system or a user. See
also permanent kernel modules.

local domain A communication domain in the interprocess-communication facilities that
supports stream- and datagram-oriented styles of communication between processes on a single
machine.

locality of reference A phenomenon whereby memory references of a running program are
localized within the virtual address space over short periods. Most programs tend to exhibit
some degree of locality of reference. This locality of reference makes it worthwhile for the
system to prefetch pages that are adjacent to a page that is faulted, reducing the fault rate of a
running program.

local page-replacement algorithm An algorithm for page replacement that first chooses a
process from which to replace a page and then chooses a page within that process based on
per-process criteria. Usually, a process is given a fixed number of pages and must then select
from them when it needs a new page.

logical block A block defined by dividing a file’s linear extent by the underlying filesystem
block size. Each logical block of a file is mapped into a physical block. This additional level of

mapping permits physical blocks to be placed on disk without concern for the linear
organization of the logical blocks in a file.

long-term-scheduling algorithm See short-term-scheduling algorithm.

low watermark A lower bound that specifies the minimum number of data that must be
present before an action can be taken. In the interprocess-communication facilities, each
socket’s data buffer has a low watermark that specifies the minimum number of data that must
be present in the data buffer before a reception request will be satisfied. See also high
watermark.

LRU See least recently used.

MAC See mandatory access control.

machine check An exceptional machine condition that indicates the CPU detected an error in
its operation. For example, a machine check is generated if a parity error is detected in a cache
memory.

magic number The number located in the first few bytes of an executable file that indicates
the file’s type. Many on-disk data structures have a magic number to help verify their contents.

main memory The primary memory system on a machine.

mandatory access control (MAC) An infrastructure that allows the system administrator to
impose security policies on all users in the system, in contrast to discretionary access control in
which users control access to their own files. Policies include multilevel security in which labels
on processes and files control access to use based on a user’s clearance level and the file’s
confidentiality level. MAC is implemented via a reference monitor, the MAC framework. See also
discretionary access control; multilevel security; reference monitor.

mandatory lock A lock that cannot be ignored or avoided. A mandatory lock is contrasted
with an advisory lock, which is enforced only when a process explicitly requests its enforcement.
See also advisory lock.

mapped object An object whose pages are mapped into a process address space. Processes
map objects into their virtual address space using the mmap system call.

mapping structure The machine-dependent state required to describe the translation and
access rights of a single page. See also page-table entry.

marshalling Preparing a set of parameters to be sent across a network. Marshalling includes
replacing pointers by the data to which they point and converting binary data to the canonical
network byte order. See also remote procedure call.

masked signal A signal blocked in a sigprocmask system call. When a signal is masked, its
delivery is delayed until it is unmasked. In addition, in FreeBSD, the system automatically
masks a caught signal while that signal is being handled.

maximum segment lifetime (MSL) The maximum time that a segment of data may exist in
the network. See also 2MSL timer.

maximum transmission unit (MTU) The largest packet that can be communicated across a
network link in a single transaction.

mbuf A data structure that describes a block of data. Mbufs are used in the
interprocess-communication facilities for holding network packets, as well as data that are
internal to the network protocol modules. “Mbuf” is shorthand for “memory buffer.”

memory address A number that specifies a memory location. Memory addresses are often
categorized as physical or virtual according to whether they reference physical or virtual
memory.

memory free list See free list.

memory-management system The part of the operating system that is responsible for the
management of memory resources available on a machine.

memory-management              unit     (MMU)         A     hardware    device    that     implements
memory-management-related tasks, such as address translation and memory protection. Most
contemporary     memory-management          units    also   provide    support   for     demand-paged
virtual-memory management. See also address translation.

message queue A local interprocess-communication mechanism that supports in-order
delivery of messages. Messages are inserted at one end of the queue and removed from the other,
and the kernel guarantees their ordering.

metadata In filesystems, metadata provides pointers and descriptions for linking multiple disk
sectors into files and identifying those files. Metadata are the directories, inodes, and free block
maps that give structure to raw storage capacity.

MLS See multilevel security.

MMU See memory-management unit.

MSL See maximum segment lifetime.

MTU See maximum transmission unit.

multilevel feedback queue A queueing scheme in which requests are partitioned into
multiple prioritized subqueues, with requests moving between subqueues based on dynamically
varying criteria. The FreeBSD kernel uses a multilevel-feedback-queueing scheme for
scheduling the execution of threads.

multilevel security (MLS) A mandatory access control (MAC), sometimes referred to as the
Bell-LaPadula policy, that controls access based on data confidentiality. In MLS, processes are
labeled with clearances and objects (e.g., files) are labeled with classifications. Two rules are
enforced: higher-clearance processes cannot “write down” to lower-classification objects, and
lower-clearance processes cannot “read up” from higher-classification objects. See also
mandatory access control.

multiple-root problem A problem that results from the implementation details of filesystems
in non-Unix environments, such as Windows-based operating systems, in which each filesystem
has its own root directory without the benefit of a single root to bind all filesystems. Directory
traversal in a system with multiple root directories required changes in the NFS protocol so that
users and programs could move smoothly across filesystems without the need to know about
multiple root directories.

neighbor discovery The technique by which a system on a network discovers the hardware
address of its neighbors, including its router, so that it can send network packets to them. The
neighbor discovery protocol is used by IPv6. See also address-resolution protocol.

netmask A network mask defines the boundary between the host and network parts of a
network address. The mask is used by various parts of the network protocol and routing systems
to make decisions about whether a network address is meant for a specific node, or if it should
be routed to another system in the Internet.

network byte order The order defined by a network for the transmission of protocol fields
that are larger than one byte. In IPv4 and IPv6, this order is “most significant byte first.”

network-interface layer The layer of software in the FreeBSD network subsystem that is
responsible for transporting messages between hosts connected to a common transmission
medium. This layer is mainly concerned with driving the transmission media involved and with

performing any necessary link-level protocol encapsulation and decapsulation. See also link
layer.

network layer The layer of software in the FreeBSD network subsystem that is responsible for
implementing ISO layer 2 functionality. In the IPv4 domain, this functionality is implemented
in the IP protocol module.

network mask See netmask.

newbus The device-driver infrastructure used in FreeBSD to manage the devices on the system.
Newbus    includes    machine-independent      routines    and   data    structures   for   use   by
machine-dependent layers and provides a framework for dynamic allocation of data structures
for each device. See also autoconfiguration.

nice A user-controllable process-scheduling parameter. The value of a process’s nice variable is
used in calculating the scheduling priority of the process’s threads. Positive values of nice mean
that the process is willing to receive less than its share of the processor. Negative values of nice
mean that the process requests more than its share of the processor.

nonblocking I/O A mode in which a descriptor may be placed, whereby the system will return
an error if any I/O operation on the descriptor would cause the process to block. For example, if
a read system call is done on a descriptor that is in nonblocking I/O mode, and no data are
available, the system will return the error code EAGAIN, rather than block the process until data
arrive. See also kernel-event polling; polling I/O; signal-driven I/O.

noncanonical mode See canonical mode.

nonlocal goto A transfer in control that circumvents the normal flow of execution in a
program across routine boundaries. For example, if procedure A calls procedure B, and B calls C,
then a direct transfer of control from C back to A (bypassing B) would be a nonlocal goto.

nonresident object An object that is not present in main memory. For example, a page in the
virtual address space of a process may be nonresident if it has never been referenced.

nonuniform memory access (NUMA) A computer memory design with nonuniform
memory access (NUMA) used in systems with multiple CPUs. Access time to the memory
depends on the memory location relative to the CPU. Under NUMA, a CPU can access its own
local memory faster than memory local to another CPU or shared between CPUs. See also
symmetric multiprocessing.

NUMA See nonuniform memory access.

object See virtual-memory object.

optimal replacement policy A replacement policy that optimizes the performance of a
demand-paging virtual-memory system. In this book, a policy whereby the full reference string
of a program is known in advance, and pages are selected such that the number of page faults is
minimized.

orphaned process group A process group in which the parent of every member is either
itself a member of the group or is not a member of the group’s session. Such a parent would
normally be a job-control shell capable of resuming stopped child processes.

out-of-band data Data transmitted and received out of the normal flow of data. Stream
sockets support a logically separate out-of-band data channel through which at least one
message of at least 1 byte of data may be sent. The system immediately notifies a receiving
process of the presence of out-of-band data, and out-of-band data may be retrieved from the
stream out of the order in which normal data are received.

overlay In computer systems, a region of code or data that may be replaced with other such
regions on demand. Overlays are usually loaded into a process’s address space on demand,
possibly on top of another overlay. Overlays are a commonly used scheme for programs that are
too large to fit in the address space of a machine that does not support virtual memory.

page In memory management, the fixed-sized unit of measure used to divide a physical or
virtual address space. See also demand paging.

page fault An exception generated by a process’s reference to a page of that process’s virtual
address space that is not marked as resident in memory.

pagein An operation done by the virtual-memory system in which the contents of a page are
read from secondary storage.

pageout An operation done by the virtual-memory system in which the contents of a page are
written to secondary storage.

pageout daemon In FreeBSD, the kernel process that is responsible for writing parts of the
address space of a process to secondary storage, to support the paging facilities of the
virtual-memory system. See also swapper.

pager A kernel module responsible for providing the data to fill a page and for providing a place
to store that page when it has been modified and the memory associated with it is needed for
another purpose.

page reclaim A page fault where the page that was faulted is located in memory, usually on the
inactive or cache list.

page table The data structure used by the virtual-memory system to store the mapping
between virtual addresses and physical addresses. See also page-table entry; page-table pages.

page-table entry (PTE) The machine-dependent data structure that identifies the location
and status of a page of a virtual address space. When a virtual page is in memory, the PTE
contains the page-frame number that the hardware needs to map the virtual page to a physical
page.

page-table pages The top level of a two-level hierarchy of data structures used by a
forward-mapped page-table algorithm to describe the virtual address space of a process. On the
PC, page-table pages are stored in an array called the directory table; each entry in a page-table
page points to a page of bottom-level page-table entries. See also directory table;
forward-mapped page table; page-table entry; page table.

paging The action that brings pages of an executing process into main memory when they are
referenced and that removes them from memory when they are replaced. When a process
executes, all its pages are said to reside in virtual memory. Only the actively used pages, however,
need to reside in main memory. The remaining pages can reside on disk until they are needed.

panic In UNIX, an unrecoverable system failure detected by the kernel. FreeBSD automatically
recovers from a panic by rebooting the machine, repairing any filesystem damage, and then
restarting normal operation. See also crash dump.

parent process A process that is a direct relative of another process as a result of a fork system
call.

partition See disk partition.

path MTU discovery An algorithm and set of messages used to find the largest packet that
can be sent between two endpoints in the network.

pathname A null-terminated character string starting with an optional slash (/), followed by
zero or more directory names separated by slashes, and optionally followed by a filename. If a
pathname begins with a slash, it is said to be an absolute pathname, and the path search begins
at the root directory. Otherwise, the pathname is said to be a relative pathname, and the path
search begins at the current working directory of the process. A slash by itself names the root
directory. A null pathname refers to the current working directory.

permanent kernel modules A collection of software that implements a kernel service that
must be present at boot time and may not be removed while the system is running. See also
loadable kernel module.

persist timer A timer used by TCP for maintaining output flow on a connection. This timer is
started whenever data are ready to be sent, but the send window is too small to bother sending
and no data are already outstanding. If no window update is received before the timer expires, a
window probe is sent.

physical block One or more contiguous disk sectors to which the system maps a logical block.

physical mapping The software state, also referred to as the pmap structure, needed to
manage the machine-dependent translation and access tables that are used either directly or
indirectly by the memory-management hardware. This mapping state includes information
about access rights, in addition to address translation.

PID See process identifier.

pipe An interprocess-communication facility that supports the unidirectional flow of data
between related processes. Data transfer is stream oriented, reliable, and flow controlled. A pipe
is specified to the shell with the “|” symbol. For example, to connect the standard output of
program a to the standard input of program b, the user would type the command “a | b.”

pipeline A collection of processes in which a pipe connects the standard output of one process
to the standard input of the next process.

placement policy The policy used by the virtual-memory system to place pages in main
memory when servicing a page fault. FreeBSD uses page coloring to optimize the placement of
pages.

pmap See physical mapping.

pmap module The physical-mapping module manages machine-dependent translation and
access tables that are used either directly or indirectly by the memory-management hardware.

polling I/O The normal mode for a descriptor whereby the system will block if a read request
has no data available or a write request has no buffering available. A process can determine
whether an I/O operation will block by polling the kernel using the select or poll system call. The
select or poll system call can be requested to return immediately with the information or to
block until at least one of the requested I/O operations can be completed. See also kernel-event
polling; nonblocking I/O; signal-driven I/O.

POSIX The standards group for P1003, the portable operating-system interfaces established by
the IEEE. Its first established standard was the kernel interface, 1003.1, which was ratified in
1988. The final POSIX standard was ratified in 1999. Since 1999, the only changes have been to
keep the existing POSIX standards current.

prefetching The retrieval of data before they are needed. Many machines prefetch machine
instructions so that they can overlap the time spent fetching instructions from memory with the
time spent decoding instructions.

prepaging The prefetching of pages of memory. Prepaging is a technique used by
virtual-memory systems to reduce the number of page faults. See also cluster.

priority inversion A problematic scenario in scheduling where a high-priority thread is
indirectly preempted by a lower-priority thread effectively inverting the relative priorities of the
two threads. This inversion violates the priority model that high-priority threads can only be
prevented from running by higher-priority threads and briefly by low-priority threads that will
quickly complete their use of a resource shared by the high- and low-priority threads. See also
priority propagation.

priority propagation The propagation of the priority of a high-priority thread blocking on a
mutex to a low-priority thread holding that mutex. The current owner temporarily assumes the
priority of the higher-priority thread waiting on the mutex. This higher priority allows the owner
to resume running if it was preempted by a mid-priority thread, and to continue running should
a mid-priority thread become ready to run. When the owner releases the mutex, it drops back to
its original priority. See also priority inversion.

private mapping When privately mapping a file in virtual memory, changes made to the
memory mapping the file are not written back to the mapped file and are not visible to other
processes mapping the file. See also shared mapping.

privilege The right to bypass normal system protections and access control. Normally, the
kernel grants privilege only to processes owned by the superuser. Root users within jails have
restricted privilege to prevent escape from jail. Mandatory access control may also grant or limit
privilege to processes as dictated by policy. See also mandatory access control; superuser.

privilege separation See application compartmentalization.

probe The operation of checking to see whether a hardware device is present on a machine.
Newer bus designs have a standardized way to identify the devices that are attached to them.

probe effect Placing data collection or debugging code in a program incurs extra execution
time and a different layout of memory. These changes are referred to as the probe effect and
may even cause different results.

process In operating systems, a task that contains one or more threads of execution. In UNIX,
user processes are created with the fork system call.

process context The context of a FreeBSD process consists of user-level state, including the
contents of its address space and the run-time environment, and kernel-level state, including
scheduling parameters, resource controls, and identification information. The process context
includes everything used by the kernel in providing services for the process. See also process
credential; thread; virtual address space.

process credential A data structure describing the security context associated with each user
process as well as cached with open files, sockets, mount-points, and other system objects that
must authorize asynchronous operations. In addition to authorizing UIDs, GIDs, security labels,
and jail information, the credential contains event-auditing configuration and resource limits.
See also user credential.

process group A collection of processes on a single machine that all have the same
process-group identifier. The kernel uses this grouping to arbitrate among multiple jobs
contending for the same terminal.

process-group identifier A positive integer used to identify uniquely each active process
group in the system. Process-group identifiers are typically defined to be the PID of the
process-group leader. Process-group identifiers are used by command interpreters in
implementing job control when the command interpreter is broadcasting signals with the killpg
system call, and when the command interpreter is altering the scheduling priority of all
processes in a process group with the setpriority system call.

process-group leader The process in a process group whose PID is used as the process-group
identifier. This process is typically the first process in a pipeline.

process identifier (PID) A nonnegative integer used to identify uniquely each active process
in the system.

process model A model inherited from the Multics operating system that places
userspace-program instances in separate virtual-address spaces for robustness and security. In
the early 2000s, threads (encapsulating execution context such as register state) were
differentiated from processes (process context containers for executing threads) to support
multithreaded programming. See also process context; thread.

process open-file table See descriptor table.

processor affinity In an SMP system, a desire to run a thread on the same processor. For
performance reasons, a thread should not be migrated between processors unnecessarily
because of the loss of its cached working memory.

processor group A set of CPU cores on a processor supporting symmetric multi-threading or
a set of processors in an SMP system that is treated as a unit by the scheduler.

process priority A parameter used by the kernel to schedule the execution of the threads
within a process. The priority for threads running in the timesharing class changes dynamically
according to the operation of the thread. In addition, the nice parameter can be set for a process
to weight the overall scheduling priority for its threads. See also scheduling class; scheduling
priority.

process structure A data structure maintained by the kernel for each active process in the
system. The process structure for a process is always resident in main memory. See also thread
structure.

/proc       filesystem   A   filesystem-based   interface   to   active   processes   that   provides
process-debugging facilities. Each process is represented by a directory entry in a
pseudo-directory named /proc. Applications access the virtual address space of a process by
opening the file in /proc that is associated with the process and then using the read and write
system calls as though the process were a regular file.

protocol family A collection of communication protocols, the members of which are related by
being part of a single network architecture. For example, the TCP, UDP, IPv4, and ICMPv4
protocols are part of the protocol family for the IPv4 domain.

protocol-switch structure A data structure that holds all the entry points for a
communication protocol supported by the kernel.

pseudo-terminal A software emulation of a hardware terminal, built from a pair of character
devices: a master device and a slave device. The slave device provides a process with an interface
identical to that for a hardware terminal. However, instead of having a hardware device driving
it, the slave device has another process manipulating it through the master half of the
pseudo-terminal. Anything written on the master device is given to the slave device as input,
and anything written on the slave device is presented as input on the master device.

PTE See page-table entry.

public-key encryption A cryptographic system in which the keys used to encrypt data can be
shared publicly, in contrast to systems that require all keys be kept secret to guarantee the
security of the data.

pure demand paging Demand paging without prepaging.

push migration When the scheduler actively moves a thread from one CPU to another to
balance the computational load in a system.

race condition When two or more actions for an operation occur in an undefined order.
Trouble arises if there exists a possible order that results in an incorrect outcome.

rapid connection reuse A new connection that exactly duplicates the addresses and ports of
a recently closed stream socket in the TIME_WAIT state.

raw-device interface The character-device interface for block-oriented devices such as disks.
This interface provides raw access to the underlying device, arranging for direct I/O between a
process and the device.

raw mode See canonical mode.

raw socket A socket that provides direct access to a communication protocol beneath the
transport layer. For example, a raw socket in the IPv4 domain gives the user the ability to read
and write IP packets directly without using a transport protocol such as UDP or TCP.

real GID See real group identifier.

real group identifier (real GID) The GID that is recorded in the accounting record when a
process terminates. The real GID for a process is initially set at the time that a user logs into a
system and is then inherited by child processes across later fork and exec system calls
(irrespective of whether a program is set-group-identifier). See also credential; effective group
identifier; saved group identifier; set-group-identifier program.

real UID See real user identifier.

real user identifier (real UID) With respect to a process, the true identity of the user that is
running the process. The real UID for a process is initially set at the time a user logs into a
system and is then inherited by child processes across later fork and exec system calls
(irrespective of whether a program is set-user-identifier). The real UID is recorded in the
accounting record when a process terminates. See also credential; effective user identifier;
saved user identifier; set-user-identifier program.

receive window In TCP, the range of sequence numbers that defines the data the system will
accept for a connection. Any data with sequence numbers outside this range that are received
are dropped. See also sliding-window scheme.

reclaim See page reclaim.

reclaim from inactive A page reclaim from the inactive list. A page can be reclaimed from the
inactive list if that page is freed by the page-replacement algorithm, but the page is not
reassigned before a process faults on it.

red zone A read-only region of memory immediately below the last page of the per-thread,
kernel-mode, run-time stack. The red zone is set up by the system so that a fault will occur if a
thread overflows the space allocated for its kernel stack.

referenced page In the virtual-memory system, a page that is read or written.

reference monitor Controls access to objects in order to implement security policies such as
mandatory access control. The classical definition requires that a reference monitor be
tamper-proof, always invoked (non-bypassable), and small enough to subject to analysis and
tests. See also mandatory access control.

reference string A dataset that describes the pages referenced by a process over the time of
the process’s execution. This description represents the memory-related behavior of the process
at discrete times during that process’s lifetime.

region A range of memory that is being treated in the same way. For example, the text of a
program is a region that is read-only and is demand paged from the file on disk that contains it.

relative pathname See pathname.

relocation The copying of a program’s contents from one place in an address space to another.
This copying may be accompanied by modifications to the image of the program so that memory
references encoded in the program remain correct after that program is copied. Code that is not
bound to a particular starting memory address is said to be relocatable or position independent.

remote procedure call (RPC) A procedure call made from a client process to invoke a
subroutine in a server process. Typically, the client and server processes are running on
different machines. A remote procedure call operates much like a local procedure call: the client
makes a procedure call, and then waits for the result while the procedure executes. See also
marshalling.

replacement policy The policy that a demand-paged virtual-memory-management system
uses to select pages for reuse when memory is otherwise unavailable.

resident object An object that is present in main memory. For example, a page in the virtual
address space of a process is resident if its contents are present in main memory.

resident-set size The number of pages of physical memory held by a process. In a well-tuned
system, the resident-set size of a process will be that process’s working set. Usually, the precise
working set cannot be calculated, so a process will have additional pages beyond that needed for
its working set.

retransmit timer A timer used by TCP to trigger the retransmission of data. This timer is set
each time that data are transmitted to a remote host. It is set to a value that is expected to be
greater than the time it will take the receiving host to receive the data and return an
acknowledgment.

reverse-mapped page table A hardware-maintained memory-resident table that contains
one entry per physical page and that is indexed by physical address instead of by virtual address.
An entry contains the virtual address to which the physical page is currently mapped; the entry
also includes protection and status attributes. The hardware does virtual-to-physical address
translation by computing a hash function on the virtual address to select an entry in the table.
The hardware handles collisions by linking together table entries and making a linear search of
this chain until it finds the matching virtual address. See also forward-mapped page table.

root directory The directory that the kernel uses in resolving absolute pathnames. Each
process has a root directory that can be set with the chroot system call, and the system has a
unique root directory, the identity of which is set at the time that the system is bootstrapped.

root filesystem The filesystem containing the root directory that is considered the root of all
filesystems on a machine. The identity of a default root filesystem is compiled into a kernel,
although the actual root filesystem used by a system may be set to some other filesystem at the
time that a system is bootstrapped.

root user See superuser.

round robin In queueing, an algorithm in which each requester is serviced for a fixed time in a
first-come, first-served order; requests are placed at the end of the queue if they are incomplete
after service.

route In packet-switched-network communication, a route to a destination specifies the host or
hosts through which data must be transmitted to reach the destination.

router A machine, also known as a gateway, that has two or more network interfaces and that
forwards packets between the networks to which it is connected. Typically, a router runs a
routing process that gathers information on the network topology; it uses that information to
devise a set of next-hop routes that it installs in the kernel’s routing table. See also routing
mechanism; routing policy.

router solicitation A message sent by a host in an attempt, without human intervention, to
discover which machine is its router. See also autoconfiguration; neighbor discovery.

routing daemon A process in FreeBSD that provides a routing-management service for the
system. This service uses a protocol that implements a distributed database of routing
information updated dynamically to reflect changes in topological connectivity.

routing mechanism The routing facilities included in the kernel that implement externally
defined policies. The routing mechanism uses a lookup mechanism that provides a first-hop
route (a specific network interface and immediate destination) for each destination. See also
router; routing policies.

routing policies The routing facilities provided in a user-level process that define external
policies. Routing policies include all the components that the routing daemon uses in choosing
the first-hop routes, such as discovery of the local network topology, implementation of various
routing protocols, and configuration information specifying local policies. See also router;
routing mechanism.

routing redirect message A message generated by a router when the latter recognizes that a
message it has received can be delivered via a more direct route.

RPC See remote procedure call.

run queue The queue of those threads that are ready to execute. See also idle queue; sleep
queue; turnstile queue.

run-to-completion A model of processing in which the maximum amount of work is done on
a piece of data without deferring any work until a later period. Earlier versions of network
protocols repeatedly deferred work between protocol modules so that packets could be buffered
and the buffers tuned to fit the application. Run-to-completion reduces per-packet overhead
because important data remain in the CPU cache for as long as the processing continues, and in
modern processors cache misses are a significant source of overhead.

SA See security association.

sandbox A restricted execution environment in which untrustworthy code can be executed
without granting it the ambient authority of the user who has executed it. See also ambient
authority; application compartmentalization; Capsicum.

saved GID See saved group identifier.

saved group identifier (saved GID) A mechanism that records the identity of a setgid
program by copying the value of the effective GID at the time that the exec for the program is
done. During its execution, the program may temporarily revoke its setgid privilege by setting its
effective GID to its real GID. It can later recover its setgid privilege by setting its effective GID
back to its saved GID. See also credential; effective group identifier.

saved UID See saved user identifier.

saved user identifier (saved UID) A mechanism that records the identity of a setuid
program by copying the value of the effective UID at the time that the exec for the program is
done. During its execution, the program may temporarily revoke its setuid privilege by setting
its effective UID to its real UID. It can later recover its setuid privilege by setting its effective
UID back to its saved UID. See also credential; effective user identifier.

scatter-gather I/O Scatter input allows a single read to be placed in several different buffers.
Scatter output allows several different buffers to be written in a single atomic write.
Scatter-gather I/O uses an iovec structure, an array of buffers and lengths, to identify the buffers
to be used for the I/O. See also iovec.

scheduling In operating systems, the planning used to share a resource. For example, process
scheduling shares the CPU and main memory.

scheduling class The FreeBSD kernel has five scheduling classes: kernel interrupts, system
calls, real time, time sharing, and idle. Each process is placed into a scheduling class. Within
each class, threads of the process are organized by their scheduling priority. See also scheduling
priority; process priority.

scheduling priority A per-process parameter maintained by the kernel that specifies the
priority with which the latter will schedule the execution of the threads of the process. When a
thread is executing in user mode in the timesharing class, the system periodically calculates the
scheduling priority using the thread priority and the nice parameter. See also process priority;
scheduling class.

SCTP See stream transmission control protocol.

secondary storage Storage that holds data that do not fit in main memory. Secondary storage
is usually located on rotating magnetic media, such as disk drives. See also backing storage.

sector The smallest contiguous region on a disk that can be accessed with a single I/O
operation.

security association (SA) The basic channel of secure communication in IPSec. Data is
secured only in one direction by a security association, which means that two security
associations are required to create a fully secure channel between two hosts. See also
security-parameter index.

security-event auditing Refers to the fine-grained logging of security-related events in the
trusted computing base. The audit framework tracks security-related system calls and
application events (such as user authentication) to the audit trail in the filesystem. Typical uses
include post-mortem analysis following compromise and live intrusion detection. See also
trusted computing base.

security label Additional security metadata associated with processes and objects (e.g., files
and sockets) used as input to access-control polices. For example, the MAC policy MLS
associates confidentiality labels with processes and objects, and the MAC policy Biba associates
integrity labels with processes and objects.

security-parameter index (SPI) A 32-bit piece of data used to identify the end of a security
association on a host using IPSec. The security-parameter index is used as a key when working
with security associations in a system’s security databases. See also security association.

segment A contiguous range of data defined by a base and an extent. In memory management,
a segment describes a region of a process’s address space. In the TCP protocol, a segment is a
range of bytes within a single connection defined by starting and ending sequence numbers.

semaphores Data structures and a set of functions used for synchronizing access to a shared
resource, such as an area of memory. Semaphores implement two functions: a take and a give,
such that once one thread has taken a semaphore, all others that follow the first are blocked
until the first thread gives the semaphore back.

send window In TCP, the range of sequence numbers that defines the data the system can
transmit on a connection and be assured that the receiving party has space to hold the data on
receipt. Any data with sequence numbers before the start of the send window have already been
sent and acknowledged. Any data with sequence numbers after the end of the window will not
be sent until the send window changes to include them. See also sliding-window scheme.

sense request A request passed to a communication-protocol module as a result of a process
making a stat system call on a socket.

sequenced-packet socket A type of socket that models sequenced, reliable, unduplicated,
connection-based communication that preserves message boundaries.

sequence space The range of sequence numbers that are assigned to data transmitted over a
TCP connection. In TCP, sequence numbers are taken from a 32-bit circular space that starts
with an arbitrary value called the initial sequence number.

server     process     A    process   that   provides    services    to   client   processes   via    an
interprocess-communication facility. See also client process.

session A collection of process groups established for job control purposes. Normally, a session
is created for each login shell. All processes started by that login shell are part of its session.

session ID Defines a single conversation and set of communications parameters between an
NFSv4 client and server.

session leader A process that has created a session. The session leader is the controlling
process for the session and is permitted to allocate and assign the controlling terminal for the
session. Normally, a session is created for each login shell. All processes started by that login
shell are part of its session.

set-group-identifier program A program that runs with an additional group privilege.
Set-group-identifier programs are indicated by a bit in the inode of the file. When a process
specifies such a file in an exec system call, the GID of the file is made the effective GID of the
process.

set-user-identifier program A program that runs with an UID different from that of the
process that started it running. Set-user-identifier programs are indicated by a bit in the inode
of the file. When a process specifies such a file in an exec system call, the UID of the file is made
the effective UID of the process.

shadow object An anonymous object that is interposed between a process and an underlying
object to prevent changes made by the process from being reflected back to the underlying
object. A shadow object is used when a process makes a private mapping of a file so that changes
made by the process are not reflected in the file.

shared mapping When doing a shared mapping to a file in virtual memory, changes made to
the memory mapping the file are written back to the mapped file and are visible to other
processes mapping the file. See also private mapping.

shared memory An area of memory that can be read and written by two different processes. It
is the fastest way to share information between processes on the same system. See also
semaphores.

shell A program that interprets and executes user commands. When a user logs into a UNIX
system, a shell process is normally created with its standard input, standard output, and
standard error descriptors directed to the terminal or pseudo-terminal on which the user logged
in.

short-term-scheduling algorithm The algorithm used by the system to select the next
process to run from among the set of processes that are deemed runnable. The
long-term-scheduling algorithm, on the other hand, can influence the set of runnable processes
by swapping processes in and out of main memory (and thus in and out of the set of runnable
processes).

signal In UNIX, a software event. In FreeBSD, this event is modelled after a hardware
interrupt.

signal-driven I/O A mode in which a descriptor can be placed, whereby the system will deliver
a SIGIO signal to a process whenever I/O is possible on the descriptor. See also kernel-event
polling; nonblocking I/O; polling I/O.

signal handler A procedure that is invoked in response to a signal.

signal post A notification to a process that a signal is pending for that process. Since most of
the actions associated with a signal are done by the receiving process, a process that is posting a
signal usually does little more than to record the pending signal in the receiving process’s
process structure and to arrange for the receiving process to be run.

signal-trampoline code A piece of code that invokes a signal handler. The signal-trampoline
code contains instructions that set up parameters for calling a signal handler, perform the actual
call to the signal handler, and, on return, perform a sigreturn system call to reset kernel state
and resume execution of the process after the signal is handled.

silly-window syndrome A condition observed in window-based flow-control schemes in
which a receiver sends several small (i.e., silly) window allocations rather than waiting for a
reasonable-size window to become available.

single indirect block See indirect block.

sleep queue The queue of those threads that are blocked awaiting a long-term event such as
completion of a disk read. They cannot run until the event has occurred. The name is derived
from the sleep() routine that places threads on this queue. See also idle queue; run queue;
turnstile queue.

sliding-window scheme A flow-control scheme in which the receiver limits the number of
data that it is willing to receive. This limit is expressed as a contiguous range of sequence
numbers termed the receive window. It is periodically communicated to the sender, who is
expected to transmit only those data that are within the window. As data are received and
acknowledged, the window slides forward in the sequence space. See also receive window; send
window; sequence space.

small-packet avoidance In networking, avoiding the transmission of a packet so small that
its transmission would be inefficient.

SMP See symmetric multiprocessing.

snapshot A filesystem snapshot is a frozen image of a filesystem at a given instant in time.

socket In the FreeBSD interprocess-communication model, an endpoint of communication.
Also, the data structure that implements the socket abstraction and the system call that creates a
socket.

socket address structure A generic structure for holding addresses for a socket. Many
interprocess communication routines, such as connect() and bind(), need to know the network
addresses of the communicating endpoints and require that a socket address structure be passed
as a parameter.

soft limit A limit that may be temporarily exceeded, or exceeded a limited number of times. A
soft limit is typically used with a hard limit. See also hard limit.

soft link See symbolic link.

soft updates A technique to maintain filesystem consistency. It uses delayed writes for
metadata changes, tracks dependencies between updates, and enforces these dependencies at
write-back time. Despite allowing blocks to be written in any order, applications always see the
most current copies of metadata blocks, and the disk always sees copies that are consistent with
its other contents.

software interrupt A software-initiated interrupt. It is requested with an asynchronous
system trap.

software-interrupt thread A thread that is set running in response to a software interrupt.
In FreeBSD, input processing for each transport-layer communication protocol is embodied in a
software-interrupt thread.

special file See device special file.

SPI See security-parameter index.

spin mutex A spin mutex will not relinquish the CPU when it cannot immediately get the
requested lock, but it will loop, waiting for the mutex to be released by another CPU.

stack An area of memory set aside for temporary storage or for procedure and interrupt-service
linkages. A stack uses the last-in, first-out (LIFO) concept. On most architectures, the stack
grows from high memory addresses to low memory addresses. As items are added to (pushed
onto) the stack, the stack pointer decrements; as items are retrieved from (popped off) the stack,
the stack pointer increments.

stack segment A segment that holds a stack. See also bss segment; data segment; text
segment.

stale translation A translation or mapping that was previously true, but is no longer valid. For
example, on machines that have a translation lookaside buffer, if a page-table entry in memory
is changed to alter the mapping, any address translation for that page present in the translation
lookaside buffer must be flushed to avoid a stale translation.

standalone device driver A device driver that is used in a standalone program. A standalone
device driver usually differs from a device driver used in an operating system in that it does not
have interrupt services, memory management, or full support for virtual-memory mapping. In
the FreeBSD stand-alone I/O library, for example, a standalone device driver polls a device to
decide when an operation has completed. It is also responsible for setting up its own memory
mapping when doing transfers between the device and main memory.

standalone I/O library A library of software that is used in writing standalone programs.
This library includes standalone device drivers that are used to perform I/O.

standalone program A program that can run without the support of an operating system.

standard error The I/O stream on which error messages are conventionally placed. This
stream is usually associated with descriptor 2 in a process.

standard input The I/O stream on which input is conventionally received. This stream is
usually associated with descriptor 0 in a process.

standard output The I/O stream to which output is conventionally directed. This stream is
usually associated with descriptor 1 in a process.

start routine A device-driver routine that is responsible for starting a device operation after
the system has acquired all the resources that are required for the operation.

stateless server A server that does not need to maintain any information about which clients
it is serving or which data have been passed to them. Every request that is received by such a
server must be completely self-contained, providing all information needed to fulfill it.

sticky bit The bit in an inode representing a directory that shows that an unprivileged user may
not delete or rename files of other users in that directory. The sticky bit may be set by any user
on a directory that the user owns or for which she has appropriate permissions. Historically, it
was the bit in an inode that indicated that the text segment of the program was to be shared and
kept memory or swap-space resident because of expected future use. That bit is no longer
needed for this use because the virtual-memory system tracks recently used executables.

stream socket A type of socket that models a reliable, connection-based byte stream that can
support out-of-band data transmission.

stream transmission control protocol (SCTP) A connection-oriented transport protocol
used in the Internet. SCTP supports both stream and sequenced-packet styles of
communication.

superblock A data structure in the on-disk filesystem that specifies the basic parameters of the
filesystem.

superpages A capability of most hardware to allow for multiple page sizes. Larger page sizes
are used to reduce pressure on the TLB. The page sizes available are dependent on the
architecture. Common sizes in addition to the standard 4-Kbyte pages are 8-Kbyte, 64-Kbyte,
512-Kbyte, 2-Mbyte, and 4-Mbyte pages. See also translation lookaside buffer.

superuser The user whose UID is 0. Processes owned by the superuser are granted special
privileges by UNIX. The superuser’s login name is usually root. See also privilege.

swap area A region on secondary storage that is used for swapping and paging.

swap device A device on which a swap area resides.

swapper In FreeBSD, the name of the kernel process that implements the swapping portion of
the memory-management facilities. Historically, the swapper is process 0. See also pageout
daemon.

swapping A memory-management algorithm in which entire processes are moved to and from
secondary storage when main memory is in short supply.

swap space See swap area.

symbolic link A file whose contents are interpreted as a pathname when it is supplied as a
component of a pathname. Also called a soft link. See also hard link.

symmetric cryptography A cryptographic system that uses the same key to encrypt data as it
does to decrypt data, sometimes referred to as secret key cryptography. See also asymmetric
cryptography.

symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) A multiprocessor consists of two or more CPUs
connected to a common main memory. Symmetric multiprocessing describes a kernel that can
run simultaneously on all the CPUs at the same time. See also nonuniform memory access.

synchronous Synchronized with the currently running process. For example, in UNIX, all I/O
operations appear to be synchronous: The read and write system calls do not return until the
operation has been completed. (For a write, however, the data may not really be written to their
final destination until some time later—for example, in writing to a disk file.)

system activity An entry into the kernel. System activities can be categorized according to the
event or action that initiates them: system calls, hardware interrupts, hardware traps, and
software-initiated traps or interrupts.

system call In operating systems, a request to the system for service; also called a system
service request.

system clock The device that maintains the system’s notion of time of day. On most systems,
this device is an interval timer that periodically interrupts the CPU. The system uses these
interrupts to maintain the current time of day and to do periodic functions such as thread
scheduling.

system mode See kernel mode.

tag queueing Helps to coordinate I/O operations with a disk driver. Each request passed to the
disk driver is assigned a unique numeric tag. After each request is finished, the tag of the
completed request is returned as part of the completion interrupt. The disk driver gains
efficiency by being able to reorder its I/O requests optimally. The client can ensure integrity by
knowing when write requests have been saved to stable storage.

tags An extensible system for adding arbitrary data to an mbuf or mbuf cluster to communicate
information between different modules in the network stack without having to modify the
packet data.

TCB See trusted computing base.

TCP See transmission control protocol.

termios structure The structure used to describe terminal state. Terminal state includes
special characters, such as the erase, kill, and word-erase characters; modes of operation, such
as canonical or noncanonical; and hardware serial-line parameters, such as parity and baud
rate.

text segment The segment of a program that holds machine instructions. The system usually
makes a program’s text segment read-only and shareable by multiple processes when the
program image is loaded into memory. See also bss segment; data segment; stack segment.

thrashing A condition where requested memory utilization far exceeds the memory availability.
When a machine is thrashing, it usually spends more time doing system-related tasks than
executing application code in user mode.

thread The unit of execution of a process. A thread requires an address space and other
resources, but it can share many of those resources with other threads. Threads sharing an
address space and other resources are scheduled independently and can all do system calls
simultaneously.

thread state block (TSB) A data structure used to hold thread context. The hardware-defined
TSB contains the hardware portion of this context. The software TSB contains the software
portion and is located in memory immediately after the hardware TSB.

thread structure A data structure maintained by the kernel for each active thread in the
system. It contains the stack used when the thread is running in the kernel. Unlike the process
structure, the thread structure can be moved to secondary storage if the process is swapped out.
See also process structure.

three-way handshake A set of three messages used by a communication protocol, such as
TCP, to initiate a reliable connection. Three messages is the minimum number necessary to
ensure that both endpoints are aware of the connection process completing successfully.

tick An interrupt by the system clock.

time quantum In a timesharing environment, the period of time that the process scheduler
gives a process to run before it preempts that process so that another process can execute. Also
called a time slice.

timer backoff The rate at which a timer value is increased. For example, in TCP, the value of
the retransmit timer is determined by a table of multipliers that provide a near-exponential
increase in timeout values.

time slice See time quantum.

time-stable identifier An identifier that refers uniquely to some entity both while it exists
and for a long time after it is deleted. A time-stable identifier allows a system to remember an
identity across transient failures and to detect and report errors for attempts to access deleted
entities.

TLB See translation lookaside buffer.

top half With regard to system operation, the routines in the kernel that are invoked
synchronously as a result of a system call or trap. These routines depend on per-process state
and can block by calling sleep(). See also bottom half.

trace trap A trap used by the system to implement single-stepping in program debuggers. On
architectures that provide trace-bit support, the kernel sets the hardware-defined trace bit in the
context of the thread being debugged and places the thread on the run queue. When the thread
next runs, the trace bit causes a trap to be generated after the thread executes one instruction.
This trap is fielded by the kernel, which stops the thread and returns control to the debugging
process.

track In computer systems, the sectors of a disk that are accessible by one head at one of its
seek positions.

track cache When the kernel is reading from a disk, memory associated with the disk that
holds the data passing under the disk heads regardless of whether they have been requested
explicitly. When the kernel is writing to a disk, memory associated with the disk in which data
are stored until the disk heads reach the correct position for writing them.

translation lookaside buffer (TLB) A processor cache containing translations for recently
used virtual addresses.

transmission control protocol (TCP) A connection-oriented transport protocol used in the
Internet. TCP provides for the reliable transfer of data, as well as for the out-of-band indication
of urgent data.

transport layer The layer of software in the network subsystem that is responsible for moving
data between two sockets. Depending on the type of transport protocol used, the data may be
delivered as a sequenced, in-order stream or as an unordered set of individual messages. See
also transmission control protocol; user datagram protocol.

transport mode One of two modes used for secure communications in IPSec. In transport
mode, only the payload of a packet is protected, whereas the network-layer protocol header is
left exposed. See also tunnel mode.

triple indirect block See indirect block.

trusted computing base (TCB) The smallest subset of a system that must be secure in order
for the system as a whole to be secure. In FreeBSD, this includes the kernel, key system libraries,
applications running as root, and system configuration files and startup scripts.

TSB See thread state block.

tunnel mode One of two modes used for secure communication in IPSec. In tunnel mode, the
packet to be secured is completely contained within another packet that carries the inner packet
between two endpoints. The endpoints are the boundaries of the tunnel. See also transport
mode.

turnstile Data structure used to manage threads awaiting a short-term event such as acquiring
a mutex. See also turnstile queue.

turnstile queue The queue of those threads that are blocked awaiting a short-term event such
as acquiring a mutex. They may propagate their priority to the mutex holder to speed their
release of it. See also idle queue; run queue; sleep queue.

2MSL timer A timer used by the TCP protocol during connection shutdown. The name refers
to the fact that the timer is set for twice the maximum time that a segment may exist in the
network. This value is chosen to ensure that future connections will not mistakenly accept late
messages from an older connection. See also maximum segment lifetime.

type-ahead Transmission of data to a system, usually by a user typing at a keyboard, before the
data are requested by a process.

uberblock An on-disk data structure in the Zettabyte filesystem that references the root of the
tree of blocks representing the storage pool.

UDP See user datagram protocol.

UID See user identifier.

uio A data structure used by the system to describe an I/O operation. This structure contains an
array of iovec structures; the file offset at which the operation should start; the sum of the
lengths of the I/O vectors; a flag showing whether the operation is a read or a write; and a flag
showing whether the source and destination are both in the kernel’s address space or whether
the source and destination are split between user and kernel address spaces. See also iovec.

update dependency The required ordering of related updates to separate meta-data
structures to ensure recoverability in the presence of unpredictable failures. An update that
must be done later has an update dependency on an earlier update because it cannot be done
until the earlier update is committed to stable storage. See also metadata.

urgent data In TCP, data that are marked for urgent delivery.

user credential A structure that identifies a user. It contains the real, effective, and saved user
and group identifiers. See also real user identifier; real group identifier; effective user
identifier; effective group identifier; saved UID; saved GID. See also process credential.

user datagram protocol (UDP) A simple, unreliable datagram protocol used in the Internet
protocols. UDP provide peer-to-peer, multicast and broadcast addressing, and optional data
checksums. A single version of UDP works the same way on top of both IPv4 and IPv6.

user identifier (UID) A nonnegative integer that identifies a user uniquely. UIDs are used in
the access-control facilities provided by the filesystem. See also credential; effective user
identifier; real user identifier; saved user identifier; set-user-identifier program.

user mode The least-privileged processor-access mode. User processes run in user mode. See
also kernel mode.

user-request routine A set of routines provided by each communication protocol that
directly supports a socket (a protocol that indirectly supports a socket is layered underneath a
protocol that directly supports a socket). These routines serve as the main interface between the

layer of software that implements sockets and the communication protocol. The
interprocess-communication facilities make calls to the user-request routines for most
socket-related system calls. See also connect request; control request; listen request; sense
request.

virtual address An address that references a location in a virtual address space.

virtual-address aliasing Two or more processes mapping the same physical page at different
virtual addresses. When using an inverted page table, there can only be one virtual address
mapping any given physical page at any one time. Here, the kernel must invalidate the
page-table entry for the aliased page whenever it switches between the processes with the
conflicting virtual addresses for that page. See also reverse-mapped page table.

virtual address space A contiguous range of virtual-memory locations.

virtual machine A machine whose architecture is emulated in software. The emulation may be
at either the hardware level or at the operating-system level.

virtual memory A facility whereby the effective range of addressable memory locations
provided to a process is independent of the size of main memory; that is, the virtual address
space of a process is independent of the physical address space of the CPU.

virtual-memory object A kernel data structure that represents a repository of data—for
example, a file. An object contains a pager to get and put the data from and to secondary storage,
and a list of physical pages that cache pieces of the repository in memory.

virtual private network (VPN) A network that is layered on top of, or tunneled through, the
public Internet using encrypted links.

vnode An extensible object-oriented interface containing generic information about a file. Each
active file in the system is represented by a vnode, plus filesystem-specific information
associated with the vnode by the filesystem containing the file. The kernel maintains a single
systemwide table of vnodes that is always resident in main memory. Inactive entries in the table
are reused on a least-recently-used basis.

VPN See virtual private network.

wait The system call that waits for the termination of a descendant process.

wait channel A value used to identify an event for which a thread is waiting. In most situations,
a wait channel is defined as the address of a data structure related to the event for which a

thread is waiting. For example, if a thread is waiting for the completion of a disk read, the wait
channel is specified as the address of the buffer data structure supplied to the disk I/O system.

wildcard route A route that is used if there is no explicit route to a destination.

window probe In TCP, a message that is transmitted when data are queued for transmission,
the send window is too small for TCP to bother sending data, and no message containing an
update for the send window has been received in a long time. A window-probe message contains
a single byte of data.

wired page Memory that is not subject to replacement by the pageout daemon. A nonpageable
range of virtual addresses has physical memory assigned when the addresses are allocated.
Wired pages must never cause a page fault that might result in a blocking operation. Wired
pages are typically used in the kernel’s address space.

word-erase character The character that is recognized by the terminal handler in canonical
mode to mean “delete the most recently typed word on this terminal.” By default, preceding
whitespace and then a maximal sequence of nonwhitespace characters are erased. Alternatively,
an alternate erase algorithm tuned to deleting pathname components may be specified. Each
terminal session can have a different word-erase character, and the user can change that
character at any time with a tcsetattr system call. The terminal handler does not recognize the
word-erase character on terminals that are in non-canonical mode. See also erase character;
kill character.

working directory See current working directory.

working set The set of pages in a process’s virtual address space to which memory references
have been made over the most recent few seconds. Most processes exhibit some locality of
reference, and the size of their working set is typically less than one-half of their total
virtual-memory size.

znode See dnode.

zombie process A process that has terminated but whose exit status has not yet been received
by its parent process (or by init).

