Foreword
When you read these lines, Rust has achieved its biggest goal: make an offer to programmers to write
their production systems in a different language. By the end of the book, it is still your choice to
follow that path, but you have all you need to consider the offer. I’ve been part of the growth process
of two widely different languages: Ruby and Rust - by programming them, but also by running events,
being part of their project management and running business around them. Through that, I had the
privilege of being in touch with many of the creators of those languages and consider some of them
friends. Rust has been my one chance in life to see and help a language grow from the experimental
stage to adoption in the industry.
I’ll let you in on a secret I learned along the way: programming languages are not adopted because
of a feature checklist. It’s a complex interplay between good technology, the ability to speak about it
and finding enough people willing to take long bets. When I write these lines, over 5000 people have
contributed to the Rust project, often for free, in their spare time - because they believe in that bet.
But you don’t have to contribute to the compiler or be recorded in a git log to contribute to Rust.
Luca’s book is such a contribution: it gives newcomers a perspective on Rust and promotes the good
work of those many people.
Rust was never intended to be a research platform - it was always meant as a programming language
solving real, tangible issues in large codebases. It is no surprise that it comes out of an organization
that maintains a very large and complex codebase - Mozilla, creators of Firefox. When I joined Rust,
it was just ambition - but the ambition was to industrialize research to make the software of tomorrow
better. With all of its theoretical concepts, linear typing, region based memory management, the
programming language was always meant for everyone. This reflects in its lingo: Rust uses accessible
names like “Ownership” and “Borrowing” for the concepts I just mentioned. Rust is an industry
language, through and through.
And that reflects in its proponents: I’ve known Luca for years as a community member who knows
a ton about Rust. But his deeper interest lies in convincing people that Rust is worth a try by
addressing their needs. The title and structure of this book reflects one of the core values of Rust:
to find its worth in writing production software that is solid and works. Rust shows its strength in
the care and knowledge that went into it to write stable software productively. Such an experience
is best found with a guide and Luca is one of the best guides you can find around Rust.
Rust doesn’t solve all of your problems, but it has made an effort to eliminate whole categories
of mistakes. There’s the view out there that safety features in languages are there because of the
incompetence of programmers. I don’t subscribe to this view. Emily Dunham, captured it well in
her RustConf 2017 keynote: “safe code allows you to take better risks”. Much of the magic of the
Rust community lies in this positive view of its users: whether you are a newcomer or an experienced
developer, we trust your experience and your decision-making. In this book, Luca offers a lot of new
knowledge that can be applied even outside of Rust, well explained in the context of daily software
praxis. I wish you a great time reading, learning and contemplating.
Florian Gilcher,
Management Director of Ferrous Systems and
Co-Founder of the Rust Foundation

