Preface
What Is This Book About
The world of backend development is vast.
The context you operate into has a huge impact on the optimal tools and practices to tackle the
problem you are working on.
For example, trunk-based development works extremely well to write software that is continuously
deployed in a Cloud environment.
The very same approach might fit poorly the business model and the challenges faced by a team that
sells software that is hosted and run on-premise by their customers - they are more likely to benefit
from a Gitflow approach.
If you are working alone, you can just push straight to main.
There are few absolutes in the field of software development and I feel it’s beneficial to clarify your
point of view when evaluating the pros and cons of any technique or approach.

    Zero To Production will focus on the challenges of writing Cloud-native applications in a team
    of four or five engineers with different levels of experience and proficiency.

Cloud-native applications
Defining what Cloud-native application means is, by itself, a topic for a whole new book1 . Instead of
prescribing what Cloud-native applications should look like, we can lay down what we expect them
to do.
Paraphrasing Cornelia Davis, we expect Cloud-native applications:
   • To achieve high-availability while running in fault-prone environments;
   • To allow us to continuously release new versions with zero downtime;
   • To handle dynamic workloads (e.g. request volumes).
These requirements have a deep impact on the viable solution space for the architecture of our
software.
High availability implies that our application should be able to serve requests with no downtime even if
one or more of our machines suddenly starts failing (a common occurrence in a Cloud environment2 ).
This forces our application to be distributed - there should be multiple instances of it running on
multiple machines.
The same is true if we want to be able to handle dynamic workloads - we should be able to measure
if our system is under load and throw more compute at the problem by spinning up new instances of
the application. This also requires our infrastructure to be elastic to avoid overprovisioning and its
associated costs.
Running a replicated application influences our approach to data persistence - we will avoid using
the local filesystem as our primary storage solution, relying instead on databases for our persistence
needs.
Zero To Production will thus extensively cover topics that might seem tangential to pure backend
application development. But Cloud-native software is all about rainbows and DevOps, therefore
we will be spending plenty of time on topics traditionally associated with the craft of operating
systems.
We will cover how to instrument your Rust application to collect logs, traces and metrics to be able
to observe our system.
  1 Like the excellent Cloud-native patterns by Cornelia Davis!
   2 For example, many companies run their software on AWS Spot Instances to reduce their infrastructure bills. The

price of Spot instances is the result of a continuous auction and it can be substantially cheaper than the corresponding
full price for On Demand instances (up to 90% cheaper!).
There is one gotcha: AWS can decommission your Spot instances at any point in time. Your software must be
fault-tolerant to leverage this opportunity.

We will cover how to set up and evolve your database schema via migrations.
We will cover all the material required to use Rust to tackle both day one and day two concerns of a
Cloud-native API.

Working in a team
The impact of those three requirements goes beyond the technical characteristics of our system: it
influences how we build our software.
To be able to quickly release a new version of our application to our users we need to be sure that
our application works.
If you are working on a solo project you can rely on your thorough understanding of the whole system:
you wrote it, it might be small enough to fit entirely in your head at any point in time.3
If you are working in a team on a commercial project, you will be very often working on code that
was neither written or reviewed by you. The original authors might not be around anymore.
You will end up being paralysed by fear every time you are about to introduce changes if you are
relying on your comprehensive understanding of what the code does to prevent it from breaking.
You want automated tests.
Running on every commit. On every branch. Keeping main healthy.
You want to leverage the type system to make undesirable states difficult or impossible to represent.
You want to use every tool at your disposal to empower each member of the team to evolve that piece
of software. To contribute fully to the development process even if they might not be as experienced
as you or equally familiar with the codebase or the technologies you are using.
Zero To Production will therefore put a strong emphasis on test-driven development and continuous
integration from the get-go - we will have a CI pipeline set up before we even have a web server up
and running!
We will be covering techniques such as black-box testing for APIs and HTTP mocking - not wildly
popular or well documented in the Rust community yet extremely powerful.
We will also borrow terminology and techniques from the Domain Driven Design world, combining
them with type-driven design to ensure the correctness of our systems.

    Our main focus is enterprise software: correct code which is expressive enough to model the
    domain and supple enough to support its evolution over time.

We will thus have a bias for boring and correct solutions, even if they incur a performance overhead
that could be optimised away with a more careful and chiseled approach.
Get it to run first, optimise it later (if needed).

Who Is This Book For
The Rust ecosystem has had a remarkable focus on smashing adoption barriers with amazing material
geared towards beginners and newcomers, a relentless effort that goes from documentation to the
continuous polishing of the compiler diagnostics.
There is value in serving the largest possible audience.
At the same time, trying to always speak to everybody can have harmful side-effects: material that
would be relevant to intermediate and advanced users but definitely too much too soon for beginners
ends up being neglected.
I struggled with it first-hand when I started to play around with async/await.
There was a significant gap between the knowledge I needed to be productive and the knowledge I
  3 Assuming you wrote it recently.

Your past self from one year ago counts as a stranger for all intents and purposes in the world of software development.
Pray that your past self wrote comments for your present self if you are about to pick up again an old project of yours.

