1     Introduction
1.1   Overview
In this project, you (and your partner) will be writing a bootloader that is ca-
pable of booting your 410 kernel. In doing so, you will complete a full stack
kernel+bootloader that is ideally capable of booting on commodity hardware
(although such isn’t a strict requirement of this project). Furthermore, by writ-
ing a bootloader, you will be exposed to a different style of systems program-
ming in a slightly unusual environment. Fortunately there will be no concur-
rency, no paging, and no protection issues to worry about. Unfortunately, there
is also no memory manager and no libc—the only support code available are
functions provided by the BIOS, and the ones you write yourself.
    Due to the constrained environment that the bootloader operates in, this
project will heavily rely on services provided by the PC BIOS. Most of this
project will involve low level programming in 16-bit real mode. As GCC does
not emit real mode compliant code, most of this project will be programmed in
assembly. However, portions of the bootloader will also be programmed in 32-
bit protected mode with paging disabled, an environment that much resembles
the operating environment of Project 1.

1.2   Goals
    • To learn (a small amount of) programming in x86 real mode, including
      the use of PC BIOS services.

    • To become familiar with reading sectors from a floppy disk, including
      the BIOS interface for interacting with the floppy disk controller as well
      as the floppy disk CHS (cylinder, head, sector) layout.
    • To understand the process of bootstrapping on an x86, including switch-
      ing into protected mode and loading a Multiboot compliant kernel.

1.3     Outline
The bootloader you will be writing will consist of two distinct stages (boot0 &
boot1), both of which are responsible for accomplishing key steps required to
load and boot your kernel:
      • The bootloader’s zeroth stage (boot0) is responsible for loading the first
        stage (boot1) from the boot floppy disk and transferring execution to it.

      • The bootloader’s first stage (boot1) is responsible for loading the kernel
        from the boot floppy disk, preparing the system environment for execut-
        ing the kernel, and transferring execution to it.
Since accomplishing these tasks requires significant programming in x86 real
mode, a brief introduction on real mode programming follows.

