4     Bootloader: Overview
4.1   boot0: Zeroth Stage
Recall from the Bootstrapping lecture that the BIOS loads a valid boot sector
(which must be the first sector of the boot device) to linear address 0x7c00
and jumps to the instruction located there. As the boot sector contains only
500 bytes (approximately) of executable code, many bootloaders are divided
into stages. The bootloader for this project will consist of two stages, boot0 and
boot1.
    The zeroth stage bootloader (boot0) resides in the boot sector of our boot
floppy disk and is automatically loaded by the BIOS. Its sole purpose is to read
the first stage bootloader (boot1) from the floppy disk, load it into memory, and
jump to it.

4.2     boot1: First Stage
The purpose of the first stage bootloader is to load the kernel from the boot
floppy disk into memory, prepare the system for executing the kernel, and
jump to the kernel entry point.
    In order to prepare the system for executing the kernel, the first stage must
switch into protected mode and load the kernel into high (> 1 MB) memory.
Unfortunately, the BIOS services used to read sectors from the boot floppy
disk are available only in real mode and real mode cannot access high memory
where the kernel is to be loaded. Many bootloaders work around this prob-
lem by repeatedly switching back and forth between real mode and protected
mode while reading the kernel from the floppy disk.
    Fortunately, the kernels you are responsible for loading have a maximum
size restriction. They can be no larger than 576 kB, which allows your boot-
loader to preload the kernel entirely into contiguous low memory (< 640 kB)
before transitioning into protected mode.

4.2.1    Multiboot Loader
Once in protected mode, boot1 invokes a Multiboot loader routine in order to
load the preloaded kernel from low memory into its proper location in high
memory. Since the Multiboot loader executes entirely in protected mode, it is
recommended that it be written in C and not assembly language.

