6      Bootloader: Details
6.1     Canonicalizing %CS:%EIP
As previously stated, the BIOS loads the boot sector of the boot disk at linear
address 0x7c00. In real mode, this is logically and most often represented as
the segment:offset pair 0000:7c00. However, certain odd BIOSes actually begin
execution at 07c0:0000. To deal with this discrepancy, the first task of any boot-
loader is to canonicalize %CS:%EIP to a known segment:offset pair that the rest
of the code depends on.
    Simultaneously setting %CS:%EIP is accomplished with an absolute long
jump instruction to a label that represents the next line of code. A typical ex-
ample looks like:
        ljmp    $0, $the_next_line_of_code
the_next_line_of_code:
        # Code ...

6.2     Loading Segment Registers
The recommended memory map (see Section 8) places all code and data, except
the preloaded kernel, in the first 64 kB of memory. By using only the first 64 kB
as the primary working area, the recommended memory map avoids the use
of “long” jumps and “far” pointers3 in bootloader code. Thus, all segment
registers should be initially set to the segment base address representing the
first 64 kB of memory.
    Since the kernel you are loading is much larger than 64 kB, you will have
to write kernel data to memory in multiple segments outside the first 64 kB
segment. When doing so, it is suggested to use %ES to refer to the segment
where you are currently loading a portion of the kernel, and %DS to refer to
the first 64 kB segment. This way, memory accesses default (using %DS) to
memory in the primary working area, while %ES may be moved around freely
as needed.

movw       myvar, %ax     # fetch myvar from somewhere in %ds (low 64k)
movw       %ax, %es:(%bx) # store the value up in high memory

6.3     Interacting with the Floppy Disk Controller
Floppy disk services are made available by the BIOS interrupt 0x13, which is
documented in Section 3.4 of [5]. All of the BIOS functions corresponding to
INT 0x13 require register %DL to contain the drive number of the boot floppy
disk. When the BIOS launches boot0, %DL is already initialized to the drive
number (0x00 for the first floppy disk drive, 0x01 for the second, 0x80 for the
first hard disk drive, etc.). Thus, %DL will contain the correct value so long
    3 “long” jumps and “far” pointers are jumps/pointers to a different segment.

as registers %DL or %DX aren’t modified. If registers %DL and %DX are to
be modified, it is the bootloader’s responsibility to record and restore the boot
drive number appropriately.
    Before interacting with the floppy disk drive the first time, the floppy disk
controller must be reset to a known state using the BIOS call: INT 0x13, %AH=0x00.
    Once the controller is reset, sectors may be read from the floppy disk using
the BIOS call: INT 0x13, %AH=0x02. Sectors are addressed on the floppy disk
using CHS (cylinder, head, sector) addressing. For example, the boot sector is
the first sector of the floppy disk with CHS address (0, 0, 1).
    While one INT 0x13 call can read multiple sectors into memory, a single
read call is not permitted to cross a cylinder or head boundary. Thus, a single
INT 0x13 call can read at most 18 sectors (a full track) for a 1.44 MB floppy disk
(see table in Section 7). Furthermore, it is an unspoken rule that no transfer
can cross a 64 kB boundary in memory. Thus, when reading more than 64 kB
(128 sectors) in total you may want to read a smaller number of sectors at a
time into a disk buffer, then copy the contents of the disk buffer to its proper
place in memory.

6.4     Establishing the boot1 Execution Environment
To allow any compliant boot0 code to execute any compliant boot1 code, we re-
quire a strict execution environment to be established before jumping to boot1
code:
      • boot1 must be loaded at the address specified in the memory map (see
        Section 8).
      • All segment registers must be set to the segment base address represent-
        ing the first 64 kB of memory.
      • Register %DL must contain the boot drive number.
      • Interrupts must be enabled.
Note that this execution environment does not place any restrictions on the
value of the stack pointer (although %SP must point to a valid stack). Thus, it
is the responsibility of boot1 code to set its own stack pointer.

6.5     Querying the BIOS for the Size of Lower/Upper Memory
Due to the hole that exists in the upper portion of the first megabyte of memory
(video memory, MMIO, BIOS, etc), PC physical memory is typically divided
into two usable regions. The lower region of memory typically ends around
640 kB, the actual value of which must be determined by the BIOS call: INT
0x12 (see Section 3.3 of [5]). Since most of low memory is required for preload-
ing the kernel, your bootloader may die if the low memory size is less than
636 kB.

    The upper region of memory starts at 1 MB and extends for the amount of
system DRAM (for sub 4 GB machines). The actual size of upper memory is
most easily determined by the BIOS call: INT 0x15, %AX=0xe801 (documented
in [1]).

6.6   Enabling the A20 Gate
The original 8086 processor featured a 20-bit address bus capable of addressing
1 MB of memory. However, the odd segmentation mechanism of the 8086 al-
lowed, theoretically, slightly more than the first megabyte of memory to be ad-
dressed (e.g., ffff:ffff == 0x10ffef). On the 8086 these address overflows would
wrap back to the beginning of memory (e.g., ffff:ffff would wrap to 0x00ffef), a
“feature” that many 8086 programs depended on. Thus, when IBM designed
the PC AT with a 80286 processor featuring a 24-bit address bus, many 8086
programs would fail to execute properly.
    To maintain 8086 compatibility, IBM added an AND gate to the 21st address
line (A20) that was signaled by an extra pin on the PC AT’s keyboard controller.
Unfortunately, this gate persists today on PC hardware and must be enabled in
order to allow protected mode programs to see all of memory beyond the first
1 MB.
    There exists three ways to enable the A20 gate, (i) via the keyboard con-
troller, (ii) via System Control Port A, and (iii) with the BIOS call: INT 0x15,
%AH=0x24. Unfortunately none of the three methods are supported on all
hardware, although most “modern” hardware supports a combination of two
or three of them. The most reliable method for enabling A20 is via the BIOS call
(which implements the proper hardware specific method internally). Unfortu-
nately the Simics BIOS appears not to support this call, so the bootloader must
fall back to one of the alternate methods should the BIOS call fail. Sample code
and documentation illustrating the three methods of enabling A20 is available
at [2].

6.7   Loading the Global Descriptor Table
As discussed in lecture and in the segmentation guide, protected mode exe-
cution requires the segment registers to refer to a segment descriptors in the
Global Descriptor Table (GDT). For your kernel, OSKit loads a GDT as part of
its initialization phase. However, since the bootloader executes before OSKit,
your bootloader must load a “temporary” GDT before it can switch to pro-
tected mode. The procedure for loading the GDT is completed in two steps:
  1. Create an eight-byte aligned GDT with three segment descriptors (see
     Section 3.4.3 of [6] for the GDT segment descriptor format):
        • A null segment descriptor (required).
        • A 4 GB, 32-bit, DPL 0, “non-conforming” type, code segment de-
          scriptor.

        • A 4 GB, 32-bit, DPL 0, “expand-up” type, data segment descriptor.
  2. Load the Global Descriptor Table Register (GDTR) with the LGDT instruc-
     tion. The GDTR contains the size (in bytes) of the GDT, and the GDT
     linear base address (see Section 2.4 of [6] for the GDTR format).

6.8   Switching to Protected Mode
The procedure for switching to protected mode is explained in detail in Sec-
tion 8.9 of [6]. Once the GDTR is loaded, the procedure is as follows:

  1. Set the Protection Enable bit in %CR0.
  2. Immediately long jump to the next line of code, specifying the code seg-
     ment selector corresponding to the code segment descriptor loaded in the
     temporary GDT. This step is similar to, but different from, what you did
     in Section 6.1.

  3. Load each of the segment registers (%DS, %ES, %FS, %GS, %SS) with
     the data segment selector corresponding to the data segment descriptor
     loaded in the temporary GDT.
  4. Set the stack pointer to the protected mode stack.

    As the bootloader does not establish a protected mode IDT nor any pro-
tected mode interrupt handlers, interrupts must be disabled the entire time
while in protected mode.
    Finally, the assembler must be directed to emit 32-bit instructions in pro-
tected mode with the .code32 directive. It must be placed immediately after
the long jump that loads the 32-bit code segment selector.

6.9   Parsing the Multiboot Header
Once in protected mode, the bootloader has access to all 256 MB of memory.
The job of the Multiboot loader is to “load” the kernel executable from low
memory to high memory using load addresses contained in the Multiboot
header. Parsing the Multiboot header is simpler than ELF, but the .bss sec-
tion must still be handled properly. As mentioned earlier, it’s probably easiest
to write this code in C.
    According to the Multiboot specification [4], the Multiboot header contains
a flags field of which bits 0–15 must be properly handled by the bootloader if
they are present (otherwise the bootloader should fail to load the kernel image),
and bits 16–31 may be optionally handled, but the bootloader should proceed
even if it doesn’t understand them.
    It is a requirement that your bootloader properly handle a flags field with
flags 1 & 16 set. Your bootloader does not need to support the functionality of
the other flags, but it must follow the specification in regard to booting vs. not

booting when any of bits 0–15 are set and the bootloader doesn’t understand
them.
    The presence of flag 16 in the Multiboot header indicates that the Multiboot
header also contains the load addresses for the kernel image. You must im-
plement a Multiboot loader that uses these load addresses to load the kernel
image into upper memory.
    The Multiboot specification states that compliant boot loaders must be able
to load images that are in the ELF format (by parsing the ELF headers), and
that flag 16 may not be present for ELF images. Your bootloader does not need
to parse the ELF headers. Any kernel image that we expected your bootloader
to properly boot (ELF format or otherwise) will always contain flag 16 set, and
we expect the load addresses present in the Multiboot header to be used to
load the kernel image.

6.10    Writing the Multiboot Information Structure
The Multiboot information structure (MBI) exists to communicate information
about the system environment from the bootloader to the kernel image. Ac-
cording to the Multiboot specification, the bootloader isn’t required to write
any of the MBI fields except the flags field (which determines which of the
other fields are present), and the mem lower & mem upper fields if flag 1 in the
Multiboot header is set.
    In addition to the mem lower and mem upper fields, your bootloader must
also write the boot device field. These fields are described in Section 3.3 of [4].
    Unfortunately, the current version of the Multiboot specification contains
an error regarding the byte ordering of the boot device field. The specifica-
tion claims that “the first byte [of the boot device subfield] contains the bios
drive number as understood by the bios INT 0x13 low-level disk interface.”
However, the drive subfield is actually the last byte (i.e., most significant) of
the boot device field and the part3 subfield is actually the first byte (i.e., least
significant).
    Here is an improved version of the subfield illustration from the Multiboot
specification with byte offsets (relative to the start of the MBI) clearly depicted:
                    +-------+-------+-------+-------+
                    | part3 | part2 | part1 | drive |
                    +-------+-------+-------+-------+
                       12      13      14      15

6.11    Establishing the Multiboot Execution Environment
The Multiboot specification specifies a strict execution environment that must
be established when transferring execution to the loaded kernel. Your boot-
loader must establish and provide this execution environment (see Section 3.2
of [4]).

