11    Plan of Attack
  1. Before starting to write the bootloader, carefully read the provided source
     code, especially sample boot1.S which provides a concrete example of
     making a BIOS call and demonstrates a number of useful GNU Assem-
     bler directives that will be helpful in writing assembly code for your boot-
     loader.
  2. Write a dummy boot0 that displays “Hello World!” using the Write String
     BIOS call in order to familiarize yourself with writing real mode assembly
     and making BIOS calls. This is harder than it sounds—thus it is very
     important to get something to work early on even if the particular thing
     isn’t ultimately ultimately useful to the bootloading process.
  3. Write a dummy boot0 which reads something from the floppy into a par-
     ticular area in memory. One suggestion would be to read boot0 into the
     suggested disk buffer area and then compare a Simics memory dump
     against a hex dump (od -x) of your floppy image (bootfd.img).
  4. Build sample boot1 and use your boot0 to load and execute it.
  5. Now that boot0 is working, start work on boot1. Your goal is to load a
     kernel (such as yours) from the designated area on the floppy into the
     designated area in memory. You can then compare a Simics memory
     dump against a hex dump of your kernel.
  6. Now enter protected mode. Try reading from and writing to a memory
     word somewhere around 16 megabytes. Also, the first line of output
     from the Simics pregs (“print registers”) command will tell you whether
     you’re in “16-bit legacy real mode” or “32-bit legacy protected mode”.
  7. Write your Multiboot loader. After you have loaded the parts of the bi-
     nary into high memory, you can compare Simics hex dumps against gdb
     “memory” dumps (e.g., x/i 0x100000).
  8. Launch your kernel!

 9. Now boot the special alternate kernel payload we provide you with.
    Holding down the shift key and right-clicking in the graphical console
    window allows Simics to “capture” the mouse (and to relinquish it too).

