7
Memory Management Internals –
Essentials
Kernel internals, especially regarding memory management, is a vast and complex topic. In this book,
I do not intend to delve into the deep, gory details of kernel memory internals. At the same time, I
would like to provide sufficient – and required – background knowledge for a budding kernel or device
driver developer like you to successfully tackle this key topic.

Accordingly, this chapter will help you understand, to sufficient depth, the internals of how memory
management is performed on the Linux OS; this includes delving into the Virtual Memory (VM) split,
examining both the user-mode and kernel VAS of the process to a good level of depth, and covering
the basics of how the kernel manages physical memory. In effect, you will come to understand the
memory maps – both virtual and (to some extent) physical – of the process and the system.

This background knowledge will go a long way in helping you correctly and efficiently manage dynam-
ic kernel memory (with a focus on writing kernel or driver code using the Loadable Kernel Module
(LKM) framework; this aspect – dynamic memory management – in a practical fashion is the focal
point of the next two chapters in the book). As an important side benefit, armed with this knowledge,
you will find yourself becoming more proficient at the debugging of both user and kernel-space code.
(The importance of this cannot be overstated! Debugging code is both an art and a science, as well
as a reality.)

In this chapter, the areas we will cover include the following:

  •    Understanding the VM split
  •    Examining the process VAS
  •    Examining the kernel VAS
  •    Randomizing the memory layout – KASLR
  •    Understanding physical memory organization

Technical requirements
I assume that you have gone through Online Chapter, Kernel Workspace Setup, and have appropriately
prepared a guest VM (or native system) running Ubuntu 22.04 LTS (or a later stable release) and installed
all the required packages. If not, I recommend you do this first. To get the most out of this book, I
strongly recommend you first set up the workspace environment, including cloning this book’s GitHub
repository for the code (https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Linux-Kernel-Programming_2E),
and work on it in a hands-on fashion.

I assume that you are familiar with the basic virtual memory concepts, the user-mode process Virtual
Address Space (VAS) layout of segments, user and kernel-mode stacks, the task structure, and so on.
If you’re unsure on this footing, I strongly suggest you read the preceding chapter first.

Understanding the VM split
In this chapter, we will broadly look at how the Linux kernel manages memory in two ways:

  •     The virtual memory-based approach, where memory is virtualized (the usual case)
  •    A view of how the kernel organizes physical memory (RAM pages)

First, let’s begin with the virtual memory view and then discuss physical memory organization later
in the chapter.

As we saw in Chapter 6, Kernel Internals Essentials – Processes and Threads, in the Understanding the
basics of the process Virtual Address Space (VAS) section, a key property of the process VAS is that it is
completely self-contained, a sandbox. You cannot look outside the box. In that chapter, in Figure 6.2,
we saw that the process VAS ranges from virtual address 0x0 to what we simply termed as the “high
address.” What is the actual value of this “high” address? It’s the highest extent of the VAS and thus
depends on the number of bits used for addressing; so:

  •     On a Linux OS running on a 32-bit processor (or compiled for 32-bit), the highest virtual ad-
        dress will be 232 = 4 GB.
  •     On a Linux OS running on (and compiled for) a 64-bit processor, the highest virtual address
        will be 264 = 16 EB. (EB is short for exabyte, which is 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 bytes or 1,024
        petabytes. Clearly, it’s an enormous quantity; 16 EB is the number 16 x 1018.)

For simplicity, to keep the numbers manageable, let’s focus for now on the 32-bit address space (we
will certainly cover 64-bit addressing as well). So, according to our discussions, on a 32-bit system,
the process VAS ranges from 0 to 4 GB – this region consists of empty space (unused regions, called
sparse regions or holes) and valid regions of memory, commonly termed segments (or more correctly,
mappings) – text, data, library, and stack (all of this having been covered in some detail in Chapter 6,
Kernel Internals Essentials – Processes and Threads).

On our journey to understanding virtual memory, it’s useful to take the well-known Hello, world
K&R C program and understand (to a decent extent) its inner workings on a Linux system; this is what
the next section covers!

Looking under the hood – the Hello, world C program
Right, is there anyone here who knows how to code the canonical K&R C Hello, world program?
Okay, very amusing, let’s check out the one meaningful line therein:
   printf("Hello, world.\n");

The process is calling the printf() function. Have you written the code of printf()? “No, of course
not,” you say, “it’s within the standard C library, typically glibc (GNU libc) on Linux.” Yes, you’re
right; but hang on, unless the code and data of printf() (and similarly all other library APIs) is actu-
ally within the process VAS, how can we ever access it? (Recall that you can’t look outside the box!) For
that, the code (and data) of printf() (in fact, of the entire glibc library) must be mapped within the
process box – the process VAS. It is indeed mapped within the process VAS, in the library segments or
mappings (as we saw in Chapter 6, Kernel Internals Essentials – Processes and Threads, Figure 6.2). How
did this mapping happen?

The reality is that on application startup, as part of the C runtime environment setup, there is a small
Executable and Linkable Format (ELF) binary (embedded into your a.out binary executable file)
called the loader (ld.so or ld-linux.so). It is given control early in execution. It detects all required
shared libraries and memory maps all of them – the library text (code), data, and any other required
segments from the (library) file(s) into the process VAS by opening them and issuing the mmap() system
call. So, now, once the code and data of the library are mapped within the process VAS, the process
can indeed access it, and thus – wait for it – the printf() API can be successfully invoked! (We’ve
skipped the gory details of memory mapping and linkage here.)

Further verifying this, the ldd script (the following output is from an x86_64 system) reveals that this
is indeed the case:
   $ gcc helloworld.c -o helloworld
   $ ./helloworld
   Hello, world
   $ ldd ./helloworld
             linux-vdso.so.1 (0x00007fffcfce3000)
             libc.so.6 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 (0x00007feb7b85b000)
             /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 (0x00007feb7be4e000)
   $

A few quick points to note:

  •     Every single Linux process – automatically and by default – links to a minimum of two objects:
        the glibc shared library and the program loader (no explicit linker switch is required during
        compilation/link).
  •     The name of the loader program varies with the architecture. Here, on our x86_64 system, it’s
       ld-linux-x86-64.so.2.

  •    In the preceding ldd output, the address within parentheses on the right is the (user space) virtu-
       al address of the location of the mapping. For example, in the preceding output, glibc is mapped
       into our process VAS at the User Virtual Address (UVA), which equals 0x00007feb7b85b000. Note
       that it’s runtime dependent (it also varies on every run when Address Space Layout Random-
       ization (ASLR) semantics are enabled (ASLR is typically enabled by default; details seen later)).
  •    For security reasons (and on architectures besides x86), it’s considered better to use the objdump
       utility to look up details like these.

Try performing strace on the Hello, world binary executable and you will see numerous mmap()
system calls, mapping in glibc (and other) segments!

Now let’s examine our simple Hello, world application more deeply.

Going beyond the printf() API
As you will know, the printf() API performs it’s pretty formatting and invokes the write() system
call, which, of course, writes the "Hello, world" string to stdout – here, by default, stdout will be
the (pseudo) terminal window or the console device.

We also understand that as write() is a system call, this implies that the current process (or thread)
running this code – the process context – must now switch to kernel mode and run the kernel code
of write() (monolithic kernel architecture)! Indeed, it does. But hang on a second: the kernel code
of write() is in the kernel VAS (refer to Chapter 6, Kernel Internals Essentials – Processes and Threads,
Figure 6.1). The point here is a key one: if the kernel VAS is outside the box, then how in the world
are we going to call it?

Well, it could be done by placing user and kernel VASs into two separate 4 GB spaces, but this approach
results in very slow context switching (and expensive Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) flushing),
so it’s simply not done.

The way it is engineered is like this: both user and kernel VASs “live” in the same “box” – the avail-
able VAS. How exactly? By splitting the available address space between the user and kernel in some
User:Kernel :: U:K ratio. This is called the VM split (the ratio U:K being typically expressed in
megabytes, gigabytes, terabytes, or even petabytes).

On many ARM-32 (AArch32), and x86-32 systems, the default VM split is often 3:1 GB. The following
diagram (Figure 7.1) is representative of a 32-bit Linux process having a 3:1 VM split (the unit is GB);
that is, the total 4 GB process VAS is split into 3 GB of user space and 1 GB of kernel space. In other
words, the split can be described as U:K :: 3:1.

Figure 7.1: A process VAS with a User:Kernel :: 3:1 GB VM split on an AArch32 system running the
                                                    Linux OS

The VM split can be configured at kernel config time on 32-bit (more on this follows. Other valid val-
ues for the VM split on an AArch32 (or x86-32) system are U:K :: 2:2 or even 1:3, though the last one
would be very unusual in practice.)

So, now that the kernel VAS is “within the box,” it’s suddenly clear and critical to understand this:
when a user-mode process or thread issues a system call, there is a context switch to the kernel’s (in
this example) 1 GB VAS within the very same process’s VAS (this switch involves the update of various
arch-specific CPU registers, including the stack pointer). The thread issuing the system call now runs
the relevant kernel code paths in process context in privileged kernel mode (and works on kernel-space
data). When done, it returns from the system call, context switching back into unprivileged user mode,
and now runs user-mode code (and works on user-mode data) within the first 3 GB of VAS.

The exact virtual address where the kernel VAS begins (aka the kernel segment) is typically represented
via the PAGE_OFFSET macro within the kernel. We will examine this, and some other key macros as
well, in the Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout section.

Where is this decision regarding the precise location and size of the VM split taken? Ah, on 32-bit Linux,
it’s a kernel build-time configurable. It’s done within the kernel build as part of the make [ARCH=xxx]
menuconfig procedure – for example, when configuring the kernel for a Broadcom BCM2835 (or the
BCM2837) System on Chip (SoC) (the Raspberry Pi family being a popular board series with this very
SoC). Here’s a snippet from the official kernel configuration file (the following output is from a 32-bit
Raspberry Pi running the default 32-bit Raspberry Pi OS):
      $ uname -r
      5.15.76+
      # gain access to /proc/config.gz by loading the 'configs' module
      $ sudo modprobe configs
      $ zcat /proc/config.gz | grep -C3 VMSPLIT
      #
      # Kernel Features
      #
      CONFIG_VMSPLIT_3G=y
      # CONFIG_VMSPLIT_3G_OPT is not set
      # CONFIG_VMSPLIT_2G is not set
      # CONFIG_VMSPLIT_1G is not set
      CONFIG_PAGE_OFFSET=0xC0000000
      [ … ]

As seen in the preceding snippet, the CONFIG_VMSPLIT_3G kernel config option is set to y (for yes)
implying that the default VM split is user:kernel :: 3:1. For 32-bit architectures, the VM split loca-
tion is tunable (as can be seen in the preceding snippet, via the CONFIG_VMSPLIT_[1|2|3]G macros;
CONFIG_PAGE_OFFSET gets set accordingly). With a 3:1 VM split, PAGE_OFFSET is set to the virtual address
0xC000 0000 (3 GB).

The default VM split for the IA-32 processor (the Intel x86-32) is 3:1 (GB). Interestingly, the (ancient)
Windows 3.x OS running on the IA-32 had the same VM split, showing that these concepts are essen-
tially OS-agnostic. Later in this chapter, we will cover several more architectures and their VM splits
(on Linux), in addition to other details.

Configuring the VM split for 64-bit architectures is sometimes possible, depending on the specific
CPU and kernel Board Support Package (BSP) (we mention examples of how this can be done for the
AArch64 in the coming materials). So, now that we understand the VM split on 32-bit systems, let’s
move on to examining how it’s done on 64-bit systems. But first, it’s useful and important to understand
at least the basics of how exactly virtual addresses get translated to physical addresses; let’s get to it!

Virtual addressing and address translation
Before diving further into these details, it’s very important to clearly understand a few key points.

Consider a small and typical code snippet from a C program:
   int i = 5;
   printf("address of i is 0x%x\n", &i);

When running this program on a rich modern OS (like Linux, Unix, Windows, or Mac), the address
you see the printf() emit is (almost) always a virtual address and not a physical one. Further, we
distinguish between two kinds of virtual addresses:

  •     If you run this code in a user space process, the address of variable i that you will see is a User
        Virtual Address, a UVA for short.
  •     If you run this code within the kernel, or a kernel module (of course, you’d then use the
        printk() (or similar) API in place of the printf()), the address of variable i that you will see
        is a Kernel Virtual Address (KVA).

Next, as is often thought, a virtual address is not an absolute value (an offset from 0); it’s a bitmask
that’s designed for and interpreted by the MMU (the Memory Management Unit that’s within the
silicon of modern microprocessors):

  •     On a 32-bit Linux OS, the 32 available bits are divided into what’s called the Page Global Direc-
        tory (PGD) value, the Page Table (PT) value, and the offset.
  •     These become indices into physical memory via which the MMU, with access to the kernel
        page tables for the current process context, performs address translation.

                      We do not intend to cover the deep details of MMU-level address translation here.
                      It’s also very arch-specific. Do refer to the Further reading section for useful links
                      on this topic.

  •     As might be expected, on a 64-bit system, even with 48-bit addressing, there will be more fields
        within the virtual address bitmask.

Okay, if this 48-bit addressing is the typical case on the x86_64 processor, then how are the bits in a
64-bit virtual address laid out?

What happens to the unused 16 MSB bits? The following figure answers the question; it’s a represen-
tation of the breakup of a 64-bit virtual address (bitmask) on an x86_64 Linux system:

Figure 7.2: Breakup of a 64-bit virtual address on the Intel x86_64 processor with 4 KB pages

Essentially, with 48-bit addressing, we use bits 0 to 47 (the LSB 48 bits) and ignore the MSB (Most Sig-
nificant Bit) 16 bits, treating it much as a sign extension. Not so fast though, the value of the unused
MSB 16 bits – as shown below – varies with the address space being referenced:

  •     In kernel VAS, the MSB 16 bits are always set to 1.
  •     In user VAS, the MSB 16 bits are always set to 0.

This is useful information! Knowing this, by merely looking at a (full 64-bit) virtual address, you can
immediately tell whether it’s a KVA or a UVA; thus, on an x86_64 Linux system:

  •     KVAs always have the format 0xffff XXXX XXXX XXXX
  •     UVAs always have the format 0x0000 XXXX XXXX XXXX

              A word of caution: the preceding format holds true only for processors (MMUs, really) that
              define virtual addresses as being KVAs or UVAs; the x86 and ARM family of processors
              (both 32- and 64-bit) do fall in this bracket. Here, the MSB (bit 63) acts as a selector for
              the paging tables; if set, the kernel paging table (at swapper_pg_dir) is used as a kernel
              virtual address is being referenced; if cleared, the process paging table (the physical
              address of the base of the process paging table is in the CR3 register on x86[_64] and the
              TTBR0 (Translation Table Base Register 0) register on ARM[64]) is used as a user virtual
              address is being referenced (while TTBR1 holds the base address of the kernel master
              PGD – swapper_pg_dir).

Another point: what does N-level paging mean? Relook at Figure 7.2; there are four levels of “indirec-
tion” – the Page Global Directory (PGD), Page Upper Directory (PUD), Page Middle Directory (PMD)
and Page Table Entry (PTE) – before getting to the offset. This is a property of the paging schema – the
number of levels of indirection; here it’s 4, hence, we call this a 4-level paging (later, Figure 7.6 will
show you various N-level paging values).

Getting from virtual to physical address – a very brief overview
As can now be seen (and I reiterate here), the reality is that virtual addresses are not absolute addresses
(absolute offsets from zero, as you might have mistakenly imagined) but are bitmasks. The fact is that
memory management is a a complex area where the work is shared; let’s reiterate the really key points:

  •     Every process alive has a set of paging tables that map the virtual pages to the physical ones
        (called page frames); the paging tables come into play whenever a virtual address – user or
        kernel – is accessed. The kernel too has its own paging tables.

  •     The OS creates and manipulates the paging tables of each process as well as of the kernel;
        the toolchain (compiler/linker) generates virtual addresses.
  •     The processor MMU performs runtime address translation, translating a given (user or kernel)
        virtual address to a physical (RAM) address.

So, again, without going into the gory details, here’s the overall procedure for what’s generally called
hardware paging (here, for the x86) in brief (Figure 7.3 gives a high level overview of the overall flow):

   1.   A process (or a thread within it) looks up a virtual address (a UVA or a KVA) – that is, it performs
        a read/write/execute operation upon a virtual address. (This is completely normal, expected
        behavior; for example, reading or writing a variable, or executing a machine instruction).
   2.   For the CPU to perform the work at that location in memory, we must now somehow trans-
        late this virtual address to its corresponding physical counterpart. Hang on, though: due to
        hardware optimization, this step can either be bypassed or done quicker (steps 3.1, 3.2); if it
        cannot, it must be translated “manually” via the MMU (slower; step 4).
   3.   Before going to the MMU, a couple of hardware optimizations can help us be quicker, short-cir-
        cuiting the ‘usual’ slower path:

            i.   First, the code or data being worked upon might already be residing within the on-
                 CPU caches (L1/L2/L3/…); this is checked for first. If this is indeed the case, we have a
                 cache-hit: the code/data item is worked upon within the CPU caches itself, and the job
                 is done. If not, we have a CPU cache miss (technically, an LLC (Last Level Cache) miss
                 (expensive)); so, we move to the next step. (We shall, in Chapter 13, Kernel Synchroniza-
                 tion – Part 2, cover more on CPU caching and the question of cache coherency; ignore
                 it for now.)
            ii. Is the virtual address already translated? Look up the CPU’s Translation Lookaside
                Buffer (TLB). If the translation is present, we have a TLB hit; if so, we have the phys-
                ical address cached within the TLB: skip ahead to step 5; if not, we have a TLB miss
                (expensive).

        (An aside: it’s not necessarily done in the order shown here; some micro-architectures use a
        physical cache model where the CPU caches lie between the MMU and RAM access, in effect,
        reversing the order of the above two steps).

   4.   The virtual address is sent to the MMU; it now “walks” the paging tables of the process (it knows
        where the base page table of the process (or kernel) is in physical RAM via a system register
        holding it’s physical address) and ends up with the corresponding page frame and physical
        address (Figure 7.4 depicts this step).
   5.   The physical address (obtained from one of the earlier steps) is now piggy-backed onto the
        CPU address lines, and the work is carried out.

Do ensure you carefully read and understand this. All steps shown, except for step 4, are depicted by
Figure 7.3; step 4 – the translation-by-MMU one – is depicted via Figure 7.4. Do study them.

Figure 7.3: Translating VA to PA, part 1 (steps 1,2,3,5)

And here’s the “P2: MMU” portion, where the MMU performs the runtime address translation, trans-
lating the user or kernel virtual address and passing into a physical address:

Figure 7.4: Translating VA to PA, part 2, MMU (steps 4, 5) on the x86_64 with 48-bit addresses and 4
                                                     KB pages

For the MMU address translation diagram (Figure 7.4) do note that here we use a very arch-specific
example of the x86_64 with 4-level paging, 4 KB page size and 48-bit addressing. When passed a virtual
address, the MMU has the ability to see it as a bitmask; it looks up the base physical address – it’s in
Control Register 3 (CR3) on the x86 (on the ARM families, it’s the TTBR0 register for user processes
and TTBR1 for the kernel paging tables) – and proceeds with translation. (Think on this: of course, the
base address in CR3 is a physical address, else this step would become infinitely recursive!)

In a nutshell, this is what the MMU does to perform runtime address translation: it looks up the base
CR3 address, adds the 9-bit value in the PGD portion of the virtual address to it, and looks up to that
quantity. This is a pointer to the next table, where it repeats the previous step, but this time with the
value from the 9-bit PUD field. This continues (over the PMD) until the Page Table, where it referenc-
es the actual Page Table Entry (PTE). This contains (among other micro-arch-specific bits) a pointer
to the physical page frame; adding the 12-bit offset to the base address of the page frame yields the
physical address.

The reality is more nuanced; a couple of key points deserve a mention here.

One, theoretically at least, when a virtual address is passed to the MMU, it “walks” the paging tables
and the end result should be the physical address; in practice, the MMU address translation attempt
can fail! One case is the obvious one: the virtual address supplied is incorrect (an unmapped address):
in effect, we have a bug, a defect, causing the MMU to raise a fault (the OS fault handler will handle
it appropriately). The other case is demand paging – the case where the virtual address is legal but
physical memory hasn’t been allocated (yet), causing the translation to fail (causing the MMU to raise
a ‘good’ fault which has the system allocate the page frame). We precisely cover this in some detail
in Chapter 9, Kernel Memory Allocation for Module Authors – Part 2 in the section Demand paging and
OOM; if you’d like, you can glance at Figure 9.9 which shows what else can happen… of course, we’ll
cover the details there.

Two, the kernel, being the boss, can actually bypass using the MMU and perform address translation
itself, in software. In practice, this is rarely done as, of course, it will be slower. One place where it is
done is when performing IO (reads or writes) by leveraging an mmap() into the process VAS via the /
proc/PID/maps pseudo file. By employing this approach, one can write to memory that’s marked as
read-only! (offlinemark does a great job detailing this in this blog article: Linux Internals: How /proc/
self/mem writes to unwritable memory, May 2021: https://offlinemark.com/2021/05/12/an-obscure-
quirk-of-proc/; be sure to check it out.)

We will not delve into further details regarding hardware paging (and various hardware acceleration
technologies, such as the Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB)) in this book. These topics are well
covered by various other excellent books and reference sites that are mentioned in the Further reading
section of this chapter.

VM split on 64-bit Linux systems
First of all, it is worth noting that on 64-bit systems, all 64 bits are not used for addressing. A standard
Linux OS configuration for the x86_64 with a (typical) 4 KB page size uses the LSB (Least Significant
Bit) 48 bits for addressing. Why not the full 64 bits? It’s simply too much! No existing computer comes
close to having even half of the full 264 = 18,446,744,073,709,551,616 bytes, which is equivalent to 16
EB (16 exabytes, that’s 16,384 petabytes) of RAM!

              ”Why,” you might well wonder, “do we equate this virtual addressing with RAM?”. Please
               read on – more material needs to be covered before this becomes clear. The Examining
               the kernel VAS section is where you will understand this fully.

As just stated, the available VAS on a 64-bit system is a mind-blowing gigantic 264 = 16 EB (16 x 1018
bytes!). It’s perhaps likely that when Linus was working on the first 64-bit Linux port (to the DEC Alpha,
the first commercial 64-bit processor), he would have had to decide how to lay out the process and
kernel segments within this enormous VAS. The decision reached has more or less remained (concep-
tually), even on today’s x86_64 Linux OS. This enormous 64-bit VAS is split into a VAS for user mode
and a separate VAS for the kernel as follows. Here, we assume 48-bit addressing with a 4 KB page size:

  •     The so-called “canonical lower half” of the process VAS, for 128 TB: User VAS – the virtual
        addresses range from 0x0 to 0x0000 7fff ffff ffff
  •     The so-called “canonical upper half” of the process VAS, for 128 TB: Kernel VAS – the virtual
        addresses range from 0xffff 8000 0000 0000 to 0xffff ffff ffff ffff

              The word canonical effectively means as per the law or as per common convention.

This 64-bit VM split on an x86_64 Linux platform can be seen in the following figure:

Figure 7.5: The Intel x86_64 (or AMD64) 16 EB VAS layout (with 48-bit addressing and a 4 KB page
                                   size); the VM split User:Kernel :: 128 TB:128 TB

In the preceding figure, you can clearly see the user VAS “anchored” at the bottom 128 terabytes and
the kernel VAS “anchored” at the top 128 terabytes of the total existing 16 EB VAS.

What about the in-between unused region (here, from 0x0000 8000 0000 0000 to 0xffff 7fff ffff
ffff)? This is simply a hole or sparse region; it’s also called the non-canonical addresses region. In-
terestingly, as the diagram informs us, with the typical 48-bit addressing scheme, most of the VAS
(99.998%) is left unused! This is why we term the VAS as being very sparse.

               The preceding figure is certainly not drawn to scale! Also, always keep in mind that this
               is all virtual memory space, not physical.

Common VM splits
To round off our discussion on the VM split, some common user:kernel VM split ratios for different
CPU architectures are shown in the following figure (again, we assume an MMU page size of 4 KB,
except for the last row, which uses 64 KB size pages):

Figure 7.6: Common user:kernel VM split ratios for different CPU architectures on modern Linux

A few notes pertaining to Figure 7.6 (with regard to the row number shown) follow:

  •    Row #1 and Row #2: The 32-bit IA-32 (or x86-32) and AArch32 with a 3:1 and 2:2 (GB) VM split,
       respectively.
  •    Row #3, the common case: The x86_64 with 4-level paging and 48 (LSB) bits used for addressing.
  •    Row #4: 5-level paging is possible but requires 4.14 Linux or later.
  •    Row #5, AArch64 examples: With a standard Yocto 4.0.4 (Kirkstone) build for Poky distro, ma-
       chine raspberrypi4-64 (with default config value CONFIG_ARM64_VA_BITS=39; thus 40 address bits
       configured, total VAS is 2^40 = 1 TB; thus, here, both the kernel and user VAS are 512 GB each).
  •    Row #6, AArch64: Above + config CONFIG_ARM64_VA_BITS=48; thus 49 (0 to 48) address bits
       configured, total VAS is 2^49 = 512 TB, thus, here, both the kernel and user VAS are 256 TB each.

  •     Row #7: This config requires (AArch64) ARMv8.2 LPA (Large Physical Address) extension +
        >=    5.4 Linux + 64K page size (for 3-level paging) enabled. It results in 53 address bits being
        configured, total VAS is 2^53 = 8 PB; thus, here, both the kernel and user VAS are 4 PB each.

A word on x86_64 Linux addressing
Using the x86_64 as an example, 2^47 is 128 TB; so why is the number of address bits 48 (in Figure 7.6
for the x86_64) and not 47? This, of course, is as we totally require 2*128 TB = 256 TB of usable address
space, 128 TB for user space, and another 128 TB for kernel space (and 2^48 = 256 TB).

In effect, the number of address bits (the fourth column in Figure 7.6) used for addressing determines
the overall size of the total in-use virtual memory: user + kernel – with each VAS typically getting
one-half of the total (the exceptions tend to be the 32-bit x86 and ARM-32, where the VM split can be
deliberately unequal).

We highlight the third row in bold (red) as it’s considered the common case: running Linux on the
x86_64 (or AMD64) architecture, with a user:kernel :: 128 TB:128 TB VM split. The fourth column,
#Addr Bits, shows us that, on 64-bit processors, no real-world processor actually uses all 64 bits for
addressing.

Under the x86_64, there are two VM splits, as seen in Figure 7.6 (rows 3 and 4):

  •     The first one (row #3 in Figure 7.6), 128 TB : 128 TB (4-level paging) is the VM split being used
        by default on Linux x86_64 systems as of today (embedded systems, laptops, PCs, workstations,
        and servers). It limits the physical address space to 64 TB (of RAM).
  •     The second one (row #4 in Figure 7.6), 64 PB : 64 PB, is, as of the time of writing at least, still
        purely theoretical; it comes with support for what is called 5-level paging from 4.14 Linux. The
        assigned VASs (with 57-bit addressing, we get an incredible total of 128 PB of VAS and 4 PB of
        physical address space!) are so enormous that, as of our knowledge at the time of writing this,
        no actual computer is (yet) using it.

A word on AArch64 Linux addressing
Note that the two rows for the AArch64 (ARM-64) architecture running on Linux are merely represen-
tative. The BSP vendor or platform team working on the product could well use differing splits (the
notes following Figure 7.6 mention the precise meaning here).

Furthermore, the last row in the table mentions the fact that later-generation (AArch64) ARMv8.2
processors provide the LPA extension. When enabled, and with a 64 KB page size, the address space
can be expanded to 52 bits in each user and kernel address space (and thus 53 bits in total), providing
for (2^53) 4 PB of VAS space each (along with an upper limit of 4 PB physical memory as well). This is
supported from Linux 5.4 onward.

              More details on AArch64 52-bit addressing can be obtained here:

                 •    Official kernel doc: Memory Layout on AArch64 Linux: https://www.kernel.org/
                      doc/html/v6.1/arm64/memory.html
                 •    Understanding 52-bit virtual address support in the Arm64 kernel, B Sharma, Dec 2020:
                      https://opensource.com/article/20/12/52-bit-arm64-kernel

Right, moving on; what’s actually residing within the kernel VAS (aka the kernel segment)? All kernel
code, kernel data structures (including the task structures, the lists, the kernel-mode stacks, paging
tables, and so on), device drivers, kernel modules, and so on are within here (as the lower half of
Figure 6.3 in Chapter 6, Kernel Internals Essentials – Processes and Threads, showed; we cover precisely
this in some detail in the upcoming Understanding the kernel segment section).

              It’s important to realize that, as a performance optimization on Linux, kernel memory is
              always non-swappable; that is, kernel memory can never be paged out to a swap parti-
              tion. User space memory pages are always candidates for paging, unless locked (see the
              mlock[all](2) system calls).

With this background, you’re now in a great position to understand the full process VAS layout on the
Linux OS. Read on!

Understanding the process VAS – the full view
Once again, refer to Figure 7.1; it shows the actual and full process VAS layout for a single 32-bit pro-
cess. The reality, of course, is that all processes alive on the system have their own unique user-mode
VAS but share the same kernel VAS. The following figure attempts to conceptually convey just this;
it shows the situation for a typical IA-32 (or it could be an AArch32) system, with a 3:1 (GB) VM split.
Here, every process’s user space is unique to it, with all processes sharing the very same kernel VAS:

Figure 7.7: Processes have a unique user VAS but share the kernel VAS (32-bit OS); IA-32 (or AArch32)
                                              with a 3:1 (GB) VM split

Notice in the preceding figure how the virtual address space reflects a 3:1 (GB) VM split. The user VAS
extends from 0 to 0xbfff ffff (0xc000 0000 is the 3 GB mark; this is what the PAGE_OFFSET macro is
set to here), and the kernel VAS extends from 0xc000 0000 (3 GB) to 0xffff ffff (4 GB).

Later in this chapter, we will cover the usage of a useful utility called procmap. It will help you literally
visualize the VASs, both kernel and user, in detail, similar to how our preceding diagrams have been
showing.

A few things to note:

  •     For the example shown in Figure 7.7, the value of the PAGE_OFFSET kernel macro is 0xc000 0000.
  •     The figures and numbers we have shown here are not absolute and binding across all archi-
        tectures; they tend to be very arch-specific and many highly vendor-customized Linux systems
        may change them (as Figure 7.6 hints at).
  •     Figure 7.7 details the VM layout on a 32-bit Linux OS. On 64-bit Linux, the concepts remain
        identical, it’s just the numbers that (significantly) change. As shown in some detail in the pre-
        ceding sections, the VM split on an x86_64 (with 48-bit addressing and 4K pages) Linux system
        becomes User : Kernel :: 128 TB : 128 TB.

Now that the fundamentals of the virtual memory layout of a process are understood, you will find that
it greatly helps in deciphering and making progress in difficult-to-debug situations. As usual, there’s
still more to it; sections follow on the user space and kernel-space virtual memory map (the kernel
VAS), and some coverage on the physical memory map as well. On, on!

Examining the process VAS
We have already covered the layout – the segments or mappings – that every process’s VAS is made
up of (see the Understanding the basics of the process Virtual Address Space (VAS) section in Chapter 6,
Kernel Internals Essentials – Processes and Threads). We learned that the process VAS consists of various
mappings or segments; among them are text (code), data segments, library mappings, and at least
one stack. Here, we will expand greatly on that discussion.

Being able to dive deep into the kernel and see various runtime values is an important skill for a de-
veloper like you (as well as for the app user, QA, sysadmin, DevOps folks, and so on). The Linux kernel
provides us with an amazing interface to do precisely this – it’s, you guessed it, the proc filesystem
(procfs).

This pseudo filesystem is always present on Linux (at least it should be) and is mounted under /proc
by default. The procfs system has two primary jobs:

  •    To provide a unified set of (pseudo or virtual) files and directories, enabling you to look deep
       into the kernel and at hardware internal details.
  •    To provide a unified set of root-writeable files, allowing the sysad (or root user) to modify key
       kernel parameters. These are present under /proc/sys/ and are termed sysctl – they are the
       tuning knobs of the Linux kernel.

Familiarity with the proc filesystem is indeed a must. I urge you to check it out and read the excellent
man page on proc(5) (by typing man 5 proc in the terminal) as well. For example, simply doing cat
/proc/PID/status (where PID is, of course, the unique process identifier of a given process or thread)
yields a whole bunch of useful details from the process or thread’s task structure!

              Conceptually similar to procfs is the sysfs filesystem, mounted under /sys (and under
              it debugfs, typically mounted at /sys/kernel/debug). sysfs is a representation of >=
              2.6 Linux’s new device and driver model; it exposes a tree of all devices (and their drivers)
              on the system, as well as several kernel-tuning knobs. All these are pseudo filesystems;
              that is, they’re mounted in RAM (and their content is thus volatile).

Examining the user VAS in detail
Let’s begin by checking out the user VAS of any given process. A pretty detailed map of the user VAS is
made available via procfs, particularly via the /proc/PID/maps pseudofile. Let’s learn how to use this
interface to peek into a process’s user space (virtual) memory map. We will see two ways of doing so:

  •    Directly via the procfs interface’s /proc/PID/maps pseudo file
  •    Using a few useful frontends (making the output more human-digestible)

Let’s start with the first one.

Directly viewing the process memory map using procfs
Looking up the internal process details of any arbitrary process does require root access, whereas
looking up details of a process under your ownership (including the caller process itself) does not. So,
as a simple example, we will look up the calling process’s VAS by using the self keyword in place of
the PID. The following screenshot shows this (on an x86_64 Ubuntu 22.04 LTS guest):

Figure 7.8: Output of the cat /proc/self/maps command on an x86_64 guest

In the preceding screenshot, you can actually see the layout of the user VAS of the cat process – a
veritable memory map of the user VAS of that process! Also, notice that the preceding procfs output
is sorted in ascending order by UVA.

               Basic familiarity with using the powerful mmap(2) system call will greatly help in under-
               standing further discussions. Do (at least) browse through its man page.

Interpreting the /proc/PID/maps output
To interpret the output of Figure 7.8, read it a line at a time. Each line represents a segment or mapping
of the user-mode VAS of the process in question (in the preceding example, it’s of the cat process).
Each line consists of the following fields; to make it easier, I will show just one sample line of output
(from Figure 7.8) whose fields we will label, refer to, and understand in the following notes:
   start_uva     -     end_uva         mode,mapping       start-off     mj:mn inode#        image-name
   558822d66000-558822d6a000           r-xp               00002000      08:01 7340181       /usr/bin/cat

Here, the entire line represents a segment, or, more correctly, a mapping within the process (user)
VAS. uva is the user virtual address. The start_uva and end_uva for each mapping are displayed as the
first two fields (or columns) and are separated by a hyphen character. So, the length of the mapping
(segment) is easily calculated (end_uva-start_uva bytes). Thus, in the preceding line, start_uva is
0x558822d66000 and end_uva is 0x558822d6a000 and the length can be calculated to be 16 KB; but
what exactly does this segment represent within the process? Do read on...

The third field, r-xp, is a combination of two pieces of information:

   •     The first three letters represent the mode (permissions) of the segment (in the usual rwx
         notation).
   •     The next letter represents whether the mapping is a private one (p) or a shared one (s). In-
         ternally, this is set up by the fourth parameter to the mmap() system call, flags; it’s really the
         mmap() system call that is internally responsible for creating every segment or mapping within
         a process!
   •     So, for the preceding sample segment shown, the third field being the value r-xp, we can now
         tell it’s a text (code) segment and is a private mapping (as expected).

The fourth field start-off (here, it’s the value 0x2000) is the start offset from the beginning of the
file whose contents have been mapped (for the size seen, 16 KB) into the process VAS. Obviously, this
value is only valid for file mappings.

 You can tell whether the current segment is a file mapping by glancing at the penultimate (sixth) field
– the file inode number. For mappings that are not file-mapped – called anonymous mappings – it’s
 always 0 (examples would be the mappings representing the heap or stack segments). In our preceding
 example line, it’s a file mapping (that of /usr/bin/cat) and the offset from the beginning of that file
 is 0x2000 bytes (the length of the mapping, as we calculated in the preceding paragraph, is 16 KB).

The fifth field (08:01) is of the form mj:mn, where mj is the major number and mn is the minor number
of the (block) device file where the image resides. Like the fourth field, it’s only valid for file mappings,
else it’s simply shown as 00:00; in our preceding example line, as it’s a file mapping, the major and
minor numbers (of the block device that represents the storage media that the file resides on) are 8
and 1, respectively.

The sixth field (7340181) represents the inode number of the image file – the file whose contents are
being mapped into the process VAS. The inode is the key data structure of the VFS (Virtual File Sys-
tem); it holds all metadata of the file object, everything except for its name (which is in the directory
(or dot) file). Again, this value is only valid for file mappings and simply shows as 0 otherwise. This
is, in fact, a quick way to tell whether the mapping is file-mapped or an anonymous mapping! In our
preceding example mapping, clearly, it’s a file mapping (that of /usr/bin/cat), and the inode number
is 7340181. Indeed, we can confirm this:
      $ ls -i /usr/bin/cat
      7340181 /usr/bin/cat

The seventh and last field represents the pathname of the file whose contents are being mapped
into the user VAS. Here, as we’re viewing the memory map of the cat process, the pathname (for
the file-mapped segments) happens to be /usr/bin/cat. If the mapping represents a file, the file’s
inode number (the sixth field) shows up as a positive quantity; if not – meaning it’s a pure memory
or anonymous mapping with no backing store – the inode number shows up as 0 and the last field
will be empty. (Of course, other files can show up as well: those of shared libraries, shared memory
segments, and so on.)

It should by now be obvious, but we will point this out nevertheless as it is a key point: all the preced-
ing addresses seen are virtual, not physical. Furthermore, they only belong to user space, hence they
are termed UVAs and are always accessed (and translated) via the unique paging table metadata for
that process. Also, the preceding screenshot was taken on a 64-bit (x86_64) Linux guest. Hence, here,
we see 64-bit virtual addresses.

              The way the virtual addresses are displayed here isn’t as a full 64-bit number – for example,
              as 558822d66000 and not as 0000558822d66000. I want you to notice this because, as it’s a
              UVA, the MSB 16 bits are zero! (Also, of course, the numbers are all in hexadecimal base.)

Right, while that covers how to interpret a particular segment or mapping (and the [heap] and [stack]
lines are self-explanatory), there seem to be a few strange ones (glance at Figure 7.8 again) – the vvar,
vdso, and vsyscall mappings. Let’s see what they mean.

The vsyscall page
Did you notice something a tad unusual in the output of Figure 7.8? The very last line there – the so-
called vsyscall entry – maps a kernel page (by now, you know how we can tell: the MSB 16 bits of its
start and end virtual addresses are set). Here, we just mention the fact that this is an (old) optimiza-
tion for performing system calls. It works by alleviating the need to switch to kernel mode for a small
subset of syscalls that don’t really need to.

Currently, on the x86, these include the gettimeofday(), time(), and getcpu() system calls. Indeed,
the vvar and vdso (aka Virtual Dynamic Shared Object) mappings above it are (slightly) modern vari-
ations on the same theme. If you are interested in finding out more about this, check out the Further
reading section for this chapter.

A quick aside: a directory named /proc/PID/map_files/ is another view; it displays only the file map-
pings within a process or thread. Here, each file-backed memory mapping (or segment) is displayed
as a symbolic link to its corresponding file.

So, you’ve now learned how to examine and interpret the “raw” user space memory map of any given
process by directly reading and interpreting the output of the /proc/PID/maps (pseudo) file for the
process with the specified PID. There are other convenient frontends to do so; we’ll now check out a few.

Frontends to view the process memory map
Besides the raw or direct format via /proc/PID/maps (which we saw how to interpret in the previous
section), there are some wrapper utilities that help us more easily interpret the user-mode VAS. Among
them are the additional (raw) /proc/PID/smaps pseudo file, the pmap and smem utilities, and my own
utility (christened procmap).

The kernel provides detailed information on each segment or mapping via the /proc/PID/smaps
pseudo file under proc. Do try running the command cat /proc/self/smaps to see this for yourself.
You will notice that for each segment (mapping), a good amount of detailed information is provided
on it. The man page on proc(5) helps explain the many fields seen.

For both the pmap and smem utilities, I refer you to the man pages on them for details. For example,
with pmap, the man page informs us of the more verbose -X and -XX options:
      $ pmap -h
      [ … ]
      -x, --extended show details
      -X      show even more details
              WARNING: format changes according to /proc/PID/smaps
      -XX     Show everything the kernel provides
      [ … ]

Regarding the smem utility, the fact is that it does not show you the process VAS; rather, it’s more about
answering an FAQ: namely, ascertaining which process is taking up the most physical memory. It
uses metrics such as Resident Set Size (RSS), Proportional Set Size (PSS), and Unique Set Size (USS)
to provide a clearer picture. I will leave the further exploration of these utilities as an exercise to you,
dear reader!

                Incidentally, and FYI, we do cover a tiny bit on smem usage in Chapter 8, Kernel Memory
                Allocation for Module Authors – Part 1, in the How can I see overall memory usage system-wide?
                section.

Now, let’s move on to exploring how we can leverage a useful utility – procmap – to view in quite a bit
of detail both the kernel and user memory map of any given process.

The procmap process VAS visualization utility
As a small learning and teaching (and helpful during debug!) project, I have authored and hosted a
project on GitHub going by the name of procmap, available here: https://github.com/kaiwan/procmap
(do git clone it!). A snippet from its README.md file helps explain its purpose:
      procmap is designed to be a console/CLI utility to visualize the complete
      memory map of a Linux process, in effect, to visualize the memory mappings of
      both the kernel and usermode Virtual Address Space (VAS).

   It outputs a simple visualization, in a vertically-tiled format ordered
   by descending virtual address (see screenshots below). The script has the
   intelligence to show kernel and user space mappings as well as calculate and
   show the sparse memory regions that will be present. Also, each segment or
   mapping is scaled by relative size (and color-coded for readability). On 64-
   bit systems, it also shows the so-called non-canonical sparse region or 'hole'
   (typically close to 16,384 PB on the x86_64).

The section Looking under the hood – the Hello, world C program, covered a little on what actually goes
on when the famous “Hello, world” K&R C program runs on Linux. Here, let’s explore the Hello, world
process’s user VAS by leveraging the procmap utility!

My “Hello, world” C code is the usual one, except for the fact that after the printf(), we’d like the
process to remain alive; so, I add the pause() system call (it keeps the caller blocking (asleep) until
a signal is received):
   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <unistd.h>
   int main()
   {
        printf("Hello, world\n");
         pause();
   }

(I also build with optimization, -O2, and strip the binary executable.) To add to the excitement, I perform
this activity from within an SSH session on a Raspberry Pi 4 (Model B), running a standard Raspberry
Pi OS (with the 5.15.84-v8+ kernel) configured as AArch64. Build it and then run it in the background:
   $ ./helloworld &
   [1] 835
   $ Hello, world

Ah, it works. Right, with the process being alive, let’s get down to business and run the procmap utility.
How do we install and invoke it? Simple, see what follows (due to a lack of space, I won’t show all the
information, caveats, and more here; do try it out yourself):
   $ git clone https://github.com/kaiwan/procmap
   $ cd procmap
   $ ./procmap
   Usage: procmap [options] --pid=PID-of-process-to-show-memory-map-of
   Options:
   --only-user         : show ONLY the usermode mappings or segments (not kernel VAS)
   --only-kernel       : show ONLY the kernel-space mappings or segments (not user
   VAS)
       [default is to show BOTH]
   --export-maps=filename

             write all map information gleaned to the file you specify in CSV
      --export-kernel=filename
             write kernel information gleaned to the file you specify in CSV
      --verbose              : verbose mode (try it! see below for details)
      --debug                : run in debug mode
      --version|--ver : display version info.
      See the config file as well.
      […]

Do note that this procmap utility is not the same as the procmap utility provided by BSD Unix. Also, FYI,
it requires the bc, smem, and yad utilities (among others) to be installed.

When I run the procmap utility with only --pid=<PID> (the one mandatory parameter), it will display
both the kernel and user space VASs of the specified process. Now, as we have not yet covered the
details regarding the kernel VAS (or segment), I won’t show the kernel-space detailed output here;
let’s defer that to the upcoming Examining the kernel VAS section. As we proceed, you will find partial
screenshots of only the user VAS output from the procmap utility. The complete output can be quite
lengthy, depending, of course, on the process in question; do try it out for yourself.

As you’ll see, procmap attempts to provide a basic visualization of the complete process memory
map – both kernel and user space VASs in a vertically tiled format (as mentioned, here we just display
truncated screenshots):

Figure 7.9: Partial screenshot: the first line of the kernel VAS output from the procmap utility (running
                                                           on an AArch64)

Notice, from the preceding (partial) screenshot, a few things:

  •         The procmap (Bash) script auto-detects that we’re running on an ARM-64 (AArch64) system.
  •         Though we’re not focused on it right now, the output of the kernel VAS appears first; this is
            natural as we show the output ordered by descending virtual address (Figure 7.1, Figure 7.5,
            and Figure 7.7 reiterate this)

  •     You can see that the very first line (after the KERNEL VAS ... header) corresponds to a KVA at the
        very top of the VAS – the value 0xffff ffff ffff ffff (as we’re executing it on a 64-bit Linux).

Moving on to the next part of the procmap output, let’s look at a truncated view of the upper end of
the user VAS of the helloworld process:

Figure 7.10: Partial screenshot: first few lines (high end) of the process user VAS output from the
                                     procmap utility (running on an AArch64)

Figure 7.10 is a partial screenshot of the procmap output and shows the user space VAS; at the very top
of it, you can see the (high) end UVA.

On our AArch64 system (recall, this is arch-dependent), the (high) end_uva value is

0x0000 007f ffff ffff (exactly as seen; the start_uva is, of course, 0x0; see the next screenshot).
Notice, in Figure 7.10, some interesting mappings: the stack (of main()), sparse regions in the VAS
(holes, illegal-to-access and unused regions, in effect), and mappings for the loader (ld*.so) and, of
course, for the glibc shared library – the reason Hello, world works!

How does procmap figure out the precise address values? Ah, it’s fairly sophisticated: for the ker-
nel-space memory information, it uses a kernel module (an LKM!) to query the kernel and sets up an
output file depending on the system architecture; user space details, of course, come from the /proc/
PID/maps direct (raw) procfs pseudo file interface.

              As an aside, the kernel component of procmap, a kernel module, sets up a way to interface
              with user space – the procmap scripts – by creating and setting up a debugfs pseudo file.
              Hey, it’s open source; please go ahead and git clone it and learn how it works!

The following figure shows a partial screenshot of the low end of the user mode VAS for our “Hello,
world” process, right down to the lowest UVA, 0x0:

Figure 7.11: Partial screenshot: last few lines (low end) of the process user VAS output from the
                                    procmap utility (running on an AArch64)

The last mapping, a single page, is, as expected, the null trap page (from UVA 0x1000 to 0x0; we will
explain its purpose in the upcoming The null trap page section). In this figure, notice the mappings for
the heap and the helloworld program code/data.

The procmap utility, after displaying the memory map(s), if enabled in its config file, then calculates and
displays a few statistics: this includes the sizes of both the kernel and user-mode VASs, the amount of
memory taken up by sparse regions (on 64-bit, as in the preceding example, it’s usually the vast majority
of the space!) as an absolute number and as a percentage, the amount of physical RAM reported, and
finally, the memory usage details for this particular process as reported by the ps and smem utilities.

You will find, in general, on a 64-bit system (see Figure 7.5), that the sparse (empty) memory regions of
the process VAS can take up close to 100% of the available address space! This implies that, typically,
well over 99% of the virtual memory space is sparse (empty)! This is the reality of the simply enor-
mous VAS on a 64-bit system. Only a tiny fraction of its gigantic 16 EB of VAS is actually in use (the
case on both the AArch64 and x86_64). Of course, the actual amounts of empty and used user-mode
VAS depend on the size of the application process.

Being able to clearly visualize the process VAS can aid greatly when debugging or analyzing issues at
a deeper level.

              If you’re reading this book in its hard-copy format, be sure to download the full-col-
              or PDF of diagrams/figures from the publisher’s website: https://packt.link/
              gbp/9781803232225.

You will also see that the statistics printed out at the end of the output (they’re enabled by default)
show the number of Virtual Memory Areas (VMAs) set up for the target process. VMAs? The following
section briefly explains what a VMA is. Let’s get to it!

Understanding VMA basics
In the output of /proc/PID/maps, each line of the output is extrapolated from a kernel metadata
structure called a virtual memory area, or a VMA. It’s quite straightforward, really: the kernel uses
the VMA data structure to abstract in code what we have been calling a segment or mapping. Thus, for
every single mapping in the user VAS, there is a VMA object maintained by the OS. Please realize that
only user space mappings are governed by the kernel metadata structure called the VMA; the kernel
VAS itself has no VMAs.

So, how many VMAs will a given process have? Well, it’s equal to the number of mappings (segments)
in its user VAS. In my sample run of the helloworld process, it reported 15 segments or mappings,
implying that there were 15 VMA metadata objects – representing the 15 user space segments or
mappings – for this process in kernel memory.

Programmatically speaking, the kernel maintains a VMA “chain” (technically a red-black tree data
structure for efficiency reasons) via the task structure rooted at current->mm->mmap. Why is the pointer
called mmap? It’s very deliberate: every time an mmap() system call – that is, a memory mapping oper-
ation – is performed, the kernel generates a mapping (or “segment”) within the calling process’s VAS,
and thus, a VMA metadata object representing it.

The VMA metadata structure is akin to an umbrella encompassing the mapping and includes all re-
quired information for the kernel to perform various kinds of memory management: servicing page
faults (very common), caching the contents of a file during I/O into (or out of) the kernel page cache,
and so on.

                  Page fault handling is a very important OS activity, whose algorithm makes up quite a bit
                  of usage of the kernel VMA objects; in this book, though, we don’t delve into these details
                  as it’s largely transparent to kernel module/driver authors.

Just to give you a feel for it, we will show a few members of the kernel VMA data structure in the fol-
lowing code snippet: the comments alongside help explain their purpose:
      // include/linux/mm_types.h
      struct vm_area_struct {
       /* The first cache line has the info for VMA tree walking. */
          unsigned long vm_start;          /* Our start address within vm_mm. */
          unsigned long vm_end;            /* The first byte after our end
                                               address within vm_mm. */
          struct mm_struct *vm_mm; /* The address space we belong to.*/
          [...]
          pgprot_t vm_page_prot;
          unsigned long vm_flags;              /* Flags, see mm.h. */
          [...]
          /* Function pointers to deal with this struct. */
          const struct vm_operations_struct *vm_ops;

          /* Information about our backing store: */
          unsigned long vm_pgoff; /* Offset (within vm_file) in
            PAGE_SIZE units */
         struct file * vm_file; /* File we map to (can be NULL). */
          […]
      } __randomize_layout;

It should now be clearer as to how cat /proc/PID/maps really works under the hood: when user space
does, say, cat /proc/self/maps, a read() system call is (eventually) issued by the cat process; this
results in it switching to kernel mode and running the read() system call code within the kernel with
kernel privilege. Here, the kernel Virtual Filesystem (VFS) switch redirects control to the appropriate
procfs callback handler (a function that is registered within a proc_ops structure in recent kernels,
from 5.6.0 onward). This code iterates (loops) over every VMA metadata structure (for the process
context running: in other words, for current, which is our cat process, of course), sending the rel-
evant detail information from each VMA object back to user space. The cat process then faithfully
dumps the data received via the read to stdout, and thus we see it: all the segments or mappings of

the process – in effect, the memory map of the user-mode VAS!

Great, we now conclude this section; we’ve covered details on examining the process user VAS. This
knowledge helps not only with understanding the precise layout of user-mode VAS but also with de-
bugging user space issues!

 Now, and about time, let’s move on to understanding another critical aspect of memory management
– the detailed layout of the kernel VAS!

Examining the kernel VAS
As we have talked about in the preceding chapter, and as seen in Figure 7.7, it’s critical to understand
that all processes have their own unique user VAS but share the kernel space – what we call the kernel
segment or kernel VAS. Let’s begin this section by starting to examine some common (arch-indepen-
dent) regions of the kernel VAS.

The kernel VAS’s memory layout is very arch (CPU)-dependent. Nevertheless, all architectures share
some commonalities. The following basic diagram represents both the user VAS and the kernel VAS
(in a horizontally tiled format), as seen on a typical x86_32 (or IA-32) with a 3:1 (GB) VM split:

Figure 7.12: User and kernel VASs on an x86_32 with a 3:1 (GB) VM split with a focus on the lowmem
                                    region; this figure is deliberately simplistic

Let’s go over each region of the process VAS (from left to right, as seen in Figure 7.12):

   •    The user mode VAS: This is the user VAS. We have covered it in detail in the preceding chapter
        as well as within earlier sections in this chapter; in this particular example, it takes 3 GB of
        VAS (its UVAs range from 0x0 to 0xbfff ffff).
   •    The kernel VAS (or kernel segment): In this particular example, we have 1 GB of kernel VAS
        (with its KVAs ranging from 0xc000 0000 to 0xffff ffff); let’s examine individual portions
        of it now.

  •    The “lowmem” region: This is the region into which the OS directly-maps platform (system)
       RAM into the kernel VAS. (Figure 7.12 attempts to clearly convey this. We will cover this key
       topic in more detail in the Direct-mapped RAM and address translation section. If you feel it helps,
       you can read that section first and then return here). Skipping a bit ahead for now, let’s just
       understand that the base location in the kernel VAS where platform RAM is mapped is specified
       by a kernel macro called PAGE_OFFSET. The precise value of this macro is very arch-dependent;
       we will leave this discussion to a later section. For now, we ask you to just take it on faith that
       on the x86_32 with a 3:1 (GB) VM split, the value of PAGE_OFFSET is 0xc000 0000.

Obviously, the size of the kernel’s so-called lowmem region is equal to the amount of RAM on the sys-
tem. (Well, at least the amount of RAM as seen by the kernel; enabling the kdump facility, for example,
has the OS reserve some specified amount of RAM very early on.) The virtual addresses that make up
this region are termed kernel logical addresses as they are at a fixed offset from their physical coun-
terparts. The core kernel and device drivers can allocate (physically contiguous!) memory from this
region via various APIs (they include the page allocator APIs and the popular slab APIs – the k{m|z}
alloc(). Patience please, we will cover precisely these APIs in detail in the following two chapters).
The kernel static text (code), data, and BSS (uninitialized data) memory regions also reside within
this lowmem region.

Right, following the lowmem region, other regions do exist; though not explicitly shown in Figure 7.12
(for now), a couple of key ones are:

  •    The kernel vmalloc region: This is a region of the kernel VAS that is completely virtual. Core
       kernel and/or device driver code can allocate virtually contiguous memory from this region
       using the vmalloc() (and friends) API. Again, we will cover this in detail in Chapter 8, Kernel
       Memory Allocation for Module Authors – Part 1, and Chapter 9, Kernel Memory Allocation for Module
       Authors – Part 2. This is also the so-called ioremap space.
  •    The kernel modules space: A region of kernel VAS is set aside for memory taken up by the
       static text and data of LKMs. When you perform an insmod (or modprobe), the underlying ker-
       nel code of the resulting [f]init_module() system call allocates memory from this region
       (typically via the vmalloc() API) and loads the kernel module’s (static) code and data there.

The preceding figure (Figure 7.12) is deliberately left simplistic and even a bit vague as the exact
kernel virtual memory layout is very arch-dependent. We’ll put off the temptation to draw a detailed
diagram for a bit.

Instead, to make this discussion less pedantic, more practical, and useful, we’ll present, in a soon-to-
come section, a kernel module that queries and prints relevant information regarding the kernel VAS
layout. Only then, once we have actual values for various regions of the kernel VAS for a particular
architecture, will we present a detailed diagram depicting this.

              Pedantically (and as can be seen in Figure 7.10), the addresses belonging to the kernel
              lowmem region are termed kernel logical addresses (they’re at a fixed offset from their phys-
              ical counterparts), whereas the addresses for the remainder of the kernel VAS are termed
              KVAs. Though this distinction is made here, please realize that, for all practical purposes,
              it’s a rather pedantic one: we don’t really differentiate one from the other and often simply
              refer to all addresses within the kernel VAS as KVAs.

Before we get to writing a module that interrogates the kernel VAS though, there are several other
pieces of information to cover. Let’s begin with a peculiarity, mostly brought about by the limitations
of the 32-bit architecture: the so-called high memory region of the kernel VAS on 32-bit systems.

High memory on 32-bit systems
Keeping in mind the kernel lowmem region that we briefly discussed previously, an interesting obser-
vation ensues. On a 32-bit system with, say, a 3:1 (GB) VM split ( just as Figure 7.12 depicts), a system
with (say) 512 MB of RAM will have this RAM direct-mapped into the kernel starting at PAGE_OFFSET
(3 GB or KVA 0xc000 0000) for 512 MB. This is quite clear.

But think about it: what would happen if the system had a lot more RAM, say, 2 GB? Now, it’s obvious
that we cannot direct-map the whole of RAM into the kernel lowmem region. It just cannot fit (as, in
this example, the entire available kernel VAS is just a gigabyte and RAM is 2 GB)! So, on a 32-bit Linux
OS, a certain amount of memory (typically 896 MB on the IA-32) is allowed to be direct-mapped and
thus falls into the lowmem region. The remaining RAM is indirectly mapped into another memory “zone”
called ZONE_HIGHMEM (we think of this as a high-memory region or zone as opposed to lowmem; more
about memory zones will follow in a later section, Zones). More correctly, as the kernel now finds it
impossible to direct-map all physical memory at once, it sets up a (virtual) region where it can set up
and use temporary virtual mappings of that RAM (typically via calls to the kmap() and kunmap() APIs).
This is the so-called high-memory region.

              Don’t get confused by the phrase “high memory.” It’s not necessarily placed “high” in the
              kernel VAS, nor is it the “high-memory” term used to describe memory over the hole at 640
              KB on the PC. Instead, the high_memory global variable, valid only on 32-bit, represents
              the upper bound of the kernel’s lowmem region. More on this follows in a later section,
              Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout.

Nowadays, though (and especially with 32-bit systems being used more and more infrequently), these
concerns completely disappear on 64-bit Linux. Think about it: for example, on the x86_64 running a
64-bit Linux, the kernel VAS size is a whopping 128 TB (that’s 131,072 GB!). As far as I know, no single
system (or node) in existence has anywhere close to this much RAM.

              As of this writing, NASA’s Pleiades Supercomputer specifies a maximum of 128 GB of RAM
              per node (ref: https://www.nas.nasa.gov/hecc/resources/pleiades.html).

Next, when the sparse memory model is being employed (the usual case; the upcoming An introduction
to physical memory models section covers this), the maximum supported bits in the physical address
are given by the macro MAX_PHYSMEM_BITS. On x86_64, it’s typically the value 46, implying the maxi-
mum amount of RAM supported on the machine is 246 bytes – that is, 64 TB. Hence, all platform RAM
can indeed (easily) be direct-mapped into the 128 TB kernel VAS and the need for ZONE_HIGHMEM (or
equivalent silly workarounds) simply disappears. The fact is, deprecating this high memory region
on 32-bit systems is something the majority of kernel folk would like to ultimately do, but as of now,
it’s still very much there, allowing older (typically ARM-32) systems with over a gigabyte of RAM to
continue running on Linux (see this article for more: An end to high memory?, LWN, Feb 2020: https://
lwn.net/Articles/813201/).

Again, the official kernel documentation provides details on this arcane “high-memory” region (relevant
to 32-bit); take a look if interested: https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/vm/highmem.txt.

Okay, let’s now tackle the thing we’ve been itching to do – writing a kernel module (an LKM) to delve
into some details regarding the kernel VAS.

Writing a kernel module to show information about the kernel
VAS
As we have learned, the kernel VAS consists of various regions. Some are common to all architec-
tures (arch-independent): they include the lowmem region (which contains, among other things, the
uncompressed kernel image – its code and data), then we have the kernel modules region, vmalloc/
ioremap regions, and so on.

 The precise location within the kernel VAS where these regions lie, and indeed which regions may
 be present, is very arch (CPU)-dependent. To help understand and pin it down for any given system,
 let’s develop a kernel module that queries and prints – in an arch-dependant fashion where required
– various details regarding the kernel VAS (in fact, if asked to, it also prints some useful user space
 memory details as well).

Now, for you to query and print this information, you must first get familiar with some key kernel
macros and globals; let’s do so in the next section.

Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout
To write a kernel module that displays relevant kernel VAS information, we need to know how exactly
to interrogate the kernel regarding these details.

In this section, we will briefly describe a few key macros and variables within the kernel representing
the memory of the kernel VAS (on most architectures, in descending order by KVA):

  •     The vector table is a common OS data structure – it’s an array of function pointers (aka a
        switching or jump table). It is arch-specific: ARM-32 uses it to initialize its vectors such that
        when a processor exception or mode change (such as an interrupt, syscall, page fault, MMU
        abort, and so on) occurs, the processor knows what code to run. The macro VECTORS_BASE is
        shown in the following table:

            Macro or variable    Interpretation
            VECTORS_BASE         Typically ARM-32 only; start KVA of a kernel vector table spanning 1 page

Table 7.1: Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout: the vector table (AArch32),
                                                           optional

  •     The fix map region is a range of compile-time special or reserved virtual addresses; they are
        employed at boot time to fix, into the kernel VAS, required kernel elements that must have
        memory available for them. Typical examples include the setup of initial kernel page tables,
        early ioremap and vmalloc regions, and so on. Again, it’s an arch-dependent region and is thus
        used differently on different CPUs:

            Macro or variable        Interpretation
            FIXADDR_START            Start KVA of the kernel fix map region spanning FIXADDR_SIZE bytes

Table 7.2: Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout: the fix map region

  •     Kernel modules are allocated memory at load time – for their static text and data – within a
        specific range in the kernel VAS. The precise location of the kernel module region varies with
        the architecture. On AArch32 systems, in fact, it’s placed just above the user VAS, while on
        64-bit systems, it’s usually higher up in the kernel VAS:

            Kernel modules (LKMs) region         Memory allocated from here for static code + data of LKMs
            MODULES_VADDR                        Start KVA of the kernel modules region
                                                 End KVA of the kernel modules region; the region size is
            MODULES_END
                                                 MODULES_END - MODULES_VADDR

Table 7.3: Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout: the kernel modules region

  •     KASAN: The modern kernel (4.0 onward for x86_64, 4.4 for AArch64, and 5.11 for AArch32)
        employs a powerful mechanism to detect and report memory issues (bugs). It’s based on the
        user space Address SANitizer (ASAN) code base and is thus called Kernel Address SANitizer
        (KASAN). Its power lies in ably, via a technique called Compile-Time Instrumentation (CTI),
        detecting memory defects (bugs) such as Out Of Bounds (OOB) accesses (including buffer over/
        underflows), Use After Free (UAF) and double-free accesses. Up to 5.11, however, it works only
        on 64-bit Linux and requires a rather large shadow memory region (of a size that is one-eighth
        that of the kernel VAS, whose extents we show if it’s enabled; in 5.11, though, Linus Walleij has
        introduced an optimized version of KASAN for the ARM-32).

  •   It’s a kernel configuration feature (CONFIG_KASAN) and is typically enabled only for debug (bug
      hunting!) purposes (it’s crucial to keep it enabled during debugging and testing!):

       KASAN shadow memory
                                      [Optional] (only if CONFIG_KASAN is defined)
       region
       KASAN_SHADOW_START             Start KVA of the KASAN region
                                      End KVA of the KASAN region; the size is KASAN_SHADOW_END -
       KASAN_SHADOW_END
                                      KASAN_SHADOW_START

Table 7.4: Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout: the KASAN shadow memory
                                                   region, optional

  •   The vmemmap region is a region within the kernel VAS that is employed when, one, the phys-
      ical memory model is sparsemem (typically the default on modern systems), and two, when
      the method employed to map a Page Frame Number (PFN) to its corresponding virtual page
      (denoted via struct page) is the vmemmap one:

       Vmemmap region           [Optional] (only if CONFIG_ SPARSEMEM_VMEMMAP is defined)
       VMEMMAP_START            Start KVA of the vmemmap region
                                Size of the kernel’s vmemmap region; this macro seems to be defined
       VMEMMAP_SIZE
                                only for AArch64 though...

Table 7.5: Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout: the vmemmap region,
                                                    optional

                    More details can be found in the section An introduction to physical memory models.

  •   The vmalloc region is the kernel region from where memory for the vmalloc() (and friends)
      APIs are allocated; we will cover various memory allocation APIs in detail in the next two
      chapters:

       The vmalloc region      For memory allocated via vmalloc() and friends
       VMALLOC_START           Start KVA of the vmalloc region
                               End KVA of the vmalloc region; size is VMALLOC_END - VMALLOC_
       VMALLOC_END
                               START

Table 7.6: Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout: the vmalloc region

  •   The lowmem region – direct-mapped RAM (i.e., RAM mapped into the kernel VAS on a 1:1 ::
      physical-page-frame:kernel-logical/virtual-page basis). It’s the region where the Linux
      kernel maps and manages (typically) all RAM.

  •     Also, it’s often set up as ZONE_NORMAL within the kernel (we will cover zones a bit later):

            Lowmem region              Direct-mapped memory region
                                       Start KVA of the lowmem region; also represents the start of the
            PAGE_OFFSET                kernel VAS/segment on some architectures and is (often) the VM
                                       split value on 32-bit.
                                       End KVA of the lowmem region, the upper bound of direct-mapped
                                       memory. In effect, this value minus PAGE_OFFSET is the amount
            high_memory                of (platform) RAM on the system (careful though, this is not
                                       necessarily the case on all architectures); not to be confused with
                                       ZONE_HIGHMEM.

Table 7.7: Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout: the lowmem region

  •     The highmem region or zone is an optional region. It might exist on some 32-bit systems (typ-
        ically, where the amount of RAM present is greater than the size of the kernel VAS itself). It’s
        often set up as ZONE_HIGHMEM in this case (we will cover zones a bit later. Also, you can refer back
        to more on this highmem region in the earlier section entitled High memory on 32-bit systems):

            Highmem region (only        [Optional] HIGHMEM may be present
            possible on 32-bit)         on some 32-bit systems
                                        Start KVA of the highmem region, runs until LAST_PKMAP pages;
            PKMAP_BASE                  represents the kernel mapping of so-called high-memory pages
                                        (only possible on 32-bit)

Table 7.8: Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout: the highmem region, op-
                                                           tional

  •     The (uncompressed) kernel image itself – its code, init, and data regions – are always present
        but are private symbols and, thus, unavailable to kernel modules. Thus, we don’t even attempt
        to print them in the code of our upcoming kernel module:

                                         Uncompressed kernel image region (symbols not exported, thus
            Kernel (static) image
                                         unavailable to kernel modules)
            _text, _etext                Start and end KVAs (respectively) of the kernel text (code) region
            __init_begin, __             Start and end KVAs (respectively) of the kernel init section
            init_end                     region
            _sdata, _edata               Start and end KVAs (respectively) of the kernel static data region
            __bss_start, __bss_          Start and end KVAs (respectively) of the kernel BSS (uninitialized
             stop                        data) region

Table 7.9: Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout: the symbols describing
                                                    the kernel image

  •       The user VAS: The last item, of course, is the process user VAS. It’s below the kernel VAS (when
          ordered by descending virtual address) and is of size TASK_SIZE bytes. It was discussed in detail
          earlier in this chapter (in the Examining the process VAS section):

              User VAS                                   User Virtual Address Space (VAS)
                                                         (Examined in detail earlier via procfs and/or our
              User-mode VAS of size TASK_SIZE
                                                         procmap utility script); the kernel macro TASK_SIZE
              bytes
                                                         represents the size of the user VAS (in bytes).

Table 7.10: Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS layout: the user VAS

Well, that’s that; we’ve seen several kernel macros and variables that, in effect, describe the kernel VAS.
Moving on to the code of our kernel module, you’ll soon see that its init method calls two functions
(that matter):

  •       show_kernelvas_info(), which prints relevant kernel VAS details
  •       show_userspace_info(), which prints relevant user VAS details (its execution is optional,
          decided via a kernel parameter, and is off by default)

We will start by describing the kernel VAS function and seeing its output. Also, the way the Makefile is
set up, it links into the object file of our kernel “library” code, klib.c, and generates a kernel module
object called show_kernel_vas.ko.

Trying it out – viewing kernel VAS details
For clarity, we will show only relevant parts of the source code in this section. Do clone and use the
complete code from this book’s GitHub repository. Also, recall the procmap utility mentioned earlier;
it has a kernel component, an LKM, which indeed does a similar job to this one – making kernel-level
information available to user space. With it being a bit more sophisticated, we won’t delve into its code
here; seeing the code of the following demo kernel module show_kernel_vas is sufficient for now:
      // ch7/show_kernel_vas/kernel_vas.c
      [...]
      static void show_kernelvas_info(void)
      {
          unsigned long ram_size;

      #if LINUX_VERSION_CODE >= KERNEL_VERSION(5, 0, 0)
          ram_size = totalram_pages() * PAGE_SIZE;
      #else // totalram_pages() undefined on the BeagleBone running an older 4.19
      kernel..
          ram_size = totalram_pages * PAGE_SIZE;
      #endif
          pr_info("PAGE_SIZE = %lu, total RAM ~= %lu MB (%lu bytes)\n",
                 PAGE_SIZE, ram_size/(1024*1024), ram_size);

We first query the amount of physical RAM on the system; this is achieved via the totalram_pages()
inline function in the <linux/mm.h> header (from kernel version 5.0). Having the amount of RAM helps
us accurately calculate the direct-mapped lowmem region of the kernel VAS. We do verify whether
the system is an AArch64 with a 64K page size and a 48-bit address space for each VAS (via the VA_BITS
macro); if so, we don’t handle this case (see the caveats mentioned at the end of this section as well).
Continuing with the code:
         pr_info("Some Kernel Details [by decreasing address; values are
                    approximate]\n"
                   "+-------------------------------------------------------
                   ------+\n");
   #if defined(CONFIG_ARM)
      /* On ARM, the definition of VECTORS_BASE turns up only in kernels >= 4.11 */
   #if LINUX_VERSION_CODE > KERNEL_VERSION(4, 11, 0)
         pr_info("|vector table: "
            " %px - %px                         | [%5zu KB]\n",
         SHOW_DELTA_K((void *)VECTORS_BASE, (void *
               )(VECTORS_BASE + PAGE_SIZE)));
   #endif
   #endif

The preceding code snippet displays the extent of the ARM (AArch32) vector table. Of course, it’s
conditional; the output’s only emitted on an AArch32 – hence the #if defined(CONFIG_ARM) prepro-
cessor directive. Also, our use of the %px, %zu printk format specifiers ensures the code is portable.

The SHOW_DELTA_*() macros used here in this demo kernel module are defined in our convenient.h
header and are helpers that enable us to easily display the low and high values passed to it, calculate
the delta (the difference) between the two quantities passed, and display it in a human-readable
manner; here’s the relevant code:
   // convenient.h
   [...]
   /* SHOW_DELTA_*(low, hi) :
    * Show the low val, high val and the delta (hi-low) in either bytes/KB/MB/GB,
   as required.
    * Inspired from raspberry pi kernel src: arch/arm/mm/init.c:MLM()
    */
   #define SHOW_DELTA_b(low, hi) (low), (hi), ((hi) - (low))
   #define SHOW_DELTA_K(low, hi) (low), (hi), (((hi) - (low)) >> 10)
   #define SHOW_DELTA_M(low, hi) (low), (hi), (((hi) - (low)) >> 20)
   #define SHOW_DELTA_G(low, hi) (low), (hi), (((hi) - (low)) >> 30)
   #define SHOW_DELTA_MG(low, hi) (low), (hi), (((hi) - (low)) >> 20), (((hi) -
   (low)) >> 30)
   #if (BITS_PER_LONG == 64)

      #define SHOW_DELTA_MGT(low, hi) (low), (hi), (((hi) - (low)) >> 20), (((hi) -
      (low)) >> 30), (((hi) - (low)) >> 40)
      #else // 32-bit
      #define SHOW_DELTA_MGT(low, hi) (low), (hi), (((hi) - (low)) >> 20), (((hi) -
      (low)) >> 30)
      #endif

In the following code, we show the code snippet that emits messages to the kernel log (via printk)
describing the extents of the following regions:

  •      Kernel module region
  •      (Optional) KASAN region
  •      The vmalloc region
  •      The lowmem, and a possible highmem, region

Regarding the kernel modules region, as explained in the detailed comment in the following source,
we try and keep the order by descending KVAs:
      // ch7/show_kernel_vas/kernel_vas.c
      [...]
      /* kernel module region
       * For the modules region, it's high in the kernel segment on typical 64-
       * bit systems, but the other way around on many 32-bit systems
       * (particularly ARM-32); so we rearrange the order in which it's shown
       * depending on the arch, thus trying to maintain a 'by descending address'
      ordering. */
      #if (BITS_PER_LONG == 64)
          pr_info("|module region: "
                " %px - %px | [%9zu MB]\n",
                    SHOW_DELTA_M((void *)MODULES_VADDR, (void *)MODULES_END));
      #endif

      #ifdef CONFIG_KASAN       /* KASAN region: Kernel Address     SANitizer */
          pr_info("|KASAN shadow: "
      #if (BITS_PER_LONG == 64)
               " %px - %px      | [%9zu MB = %6zu GB ~= %3zu TB]\n",
                SHOW_DELTA_MGT((void *)KASAN_SHADOW_START, (void *)KASAN_SHADOW_END)
      #else    // 32-bit with KASAN enabled
               " %px - %px                       | [%9zu MB = %6zu GB]\n",
                SHOW_DELTA_MG((void *)KASAN_SHADOW_START, (void *)KASAN_SHADOW_END)
      #endif
         );
      #endif

        [ ... ]
      /* vmalloc region */
        pr_info("|vmalloc region: "
   #if (BITS_PER_LONG == 64)
        " %px - %px         | [%9zu MB = %6zu GB ~= %3zu TB]\n",
        SHOW_DELTA_MGT((void *)VMALLOC_START, (void *)VMALLOC_END)
   #else     // 32-bit
        " %px - %px                             | [%5zu MB]\n",
        SHOW_DELTA_M((void *)VMALLOC_START, (void *)VMALLOC_END)
   #endif
        );

Notice how the code tends to be arch (CPU) and platform-dependent. Now, let’s see the code to show the
extents of the kernel lowmem region – in effect, the region where the platform RAM is direct-mapped
into the kernel VAS:
      /* lowmem region (RAM direct-mapping)          */
        pr_info("|lowmem region: "
   #if (BITS_PER_LONG == 32)
        " %px - %px                             | [%5zu MB]\n"
        "|                         ^^^^^^^^                                        |\n"
        "|                        PAGE_OFFSET                                      |\n",
   #else
        " %px - %px         | [%9zu MB]\n"
        "|                         ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^                                |\n"
        "|                             PAGE_OFFSET                                 |\n",
   #endif
   SHOW_DELTA_M((void *)PAGE_OFFSET, (void *)(PAGE_OFFSET) + ram_size));

A look at how a possible (on 32-bit) highmem region is seen:
   /* (possible) highmem region; may be present on some 32-bit systems */
   #if defined(CONFIG_HIGHMEM) && (BITS_PER_LONG==32)
        pr_info("|HIGHMEM region:           "
              " %px - %px                           | [%5zu MB]\n",
              SHOW_DELTA_M((void *)PKMAP_BASE, (void *)((PKMAP_BASE) +
                  (LAST_PKMAP * PAGE_SIZE))));
   #endif

Finally, a quick look at the code that determines the extents of the kernel module region:
   [ ... ]
   #if (BITS_PER_LONG == 32)          /* modules region: see the comment above reg this
   */

          pr_info("|module region:                "
               " %px - %px                               | [%5zu MB]\n",
               SHOW_DELTA_M((void *)MODULES_VADDR, (void *)MODULES_END));
      #endif
          pr_info(ELLPS);
      }

Right, let’s build and insert our LKM on an ARM-32 Raspberry Pi Zero W running the stock Raspberry
Pi OS (here, it so happens that it too is running a 6.1-based kernel!). The following screenshot shows
it being set up and then the kernel log:

Figure 7.13: Output from the show_kernel_vas.ko LKM on a Raspberry Pi Zero W running stock Rasp-
                                              berry Pi OS 32-bit Linux

As can be deciphered from the value of PAGE_OFFSET (the KVA 0xc000 0000 in Figure 7.13), our Rasp-
berry Pi kernel’s VM split is configured as 3:1 (GB) (as the hexadecimal value 0xc000 0000 is 3 GB in
decimal base). This VM split value is typically the default for the Raspberry Pi 32-bit OS on recent
kernels.

                 Do note that with a 3:1 (GB) VM split, user space should span from 0 to 3 GB and kernel
                 space the remainder. Technically, however, on AArch32 (ARM-32) systems at least, user
                 space is slightly under 2 GB (2 GB – 16 MB = 2,032 MB) as this 16 MB is used as the kernel
                 module region ( just below PAGE_OFFSET); indeed, exactly this can be seen in Figure 7.11
                 (the kernel module region here spans from 0xbf00 0000 to 0xc000 0000 for 16 MB). Also,
                 as you’ll soon see, the value of the TASK_SIZE macro – the size of the user VAS – reflects
                 this fact as well.

We present much of this information in the following detailed diagram:

Figure 7.14: The complete VAS of a process on AArch32 (Raspberry Pi Zero W) with a 3:1 GB VM split

               Do note that due to variations in differing models, the amount of usable RAM, or even the
               device tree, the layout shown in Figure 7.12 may not precisely match that of the Raspberry
               Pi you have.

Okay, now you know how to access relevant kernel macros and variables related to the VAS, helping
you understand the kernel VM layout on any Linux system!

We’ll also mention a few caveats regarding our rather simplistic kernel module:

  •     The description of kernel macros/constants is often very arch-dependant and dependent on
        the kernel config as well; it’s thus incomplete here – for example, recent features like the
        Kernel Memory Sanitizer (KMSAN), when enabled, can cause changes in the memory layout.
  •     We don’t attempt to handle the memory layout on an ARMv8.2 or later with LPA enabled.
  •     Hardware I/O regions (like PCI I/O, DMA) aren’t tracked or displayed.
  •     Due to the non-availability of floating-point calculation when running in kernel mode, at times,
        our module’s size accuracy reduces when large values are expressed (an example of the reason
        why I mention this: the value 131071.999996185 GB will show up as 127 TB, not 128 TB, which
        of course is really the value it’s very close to).
  •     The kernel does have similar functionality that our module exhibits, of course – the “dump
        tables” one; the feature can be configured via CONFIG_PTDUMP_DEBUGFS.
  •     It’s still a work in progress!

Nevertheless, our module is a good start! In the following section, we will attempt to “see” (visualize)
the kernel VAS – this time, via our procmap utility.

The kernel VAS via procmap
Okay, this is interesting: the view of the memory map layout seen in some detail in Figure 7.14 is ex-
actly what our aforementioned procmap utility provides; we introduced usage of this utility in the The
procmap process VAS visualization utility section. As promised there, let’s now see screenshots of the
kernel VAS when running procmap (the earlier section showed screenshots of the process user VAS).

To keep in sync with the immediate discussion, we will now show screenshots of procmap providing
a “visual” view of the kernel VAS on the very same AArch32 Raspberry Pi Zero W system (we could
specify the --only-kernel switch to show only the kernel VAS; we don’t do so here, though). As we
have to run procmap on some process, we arbitrarily choose systemd PID 1; we also use the --verbose
option switch. However, it might initially fail, as seen in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.15: Truncated screenshot showing the procmap kernel module build failing

It failed, as building the procmap kernel module failed; but why? I mention this possibility in the
project’s README.md file (https://github.com/kaiwan/procmap/blob/master/README.md#procmap):
      […] to build a kernel module on the target system, you will require it to have
      a kernel development environment setup; this boils down to having the compiler,
      make and - key here - the 'kernel headers' package installed for the kernel
      version it's currently running upon. [...]

Here, it’s as the kernel headers package for this kernel isn’t available, hence the module build fails
(this would also have happened if you had a custom kernel installed on the board). While you can
conceivably copy the entire Raspberry Pi kernel source tree onto the device and set up the /lib/
module/<kver>/build symbolic link, this isn’t considered the right way to do so. So, what is? Cross-com-
piling the procmap kernel module for the Raspberry Pi from your host, of course! We have covered
the details on cross-compiling the kernel itself for the Raspberry Pi here: Chapter 3, Building the 6.x
Linux Kernel from Source – Part 2, in the Kernel build for the Raspberry Pi section; the discussion applies
to cross-compiling kernel modules as well.

               I want to stress this point: the procmap kernel module build on the Raspberry Pi only
               fails due to the lack of a Raspberry Pi-supplied kernel headers package when running a
               (custom) kernel. If you are happy to work with the stock (default) Raspberry Pi OS kernel
               (earlier called Raspbian OS), the kernel headers package is certainly installable (or already
               installed) and everything will just work (the package is named raspberrypi-kernel-
               headers). Similarly, on your typical x86_64 Linux distribution, the procmap.ko kernel
               module gets cleanly built and inserted at runtime. Do read the procmap project’s README.
               md file in detail, especially the section labeled IMPORTANT: Running procmap on systems
               other than x86_64 for details on how to cross-compile the procmap kernel module.

Once you successfully cross-compile the procmap kernel module on your host system, copy across
the procmap.ko kernel module (via scp, perhaps) to the device and place it under the <…>/procmap/
procmap_kernel directory; now you’re ready to go!

Here, as an example, is the copied-in (or built) kernel module on the Raspberry Pi device:
   cd <...>/procmap/
   $ ls -l procmap_kernel/procmap.ko
   -rw-r--r-- 1 pi pi 9100 Jan 22 17:32 procmap_kernel/procmap.ko

You can also run the modinfo utility on it to verify that it’s built for ARM. Here, I run the stock Raspberry
Pi OS on the board. With this in place, let’s retry our procmap run to display the kernel VAS details:

Figure 7.16: Truncated screenshot showing the procmap kernel module successfully inserted and
                                             various system details

The procmap kernel module does indeed get built and work now! As we’ve specified the --verbose
option to procmap, you get to see its detailed progress, as well as – quite usefully – various kernel vari-
ables/macros/constants of interest and their current value.

Okay, let’s continue capturing the screen and viewing the portion we’re really after – the “visual map”
of the kernel VAS on the Raspberry Pi Zero W, in descending order by KVA; the following (partial)
screenshot captures (most of) the upper portion of this output from procmap:

Figure 7.17: Partial screenshot of our procmap utility’s upper portion output showing the complete
                         kernel VAS (when run on the Raspberry Pi Zero W with 32-bit Linux)

The complete kernel VAS – from end_kva (value 0xffff ffff) right to the start of the kernel, start_
kva (0xbf00 0000, which, as you can see, is the start of the kernel module region on this system) – is
displayed.

Notice (on the right side in green color; hard-copy readers, please refer to the PDF with full-color
diagrams here: https://packt.link/gbp/9781803232225.pdf) the label on the right of certain key
addresses denoting what they are! For completeness, we also included in the preceding screenshot the
kernel-user boundary. As the preceding output is on an ARM 32-bit system, the user VAS immediately
follows the kernel VAS.

As we’ve learned, on a 64-bit system though, there is an (enormous!) “non-canonical” sparse unused
region – a hole – between the start of the kernel VAS and the top of the user VAS. On the x86_64, it
spans the vast majority of the overall VAS: 16,383.75 PB (out of a total VAS of 16,384 PB! Refer to Figure
7.5 again, to refresh this fact).

              Exercise

              Install and run the procmap utility on your Linux system(s) and carefully study its output;
              this can be done on your x86_64 (VM or native system), any ARM (32 and/or 64-bit), or
              whichever box or VM you happen to have handy. It also works well on a BeagleBone Black
              embedded board with a 3:1 VM split, showing details as expected.

              FYI, I also provide a solution in the form of three (large, stitched-together) screenshots
              of procmap's output on a native x86_64 system, a BeagleBone Black (AArch32) board,
              and the Raspberry Pi running a 64-bit OS (AArch64) here: https://github.com/
              PacktPublishing/Linux-Kernel-Programming_2E/tree/main/solutions_to_assgn/
              ch7.

Studying the source code of procmap, and, especially relevant here, its kernel module component, will
certainly help you learn more. I urge you to dig into it and even contribute; it’s open source, after all!

Let’s finish this section by glancing at the user segment view that our earlier demo kernel module –
ch7/show_kernel_vas – provides.

Trying it out – the user segment
Now, let’s go back to our ch7/show_kernel_vas LKM demo program. We have provided a kernel mod-
ule parameter named show_uservas (defaulting to the value 0); when set to 1, some details regarding
the process context’s user space – more correctly, the user-mode process context that ran the module’s
code paths – are displayed as well. Here’s the definition of the module parameter:
   static int show_uservas;
   module_param(show_uservas, int, 0660);
   MODULE_PARM_DESC(show_uservas,
   "Show some user space VAS details; 0 = no (default), 1 = show");

Right, once more on the same device (a Raspberry Pi Zero W), let’s again run our show_kernel_vas
kernel module, this time requesting it to display user space details as well (via the aforementioned
parameter).

The following screenshot shows the complete output:

Figure 7.18: Screenshot of our show_kernel_vas.ko LKM’s output showing both kernel and user VAS
           details when running on a Raspberry Pi Zero W with the stock Raspberry Pi 32-bit Linux OS

This is useful! We now literally see a (more or less) complete memory map of the process – both the
so-called “upper (canonical) half” kernel space as well as the “lower (canonical) half” user space – in
one shot (yes, that’s right, even though the procmap project shows this better and, in more detail).

As one more interesting experiment, let’s use our show_kernel_vas module to view the overall VAS
on our AArch64 Raspberry Pi 4 Model B board running the stock RPi 64-bit OS.

The screenshot (Figure 7.19) shows it all:

Figure 7.19: Screenshot showing our module running on a standard AArch64 Raspberry Pi 4

Note how this particular memory layout pretty much matches what we showed in row 5 of the table
in Figure 7.6

I will leave it as an exercise for you to run this kernel module and carefully study the output on your
x86_64, or whichever box or VM. Do carefully go through the code as well. We printed the user space
details that you see in the preceding screenshot, such as the segment start and end addresses, by deref-
erencing the mm_struct structure (the task structure member named mm) from current. Recall that mm
is the abstraction of the user mapping of the process. A snippet of the code that does this is as follows:
   // ch7/show_kernel_vas/kernel_vas.c
   [ ... ]
   static void show_userspace_info(void)
   {
        pr_info("+------- Above this line: kernel VAS; below: user VAS --------+\n"
        ELLPS
        "|Process environment "

      #if (BITS_PER_LONG == 64)
         " %px - %px        | [ %4zu bytes]\n"
         "|             arguments "
         " %px - %px        | [ %4zu bytes]\n"
         "|         stack start     %px                               |\n"
      [ ... ]
      #else // 32-bit
         " %px - %px                           | [ %4zu bytes]\n"
         "|             arguments "
         " %px - %px                           | [ %4zu bytes]\n"
         "|         stack start     %px                                         |\n"
      [ ... ]\n",
          SHOW_DELTA_b((void *)current->mm->env_start, (void *)current->mm->env_end),
          SHOW_DELTA_b((void *)current->mm->arg_start, (void *)current->mm->arg_end),
          (void *)current->mm->start_stack,
          [ ... ]

 Remember the so-called null trap page at the very beginning of the user VAS? (Also, procmap's output
– see Figure 7.11 – shows the null trap page). Let’s see what it’s for in the following section.

The null trap page
Did you notice within the preceding diagrams (Figure 7.11 and Figure 7.14), at the extreme left edge
(of Figure 7.11, albeit very small!), a single page at the very beginning of the user space, named the
null trap page? What is it? That’s easy: virtual page 0 is given no permissions (at the hardware MMU/
PTE level). Thus, any access to this page, be it r, w, or x (read/write/execute), will result in the MMU
raising what is called a processor fault or exception. This will have the processor jump to an OS handler
routine (the fault handler). It runs, killing the culprit process trying to access a memory region with
no permissions!

It’s very interesting indeed: the OS handler mentioned previously runs in process context, and guess
what current is: why, it’s the process (or thread) that initiated this bad NULL pointer lookup! (Also
note that it’s not just the NULL or 0x0 address that generates this fault; any address from 0 to 4095
will.) Within the fault handler code, the SIGSEGV signal is delivered to the faulting process (current),
causing it to die (via a segfault). In a nutshell, this is how the classic NULL pointer dereference bug is
caught by the OS.

Viewing kernel documentation on the memory layout
Back to the kernel VAS; obviously, with a 64-bit VAS, the kernel VAS is much larger than on 32-bit. As
we saw earlier, it’s typically 128 TB on the x86_64. Study again the VM split table shown previously
(Figure 7.6 in the Common VM splits section); there, the column labeled “VM Split ...” is, of course, the
VM split for different architectures. You can see how on the 64-bit Intel/AMD and AArch64 (ARM64),
the numbers are much larger than for their 32-bit counterparts.

For arch-specific details, we refer you to the “official” kernel documentation on the process virtual
memory layout here (the relevant kernel headers turn out to be very useful to the purpose as well):

                        Process memory layout documentation (file location in kernel source tree, link to
 Architecture
                        documentation, and relevant kernel header)
                        File: Documentation/arm/memory.txt.

 AArch32                Link: https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.1.25/source/Documentation/
 (ARM32)                arm/memory.rst

                        Header: arch/arm/include/asm/memory.h.
                        File: Documentation/arm64/memory.txt.

 AArch64                Link: https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.1.25/source/Documentation/
 (ARM64)                arm64/memory.rst

                        Header: arch/arm64/include/asm/memory.h
                        File: Documentation/x86/x86_64/mm.txt

                        Link: This document’s readability was vastly improved quite recently; I recommend
                        you browse through this file: https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.1.25/
 x86_64                 source/Documentation/x86/x86_64/mm.rst

                        Header: arch/x86/include/asm/pgtable_64_types.h.

                        For the x86_32: arch/x86/include/asm/page_32_types.h

Table 7.11: Arch (CPU)-specific official kernel documentation for process memory layout on Linux

                  At the risk of repetition, I urge you to try out the ch7/show_kernel_vas kernel module
                 – and, even better, the procmap project (https://github.com/kaiwan/procmap) – on
                  different Linux systems and study the output. You can then literally see the “memory map”
                 – the complete process VAS – of any given process, which includes the kernel VAS! This
                  understanding is critical when working with and/or debugging issues at the system layer.

Again, at the risk of overstating it, the previous two sections – covering the detailed examination of
the user and kernel VASs – are very important indeed. Do take the time required to go over them and
work on the sample code and suggested exercises. Great going!

Moving along on our journey through the Linux kernel’s memory management subsystem, let’s now
check out another interesting topic – that of the [K]ASLR protection-via-memory-layout-randomization
feature. Read on!

Randomizing the memory layout – KASLR
 In infosec circles, it’s a well-known fact that, with proc filesystem (procfs) and various powerful
“hacking” tools at their disposal (heard of Kali Linux?), a malicious user, knowing in advance the
 precise location (virtual addresses) of various functions and/or globals within a process’s VAS, could
 devise an attack to exploit and ultimately compromise a given system. (Why, even knowing the precise
 location of one well-known function or global in a given kernel could lead to an attack vector!) Thus,
 for security, to make it near impossible (or at least difficult) for attackers to rely on “known” virtual
 addresses, user space, as well as kernel space, supports Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR)
 and Kernel ASLR (KASLR) techniques (often pronounced Ass-ler/Kass-ler).

The keyword here is randomization: this feature, when enabled, changes the location of portions of the
process (and kernel) memory layout in terms of absolute numbers as it offsets portions of memory from
a given base address by a random (page-aligned) quantity.

What “portions of memory” exactly are we talking about? With respect to user space mappings (we will
talk about KASLR later), the starting addresses of shared libraries (their load address), mmap()-based
allocations (you’ll realize that any malloc() function (/calloc()/realloc()) allocating any memory
above MMAP_THRESHOLD (typically 128 KB) becomes an mmap-based allocation, not memory off the heap),
stack start, the heap, and the vDSO page; all of these can be randomized at process run (launch) time.

Hence, an attacker cannot depend on, say, a glibc function (such as system()) being mapped at a
particular fixed UVA in any given process (as it used to be!); not only that, the location will vary every
time the process runs! Before ASLR, and on systems where ASLR is unsupported or turned off, the
location of symbols can be ascertained in advance for a given architecture and software version (procfs
plus utilities like objdump, readelf, nm, and so on make this quite easy).

It’s key to realize that [K]ASLR is merely a statistical protection. In fact, typically, not many bits are
available for randomization and thus the entropy isn’t very good. This implies that the page-sized
offsets are not too many, even on 64-bit systems, thus leading to a possibly weakened implementation
(to the experienced cracker’s delight).

Let’s now briefly look at a few more details regarding both user mode and kernel-mode ASLR (the
latter being referred to as KASLR); the following sections cover these areas, respectively.

User memory randomization with ASLR
User-mode ASLR is usually what is meant by the term ASLR. It being enabled implies this protection
is available on the user space mapping of every process. Effectively, ASLR being enabled implies that
the absolute memory map of user-mode processes will vary every time they’re run, and every process
instance of the same program will be different in terms of the absolute user-space memory map.

ASLR has been supported on Linux for a very long time (since 2005 on 2.6.12). The kernel has a tun-
able pseudo file within procfs to query and set (as root) the ASLR state; here it is: /proc/sys/kernel/
randomize_va_space.

It can have three possible values; the three values and their meaning are shown in the following table:

 Tunable value     Interpretation of this value in /proc/sys/kernel/randomize_va_space
                   (User mode) ASLR is turned OFF, or can be turned off by passing the kernel
 0
                   parameter norandmaps at boot.
                   (User mode) ASLR is ON: mmap() based allocations, the stack, and the vDSO page
 1                 are randomized. This also implies that shared library load locations and shared
                   memory segments are randomized.
                   (User mode) ASLR is ON: all of the preceding (value 1) plus the heap location are
 2
                   randomized (since 2.6.25); this is the OS value by default.

Table 7.12: Linux (user mode) ASLR tuning via a proc pseudo file

As noted in an earlier section, The vsyscall page, the vDSO page is a system call optimization, allowing
some frequently issued system calls (gettimeofday() being a typical one) to be invoked with less
overhead. If interested, you can look up more details on the man page on vDSO(7) here: https://
man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/vdso.7.html.

User-mode ASLR can be turned off at boot by passing the norandmaps parameter to the kernel (via
the bootloader); why would one do that? It’s at times useful to do so when debugging...leave it on in
production!

Kernel memory layout randomization with KASLR
Similar to (user) ASLR – and more recently, from the 3.14 kernel onward – even kernel VAS can be ran-
domized (to some extent) by having KASLR enabled. Here, the base location of some kernel sections
(the lowmem, vmalloc, and vmemmap regions), as well as module code within the kernel VAS will be
randomized by a page-aligned random offset from the base of RAM. This remains in effect for that
session – that is, until a power cycle or reboot.

The kernel config for KASLR is named CONFIG_RANDOMIZE_MEMORY. KASLR appears to be supported
on the x86[_64] and AArch64 platforms, not on AArch32.

Several kernel configuration variables exist, enabling the platform developer to enable or disable
these randomization options. As an example specific to the x86, the following is quoted directly
from Documentation/x86/x86_64/mm.txt (https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.1.25/source/
Documentation/x86/x86_64/mm.rst#L148):

              Note that if CONFIG_RANDOMIZE_MEMORY is enabled, the direct mapping of all physical
              memory, vmalloc/ioremap space and virtual memory map are randomized. Their order
              is preserved but their base will be offset early at boot time.

Once configured, KASLR will remain on by default; one can control its state at boot by passing a kernel
command-line parameter (via the bootloader):

  •    Explicitly turn it off by passing the nokaslr parameter
  •    Explicitly turn it on by passing the kaslr parameter

From the 5.13 kernel, a new security feature is available: CONFIG_RANDOMIZE_KSTACK_OFFSET_DEFAULT.
Turning it on has the kernel-mode stack offsets randomized every time a system call is issued! (Do
see the really well-written commit #39218ff4c625dbf2, here: https://github.com/torvalds/linux/
commit/39218ff4c625dbf2e68224024fe0acaa60bcd51a).

              Tip: You can search for a given (abbreviated) commit number from the Search box at
              https://github.com/torvalds/linux.

So, what’s the current setting for [K]ASLR on your Linux system? And can we change it? Yes, of course
(provided we have root access); the next section shows you how to do so via a Bash script.

Querying/setting KASLR status with a script
We provide a simple Bash script at <book-source>/ch7/ASLR_check.sh. It checks for the presence
of both (user-mode) ASLR as well as KASLR, printing (color-coded) status information about them. It
also allows you to change the ASLR value.

Let’s give it a spin on our x86_64 Ubuntu 22.04 guest. As our script is programmed to be color-coded,
we show a screenshot of its output here:

Figure 7.20: Screenshot showing the output when our ch7/ASLR_check.sh Bash script runs on an
                                             x86_64 Ubuntu guest

It runs, showing you that (at least on this box) both the user mode ASLR as well as KASLR configs
are indeed turned on. Not only that, we write a small “test” routine to see ASLR functioning. It’s very
simple; it runs the following command twice:
   grep -E "heap|stack" /proc/self/maps

From what you learned in the earlier Interpreting the /proc/PID/maps output section, you can now see,
in Figure 7.20, that the respective UVAs for the heap and stack segments are different in each run, thus
proving that the ASLR feature indeed works! For example, look at the starting heap UVA: in the first run,
it’s 0x5638 bad9 4000, and in the second run, it’s 0x55b5 78f6 7000 (bottom portion of Figure 7.21.

Next, let’s pass the parameter 0 to the script, thus turning ASLR off; the following screenshot shows
the (expected) output:

Figure 7.21: Screenshot showing how ASLR is turned off (via our ch7/ASLR_check.sh script on an
                                          x86_64 Ubuntu guest)

This time, we can see that ASLR was on by default, but we turned it off. This is clearly highlighted
in (red) bold font via the line “ => (usermode) ASLR is currently OFF” in the preceding screenshot. (Do
remember to turn it on again.) Also, as expected, as it’s now off, the UVAs of both the heap and stack
(respectively) remain the same in both test runs, which is insecure. I will leave it to you to browse
through and understand the source code of the script.

              Note: To take advantage of ASLR, applications must be compiled with the -fPIE and -pie
              GCC flags (PIE stands for Position Independent Executable).

 Both ASLR and KASLR protect against some types of attack vectors, the return-to-libc and Return-Ori-
 ented Programming (ROP) ones being the typical cases. However, and unfortunately, white and black
 hat security being the cat-and-mouse game it is, defeating [K]ASLR and similar methodologies is
 something advanced exploits do quite well. As an example, the well-known setarch utility has the
--addr-no-randomize option to, guess what, turn off ASLR. Refer to this chapter’s Further reading sec-
 tion (under the Linux kernel security heading) for more details.

While on the topic of security, as an added-value tip, many useful tools exist to carry out vulnerability
checks on your system. Check out the following:

   •    The checksec.sh script (http://www.trapkit.de/tools/checksec.html) displays various
       “hardening” measures and their current status (for both individual files and processes): REL-
        RO, stack canary, NX-enabled, PIE, RPATH, RUNPATH, presence of symbols, and compiler
        fortification.
   •    grsecurity’s PaX suite.
   •    The hardening-check script (an alternative to checksec).
   •    The kconfig-hardened-check Perl script (https://github.com/a13xp0p0v/kconfig-
        hardened-check) checks (and suggests) kernel config options for security against some pre-
        defined checklists.
   •    Several others: Lynis, linuxprivchecker.py, memory, and so on.

So, the next time you see differing kernel or user virtual addresses on multiple runs or sessions, you
will know it’s probably due to the [K]ASLR protection feature (turning [K]ASLR off for debugging is
fairly common). Now, let’s complete this chapter by moving on to an exploration of how the Linux
kernel organizes and works with physical memory.

Understanding physical memory organization
Now that we have examined the virtual memory view for both user and kernel VASs in quite some detail,
let’s turn to the topic of physical memory organization on the Linux OS.

Physical RAM organization
The Linux kernel, at boot, organizes and partitions physical RAM into a tree-like hierarchy consisting
of nodes, zones, and page frames (page frames are physical pages of RAM) (see Figure 7.22 and Figure
7.23). Do note that further organization via physical memory models is also performed at early boot
and is a related discussion; we will throw some light on this in the An introduction to physical memory
models section.

Nodes are divided into zones, and zones consist of page frames. It’s essentially a tree-like hierarchy, sim-
plistically and conceptually depicted as a three-level tree-like hierarchy like this:

  •     Node(s)            ← Level 1

          •     Zone(s)          ← Level 2

                  •     Page frames      ← Level 3

A node is a metadata structure that abstracts a physical bank of RAM; this RAM itself is associated
with one or more processor (CPU) cores. At the hardware level, the microprocessors are connected
to the RAM controller chip(s); any memory controller chip, and thus any RAM, can be reached from
any CPU core, across an interconnect. Now, obviously, being able to reach the RAM physically nearest
the core on which a thread is allocating or using memory will lead to performance enhancement. This
very idea is leveraged by hardware and OSes that support the so-called NUMA model (the meaning
is explained shortly).

Nodes and NUMA
Essentially, nodes are data structures used to denote and abstract a physical RAM module on the sys-
tem motherboard and its associated controller chipset. Yes, we’re talking actual hardware here being
abstracted via software metadata. (Note that the term “node,” as used in this context, isn’t the same
as when used to denote a single hardware computer on a network, perhaps). It’s always associated
with a physical socket (or collection of processor cores) on the system motherboard. Two types of
hierarchies exist:

  •     Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) systems: Where the particular CPU core on which a
        kernel allocation request occurs does matter (memory is treated non-uniformly), leading to
        performance improvements
  •     Uniform Memory Access (UMA) systems: Where the particular CPU core on which a kernel
        allocation request occurs doesn’t matter (memory is treated uniformly)

True NUMA systems are those whose hardware is always multicore – implying two or more CPU cores,
thus it’s always Symmetric Multi-Processor (SMP) as well – and there must be two or more physical
banks of RAM, each of which is associated with a CPU (or CPUs). In other words, NUMA systems will
always have two or more nodes, whereas UMA systems will have exactly one node (FYI, the data struc-
ture that abstracts a node is called pg_data_t and is defined here: include/linux/mmzone.h:pg_data_t
as a typedef structure).

Why all this complexity, you may wonder? Well, it’s – what else – all about performance! NUMA sys-
tems (they typically tend to be rather expensive server-class machines and supercomputers) and the
OSes they run (Linux/Unix/Windows Server, typically) are designed in such a way that when a pro-
cess (or thread) on a particular CPU core wants to perform a kernel memory allocation, the software
guarantees that it does so with high performance by taking the required memory (RAM) from the node
closest to the core (hence the NUMA moniker!). No such benefits accrue to UMA systems (your typical
embedded systems, smartphones, laptops, and desktops), nor do they matter. Enterprise, data center
class servers, and supercomputer systems nowadays can have hundreds of processors and terabytes,
even a few petabytes, of RAM, a node, and there will be 2 or more nodes. These are almost always
architected as NUMA systems.

With the way that Linux is designed, though – and this is a key point – even regular UMA systems are
treated as NUMA systems by the kernel (well, pseudo-NUMA). This is to avoid, at any cost, changing
the code base, thus forking Linux (as you’ll know, the very same Linux kernel code base is used to
power any and all types of Linux systems, from tiny, embedded ones to supercomputers). They – UMA
systems – will have exactly one node, so that’s a quick way to check whether the system is NUMA or
UMA: if there are two or more nodes and it has multiple CPU cores, it’s a true NUMA system; only one
node and/or only one CPU core, and it’s a “fake NUMA” or pseudo-NUMA box. How can you check the
number of nodes? The numactl utility is one way (try doing numactl --hardware). There are other
ways to check (via procfs itself); hang on a bit, we’ll get there... (FYI, checking the number of CPU cores
the OS sees is easy; you can use nproc, lscpu, and/or cat /proc/cpuinfo).

So, a simpler way to visualize this: on a NUMA box, one or more CPU cores are associated with a bank
(a hardware module) of physical RAM; this is termed a node, and MUMA systems will always have
two or more nodes. Thus, a NUMA system is also always a SMP one, but an SMP box may be a NUMA
or UMA system.

An example of a NUMA server processor
To make this discussion a bit more practical, let’s briefly visualize the micro-architecture of an actual
server system – one running the AMD Epyc/Ryzen/Threadripper (and the older Bulldozer) CPUs. It
contains the following hardware (see Figure 7.22):

  •     A total of 32 CPU cores (as seen by the OS) within two physical sockets (P#0 and P#1) on the
        motherboard. Each socket consists of a package of 8x2 CPU cores (8x2, as there are actually
        8 physical cores, each of which is hyperthreaded; the OS sees each hyperthreaded core as a
        usable core of course, thus yielding a total of 16 CPU cores per socket).
  •     A total of 32 GB of RAM split up into four physical banks of 8 GB each.

Clearly, here, this system is multicore (SMP) and has two or more RAM banks, thus qualifying as a
true NUMA system. Thus, the Linux NUMA-aware memory management code, upon detecting this
topography at boot, will set up four NUMA nodes to represent it. We won’t delve into the processor’s
various (L1/L2/L3/etc.) caches here; see the Tip box after the following diagram for a way to see all of
this. Furthermore, systems like this are termed cache-coherent NUMA (ccNUMA), as they maintain
cache coherency with help from the hardware; you’ll learn more about caches and cache coherency
in Chapter 13, Kernel Synchronization – Part 2, in the Understanding CPU caching basics, cache effects, and
false sharing section.

The following conceptual diagram shows an approximation of the four tree-like hierarchies – one for
each node – formed on some AMD server systems running the Linux OS. Figure 7.22 conceptually
shows the nodes/zones/page frames per physical RAM bank on the system coupled to different CPU cores:

Figure 7.22: An approximate conceptual view of an AMD server: physical memory hierarchy on Linux

               TIP: Use the powerful lstopo utility (list topography, and its associated hwloc-* – hardware
               locality – utilities) to graphically view the hardware (CPU) topology of your system! On
               Ubuntu, install it with sudo apt install hwloc. FYI, the hardware topography graphic
               of the previously mentioned AMD server system can be generated by lstopo and is avail-
               able here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CPU_cache#/media/File:Hwloc.png.

To reassert the key point here: for performance (here, with respect to Figure 7.22), a thread running
some kernel or driver code in process context on, say, CPU #18 requests the kernel for some RAM.
The kernel’s memory management (MM) layer, being NUMA-aware, will have the request serviced
(as priority) from any free RAM page frames in any zone on NUMA node #2 (that is, from physical
RAM bank #2) as it’s “closest” to the processor core that the request was issued upon. Just in case
there are no free page frames available in any zone within NUMA node #2 (unlikely), the kernel has
an intelligent fallback system. It might now go across the interconnect and request RAM page frames
from another node:zone (worry not, we cover these aspects in more detail in the following chapter,
8, Kernel Memory Allocation for Module Authors – Part 1, in the Understanding and using the kernel page
allocator (or BSA) section).

Zones within a node
Zones can be thought of as Linux’s way of smoothing out and dealing with hardware quirks; these
tend to proliferate on the x86, where Linux “grew up” of course. They also deal with a few software
difficulties (look up ZONE_HIGHMEM on the now mostly legacy 32-bit x86 architecture; we discussed this
concept in an earlier section, High memory on 32-bit systems).

Zones form the second level of the hierarchy; they always belong to a certain node (0, 1, 2, …) and
consist of page frames – physical pages of RAM. More technically, a range of Page Frame Numbers
(PFNs) are allocated to each zone within a node:

Figure 7.23: Another (conceptual and generic) view of the physical memory hierarchy on Linux – nodes,
                                              zones, and page frames

(An aside: a bit more on how PFNs are tracked by Linux can be found in the section An introduction
to physical memory models.)

 Figure 7.23 depicts a conceptual generic Linux system with N nodes (numbered from 0 to N-1), with
 each node consisting of, for example, three zones, and each zone made up of physical pages of RAM
– page frames. The number (and name) of zones per node is dynamically determined by the kernel at
 boot. You can check out this physical memory hierarchy on a Linux system by delving under procfs.
 In the following code, we peek into a native Linux x86_64 system with 16 GB of RAM:
      $ cat /proc/buddyinfo
      Node 0, zone DMA          3         2       4     3     3      1    0    0   1     1    3
      Node 0, zone DMA32    31306     10918    1373   942   505    196   48   16   4     0    0
      Node 0, zone Normal 49135        7455    1917   535   237     89   19    3   0     0    0
      $

The leftmost column reveals that we have exactly one node across the entire system: Node 0. This
tells us we’re actually on a UMA system, though of course, the Linux OS will treat it as a (pseudo/fake)
NUMA system. As can be seen, this single node, Node 0, is split into three zones, labeled DMA, DMA32,
and Normal; each zone, of course, consists of page frames. For now, ignore the numbers on the right;
we will get to their meaning in the following chapter.

Another way to notice how Linux “fakes” a NUMA node on UMA systems is visible from the kernel log.
We run the following command on the same native x86_64 system with 16 GB of RAM. For readability,
I replaced the first few columns showing the timestamp and hostname with ellipses:
      $ journalctl -b -k --no-pager | grep -A7 "NUMA"
       <...>: No NUMA configuration found
       <...>: Faking a node at [mem 0x0000000000000000-0x00000004427fffff]
       <...>: NODE_DATA(0) allocated [mem 0x4427d5000-0x4427fffff]
       <...>: Zone ranges:
           <...>: DMA      [mem 0x0000000000001000-0x0000000000ffffff]
       <...>:     DMA32     [mem 0x0000000001000000-0x00000000ffffffff]
       <...>:     Normal    [mem 0x0000000100000000-0x00000004427fffff]
       <...>:     Device    empty
       $

We can clearly see that, as the system is detected as not NUMA (thus, UMA), the kernel fakes a NUMA
node. The extents of the node are the total amount of RAM on the system (here, 0x0-0x00000004427fffff,
which is indeed 16 GB). We can also see that on this particular system, the kernel instantiates three
zones – DMA, DMA32, and Normal – to organize the available physical page frames of RAM. This is fine
and ties in with the /proc/buddyinfo output we saw previously. The data structure representing the
zone on Linux is defined here: include/linux/mmzone.h:struct zone. We will have occasion to visit
it later in the book.

Now, to better understand how the Linux kernel organizes RAM, let’s start at the very beginning –
boot time.

Direct-mapped RAM and address translation
At boot, the Linux kernel “maps” all (usable) system RAM (aka platform RAM) directly into the kernel
VAS (we learned about this in the Examining the kernel VAS section; see Figure 7.12 and Figure 7.14
again if you wish). So, we have the following:

  •     Physical page frame 0 maps to kernel virtual page 0.
  •     Physical page frame 1 maps to kernel virtual page 1.
  •     Physical page frame 2 maps to kernel virtual page 2, and so on.

Thus, we call this a 1:1 or direct mapping, identity-mapped RAM, or linear addresses. A key point
is that all these kernel virtual pages are at a fixed offset from their physical counterparts (and, as already
mentioned, these kernel addresses are pedantically referred to as kernel logical addresses). The fixed
offset is the PAGE_OFFSET value (here let’s assume it’s the value 0xc000 0000).

So, think of this. On a 32-bit system with a 3:1 (GB) VM split, physical address 0x0 is equal to kernel
logical address 0xc000 0000 (PAGE_OFFSET). As already mentioned, the (pedantic) terminology kernel
logical address is applied to kernel addresses that are at a fixed offset from their physical counterparts.
Thus, direct-mapped RAM maps to kernel logical addresses. This region of direct-mapped memory is
often referred to as the low-memory (or simply, lowmem) region within the kernel VAS.

We have already shown an almost identical diagram earlier, Figure 7.12. In the following figure, to em-
phasize the points just made, it’s slightly modified to actually show how the first three (physical) page
frames of RAM map to the first three kernel virtual pages (in the lowmem region of the kernel VAS):

Figure 7.24: Focus on the direct-mapped RAM – the lowmem region – on 32-bit Linux with a 3:1 (GB)
                                                    VM split

As an example, Figure 7.24 shows a direct mapping of platform RAM to the kernel VAS on a 32-bit sys-
tem with a 3:1 (GB) VM split. The point where physical RAM address 0x0 maps into the kernel is the
PAGE_OFFSET kernel macro (in the preceding figure, it’s kernel logical address 0xc000 0000).

Notice how Figure 7.24 also shows the user VAS on the left side, ranging from 0x0 to PAGE_OFFSET-1
(of size TASK_SIZE bytes). We have already covered details on the remainder of the kernel VAS in the
earlier Examining the kernel VAS section.

Understanding this mapping of physical-to-virtual pages might well tempt you into reaching these
seemingly logical conclusions:

  •         Given a KVA, to calculate the corresponding Physical Address (PA) – that is, to perform a KVA-
            to-PA calculation – simply do this:
                    pa = kva - PAGE_OFFSET

  •         Conversely, given a PA, to calculate the corresponding KVA – that is, to perform a PA-to-KVA
            calculation – simply do this:
                    kva = pa + PAGE_OFFSET

Do refer to Figure 7.24 again. The direct mapping of RAM to the kernel VAS (starting at PAGE_OFFSET)
certainly predicates this conclusion. So, it is correct. But hang on, please pay careful attention here:
these address translation calculations work only for direct-mapped or linear addresses – in other
words, KVAs (technically, the kernel logical addresses) – within the kernel’s lowmem region, nothing
else! For all UVAs, and all KVAs besides the lowmem region (which includes module addresses, vmalloc/
ioremap (MMIO) addresses, KASAN addresses, the (possible) highmem region addresses, DMA mem-
ory regions, and so on), it does not work! This fact is also further reinforced by the realization that
physical RAM on a system isn’t always contiguous or linear; it can have holes! Again, this discussion
is deferred to the upcoming section An introduction to physical memory models.

As you will anticipate, the kernel does indeed provide APIs to perform these address conversions; of
course, their implementation is arch-dependent. Here they are:

 Kernel API                                                     What it does
 phys_addr_t virt_to_phys(volatile void                         Converts the given virtual address to its physical
*address)                                                       counterpart (return value)
                                                                Converts the given physical address to a virtual
 void *phys_to_virt(phys_addr_t address)
                                                                address (return value)

Table 7.13: Converting between physical to kernel virtual addresses (and vice versa) within the lowmem
                                                            region

The virt_to_phys() API for the x86 has a comment above it clearly advocating that this API (and
its ilk) are not to be used by driver authors; for clarity and completeness, we have reproduced the
comment in the kernel source here (https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.1.25/source/arch/
x86/include/asm/io.h#L118):

      // arch/x86/include/asm/io.h
      /**
       *    virt_to_phys           -    map virtual addresses to physical

    *    @address: address to remap
    *
    *    The returned physical address is the physical (CPU) mapping for
    *    the memory address given. It is only valid to use this function on
    *    addresses directly mapped or allocated via kmalloc.
    *
    *    This function does not give bus mappings for DMA transfers. In
    *    almost all conceivable cases a device driver should not be using
    *    this function
    */
   static inline phys_addr_t virt_to_phys(volatile void *address)

The preceding comment mentions the (very common) kmalloc() API. Worry not, it’s covered in
depth in the following two chapters. Of course, a similar comment to the preceding is in place for the
phys_to_virt() API as well.

              So, who – sparingly – uses these address conversion APIs (and the like)? The kernel internal
              MM code, of course! As a demo, we do use them in at least a couple of places in this book:
              in the following chapter, in an LKM called ch8/lowlevel_mem (well actually, its usage
              is within a function in our “kernel library” code, klib.c). Also FYI, the powerful crash
              utility can indeed translate any given virtual address to a physical address via its vtop
              (virtual-to-physical) command (and vice versa, via its ptov command!).

Moving along, another key point to note: by mapping all physical RAM into itself, do not get misled
into thinking that the kernel is reserving RAM for itself. It isn’t; it’s merely mapping all the available
RAM, thus making it available for allocation to anyone who wants it – core kernel code, kernel threads,
device drivers, or user space applications. This is part of the job of the OS; it is the system resource
manager, after all.

Of course, a certain portion of RAM will be taken up (allocated) – by the static kernel code, data, kernel
page table, and so on – at boot, no doubt. Furthermore, using the kernel’s kdump and/or Contiguous
Memory Allocator (CMA) functionalities can entail reserving larger specified amounts of RAM at boot
for them. Typically, though, you should realize that the amount of RAM used directly by the kernel
itself is quite small. As an example, on my guest VM with 1 GB RAM, the kernel code, data, and BSS
typically take up a combined total of about 25 MB of RAM. All kernel memory comes to about 100
MB, whereas user space memory usage is in the region of 550 MB! It’s almost always user space that
is the memory hogger.

              TIP: Try using the smem utility with the --system -p option switches to see a summary of
              memory usage as percentages (also, use the --realmem= switch to pass the actual amount
              of RAM on the system).

Back to the point: we know that kernel page tables are set up early in the boot process. So, by the
time applications start up, the kernel has all RAM mapped and available, ready for allocation! Thus,
we understand that while the kernel direct-maps page frames into its VAS, user mode processes are
not so lucky – they can only indirectly map page frames via paging tables set up by the OS (at process
creation – fork() – time) on a per-process basis. It’s also interesting to realize that memory mapping
via the powerful mmap() system call can provide the illusion of “direct mapping” files or anonymous
pages into the user VAS (under the hood, its all page table manipulation).

A few additional points to note:

  •    For performance, allocated kernel memory pages can never be swapped, even if they aren’t in use.
  •    Sometimes, you might think, it’s quite obvious that user space memory pages map to (phys-
       ical) page frames (assuming the page is resident) via the paging tables set up by the OS on a
       per-process basis.

       Yes, but what about kernel memory pages? Please be very clear on this point: all kernel pages
       also map to page frames via the kernel “master” paging table (named swapper_pg_dir). Kernel
       memory, too, is virtualized, just as user space memory is.

       In this regard, for you, the interested reader, check out a Q&A I initiated on Stack Overflow:
       How exactly do kernel virtual addresses get translated to physical RAM? at http://stackoverflow.
       com/questions/36639607/how-exactly-do-kernel-virtual-addresses-get-translated-
       to-physical-ram.

  •    Several memory optimization techniques have been baked into the Linux kernel (well, many
       are configuration options); among them are Transparent Huge Pages (THPs) and, critical for
       cloud/virtualization workloads, Kernel Samepage Merging (KSM, aka memory de-duplication).
       I refer you to the Further reading section of this chapter for more information.

Now that we’ve covered the first two levels of the physical memory hierarchy (nodes and zones), let’s
delve into the organization of the third and last one: page frames!

An introduction to physical memory models
Any way you cut it, physical memory is a precious resource. Add to this the fact that memory organi-
zation on modern systems can be complex hierarchies, with large holes (or sparse regions) scattered in
between the memory space being quite common (the previous sections glossed over this). Not only
that, each NUMA node on a server-type system needs its own set of memory management metadata.
Hardware too has become more demanding – the ability to hot-plug (and remove) memory banks (and
CPUs), the desire for setting up page-level mapping within some types of persistent storage devices, and
so on... Thus, the Linux kernel community has devised abstractions to better mimic and thus manage
physical memory. These abstractions are in the form of a memory model; in fact, to date, three such
models have been proposed and implemented: flatmem, discontigmem, and sparsemem. Realistically
though, the sparsemem model is the one enjoying wide deployment, especially with modern 64-bit
systems with large-ish amounts of RAM; the discontigmem model has been deprecated and the flatmem
one still clings on for dear life (servicing 32-bit systems with small amounts of RAM).

In all models, a basic notion is the ability to track every single physical page of RAM on the system. The
metadata structure that tracks this is struct page (https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.1.25/
source/include/linux/mm_types.h#L73); it’s commonly called the page descriptor. (Track every single
RAM page with a page structure? Yes indeed, and that’s why it’s kept small, just 64 bytes; nevertheless,
it does eat into memory, especially when the amount of RAM is large.) It has metadata within it re-
garding the page it tracks – what it’s being used for (or that it’s currently free), and various flag values,
including the mapping.

 Back to the memory models. Linux requires each architecture to manage its memory using a model
– either flatmem or sparsemem. The arch-specific code in early boot sets this up (for example, sparse_
 init() sets up the sparsemem model). A few characteristics true of every memory model follow:

   •    As physical RAM tends to be consecutive page frames, possibly broken up by holes, the models
        typically implement one or more arrays of struct page within units; sparsemem calls a unit a section.
        Each physical frame of RAM is denoted by a Page Frame Number (PFN), effectively the index
        to an array of struct page objects. A 1:1 mapping always exists between a PFN and a struct page.
   •    This mapping requires helper functions to convert between the two: the helpers page_to_pfn()
        and pfn_to_page() will minimally be defined for each model.

Let’s delve a bit more into the sparsemem memory model.

Understanding the sparsemem[-vmemmap] memory model in brief
The sparsemem model is effectively the versatile one, the one most often used in practice. It can abstract
and support required modern features like the hot-plugging and removal of memory banks, persistent
device memory mapping, deferred init of memory, and so on.

This model can implement the mandatory helper APIs (page_to_pfn() and pfn_to_page()) in two
ways: via “classic sparse” or the “sparse vmemmap” approach. When using the latter (the common
approach), a vmemmap pointer points to the base of an array of struct page objects (more precisely, it’s
set to (struct page *)VMEMMAP_START. For a more visual look, I suggest you look up the diagrams
(and read the article): Reducing page structures for huge pages, Jon Corbet, LWN, Dec 2020 at https://lwn.
net/Articles/839737/. Now you’ll better understand the vmemmap region – the metadata described
originating from this pointer – mentioned in the earlier Macros and variables describing the kernel VAS
layout section.

With the sparsemem-vmemmap model being the preferred one for 64-bit Linux these days, you’ll often
find the kernel configs CONFIG_SPARSEMEM_VMEMMAP=y and CONFIG_SPARSEMEM_VMEMMAP_ENABLE=y set
on such systems (modern x86_64 always uses the sparsemem model and AArch64 platforms seem to
adhere to this as well. FYI, the common Android Generic Kernel Image (GKI) kernel for AArch64 has
these config options enabled as well by default, demonstrating that it too uses this model).

Two macros are required to be defined for the sparsemem model:

   •    SECTION_SIZE_BITS: Number of physical address bits to cover the maximum amount of mem-
        ory in a (physically contiguous) section; the size of each memory section will be 2 raised to
        this power.

  •      MAX_PHYSMEM_BITS: Maximum number of bits in a physical address; in effect, the maximum
         amount of RAM supported. This value is the same as the CONFIG_ARM64_PA_BITS kernel con-
         figurable on the AArch64.

These macros are typically defined within the arch/<arch>/include/asm/sparsemem.h header. A tiny
module to reveal these numbers, as well as provide a little more info on the sparsemem model, is here:
ch7/sparsemem_show. The essential code is as follows:

      // ch7/sparsemem_show/sparsemem_show.c
      #include <linux/mmzone.h>
      [ ... ]
      #ifdef CONFIG_SPARSEMEM_VMEMMAP
          pr_info("VMEMMAP_START = 0x%016lx\n"
         "SECTION_SIZE_BITS = %u, so size of each section=2^%u = %u bytes = %u MB\n"
         "max # of sections=%lu\n"
          "MAX_PHYSMEM_BITS=%u; so max supported physical addr space (RAM): %lu GB =
      %lu TB\n",
          VMEMMAP_START,
          SECTION_SIZE_BITS, SECTION_SIZE_BITS, (1 << SECTION_SIZE_BITS),
          (1 << SECTION_SIZE_BITS) >> 20, NR_MEM_SECTIONS, MAX_PHYSMEM_BITS,
          (1UL << MAX_PHYSMEM_BITS) >> 30, (1UL << MAX_PHYSMEM_BITS) >> 40);
      #else
         pr_info("SPARSEMEM_VMEMMAP not supported\n");
      #endif

A summary table showing the values obtained for the sparsemem-related macros via this module on
different 64-bit platforms is shown:

                                                           AArch64: custom Yocto build      x86_64 VM or
                                      AArch64: stock
Attributes / Platforms                                     (Poky, 4.0.4), with CONFIG_      native Ubuntu
                                      Raspberry Pi OS
                                                           ARM64_VA_BITS=52                 22.04 LTS
 SECTION_SIZE_BITS                     27                  29                               27
 Size of each sparsemem section:
                                      128 MB               512 MB                           128 MB
 2^ SECTION_SIZE_BITS
 MAX_PHYSMEM_BITS                      48                  52                               46
 Max physical address space
 (max RAM, in effect):                 256 TB              4,096 TB = 4 PB                  64 TB
  ^
 2 MAX_PHYSMEM_BITS

Table 7.14: Summary of values obtained with regard to some of the sparsemem macros on different
                                  architectures (platforms) running 64-bit Linux

Notice how the third column here matches up with row #7 (the last AArch64 row) in Figure 7.6. I don’t
show entries for the 32-bit platforms as they simply don’t support the sparsemem[-vmemmap] model
(and instead employ the much simpler flatmem one). For more detail on these topics, refer to the links
within the Further reading document.

Alright, with this coverage of some aspects of physical RAM management behind us, we complete this
chapter. Good going; excellent progress!

Summary
In this chapter, we delved – in quite some depth – into the big topic of kernel memory management
in a level of detail sufficient for a kernel module or device driver author like you; also, there’s more to
come! A key piece of the puzzle – the VM split and how it’s achieved on various architectures running
the Linux OS – served as a starting point.

We then moved into a deep examination of both regions of this split: first, user space (the user mode
process VAS) and then the kernel VAS (or kernel segment). Here, we covered many details and tools/
utilities on how to examine it (including via the quite powerful procmap utility). We built a demo kernel
module that can literally generate a pretty complete memory map of the kernel and the calling process.
User and kernel memory layout randomization technology ([K]ASLR) was also briefly discussed. We
closed the chapter by looking at the physical organization of RAM within the Linux OS, including the
memory models in use (especially the sparsemem one).

The information and the concepts learned within this chapter are very useful, not only for designing
and writing better kernel/device driver code but also when you encounter system-level issues and
bugs; it makes you better able to debug complex scenarios.

This chapter has been a long and, indeed, critical one; great job on completing it! Next, in the following
two chapters, you will move on to learning about key and practical aspects of how exactly to allocate
(and of course deallocate) kernel memory efficiently, along with related important concepts behind
this common activity. On, on!

Questions
As we conclude, here is a list of questions for you to test your knowledge regarding this chapter’s mate-
rial: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Linux-Kernel-Programming_2E/blob/main/questions/
ch7_qs_assignments.txt. You will find some of the questions answered in the book’s GitHub repo:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Linux-Kernel-Programming_2E/tree/master/solutions_
to_assgn.

Further reading
To help you delve deeper into the subject with useful materials, we provide a rather detailed list of online
references and links (and at times, even books) in a Further reading document in this book’s GitHub
repository. The Further reading document is available here: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/
Linux-Kernel-Programming_2E/blob/master/Further_Reading.md.

Learn more on Discord
To join the Discord community for this book – where you can share feedback, ask questions to the
author, and learn about new releases – follow the QR code below:

https://packt.link/SecNet
