Introduction

M         emory forensics is arguably the most fruitful, interesting, and provocative realm
          of digital forensics. Each function performed by an operating system or applica-
tion results in specific modifications to the computer’s memory (RAM), which can often
persist a long time after the action, essentially preserving them. Additionally, memory
forensics provides unprecedented visibility into the runtime state of the system, such as
which processes were running, open network connections, and recently executed com-
mands. You can extract these artifacts in a manner that is completely independent of the
system you are investigating, reducing the chance that malware or rootkits can interfere
with your results. Critical data often exists exclusively in memory, such as disk encryp-
tion keys, memory-resident injected code fragments, off-the-record chat messages, unen-
crypted e‑mail messages, and non-cacheable Internet history records.
   By learning how to capture computer memory and profile its contents, you’ll add an
invaluable resource to your incident response, malware analysis, and digital forensics
capabilities. Although inspection of hard disks and network packet captures can yield
compelling evidence, it is often the contents of RAM that enables the full reconstruction of
events and provides the necessary puzzle pieces for determining what happened before,
during, and after an infection by malware or an intrusion by advanced threat actors. For
example, clues you find in memory can help you correlate traditional forensic artifacts
that may appear disparate, allowing you to make associations that would otherwise go
unnoticed.
   Regarding the title of this book, the authors believe that memory forensics is a form
of art. It takes creativity and commitment to develop this art, but anyone can enjoy and
utilize it. Like an exquisite painting, some details are immediately obvious the first time
you see them, and others may take time for you to notice as you continue to explore and
learn. Furthermore, just like art, there is rarely an absolute right or wrong way to perform
memory forensics. Along those lines, this book is not meant to be all-encompassing or
wholly authoritative. From the plethora of tools and techniques, you can choose the ones
that best suit your personal goals. This book will serve as your guide to choosing what
type of artist you want to become.
xviii Introduction

      Overview of the Book and Technology
      The world’s reliance on computing grows enormously every day. Companies protect
      themselves with digital defenses such as firewalls, encryption, and signature/heuristic
      scanning. Additionally, nations plan attacks by targeting power grids, infiltrating mili-
      tary data centers, and stealing trade secrets from both public and private organizations.
      It is no wonder that detecting, responding, and reporting on these types of intrusions, as
      well as other incidents involving computer systems, are critical for information security
      professionals.
          As these attack surfaces expand and the sophistication of adversaries grows, defend-
      ers must adapt in order to survive. If evidence of compromise is never written to a hard
      drive, you cannot rely on disk forensics. Memory, on the other hand, has a high potential
      to contain malicious code from an infection, in whole or in part, even if it’s never writ-
      ten to disk—because it must be loaded in memory to execute. The RAM of a victimized
      system will also contain evidence that system resources were allocated by, and in support
      of, the malicious code.
          Likewise, if the data exfiltrated from an organization is encrypted across the network,
      a packet capture is not likely to help you determine which sensitive files were stolen.
      However, memory forensics can often recover encryption keys and passwords, or even
      the plain-text contents of files before they were encrypted, giving you an accelerated way
      to draw conclusions and understand the scope of an attack.
          The most compelling reason for writing this book is that the need for memory foren-
      sics in digital investigations greatly exceeds the amount of information available on
      the topic. Aside from journals, short academic papers, blog posts, and Wiki entries, the
      most thorough documentation on the subject of consists of a few chapters in Malware
      Analyst’s Cookbook (Wiley, 2010, Chapters 15 through 18). Nearing its fourth birthday,
      much of the Cookbook’s content is now outdated, and many new capabilities have been
      developed since then.
          The Art of Memory Forensics, and the corresponding Volatility 2.4 Framework code,
      covers the most recent Windows, Linux, and Mac OS X operating systems. In par-
      ticular, Windows 8.1 and Server 2012 R2, Linux kernels up to 3.14, and Mac OS X
      Mavericks, including the 64-bit editions. If your company or clients have a hetero-
      geneous mix of laptops, desktops, and servers running different operating systems,
      you’ll want to read all parts of this book to learn investigative techniques specific to
      each platform.
                                                                                  Introduction    xix

Who Should Read This Book
This book is written for practitioners of technical computing disciplines such as digital
forensics, malicious code analysis, network security, threat intelligence gathering, and
incident response. It is also geared toward law enforcement officers and government
agents who pursue powerful new ways to investigate digital crime scenes. Furthermore,
we know that many students of colleges and universities are interested in studying similar
topics. If you have worked, or desire to work, in any of the aforementioned fields, this
book will become a major point of reference for you.
   The material we present is intended to appeal to a broad spectrum of readers inter-
ested in solving modern digital crimes and fighting advanced malware using memory
forensics. While not required, we assume that you have a basic familiarity with C and
Python programming languages. In particular, this includes a basic understanding of
data structures, functions, and control flow. This familiarity will allow you to realize the
full benefit of the code exhibits, which are also presented with detailed explanations.
   For those new to the field, we suggest carefully reading the introductory material in the
first part, because it will provide the building blocks to help you through the rest of the
book. For the experienced reader, you may want to use the first part as reference material
and skip to the parts that interest you most. Regardless of the path you take, the book is
intended for the digital investigator who constantly strives to build their skills and seeks
new ideas for combating sophisticated and creative digital adversaries.

How This Book Is Organized
This book is broken down into four major parts. The first part introduces the fundamentals
of modern computers (hardware and software) and presents the tools and methodologies
you need for acquiring memory and getting started with the Volatility Framework. The
next three parts dive deep into the specifics of each major operating system: Windows,
Linux, and Mac. The individual chapters for each OS are organized according to the
category of artifacts (i.e., networking, rootkits) or where the artifacts are found (i.e., pro-
cess memory, kernel memory). The order of the chapters is not meant to imply that your
investigations should occur in the same order. We suggest reading the entire book to learn
all the possibilities and then determine your priorities based on the specifics of each case.
    xx Introduction

        Conventions
﻿

        There are a number of conventions used throughout the book, such as the following:

           • Hexadecimal addresses and names of files, API functions, variables, and other
               terms related to code are shown in monofont. For example: 0x31337, user.ds,
               PsCreateProcess, process_pid = 4

           • Typed commands are shown in monofont and bold. If the command is preceded by
               a $ sign, that means we were using a UNIX system (Linux or Mac OS X). Otherwise,
               you’ll see a Windows prompt. For example:
               $ echo "typing on UNIX" | grep typing

               C:\Users\Mike\Desktop> echo "typing on windows" | findstr typing

           • If we truncated output for the sake of brevity, we inserted “snip” to indicate the
               placement of missing fields.
           • Unless otherwise noted, the memory dump files used as evidence throughout the
               text are not publicly available. However, the evidence package on the website (see
               “What’s on the Website”) contains memory dumps you can explore.

         NOTE
         Tips, hints, and references related to the current discussion look like this. For example,
         Francesco Picasso ported Benjamin Delpy’s Mimikatz (password recovery Windbg
         plugin) to Volatility. See https://github.com/gentilkiwi/mimikatz and https://code
         .google.com/p/hotoloti.

         WARNING
         Common mistakes, misconceptions, and potentially threatening anti-forensics
         techniques look like this. For example, Dementia ( https://code.google.com/p/­
         dementia-forensics) by Luka Milkovic is an open source anti-forensics tool.

           Additionally, we typically define analysis objectives before we present the details of a
        particular subject. We also make an effort to present and explain the underlying operat-
        ing system or application data structures related to the evidence you’re analyzing. You’ll
        see these items in the following format:
                                                                             Introduction   xxi

Analysis Objectives

  Your objectives are these:

   • This is an objective
   • This is an objective
Data Structures
  This section shows data structures.

Key Points
  The key points are as follows:

   • This is a key point
   • This is a key point

   To facilitate understanding and help associate context with the artifacts, we show
practical examples of using memory forensics to detect specific behaviors exhibited by
high profile malware samples, rootkits, suspects, and threat groups.

What’s on the Website
On the book’s website (http://artofmemoryforensics.com) you will find the lab guide
and exemplary evidence files. These hands-on exercises are designed to simulate practical
investigations and to reinforce the concepts you learn in the text. You can also find any
necessary errata (i.e., mistakes, bug fixes) on the website.

Tools You Will Need
To complete the hands-on exercises, you will need at a minimum:

   • Access to Volatility (http://volatilityfoundation.org), the open-source memory
     forensics framework version 2.4 or greater.
   • A Windows, Linux, or Mac computer with Python (http://www.python.org) ­version
     2.7 installed.
   • Memory    acquisition tools (see links in Chapter 4).
xxii Introduction

        The following tools are not required for memory forensics per se, but they’re mentioned
     throughout the book and can help complement your memory-related investigations.

         • IDA Pro and Hex-Rays (https://www.hex-rays.com) if you plan to disassemble or
           decompile code.
         • Sysinternals Suite (http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/bb842062
           .aspx) to analyze artifacts on running Windows systems.
         • Wireshark  (http://www.wireshark.org) for capturing and analyzing network data.
         • Microsoft WinDbg debugger (http://www.microsoft.com/whdc/devtools/­
           debugging/default.mspx).
         • YARA (https://plusvic.github.io/yara), the “pattern matching swiss army knife
           for malware researchers.”
         • Virtualization software such as VMware or VirtualBox, if you plan to execute
           malware in a controlled environment.

        Please note that some tools may require third-party libraries or dependencies.

     Memory Forensics Training
     The authors of this book, also the core developers of the Volatility Framework, teach an
     internationally acclaimed five-day training course: Windows Malware and Memory Forensics
     Training by The Volatility Project. Although books help us disseminate the information
     that we feel is critical to the future of digital forensics, they only provide one-way com-
     munication. If you prefer a classroom environment with the ability to ask questions and
     receive one-on-one tutorials, we invite you to bring your curiosity and enthusiasm to this
     weeklong journey to the center of memory forensics.
        Keep an eye on our training website (http://www.memoryanalysis.net) for upcoming
     announcements regarding the following:

         • Public course offerings in North and South America, Europe, Australia, and other
            locations
         • Online, self-paced training options covering Windows, Linux, and Mac OS X
         • Availability for private training sessions provided on site
         • Success stories from our past attendees sharing their experiences with memory
            analysis
                                                                              Introduction xxiii

   Since launching the course in 2012, we have exposed students to bleeding-edge material
and exclusive new capabilities. This course is your opportunity to learn these invaluable
skills from the researchers and developers that pioneered the field. This is also the only
memory forensics training class authorized to teach Volatility, officially sponsored by
the Volatility Project, and taught directly by Volatility developers. For more information,
send us an e-mail at voltraining@memoryanalysis.net.
