4                        Memory Acquisition

M       emory acquisition (i.e., capturing, dumping, sampling) involves copying the contents of
        volatile memory to non-volatile storage. This is arguably one of the most important
and precarious steps in the memory forensics process. Unfortunately, many analysts blindly
trust acquisition tools without stopping to consider how those tools work or the types of
problems they might encounter. As a result, they end up with corrupt memory images,
destroyed evidence, and limited, if any, analysis capabilities. Although this chapter focuses
on Windows memory acquisition, many of the concepts apply to other operating systems.
You’ll also find Linux and Mac OS X–specific discussions in their respective chapters.

Preserving the Digital Environment
Although the main focus of this book is analyzing the data stored in volatile memory,
the success of that analysis often depends at the outset on the acquisition phase of the
investigation. During this phase, the investigator must make important decisions about
which data to collect and the best method for collecting that data. Fundamentally, memory
acquisition is the procedure of copying the contents of physical memory to another stor-
age device for preservation. This chapter highlights the important issues associated with
accessing the data stored in physical memory and the considerations associated with writ-
ing the data to its destination. The particular methods and tools you use often depends on
the goals of the investigation and the characteristics of the system you are investigating.
   A digital investigator seeks to preserve the state of the digital environment in a manner
that allows the investigator to reach reliable inferences through analysis. The data stored
on disk and in RAM provide two of the most important components of that environment.
Traditional views of digital investigation focused on the assumption that the reliability of
the inferences was entirely dependent on acquiring evidence without changing its state.
For example, the commonly accepted evidence handling procedures involved powering
off a system and making a duplicate copy (imaging) of the data on the disk storage device
for offline analysis. These acquisition processes and procedures focused on minimizing

     the distortion to the file system data at the expense of destroying the other data sources
     (i.e., RAM, device memory), which also help compose the digital environment.
         As the digital investigation field has evolved, it has become obvious that the selective
     preservation of some evidence at the expense of other equally important evidence may
     also impact the reliability of the derived inferences. This is particularly important when
     malicious actors seek to exploit the limitations of traditional digital forensic evidence-
     gathering techniques. By correlating data from multiple sources (disk, network, memory,
     etc.) within the digital environment, you can often get a better understanding of what
     happened on the system than the limited perspective that the contents of disk storage pro-
     vides alone. In order to include these alternate sources, you must accept that all acquisition
     methods, including traditional disk acquisition procedures, will result in some distortion
     to the digital environment. Investigators must be aware of how those distortions could
     impact their analysis and the order that they must collect the data to reduce that impact.
     The course of action is often prioritized based on the order of decreasing volatility (i.e.,
     evidence that changes more rapidly is acquired before evidence that is more stable). As
     a practical matter, this means that volatile memory evidence needs to be acquired first.
         For example, in most situations you cannot create a conventional notion of an “image” of
     physical memory if the runtime state of the machine changes while you acquire memory.
     A more appropriate description of “imaging memory” is a sampling of the state of physi-
     cal memory at a given point in time. Theoretically, it might be possible to refer to the
     acquisition of discrete units of memory (pages), as “imaging” those pages but the state of
     physical memory as a whole cannot be directly measured and must be inferred from the
     state of these individual samples. Although the process of acquiring a sample of physical
     memory may add uncertainty in the collection phase, the additional information it yields
     might result in greater confidence in the investigator’s analysis and less distortion of the
     actual facts of the investigation.

     Acquisition Overview
     As previously mentioned, memory acquisition is not a trivial task. You’ll need a versatile
     tool set and the ability to adapt your techniques based on the specifics of each case and
     the environments that you encounter. Figure 4-1 shows a relatively simplistic decision tree
     based on some, but certainly not all, of the common factors you’ll encounter in the field.
     For example, one of the first questions you’ll need to ask is whether the target system(s)
     is a virtual machine (VM). This can have a huge impact on your methodologies, because
     if the target is a VM, you may have options for acquiring memory-using capabilities that
     the hypervisor provides for pausing, suspending, taking a snapshot, or using introspec-
     tion. However, it is important to be familiar with the different virtualization platforms
     and their respective capabilities because some products require special steps and store
     VM memory in proprietary formats.

                                               No                    Yes
                                                      VM?

                            No                      Yes
                                    Running?
                                                               1) Snapshot / Pause
                                                               2) Clone
              1) Hibernation File                              3) Host disk
              2) Page file(s)                                  4) Introspection
              3) Crash dumps

                            No                      Yes
                                    Got root?

 *may require
                    *Hardware                             Software
pre-installation

           Yes        > 4 GB        No
                      RAM?                            1) Remote?
                                                      2) Cost?
                                                      3) Format
      **PCI                         Firewire          4) CLI?
                                                      5) Real-time?
**very expensive

Figure 4-1: A diagram of some of the initial factors you’ll need to consider
before acquiring memory

    If the target system is “bare metal,” such as a laptop, desktop, or server, you need to deter-
mine whether it is currently running (remember that the machine might not always be in
your physical possession). If it’s hibernating or powered down, the current state of memory
is not volatile. But, in many cases, recent volatile data may have been written to more persis-
tent storage devices such as the hard disk. These alternate sources of data include hiberna-
tion files, page files, and crash dumps. Acquiring memory from non-volatile sources entails
booting the target system(s) with a live CD/DVD/USB to access its disk or making a forensic
duplication of the disk image and mounting it (read-only) from your analysis workstation.
    A running system provides the opportunity to acquire the current state of volatile
memory but you’ll need administrator-level privileges. If a suspect or victim is already
logged on with an admin account, or if they’re cooperating with your investigation (such
as to provide the proper credentials) you’re in luck. You also might have admin access
due to your status as an investigator (credentials were provided to you by the backing
corporation). In these scenarios, you can use a software-based utility, which we’ll describe
shortly. Otherwise, the options are not so straightforward. It might be possible to gain
admin access through a privilege escalation exploit (an offensive tactic that may invalidate
the forensic soundness of your evidence) or by brute force password guessing.

        Another option is hardware-assisted acquisition. In this case, you do not need cre-
     dentials for the target system(s)—physical access suffices. You’ll rely on Direct Memory
     Access (DMA) using a technology such as Firewire, Thunderbolt, ExpressCard, or PCI.
     The downside to this method is that unless the target machine is already equipped with
     a device (or if it supports hot swapping devices), you have to power down the target
     system to install the required hardware adaptors (and doing so destroys your volatile
     evidence). Other disadvantages include the fact that Firewire only permits acquisition of
     the first 4GB of RAM, which can severely limit your success for large-memory systems.
     Additionally, PCI devices for memory acquisition are extremely rare, so they’re also quite
     expensive. In fact, we currently know only one product that’s commercially available and
     costs about $8,000 USD (WindowsSCOPE).
        When the factors lead you in the direction of software-based acquisition, you still have
     many decisions to make. Consider the following points:

        • Remote versus local: Do you (or a fellow investigator) have physical access to the
          target system(s)? A case can quickly become complicated if the computer is located
          in another state or country. Also, you might encounter situations in which the target
          is a server with no keyboard or monitor attached, sitting in a security or network
          operations center. In these situations, remote acquisition (over the network) might
          be your only option.
        • Cost: Do you have budgetary restrictions on the acquisition software you can buy?
          Obviously, the restriction will affect which tools are available to you.
        • Format: Do you require memory in a specific file format? Later in the chapter, we’ll
          describe how many analysis tools have limitations on the formats they support.
          However, you can always convert between formats if you initially capture memory
          in a format that’s incompatible with your desired analysis tool(s).
        • CLI versus GUI: Do you prefer command-line or graphical user interface (GUI)
          tools? There is a common bias that GUI tools leave a larger footprint on the target and
          have a larger attack surface area, so they’re bad for forensic acquisitions. However,
          a well-written GUI produces far less noise than a poorly written command-line tool.
          Also, you might not have console access or Virtual Network Computing (VNC)/
          Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) services on which to run GUI applications.
        • Acquisition versus runtime interrogation: Do you need a full physical memory
          dump or just the ability to determine the running processes, network connections,
          and so on? Do you need to continuously poll the system for changes? In corporate
          environments with hundreds or thousands of systems, it’s not practical to acquire
          full memory dumps just to check for the existence of a particular indicator. Instead,
          you can perform a quick sweep throughout the enterprise, checking a few specific
          areas of memory on each machine.

   We’re often asked this question—what tool should I use for acquiring memory? There’s
really no clear-cut answer. The right tool for a particular job depends on the job. After
you determine the specifics of the case, you can focus on selecting a tool that best sup-
ports your goals. Later in the chapter we present some specific precautions you should
take when performing acquisitions.

The Risk of Acquisition
Before you acquire physical memory from a suspect system, you should always consider
the associated risk. Because most OSs do not provide a supported native mechanism for
acquiring physical memory, you’ll use the system in a manner that might leave it in an
unexpected state. In addition, a system with poorly written malware can be unstable and
may behave in an unpredictable way. The decision to acquire physical memory requires
you to balance the benefit of acquiring the data against the inherent risk(s) associated with
the acquisition procedure. For example, if the target is a mission-critical system that can
be shut down or rebooted only in extreme circumstances, you must be prepared to justify
why acquiring memory is vital to your investigation. There may even be circumstances
in which the consequences (i.e., death, environmental damage) of destabilizing a system
are never worth the risk.

 NOTE
 It is important that the person who will bear the consequences of the risks (e.g., the sys-
 tem owner, the client, your supervisor) be fully informed before the risks are assumed.
 On an organizational level, this means that you need to have policies in place that
 address when acquisition of physical memory and other volatile evidence is appropri-
 ate within the incident-response context before an incident actually occurs.

   The following sections describe some of the major reasons why memory acquisition can
lead to system instabilities and evidence corruption. It is important to note that although
we use Microsoft Windows in the following examples, the problems are not specific to
any OS—they are functions of the processor and hardware architecture.

Atomicity
An atomic operation is one that appears (to the rest of the system) to complete instanta-
neously, without interruption from concurrent processes. Memory acquisition is not an
atomic operation, because the contents of RAM are constantly changing, even on an idle
system and especially during the acquisition process. As Dan Farmer and Wietse Venema
wrote “Memory […] can change so rapidly that recording even the bulk of those fluctuations in
an accurate and timely fashion is not possible without dramatically disturbing the operation of a

    typical computer system” (see Forensic Discovery). Thus, it’s inevitable that your acquisition
    tool will alter the system (in ways that should be documented). During acquisition, other
    processes are writing memory, the kernel is adding/removing linked-list elements, net-
    work connections are being initiated or torn down, and so on.
       In the best case, you’ll acquire evidence that can help you infer the current state of the
    system, and to some degree the past activities that were performed recently. Note, how-
    ever, that the current state could be the time when the acquisition started, when it ended,
    or at any moment in between—depending on the order in which the physical memory
    pages, containing the data in question, were collected. In the worst case, you’ll end up
    with a corrupted memory dump that analysis tools cannot process, because the capture
    of particular page(s) occurred after a critical operation began but before it finished.

    Device Memory
    Physical memory is a logical addressing scheme that permits disparate motherboard
    resources to be accessed (or “addressed”) in a uniform manner. On x86/x64–based com-
    puters, the firmware (BIOS) provides a physical memory map to the OS with different
    regions marked as reserved for use by the firmware, by the ISA or PCI busses, or by
    various motherboard devices. These regions are henceforth referred to as device-memory
    regions.
       Figure 4-2 shows a simplified diagram of the physical memory layout, when you con-
    sider these “holes” that exist due to device-memory regions. On 32-bit systems with less
    than 4GB of memory, the “holes” cause the total amount of memory available to the OS to
    be slightly less than the advertised capacity of the RAM chips (this is known as the “32–bit
    client effective memory limit”). For more information, see Pushing the Limits of Windows:
    Physical Memory by Mark Russinovich (http://blogs.technet.com/b/markrussinovich/
    archive/2008/07/21/3092070.aspx). Notice how the MmGetPhysicalMemoryRanges function
    omits the ranges of physical memory that are reserved by devices. In other words, using
    this API avoids the device-memory regions.
       Inadvertently reading from one of these reserved regions can be dangerous. Depending
    on the nature of the device you access, reading from a physical address within the region
    may obtain data stored at that location or alter the state of the device you’re accessing. There
    are, for example, physical addresses that are mapped to device registers that change the
    state of the device each time the physical location is read. This change might confuse
    device drivers or firmware that depend on the values in those registers, ultimately caus-
    ing the system to freeze. This freezing or hanging is especially common when addresses
    occupied by the video chipset, High Precision Event Timer (HPET), or obscure, legacy PCI
    devices are read. As an additional challenge, most of these devices are not designed to
    accommodate simultaneous access from more than one processor at a time.

                      0

                                                                 RAM
Device memory                                         MmGetPhysicalMemoryRanges()

                 4.0 GB

                 4.5 GB

Figure 4-2: The physical memory layout for an x86/x64 compatible system shows various holes due
to device-memory regions

   Despite the risk involved in acquiring device-memory regions, doing so can yield
evidence with high forensic value. For example, data in these regions might contain the
real mode interrupt vector table (IVT) with artifacts left by firmware-based rootkits. You
can also find evidence of BIOS rootkits that inject code at the top of real mode memory.
Additionally, you can use the CMOS region to change the boot order and the IOAPIC
indirect access registers to re-route interrupts. Of the software-based memory acquisition
tools discussed later in the chapter, only KnTDD from GMG Systems can acquire these
regions with a reasonable level of reliability and accuracy.

 Warning
 As shown in Mark’s article, you can see the ranges of reserved physical memory using the
 Device Manager (View ➪ Resources by Connection). Programmatically, you can enumer-
 ate them with the Win32_DeviceMemoryAddress WMI class (http://msdn.microsoft.com/
 en-us/library/aa394125%28v=vs.85%29.aspx). Both methods ultimately rely on data in
 the volatile HARDWARE registry hive. Thus, malicious code can add values to hide memory
 among the reserved regions. In some cases, this might serve as an anti-forensics technique
 (the malware can avoid being acquired).

     Cache Coherency
    Modern processors are designed with one or more internal memory caches to improve per-
    formance. A page table entry may be programmed with different memory cache attributes
    (non-cached, cached, write-combined) that determine the way in which the processor
    accesses a physical memory page. These processors have a documented design limitation:
    They are not designed to accommodate the simultaneous mapping of the same physical
    address with multiple cache attributes. Doing so might lead to undefined behavior on
    the part of the processor, including but not limited to translation lookaside buffer (TLB)
    corruption and corruption of the data at the specified memory address. Thus, a poorly
    written acquisition tool can easily invalidate the very memory being acquired. See Intel®
    64 and IA-32 Architectures Developer’s Manual, Vol. 3A § 11.12.4.
        Cache coherency is one of the major reasons why Microsoft cautions Windows driver
    developers not to map physical pages unless their driver has directly allocated the mem-
    ory through an API that guarantees no other system component has mapped the same
    memory range with a different caching type (http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/
    windows/hardware/ff566481%28v=vs.85%29.aspx). A common misconception is that acqui-
    sition tools are protected against cache conflicts if they use ZwMapViewOfSection to map
    physical pages from \Device\PhysicalMemory. Although this might be true for some ver-
    sions of Windows, it doesn’t apply to all releases; nor does it prevent cache conflicts when
    mapping memory pages that are not currently allocated.
        In Windows 2000, the API allowed conflicting cache attributes to be specified (see
    http://ntsecurity.nu/onmymind/2006/2006-06-01.html). Starting with Windows XP, the
    API performs a comparison of the requested and existing attributes and fails harmlessly
    by returning a STATUS_CONFLICTING_ADDRESSES error if there is a mismatch. However,
    starting with Windows 7 and 2008 R2, this error is no longer generated. Current versions
    of Windows silently substitute the cache attributes that are stored in the PFN database,
    even if the target page is not currently allocated and values in the corresponding PFN
    database entry are no longer valid.

     When to Acquire Memory
     Choosing the proper time to gather physical memory evidence depends on a number of
     factors. The following points are merely suggestions, not rules. For example, if you are
     collecting evidence from a suspect’s computer you might want to plan your acquisition so
     that the suspect is online (or at least logged in) at the time, which can give you access to
     the suspect’s logon session, information about cloud services or remote storage to which
     they might have access, and any encrypted documents that the suspect might have been
     viewing. On the other hand, if you are gathering evidence from a victim’s computer, you
     might want to time your acquisition when the suspect is not active to avoid tipping off
     the suspect. Collecting network session data to and from the victim computer for some
     time prior to the acquisition can help you make this determination.

 Warning
 Collecting comprehensive network session data on-site may be difficult if the adver-
 sary detects your sniffer, or if wireless-, Bluetooth-, or software-defined radio (SDR)
 networks are present and offer alternate network paths. But these alternate network
 paths typically coalesce onto a wired or fiber network backbone at some point that may
 offer a more strategic location to install a network tap.

    Remember that, in most cases, you are collecting evidence from a running computer
system. Increasing the amount of change that occurs while you collect memory evidence
might increase the number of anomalies you encounter when you analyze the evidence.
If possible, avoid collecting memory evidence during periods of dramatic change such as
during system startup, shutdown, or while system maintenance tasks are running (i.e.,
disk defragmentation, full virus scans, system backups). It is also recommended to limit
your interaction with the machine until the acquisition has completed.

How to Acquire Memory
After you determined an opportune time to acquire memory, you still have a number of
important precautions to consider. This section focuses on the most common-use cases and
their associated caveats, which can quickly turn into major blowbacks if you’re not careful.

Local Acquisition to Removable Media
In this case, you’re dumping memory to an external USB, ESATA, or Firewire drive con-
nected to the target system. It is never recommended to dump memory to the target system’s
local drives, such as the C: partition, because this will overwrite a significant amount of evidence
that may be relevant to your case (i.e., slack space). Due to the size of RAM on modern com-
puters, you’ll want to ensure the destination drive is formatted with NTFS or other high-
performance file system. Also, be aware that malware often spreads by infecting external
media. The following points provide additional advice for local acquisitions:

    • Never attach the same removable media to more than one possibly infected com-
       puter to avoid spreading the infection while you are gathering evidence.
    • Do not plug possibly infected removable media directly into your forensic work-
      station. Connect the media to an intermediate “sacrificial” system and inspect it.
      Then copy the evidence to your forensic workstation over a small, isolated network
      (e.g., across a hub or non-managed switch).
    • Always forensically “sterilize” (securely erase) removable media before using (or
      re-using) it to acquire evidence.

      NOTE
      If the malware infects the firmware on the removable media, forensic “sterilization”
      will not be sufficient to mitigate the risk of infection through media reuse.

     Remote Acquisition
    In a primitive remote acquisition scenario, you typically push tools over the network to
    the target machine via PsExec (http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/
    bb897553.aspx) or by copying them to a C$ or ADMIN$ share via Server Message Block
    (SMB). You can then schedule a task or install a service on the target system that runs
    the tool(s) and sends the contents of physical memory back to you via a netcat listener
    or other connect-back protocol. The major issues with this method are the exposure of
    administrator credentials and the contents of the target system’s RAM being sent in plain
    text over the network. Main computer memory contains a lot of sensitive information that
    might be disclosed when acquired in plain text over an open network.
       In domain or enterprise environments, domain admin credentials provide a conve-
    nient way to access the target system; however, if the target computer is already compro-
    mised, the attackers may recover the generated authentication tokens from memory for
    use in Pass the Hash attacks (http://www.microsoft.com/security/sir/strategy/default
    .aspx#!password_hashes). A better solution is to create a temporary admin account that
    only permits access to the target system. Then, disable the temporary admin account after
    acquisition is complete and audit subsequent attempts to use the credentials. You can also
    look into blocking connections from the target machine in the firewall or router (except
    to/from the systems involved in the remote acquisition). This prevents any malware or
    attackers from using the stolen credentials to further infiltrate the network.
       Acquisition to a network share should be used only as a last resort but may be neces-
    sary in some limited cases. Starting with SMB 3.0 (Windows Server 2012), end-to-end
    encryption is supported. Also, some tools (e.g., CryptCat, KnTDD, F-Response Enterprise)
    support acquisition of evidence over the network using SSL/TLS. You might also consider
    compressing the evidence before transferring it over the network to reduce the required
    time and bandwidth. Remember to compute integrity hashes before and after the transfer,
    to ensure your evidence didn’t change during the transmission.

      NOTE
      Encryption of the communications channel does not prevent information disclosure
      where the adversary already owns one end of the communications channel, or can
      perform a Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attack.

Runtime Interrogation
Runtime interrogation enables you to quickly sweep across an entire enterprise and check
for specific indicators in physical memory (instead of capturing a full memory dump
from each system). You typically execute this type of analysis in an automated capacity.
Various commercial suites provide enterprise-level capabilities for interrogating physical
memory, such as F-Response, AccessData Enterprise, and EnCase Enterprise.

Hardware Acquisition
Due to the limitations mentioned earlier, this book doesn’t cover hardware-based acquisi-
tions in depth. However, it’s worth mentioning that Volatility does support acquisition and
interrogation of memory over Firewire. You’ll need the libforensic1394 library (https://
freddie.witherden.org/tools/libforensic1394), the JuJu Firewire stack, and a special
invocation of Volatility. Note the -l instead of -f parameter:
  $ python vol.py –l firewire://forensic1394/<devno> plugin [options]

   The <devno> is the device number (typically 0 if you’re only connected to one Firewire
device). Use the imagecopy plugin to acquire memory or any other analysis plugin to inter-
rogate the running system, but be aware of the 4GB limit discussed previously.
   Another use case for hardware-based memory analysis includes unlocking work-
stations. For example, the Inception tool by Carsten Maartmann-Moe (http://www
.breaknenter.org/projects/inception) finds and patches instructions that allow you to
log into password-protected Windows, Linux, and Mac OS X computers even without the
credentials. However, as stated on the tool’s website, if the required instructions aren’t
found in the lower 4GB of memory, it might not work reliably.

Software Tools
All software-based acquisition tools follow a similar protocol to acquire memory. In
particular, these tools work by loading a kernel module that maps the desired physical
addresses into the virtual address space of a task running on the system. At this point,
they can access the data from the virtual address space and write it to the requested
non-volatile storage. Acquisition software has two ways to make this virtual-to-physical
address mapping occur:

   • The approach that most, if not all, commercially available tools utilize involves
       using an operating system API to create a page table entry. The typical func-
       tions include: ZwMapViewOfSection (on \Device\PhysicalMemory), MmMapIoSpace,
       MmMapLockedPagesSpecifyCache, and MmMapMemoryDumpMdl.

        • A second possible approach uses other OS APIs to allocate an empty page table
            entry and manually encode the desired physical page into the page table entry.

         There are substantial risks associated with either approach. For example, the afore-
     mentioned APIs for mapping physical to virtual memory all have a common limitation
     in that none of them are intended for mapping pages that a driver does not own. In other
     words, an acquisition tool isn’t more stable than others just because it uses MmMapIoSpace
     instead of MmMapMemoryDumpMdl (for example). One difference of memory management APIs
     is that certain APIs (e.g., ZwMapViewOfSection) map the specified physical address into
     the user mode address space of the acquisition application (where it might be accessed
     by other user mode code), whereas other APIs map the physical address into the kernel
     mode address space.

      Warning
      Many tools can acquire memory using multiple methods so they can bypass certain
      malware or OS safeguards (i.e., hooking MmMapIoSpace). For these reasons, Michael
      Cohen and Johannes Stüttgen researched manual PTE remapping (see http://www
      .dfrws.org/2013/proceedings/DFRWS2013-p13.pdf) as an acquisition method that can
      be resilient to anti-forensic techniques.

        Acquisition tools also differ in the way that they identify the physical addresses to
     include or exclude in the capture. Some tools start at physical address 0 and increment
     the counter by the nominal page size until the expected (which is another factor in the
     equation) limit of physical memory is reached. Most, if not all, tools are designed to skip
     the device memory regions shown in Figure 4-2. This precaution makes the acquisition
     process more stable, but misses a good deal of memory evidence that might contain arti-
     facts of sophisticated rootkits. On the other hand, some applications provide options for
     acquiring all physical addresses from page 0 to the perceived end of the physical address
     space. This is more risky, particularly on systems that are equipped with more than 4GB
     of memory, but has the potential to produce a more complete representation of the target
     system’s memory. Ideally, you would use a tool that knows how to acquire relevant data
     from device-memory regions without freezing or crashing the system. For example, if
     the acquisition tool can identify the device that occupies the particular physical memory
     region, the tool can use a method appropriate for that device.

     Tool Evaluation
     Unlike disk-imaging tools, formal specifications have not been developed nor have eval-
     uations been conducted of memory-acquisition tools. In fact, it is still an area of open

research and a topic of heated debates. One of the major challenges of evaluating memory
acquisition tools is that they might perform differently depending on the version of the
OS, the configuration of the operating system, and the hardware that is installed. It is also
important to emphasize that virtualization platforms are often far more predictable and
homogenous than real hardware, which means they might not provide a good indication
of how a tool will perform in the heterogeneous world of real hardware. Some promising
research is being done. For example, in 2013, Stefan Voemel and Johannes Stüttgen pub-
lished a research paper in which they presented An evaluation platform for forensic memory
acquisition software (http://www.dfrws.org/2013/proceedings/DFRWS2013-11.pdf). In addi-
tion, GMG Systems, Inc., offers its customers a methodology for testing the accuracy and
completeness of its memory acquisition tools (MAUT).
    From an operational perspective, the basic attributes of a trusted forensic acquisition
tool are that it must acquire evidence in a manner that is accurate, complete, documented,
and with robust error logging. A major problem among many current acquisition tools
is that when they fail (either altogether or while reading one or more pages) they often
silently fail. This problem prevents investigators from realizing that a problem even exists
until they reach the analysis phase (i.e., Volatility cannot list processes), at which point
it’s frequently too late to go back and acquire another memory image from the target
system. No evidence gathering technique is free from error. However, if an acquisition
tool reliably logs errors, then the analyst (or trier of fact) can decide how to deal with the
error. From an operational or evidentiary perspective, the worst scenario is not to know
what you have once you’ve completed evidence gathering.
    Also keep in mind that just because a tool didn’t crash or freeze the target machine, that
doesn’t mean it produced an accurate and complete memory “image.” On Microsoft Windows
systems, you can use the Microsoft driver verifier (https://support.microsoft.com/
kb/244617) to determine whether or not the tool vendor has exercised reasonable care in
the development of the tool. Aside from this, your best line of defense is testing the tool
on systems that resemble (as closely as possible) the systems on which you’ll use them
in the field. Unfortunately this is not always feasible due to the various combinations of
hardware and software that exist.

Tool Selection
The following list shows commonly used memory acquisition tools, in no particular order.
This section is also not intended to give an exhaustive list of the features that respective
tools provide. Furthermore, we have not validated the claims nor had the opportunity
to use every feature described. So do not interpret this information as an evaluation or
endorsement of any particular product.

        • GMG Systems, Inc., KnTTools: This tool’s highlights include remote deployment
          modules, cryptographic integrity checks, evidence collection over SSL, output com-
          pression, optional bandwidth throttling, automatic collection of live user state data
          for cross-referencing, pagefile capture, robust error logging, and rigorous testing
          and documentation. It can also acquire ROM/EEPROM/NVRAM from the BIOS
          and peripheral device memory (PCI, video card, network adapter).
        • F-Response: The suite of products from F-Response introduced a groundbreaking
          new capability in memory forensics—the ability to interrogate live systems from
          a remote location over a read-only iSCSI connection. F-Response presents a ven-
          dor- and OS-agnostic view of the target system’s physical memory and hard disks,
          which means you can access them from Windows, Mac OS X, or Linux analysis
          stations and process them with any tool.
        • Mandiant Memoryze: A tool you can easily run from removable media and that
          supports acquisition from most popular versions of Microsoft Windows. You can
          import the XML output of Memoryze into Mandiant Redline for graphical analysis
          of objects in physical memory.
        • HBGary FastDump: A tool that claims to leave the smallest footprint possible, the
          ability to acquire page files and physical memory into a single output file (HPAK),
          and the ability to probe process memory (a potentially invasive operation that forces
          swapped pages to be read back into RAM before acquisition).
        • MoonSols Windows Memory Toolkit: The MWMT family includes win32dd,
          win64dd, and the most recent version of DumpIt—a utility that combines the
          32- and 64-bit memory dumping acquisition tools into an executable that requires
          just a single click to operate. No further interaction is required. However, if you
          do need more advanced options, such as choosing between output format types,
          enabling RC4 encryption, or scripting the execution across multiple machines, you
          can do that as well.
        • AccessData FTK Imager: This tool supports acquisition of many types of data,
          including RAM. AccessData also sells a pre-configured live response USB toolkit that
          acquires physical memory in addition to chat logs, network connections, and so on.
        • EnCase/WinEn: The acquisition tool from Guidance Software can dump memory
          in compressed format and record metadata in the headers (such as the case name,
          analyst, etc.). The Enterprise version of EnCase leverages similar code in its agent
          that allows remote interrogation of live systems (see http://volatility-labs
          .blogspot.com/2013/10/sampling-ram-across-encase-enterprise.html).
        • Belkasoft Live RAM Capturer: A utility that advertises the ability to dump mem-
          ory even when aggressive anti-debugging and anti-dumping mechanisms are pres-
          ent. It supports all the major 32- and 64-bit Windows versions and can be run from
          a USB thumb drive.

   • ATC-NY Windows Memory Reader: This tool can save memory in raw or crash
     dump formats and includes a variety of integrity hashing options. When used
     from a UNIX-like environment such as MinGW or Cygwin, you can easily send
     the output to a remote netcat listener or over an encrypted SSH tunnel.
   • Winpmem: The only open-source memory acquisition tool for Windows. It includes
     the capability to output files in raw or crash dump format, choose between various
     acquisition methods (including the highly experimental PTE remapping technique),
     and expose physical memory through a device for live analysis of a local system.

Memory Acquisition with KnTDD
KnTDD is a component of the KnTTools package available from GMG Systems, Inc.
(http://www.gmgsystemsinc.com/knttools). An earlier version of this software won the
2005 Digital Forensics Research Conference’s (DFRWS) Forensics Challenge (http://www
.dfrws.org/2005/challenge/kntlist.shtml) and has since been regarded as one of the
most robust, fully featured, and well-documented memory acquisition and analysis pack-
ages. KnTTools is available in Basic and Enterprise Editions. Paraphrased from the tool’s
website, the Basic Edition includes the following:

   • Acquisition of physical memory (main computer memory) from systems running
     most versions of Windows from XP Service Pack 3 to Windows 8.1 and Server 2012
     R2 (see the website for an exact list)
   • Acquisition to removable media; includes pre-configured but customizable
     ­ utorun.inf scripts for automation
     a
   • Acquisition to the network (to a custom encrypted netcat listener) with or without
     bandwidth throttling
   • Cryptographic integrity checks (MD5, SHA1, SHA256, SHA512) and robust audit
     logging
   • Output compression using zlib, gzip, bzip, lznt1, and others
   • Conversion of the binary memory image to Microsoft crash dump format
   • Bulk encryption of output using X509/PKCS#7 certificates
   • Acquisition of certain system-state information, including active processes, loaded
     modules and listening endpoints using user mode APIs (for later use in cross-view
     detection algorithms)
   • On Windows 2003 and later, NVRAM, standard CMOS, IOAPIC table, MBR boot
     sector, and VBR are acquired
   • Collection of the system page file(s)
   • Integration with KnTList for analysis and cross-view analysis

       Additionally, the Enterprise Edition supports the following:

        • Evidence acquisition over an SSL/TLS tunnel
        • Evidence acquisition to a WebDAV-enabled web server
        • Evidence acquisition to an anonymous FTP server
        • A remotely deployable version that runs as a system service (KnTDDSvc)
        • A remote deployment module (KnTDeploy) that can pull and deploy encrypted
          evidence collection “packages” from an SSL-enabled web server or push the pack-
          ages out to a remote Admin$ share on the “suspect” machine
        • Supports the \\.\VideoMemory, \\.\NetXtremeMemory, and \\.\NicMemory pseudo-
          devices for acquiring RAM or SRAM from select video and network controllers

     An Example of KnTDD in Action
     The following steps show you how to deploy KnTTools from removable media. Specifically,
     we will demonstrate acquisition of physical memory and the page file(s) in an encrypted,
     compressed format.

       1. Create an X509/PKCS#7 digital certificate if you don’t have one. For creation,
          you can use makecert.exe, a tool distributed with Microsoft Visual Studio and
          other Microsoft software development packages, including the free Visual Studio
          Express. The following command generates a self-signed certificate named
          michael.ligh.cer:

            C:\Analyst>makecert.exe -r -pe -n "CN=michael.ligh@useonce.mnin.org"
                  -sky exchange -ss my -a sha1 -len 2048
                  -b 05/06/2014 -e 05/06/2014 michael.ligh.cer
            Succeeded

       2. Execute KnTDD from the removable media (G: in this case) once it’s connected
          to the target system. The options request SHA512 hashes, encryption with the
          self-signed certificate, LZNT1 compression, and page file collection. Note that the
          components of the tool set are disguised with the “covert” naming convention
          (i.e., kntdd.exe was renamed to covert.exe). The renaming prevents simple anti-
          forensics attacks based on names of common acquisition tools. Also, the device
          and symbolic link names are randomized.
            G:\deploy\covert.amd64>covert.exe -v -o memory.bin --log
                --cryptsum sha_512
                --pagefiles --force_pagefiles --4gplus
                --comp lznt1 --cert michael.ligh.cer --case case001

KnTTools, 2.3.0.2898
kntdd physical memory forensic acquisition utility, 2.3.0.2898
Copyright (C) 2006-2013 GMG Systems, Inc.

Current User: WIN-948O8I1DO91\Valor

Fully-qualified DNS Name: WIN-948O8I1DO91
NetBIOS Name: WIN-948O8I1DO91
Fully-qualified physical DNS Name: WIN-948O8I1DO91
Uptime: 0 days 7:39:4.987
Physical memory modules installed on the system: 0x80000000
Physical memory visible to the operating system: 0x7ff7e000
Highest physical page plus 4096 bytes: 0x80000000
PAE is enabled!

[snip]

Installing driver covertdrv from image path
    G:\deploy\covert.amd64\amd64\covertdrv.sys
Starting driver as \Device\LNk2OwGwN
Driver symbolic link name: \DosDevices\XPBM8vLS
Driver started.
Binding to symbolic link \\.\Vpa1CSE6zN
Symbolic link is bound.
Total bytes copied: 0x80000000
The loaded OS kernel name is C:\Windows\system32\ntoskrnl.exe

[snip]

Reading standard Cmos data...Ok!
Reading standard IOAPIC data...Ok!

Reading disk boot sector...
ArcPath: multi(0)disk(0)rdisk(0)partition(1)->\\.\PhysicalDrive0
OK!
Reading volume boot records...
ArcPath: multi(0)disk(0)rdisk(0)partition(1)->\\.\PhysicalDrive0
OK: 1 volume boot records read.

[snip]

Copying pagefiles...
C:\pagefile.sys
     Pid: 0x4
     Handle: 0xffffffff800001e0
     Object: 0xfffffa8002ca7390
     LogicalFileSize: 0x72d33000
     Directory: No
     Compressed: No

                Encrypted: No
                PagingFile: Yes
                Start: 0x0 ExtentSize: 0x72d33000 LogicalOffset: 0x251508000

           Copying pagefiles completed successfully.

           [snip]

       3. Transfer the acquired evidence to your forensic workstation using the best prac-
          tices described in the “Local Acquisition to Removable Media” section. Listing the
          evidence directory shows the compressed and encrypted (lznt1.kpg extension)
          physical memory dump, page file(s), acquisition log, user system state, and hashes.
          The critical OS files (ntoskrnl.exe, tcpip.sys, ndis.sys, etc.) are also captured for
          later analysis—they will appear in the WINDOWS subdirectory.
           C:\Analyst>dir "{DC04DB43-AC21-4060-8954-17D0AD3166DC}"

            Directory of C:\Analyst\{DC04DB43-AC21-4060-8954-17D0AD3166DC}

           05/06/2014 09:14 PM      <DIR>          .
           05/06/2014 09:14 PM      <DIR>          ..
           05/06/2014 09:14 PM               1,524 memory.bin.dumpheader.lznt1.kpg
           05/06/2014 09:14 PM         933,585,748 memory.bin.lznt1.kpg
           05/06/2014 09:14 PM               4,116 memory.log.lznt1.kpg
           05/06/2014 09:14 PM          51,067,636 memory.Pagedump_C!!
           pagefile!sys.DMP.lznt1.kpg
           05/06/2014 09:14 PM             293,348 memory.user_system_state.xml.lznt1.kpg
           05/06/2014 09:14 PM               4,068 memory.xml.lznt1.kpg
           05/06/2014 09:14 PM      <DIR>          WINDOWS
                          6 File(s)     984,956,440 bytes
                          3 Dir(s)      901,435,392 bytes free

       4. Use the kntencrypt.exe utility to decrypt the files using your certificate. This
           command generates new files with an lznt1 extension, to indicate they are still
           compressed.
           C:\Analyst\KnTTools.amd64>kntencrypt.exe --cert michael.ligh.cer
                 -d -v "{DC04DB43-AC21-4060-8954-17D0AD3166DC}/*"

           KnTTools, 2.3.0.2898
           KnTTools encryption utility., 2.3.0.2898
           Copyright (C) 2006-2013 GMG Systems, Inc.

           07/05/2014   02:31:41 (UTC)
           06/05/2014   21:31:41 (local time)

       Current User: WIN-948O8I1DO91\Valor

       C:\Analyst\KnTTools.amd64\{DC04DB43-AC21-4060-8954-
       17D0AD3166DC}\memory.bin.dumpheader.lznt1.kpg-->C:\Analyst\KnTTools.amd64\
       {DC04DB43-AC21-4060-8954-17D0AD3166DC}\memory.bin.dumpheader.lznt1...
       OK.percent complete
       C:\Analyst\KnTTools.amd64\{DC04DB43-AC21-4060-8954-17D0AD3166DC}\
       memory.bin.lznt1.kpg-->C:\Analyst\KnTTools.amd64\{DC04DB43-AC21-4060
       -8954-17D0AD3166DC}\memory.bin.lznt1...
       OK.percent complete

       [snip]

  5. Use the custom version of dd.exe provided with KnTTools to decompress the evi-
     dence files into an output directory. We also use the --sparse option so the files
     are recompressed using NTFS file compression (which results in the evidence files
     taking up a lot less space on disk and they are generally faster to read).
       C:\Analyst\KnTTools.amd64>dd.exe -v
            if="{DC04DB43-AC21-4060-8954-17D0AD3166DC}/*.lznt1"
            of=decompressed\ --decomp lznt1 --sparse –localwrt

       Forensic Acquisition Utilities, 1.4.0.2464
       dd, 5.4.0.2464
       Copyright (C) 2007-2013 GMG Systems, Inc.

       C:\Analyst\KnTTools.amd64\decompressed\memory.user_system_state.xml
       327680/1008180 bytes (compressed/uncompressed)
       0+1 records in
       0+1 records out
       1008180 bytes written

       [snip]

   Figure 4-3 shows an example of the evidence directory after decryption and decom-
pression. The memory.bin file is the main memory sample and the user state is collected
in memory.user_system_state.xml. As shown in the figure, this XML file contains details
on the current state of the machine from the operating system’s perspective (i.e., its APIs).
You can parse the XML to compare data with what you find in the physical memory
sample (this is what KnTList does).

     Figure 4-3: An example of the evidence gathered by KnTDD, including the physical memory, page
     file, XML user state, and OS kernel files.

     Remote Acquisition
     We demonstrate one of the remote acquisition options available with KnTDD here. On
     the server-side (the machine you’ll use to receive data), we executed the command that
     follows. The -L option listens for multiple connections, because the memory sample is
     transmitted over a different port than the log file, XML user state, and so on. Our server
     IP is 192.168.228.143 (acquiring over the local subnet).
       F:\KnTTools.amd64> nc --verbose -L --port 8000
            --source 192.168.228.143
            -O memory.bin --localwrt

       Forensic Acquisition Utilities, 3.4.0.2464
       Netcat network data redirector., 1.11.2.2464
       Copyright (C) 2002-2013 GMG Systems, Inc.

       Windows 8 Enterprise 6.2.9200 Multiprocessor Free(, 9200.win8_rtm.120725-1247)
       4/28/2014 19:21:52 PM (UTC)
       4/28/2014 12:21:52 PM (local time)
       Current User: ugly\Test
       Current Locale: English_United States.437
       User Default Locale Language: 0x0409

  The VistaFirewall Firewall is active with exceptions.
  Listening on TCP: ugly.localdomain: 8000.

  On the target system (the one from which we are acquiring memory), the following
command was used:
  F:\KnTTools.amd64> kntdd.exe --verbose --out 192.168.228.143
         --iport 8000 --4gplus
         --cryptsum sha_512 --pagefiles --force_pagefiles
         --log --case "Case002"
         --comp lznt1
         --cert michael.ligh.cer

  100 percent complete
  The loaded OS kernel name is C:\Windows\system32\ntoskrnl.exe

  If needed, you can control the peak bandwidth and Quality of Service (QoS) using
additional command-line options (for example, if you don’t want to saturate a client’s
network while acquiring memory).

 NOTE
 The Enterprise version of KnTTools also allows remote acquisition to an anonymous
 FTP server (configured for write-only access). Here’s an example command showing
 that capability:
    F:\KnTTools.amd64>kntdd.exe --verbose
         --out ftp:\\ftp.mnin.org\Evidence --log
         --cryptsum sha_512 --pagefiles --force_pagefiles
         --4gplus --comp lznt1 --case case001
         --cert michael.ligh_at_useonce.mnin.org.cer

Runtime Interrogation with F-Response
F-Response (https://www.f-response.com) by Agile Risk Management provides read-only
access to a remote computer’s physical storage media, including physical memory. The
F-Response agent implements a modified version of the iSCSI protocol that blocks write
operations to the target media, preventing accidental changes during acquisition and
analysis. F-Response is designed for compatibility with any forensic software that provides
disk or memory-analysis capabilities. For example, you could use F-Response to mount
a target system’s drives over the network and then use The Sleuth Kit, X-Ways, EnCase,
or FTK on your analysis machine to inspect the target machine for malicious activity.
   Most important, you can use F-Response to mount RAM over the network and then exam-
ine it from your analysis machine. In a presentation titled Upping the ‘Anti’: Using Memory
Analysis to Fight Malware (http://www.4tphi.net/fatkit/papers/Walters_2008_SANS.pdf)

     Matt Shannon (F-Response principal) and AAron Walters, (Volatility founder) introduced
     a tool called Voltage, which couples the power of F-Response and Volatility. This allows
     detection of changes to memory in real time across all computers in an enterprise without
     having to reboot, power down, visit them physically, or worry about accidentally writing
     changes back to the target system’s memory.

     General Steps for Using F-Response
     The steps for using F-Response are different depending on which edition of the software
     you purchase, but the concepts are the same. The following example is based on the
     Field Kit Edition. Since the time we first wrote about F-Response in the Malware Analyst’s
     Cookbook, the team has drastically expanded their entire family of products. You can now
     deploy covert agents (i.e., no GUI) to target systems, enable 256-bit AES encryption for data
     that is transmitted over the wire, and connect to cloud-based storage systems.
        Figure 4-4 shows an image of the agent that you would run on a target machine using
     the Field Kit Edition of F-Response. Once you enter the requested options, you connect to
     the target machine (192.168.1.129 on TCP port 3260 in this case) from your analysis station
     using Microsoft’s iSCSI initiator. The target machine’s physical disk(s) and memory then
     become available to your analysis machine over the network. For example, you might
     see the target machine’s C: drive mounted as F: on your analysis station, and the target
     machine’s memory mounted as G:. Then you can launch your desired forensic software
     from your analysis station and aim them at your F: or G: drive.

     Figure 4-4: Configuring the F-Response GUI agent on a target system

     Connecting from Mac OS X and Linux
     You can also connect to the target from a Mac OS X or Linux system using Open-iSCSI
     (http://www.open-iscsi.org). Once installed, you can manually leverage the ­iscsiadm
     command-line utility or by embedding it in a script to automatically connect and mount

a remote system’s drives. Students in our training class experiment with the latter method
by using a script called remotemem.py that we designed for exactly this purpose. Here’s
how to run it:
  $ sudo python remotemem.py
        --host=192.168.1.129
        --port=3260
        --user=fielduser
        --password=YOURPASSWORD

  ===================================================
  Memory node: /dev/sdb, Disk node: /dev/sdc

  To acquire a full RAM dump, open a new tab in your
  terminal and type the following command:

  $ sudo dd if=/dev/sdb of=~/mem.dmp bs=512

  To "interrogate" memory (i.e. examine RAM w/o a full acquisition)
  simply point Volatility to the memory node. For example:

  $ sudo python vol.py -f /dev/sdb --profile=PROFILE pslist

  [snip]

  NOTE: you must run the commands as sudo/root to access the unix
  devices (i.e. /dev/sdX).

  Press enter to disconnect and logout...

   In the output, the script takes care of all the administrative tasks and simply tells you
where to find the remote system’s RAM and hard drive (/dev/sdb and /dev/sdc, respec-
tively). The connection stays alive until you press ENTER into the terminal to dismiss
the script. We typically instruct investigators to either acquire memory over the remote
channel (by using a typical dd command) or perform runtime interrogation by directly
running Volatility plugins against the /dev/sdb device.
   The major benefit of interrogation is getting a list of processes, kernel modules, or net-
work connections in a matter of seconds by transferring only 5-10KB of data per machine.

 NOTE
 F-Response recently announced its forthcoming F-Switch Appliance and Cloud Solution
 (http://www.f-switch.com). Although F-Switch provides very similar remote disk, vol-
 umes, and memory access to F-Response, it is designed to handle complex networking
 environments and more structured corporate controls. With the F-Switch technology,
 live physical memory analysis over the Internet with Volatility is now possible.

     MoonSols Windows Memory Toolkit
     MoonSols Windows Memory Toolkit (http://www.moonsols.com/windows-memory-tool-
     kit) by Matthieu Suiche supports memory acquisition from 32-bit and 64-bit versions of
     Windows XP, 2003, 2008, Vista, 2008 R2, 7, and 8. Version 1.4 of the software is free. At
     the time of this writing, the most recent version is 2.0, which is available in Consultant,
     Enterprise, and Enterprise Plus licensing schemes. Here are a few of the features of the
     2.0 toolkit:

        • It supports hashing with MD5, SHA-1, and SHA-256.
        • It includes a server component so you can transmit memory dumps across the
          network, with optional RC4 encryption and/or LZNT1 compression.
        • It can map memory in three different ways, including the well-known use of
          \Device\PhysicalMemory.
        • It can convert full memory dumps to Microsoft crash dumps, which you can then
          analyze using one of the Microsoft debuggers.
        • It can convert hibernation files and crash dumps into raw memory dumps.
        • DumpIt.exe combines win32dd.exe and win64dd.exe to provide memory dumps in
          a single-click. You can still control options via command-line if you desire.

     Local Collection
     You can create a memory dump by double-clicking the DumpIt.exe icon or executing it on
     the command line without any options. However, we highly recommend at least display-
     ing the possible options first, just to make sure you know what the defaults are (and that
     they’re suitable for your case).
       F:\DFIR> DumpIt.exe /?
         DumpIt - v2.1.0.20140115 - One click memory memory dumper
         Copyright (c) 2007 - 2014, Matthieu Suiche <http://www.msuiche.net>
         Copyright (c) 2012 - 2014, MoonSols Limited <http://www.moonsols.com>

       Usage: DumpIt [options]
         Option       Description
         ------       -----------
         /j <log>     Log file destination.
         /f <file>    File destination.
         /r           Create a Raw memory dump file. (default)
         /d           Create a Microsoft memory crash dump file.
                     (WinDbg compliant, XP and later only)
         /c <value>   Memory content.
                         0 - Full physical address space.
                         1 - Memory manager physical memory block. (default)
                         2 - Memory manager physical memory block + Very First PFNs.

    /m <value>   Mapping method for either /d or /r option.
                    0 - MmMapIoSpace().
                    1 - \\Device\\PhysicalMemory.
                    2 - PFN Mapping. (default)
    /k           Create a Microsoft memory crash dump file (BSOD).
                 (local only, reboot)
    /lznt1        Use LZNT1 compression.
    /rc4 <key>    USE RC4 encryption.
    /unpack <input> <output>    Unpack a file who had been previously encoded
                  or compressed via MoonSols DumpIt.
    /s <value>   Hash function to use. (Only on sender/local machine)
                    0 - No hashing algorithm. (default)
                    1 - SHA1 algorithm.
                    2 - MD5 algorithm.
                    3 - SHA-256 algorithm.
    /y <value>   Speed level.
                    0 - Normal.
                    1 - Fast.
                    2 - Sonic.
                    3 - Hyper sonic. (default)
    /t <addr>    Remote host or address IP.
    /p <port>    Port, can be used with both /t and /l options. (default: 1337)
    /l           Server mode to receive memory dump remotely.
    /i            Interactive mode.
    /a           Answer "yes" to all questions. Must be used for piped-report.
    /?           Display this help.

  Samples:
    DumpIt /d /f physmem.dmp                 - Standard Microsoft crash dump.
    DumpIt /m 0 /r /f F:\physmem.bin         - Raw dump using MmMapIoSpace() method.
    DumpIt /l /f F:\msuiche.bin              - Waiting for a local connexion on
                                               port 1337.
    DumpIt /t sample.foo.com /d /c 0         - Send remotely a Microsoft
                                               full crash dump.
    DumpIt /d /f \\smb_server\remote.dmp     - Send remotely on a SMB server.

  The following output shows an example of running DumpIt.exe with all the default
options. To automatically answer “yes” to all questions, use the /a option (for scripted
acquisition). The results from this command show details about the computer’s memory
configuration, including the total address space size, the size of an individual memory
page, and the number of seconds that elapsed during the memory acquisition. The mem-
ory dump is saved in the directory containing DumpIt.exe (preferably a removable drive).
  F:\DFIR> DumpIt.exe
    DumpIt - v2.1.0.20140115 - One click memory memory dumper
    Copyright (c) 2007 - 2014, Matthieu Suiche <http://www.msuiche.net>
    Copyright (c) 2012 - 2014, MoonSols Limited <http://www.moonsols.com>

      Address space size:          7365197824 bytes (    7024 Mb)

           Free space size:            38171750400 bytes (    36403 Mb)

           * Destination path:             \??\F:\DFIR\BC44-20140426-221920.dmp

           O.S. Version:                 Microsoft Enterprise, 64-bit (build 9200)
           Computer name:                BC44

           Physical memory in use:           11%
           Physical memory size:         6143476 Kb (    5999 Mb)
           Physical memory available:    5411984 Kb (    5285 Mb)
           Paging file size:             10337780 Kb (   10095 Mb)
           Paging file available:        9467612 Kb (    9245 Mb)
           Virtual memory size:          2097024 Kb (    2047 Mb)
           Virtual memory available:     2054932 Kb (    2006 Mb)
           Extented memory available:          0 Kb (       0 Mb)

           Physical page size:           4096 bytes
           Minimum physical address:     0x0000000000001000
           Maximum physical address:     0x00000001B6FFF000

           Address space size:           7365197824 bytes (7192576 Kb)

           --> Are you sure you want to continue? [y/n] y
           Acquisition started at:     [26/4/2014 (DD/MM/YYYY) 22:19:52 (UTC)]
           + Processing... Done.

           Acquisition finished at:    [2014-04-26 (YYYY-MM-DD) 22:20:45 (UTC)]
           Time elapsed:               0:53 minutes:seconds (53 secs)

           Created file size:            6290927616 bytes (     5999 Mb)

     Remote Collection
     To save the dump directly to another machine by transferring the image across the net-
     work, you first need to start a server instance of DumpIt.exe. On the machine where you
     want to receive the memory dump, determine its IP address and then invoke a server
     instance, like this:
       F:\DFIR> ipconfig
            Windows IP Configuration
            Ethernet adapter Local Area Connection:
            Connection-specific DNS Suffix . :
            IP Address. . . . . . . . . . . . : 10.211.55.5
            Subnet Mask . . . . . . . . . . . : 255.255.255.0
            Default Gateway . . . . . . . . . : 10.211.55.1

        F:\DFIR> DumpIt.exe /l /f mem.raw
         DumpIt - v2.1.0.20140115 - One click memory memory dumper
         Copyright (c) 2007 - 2014, Matthieu Suiche <http://www.msuiche.net>

     Copyright (c) 2012 - 2014, MoonSols Limited <http://www.moonsols.com>

     Remote server:                0.0.0.0:1337

   By default, DumpIt.exe listens on all interfaces and uses TCP port 1337. You can modify
the port with the /p switch when creating the server instance. The next step is to execute
DumpIt.exe on the machine whose memory is being acquired and connect to your server
instance to transmit the memory dump. In this example, we use RC4 encryption by speci-
fying a text-based key on the command line (the longer the better; ours is just an example).
  F:\DFIR> DumpIt.exe /t 10.211.55.5 /s 1 /rc4 MyRc4k3y

  Note that we opted to compute a SHA-256 hash of the memory dump, as in the first
example. On your server machine, you should then decrypt the memory dump, like this:
  F:\DFIR> DumpIt.exe /rc4 MyRc4K3y /unpack mem.raw unpacked.raw

     DumpIt - v2.1.0.20140115 - One click memory memory dumper
     Copyright (c) 2007 - 2014, Matthieu Suiche <http://www.msuiche.net>
     Copyright (c) 2012 - 2014, MoonSols Limited <http://www.moonsols.com>

       -> Unpacking mem.raw...
          0x176f1f4ac bytes readed. 0x176f02000 bytes written.
       -> Success.

   At this point, you can verify the SHA-256 hash to ensure that there were no errors in
transmission over the network and that the RC4 decryption completed successfully. Note
that you can use netcat to receive the memory as well, but you’d still need DumpIt.exe (or
another compatible utility) to unpack it if you used compression or encryption.

Memory Dump Formats
Depending on your role in a particular case, you might not be the person in charge of
acquiring memory. In fact, the person who acquires memory might not even correspond
with you before capturing the evidence. Thus, you won’t get the opportunity to share
best practices with them, recommend your favorite tool(s), or request the evidence in a
particular format. Nevertheless, you have to deal with what you get. Luckily, Volatility
uses address space voting rounds to automatically identify the file format for you. In other
words, it cycles through all supported formats until it can identify the appropriate address
space for the target file based on magic bytes or other patterns.
   The Volatility Framework also provides several plugins, listed in Table 4-1, for explor-
ing the metadata associated with many of the common file formats.

     Table 4-1: Volatility Plugins for File Format Metadata

       Format                Plugin               Output

       Crash dump            crashinfo            CPU registers, critical pointers and symbol locations, bug check
                                                  codes, memory runs

       Hibernation file      hibinfo              CPU registers, timestamps, OS version, memory runs

       HPAK                  hpakinfo             Memory runs, page file name, compression enabled/disabled

       Mach-o                machoinfo            Memory runs

       VMware                vmwareinfo           Memory runs, VMX configuration, CPU registers, PNG thumb-
                                                  nail screenshot

       VirtualBox            vboxinfo             Memory runs, VirtualBox version, number of CPUs

     Raw Memory Dump
     A raw memory dump is the most widely supported format among analysis tools. It does
     not contain any headers, metadata, or magic values for file type identification. The raw
     format typically includes padding for any memory ranges that were intentionally skipped
     (i.e., device memory) or that could not be read by the acquisition tool, which helps maintain
     spatial integrity (relative offsets among data).

     Windows Crash Dump
     The Windows crash dump file format was designed for debugging purposes. Crash dumps
     begin with a _DMP_HEADER or _DMP_HEADER64 structure, as shown in the following code.
     The Signature member contains PAGEDUMP or PAGEDU64, respectively.
        >>> dt("_DMP_HEADER")
        '_DMP_HEADER' (4096 bytes)
        0x0    : Signature                              ['array', 4, ['unsigned char']]
        0x4    : ValidDump                              ['array', 4, ['unsigned char']]
        0x8    : MajorVersion                           ['unsigned long']
        0xc    : MinorVersion                           ['unsigned long']
        0x10 : DirectoryTableBase                       ['unsigned long']
        0x14 : PfnDataBase                              ['unsigned long']
        0x18 : PsLoadedModuleList                       ['unsigned long']
        0x1c : PsActiveProcessHead                      ['unsigned long']
        0x30 : MachineImageType                         ['unsigned long']
        0x34 : NumberProcessors                         ['unsigned long']
        0x38 : BugCheckCode                             ['unsigned long']
        0x40 : BugCheckCodeParameter                    ['array', 4, ['unsigned long long']]
        0x80 : KdDebuggerDataBlock                      ['unsigned long long']
        0x88 : PhysicalMemoryBlockBuffer                ['_PHYSICAL_MEMORY_DESCRIPTOR']
        [snip]

   The header identifies the major and minor OS version, the kernel DTB
(DirectoryTableBase), the addresses of the active process and loaded kernel module list
heads, and information on the physical memory runs. It also shows the bug check codes,
which a debugger uses to determine the cause of the crash.

 NOTE
 Crash dumps come in many shapes and sizes. If you want your crash dump to be
 compatible with Volatility, it must be a complete memory dump, not a kernel memory
 dump or a small dump. The article “Understanding Crash Dump Files” describes the
 differences in detail: http://blogs.technet.com/b/askperf/archive/2008/01/08/
 understanding-crash-dump-files.aspx.

  The following list describes how you can create a crash dump. Please note that not all
methods are suitable for forensics purposes.

   • Blue Screens: You can configure a system to create a crash dump when a Blue
     Screen of Death (BSoD) occurs (see KB 969028). For testing purposes, you can
     use NotMyFault from Sysinternals (http://download.sysinternals.com/files/
     NotMyFault.zip), which includes an intentionally buggy driver that causes a BSoD.
     Of course, this method powers down the system hard, which might result in loss
     of other data.
   • CrashOnScrollControl: Some PS/2 and USB keyboards have special key sequences
     that produce a crash dump (see KB 244139). On server systems that don’t have key-
     boards attached, you can use Non-Maskable Interrupts (see KB 927069). However,
     these methods typically require pre-configuration of the registry and BIOS.
   • Debuggers: If you’re attached to a target system using a remote kernel debugger
     (WinDBG), you can use the .crash or .dump commands. It is convenient for debug-
     ging, but it rarely ever applies to a forensic scenario. You can also use LiveKD
     (http://download.sysinternals.com/files/LiveKD.zip) if you’re debugging
     locally, but it typically requires pre-installing special software on the target system.

   The methods we just described rely on the same facility within the kernel to generate
the crash dumps. Thus, they all suffer from a few similar weaknesses. They typically
don’t include device memory regions or the first physical page, which might contain a
copy of the Master Boot Record (MBR) from disk and pre-boot authentication passwords.
Furthermore, they can be subverted by malware that registers a bug check callback (see
“Malicious Callbacks” in Chapter 13) or by disabling access to the kernel debugger. Some
systems might not even be able to create complete crash dumps due to size (see http://

     media.blackhat.com/bh-us-10/whitepapers/Suiche/BlackHat-USA-2010-Suiche-Blue-
     Screen-of-the-Death-is-dead-wp.pdf).
        Some forensic memory acquisition tools such as MoonSols MWMT provide the option
     to create a crash dump file. In these cases, the tool(s) construct their own crash dump
     header and then write physical memory runs into the output file. In other words, they
     generate a crash dump file compatible with the WinDBG debugger (and thus Volatility),
     but do not use the same kernel facility that the other techniques use. Thus, many of the
     disadvantages such as the missing first page, subversion via callbacks, and size limita-
     tions are avoided. Volatility and KnTDD can also convert raw memory dumps into crash
     dumps, as you’ll learn later in the chapter.

     Windows Hibernation File
     A hibernation file (hiberfil.sys) contains a compressed copy of memory that the system
     dumps to disk during the hibernation process. In 2008, Matthieu Suiche (MoonSols) devel-
     oped the first tool, Sandman, for analyzing these files for forensic purposes. You can read
     about his initial research in Windows Hibernation File For Fun ‘N’ Profit (http://sebug.net/
     paper/Meeting-Documents/BlackHat-USA2008/BH_US_08_Suiche_Windows_hibernation.pdf).
        Hibernation files consist of a standard header (PO_MEMORY_IMAGE), a set of kernel contexts
     and registers such as CR3, and several arrays of compressed data blocks. The compres-
     sion format used was basic Xpress (http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh554002
     .aspx). However, starting in Windows 8 and Server 2012, Microsoft started using the
     Xpress algorithm along with Huffman and LZ encoding. Here’s an example of the hiber-
     nation file header:
       >>> dt("PO_MEMORY_IMAGE")
       'PO_MEMORY_IMAGE' (168 bytes)
       0x0    : Signature                          ['String', {'length': 4}]
       0x4    : Version                            ['unsigned long']
       0x8    : CheckSum                           ['unsigned long']
       0xc    : LengthSelf                         ['unsigned long']
       0x10 : PageSelf                             ['unsigned long']
       0x14 : PageSize                             ['unsigned long']
       0x18 : ImageType                            ['unsigned long']
       0x20 : SystemTime                           ['WinTimeStamp', {}]
       [snip]

        The Signature member usually contains hibr, HIBR, wake, or WAKE. However in some
     cases, the entire PO_MEMORY_IMAGE header is zeroed out (this happens when the system
     resumes), which can prevent analysis of the hibernation file in most tools. In those cases,
     Volatility uses a brute force algorithm to locate the data it needs. When performing an
     analysis of the hibernation file with Volatility, remember that every time you run a com-
     mand, you need to decompress certain segments. As a general time saver, we recommend

decompressing the entire memory dump once (using the imagecopy command, which we
describe shortly). The decompression converts the hibernation file into a raw memory
dump that you can analyze without on-the-fly decompression.
   As explained in Microsoft KB 920730, to create a hibernation file, first enable hiberna-
tion in the kernel (powercfg.exe /hibernate on) and then issue a shutdown /h command
to hibernate. Depending on your OS version, you may also accomplish it by clicking from
the Start menu (Start ➪ Hibernate or Start ➪ Shutdown ➪ Hibernate). In most forensic
cases, however, you’ll receive a laptop that has already been hibernated or you’ll get a
forensic disk image from a system that has a hibernation file available. In this case, you’ll
have to copy off the C:\hiberfil.sys file by mounting the disk from an analysis machine
(or by using a live CD/DVD).

 Warning
 Before a system hibernates, the DHCP configuration (if any) is released and any active
 connections are terminated. As a result, networking data in hibernation files might be
 incomplete. Also, during this time, malware can remove itself from memory so that
 you’re not able to detect its presence in the hibernation file.

Expert Witness Format (EWF)
Memory acquired by EnCase is stored in Expert Witness Format (EWF). This is a very
common format due to the popularity of EnCase in forensic investigations. Thus, you
should be familiar with the following methods of analyzing the EWF memory dumps:

   • EWFAddressSpace: Volatility includes an address space that can work with EWF
     files, but it requires that you install libewf (https://code.google.com/p/libewf).
     At the time of this writing, libewf advertises full supports of the EWF files used by
     EnCase v6 and prior versions, but the newer EWF2-EX01 introduced with EnCase
     v7 is experimental only.
   • Mounting with EnCase: You can mount an EWF file with EnCase and then run
     Volatility over the exposed device. This also works in a networked environ-
     ment that allows sampling (see Sampling RAM Across the EnCase Enterprise at
       http://­volatility-labs.blogspot.com/2013/10/sampling-ram-across-encase
       -enterprise.html). This method also avoids the libewf dependency and supports
     EnCase v7 files.
   • Mounting with FTK Imager: Another alternative is to mount the EWF file as
     “Physical & Logical” and then run Volatility against the unallocated space portion

            of the volume (for example, E:\unallocated space if the file is mounted on the
            E: drive letter).

      NOTE
      Although the EWFAddressSpace ships with Volatility, it’s not enabled by default (due
      to the dependency on libewf). To enable it, use --plugins=contrib/plugins in your
      command, as described in Chapter 3.

     HPAK Format
     Designed by HBGary, HPAK allows a target system’s physical memory and page file(s)
     to embed in the same output file. This is a proprietary format, so the only tool capable of
     creating an HPAK file is FastDump. Specifically, with this tool, you must use the -hpak
     command-line option. Otherwise, the memory dump is created in the default format (raw),
     which doesn’t include the page file(s). You can optionally supply the -compress option to
     compress the data with zlib. The resulting file has an .hpak extension.
        In response to several Volatility users who had unexpectedly received HPAK files for
     analysis, we created an address space for handling them. Remember, if you don’t perform
     the acquisition, you have to deal with what you get. Luckily the HPAK file format is rela-
     tively simplistic. It has a 32-byte header, as shown next, of which the first four bytes are
     HPAK (the magic signature). The rest of the fields are currently unknown, but are incon-
     sequential to performing memory analysis.
        >>> dt("HPAK_HEADER")
        'HPAK_HEADER' (32 bytes)
        0x0   : Magic                             ['String', {'length': 4}]

        After the header, you will find one or more HPAK_SECTION structures that look like this:
        >>> dt("HPAK_SECTION")
        'HPAK_SECTION' (224 bytes)
        0x0   : Header                            ['String', {'length': 32}]
        0x8c : Compressed                         ['unsigned int']
        0x98 : Length                             ['unsigned long long']
        0xa8 : Offset                             ['unsigned long long']
        0xb0 : NextSection                        ['unsigned long long']
        0xd4 : Name                               ['String', {'length': 12}]

        The Header value is a string such as HPAKSECTHPAK_SECTION_PHYSDUMP for the section
     containing physical memory. Likewise, it becomes HPAKSECTHPAK_SECTION_PAGEDUMP for
     the section containing the target system’s page file. The Offset and Length members tell

you exactly where the corresponding data exists in the HPAK file. If Compressed is non-
zero, then the section’s data is compressed with the zlib algorithm.
   As shown in the following command, you can use hpakinfo to explore the contents
of an HPAK file:
  $ python vol.py -f memdump.hpak hpakinfo
  Header:     HPAKSECTHPAK_SECTION_PHYSDUMP
  Length:     0x20000000
  Offset:     0x4f8
  NextOffset: 0x200004f8
  Name:       memdump.bin
  Compressed: 0

  Header:     HPAKSECTHPAK_SECTION_PAGEDUMP
  Length:     0x30000000
  Offset:     0x200009d0
  NextOffset: 0x500009d0
  Name:       dumpfile.sys
  Compressed: 0

   The output tells you that this HPAK contains physical memory and one paging file.
The physical memory section starts at offset 0x4f8 of the memdump.hpak file and consists
of 0x20000000 bytes (512MB). Neither section is compressed. You can either run Volatility
plugins directly against memdump.hpak, or you can extract the physical memory section
to a separate file using the hpakextract plugin. By extracting it, you’re left with a raw
memory dump that is compatible with nearly all analysis frameworks.

Virtual Machine Memory
To acquire memory from a VM, you can run one of the aforementioned software tools
within the guest OS (VM) or you can perform the acquisition from the hypervisor. This
section focuses on VM memory collected from the hypervisor. This technique is typically
less invasive (when you perform it without pausing or suspending the VM), because it’s
harder for malicious code lurking on the VM to detect your presence. At the end of this
section, we’ll also discuss Actaeon, which allows you to perform memory forensics of
the actual hypervisor (i.e., analyzing a guest OS directly within the memory of the host).

VMware
If you’re using a desktop product such as VMware Workstation, Player, or Fusion, you
just need to suspend/pause or create a snapshot of the VM. As a result, a copy of the VM’s
memory writes to a directory on the host’s file system, relative to the .vmx configuration.
If you’re using VMware Server or ESX, you can do this from a vSphere GUI console or
on command-line with the scriptable vmrun command (see https://www.vmware.com/pdf/

     vix160_vmrun_command.pdf). In a cloud environment, the memory dump will likely write
     to a storage area network (SAN) or Network File System (NFS) data store.

      NOTE
      Be aware that pausing or suspending a VM is not without consequence. For example,
      active SSL/TLS connections cannot easily resume after being “frozen.” Thus, although
      you’re acquiring from the hypervisor, you’re still causing (limited) changes within the
      VM’s memory.

         Depending on the VMware product/version and how the memory dump was created,
     you might need to recover more than one file for memory analysis. In some cases, the
     VM’s memory is entirely contained in a single.vmem file (the raw schema). In other cases,
     instead of a .vmem, you’ll get a .vmsn (snapshots) or .vmss (saved state), which are propri-
     etary file formats containing memory and metadata (the combined schema). Luckily, Nir
     Izraeli documented the format well enough to produce an address space for Volatility
     (see his initial work here: http://code.google.com/p/vmsnparser).
         To slightly complicate matters, Sebastian Bourne-Richard recently noticed that VMware
     products often create a .vmem and one of the structured metadata files (the split schema).
     An entirely new address space needed to be written for Volatility to support this schema,
     because the .vmem contains physical memory runs, but the metadata file indicates how to
     piece them back together to create an accurate representation of the guest’s memory. In
     other words, when acquiring memory from VMware systems, make sure to recover all
     files with .vmem, .vmsn, and .vmss extensions—because it is not easy to know beforehand
     which ones(s) contain the required evidence.
         At offset zero of the metadata files, you will find a _VMWARE_HEADER structure that looks
     like this:
        >>> dt("_VMWARE_HEADER")
        '_VMWARE_HEADER' (12 bytes)
        0x0   : Magic             ['unsigned int']
        0x8   : GroupCount        ['unsigned int']
        0xc   : Groups            ['array', lambda x : x.GroupCount, ['_VMWARE_GROUP']]

        For the file to be considered valid, there’s a Magic value that must be 0xbed2bed0 ,
     ­ xbad1bad1 , 0xbed2bed2 , or 0xbed3bed3 . The Groups member specifies an array of
     0
     _VMWARE_GROUP structures that look like this:

        >>> dt("_VMWARE_GROUP")
        '_VMWARE_GROUP' (80 bytes)
        0x0   : Name               ['String', {'length': 64, 'encoding': 'utf8'}]
        0x40 : TagsOffset          ['unsigned long long']

   Each group has a Name that allows the metadata components to be categorized and a
TagsOffset that specifies where you can find a list of _VMARE_TAG structures. A tag looks
like this:
  >>> dt("_VMWARE_TAG")
  '_VMWARE_TAG' (None bytes)
  0x0   : Flags         ['unsigned char']
  0x1   : NameLength    ['unsigned char']
  0x2   : Name          ['String',
       {'length': lambda x : x.NameLength, 'encoding': 'utf8'}]

   These tag structures are the key to finding the physical memory data within the meta-
data file. If the VM has less than 4GB of RAM, a single physical memory run is stored
in a group named “memory” and a tag named “Memory.” For systems with more than
4GB of RAM, there are multiple runs, also in a group named “memory,” but including
tags named “Memory,” “regionPPN,” “regionPageNum,” and “regionSize.” The address
space within Volatility (see volatility/plugins/addrspaces/vmware.py) parses these tags
in order to rebuild the view of physical memory.

VirtualBox
VirtualBox does not automatically save a full RAM dump to disk when you suspend or
pause a virtual machine (as other virtualization products do). Instead, you must create a
memory dump using one of the following techniques:

   • The vboxmanage debugvm commands. This method creates an ELF64 core dump binary
     with custom sections that represent the guest’s physical memory. For more infor-
     mation, see: http://www.virtualbox.org/manual/ch08.html#vboxmanage-debugvm.
   • Use the --dbg switch when starting a VM and then the .pgmphystofile command.
     This method outputs a raw memory dump. For more information, see https://
     www.virtualbox.org/ticket/10222.
   • Use the VirtualBox Python API (vboxapi) to create your own memory dumping
     utility. A user also attached a Python script named vboxdump.py to the aforemen-
     tioned ticket #10222 showing an example.

   The second and third methods produce raw memory dumps, which are natively sup-
ported by Volatility. However, the first method generates an ELF64 core dump, which
requires special support. Philippe Teuwen (see http://wiki.yobi.be/wiki/RAM_analysis)
performed the initial research into this file format and created a Volatility address space
that supported them. As a result, Cuckoo Sandbox was able to integrate the ability to save
memory dumps from VirtualBox VMs in ELF64 core dump format.

         The ELF64 files have several custom program header segments. One of them is a
     P T _ N O T E (e l f 6 4 _ n o t e ) whose name is V B C O R E . The note segment contains a
     DBGFCOREDESCRIPTOR structure, which is shown in the following code:

        >>> dt("DBGFCOREDESCRIPTOR")
        'DBGFCOREDESCRIPTOR' (24 bytes)
        0x0   : u32Magic                                ['unsigned int']
        0x4   : u32FmtVersion                           ['unsigned int']
        0x8   : cbSelf                                  ['unsigned int']
        0xc   : u32VBoxVersion                          ['unsigned int']
        0x10 : u32VBoxRevision                          ['unsigned int']
        0x14 : cCpus                                    ['unsigned int']

         This structure contains the VirtualBox magic signature (0xc01ac0de), the version infor-
     mation, and number of CPUs for the target system. If you continue to iterate through the
     file’s program headers, you’ll find various PT_LOAD segments (elf64_phdr). Each segment’s
     p_paddr member is a starting physical memory address. The p_offset member tells you
     where in the ELF64 file you can find the chunk of physical memory. Finally, the p_memsz
     tells you how big the chunk of memory is (in bytes).

      NOTE
      For more information on the VirtualBox ELF64 core dump format, see the following
      web pages:

          • ELF64 core dump format: h t t p : / / w w w . v i r t u a l b o x . o r g / m a n u a l / c h 1 2
             .html#guestcoreformat
          • VirtualBox source code header file: http://www.virtualbox.org/svn/vbox/
              trunk/include/VBox/vmm/dbgfcorefmt.h
          • C source code that creates the ELF64 core dump files: http://www.virtualbox
             .org/svn/vbox/trunk/src/VBox/VMM/VMMR3/DBGFCoreWrite.cpp

     QEMU
     QEMU is very similar to VirtualBox in that it saves VM memory in the ELF64 core dump
     format. In fact, the only major difference is that the PT_NOTE name is CORE rather than
     VBCORE. You can create these dumps by using virsh, a command-line interface to libvirt
     (http://libvirt.org/index.html). There’s also a Python API, which Cuckoo Sandbox
     (http://www.cuckoosandbox.org/) currently uses to create memory dumps of infected
     QEMU VMs.

Xen/KVM
The LibVMI project (https://github.com/bdpayne/libvmi) is a VM introspection library
that supports the Xen and KVM hypervisors. In other words, you can perform real-time
analysis of running VMs without executing any code inside the VM. This is a powerful
capability for live antivirus and rootkit scanning, as well as general system monitoring.
As an added bonus, the project includes a Python API (pyvmi) and a Volatility address
space (PyVmiAddressSpace) for analyzing the memory.

Microsoft Hyper-V
To acquire memory from Hyper-V VMs, you first need to save the VM’s state or create a
snapshot. Then recover the .bin (physical memory chunks) and .vsv (metadata) files from
the VM configuration directory. Unfortunately, Volatility does not currently support the
Hyper-V memory format, so you need to use the vm2dmp.exe utility (http://archive.msdn
.microsoft.com/vm2dmp) to convert the .bin and .vsv files into a Windows crash dump.
You can then analyze the crash dump with WinDBG or Volatility. For more information on
this process, see Analyzing Hyper-V Saved State Files in Volatility by Wyatt Roersma (http://
www.wyattroersma.com/?p=77). One of Wyatt’s major observations is that vm2dmp.exe fails
on any VM with more than 4GB of RAM.

 NOTE
 You can also acquire memory from a running Hyper-V VM using Sysinter-
 nals LiveKD or MoonSols LiveCloudKd (http://moonsols.com/2010/08/12/
 livecloudkd).

Hypervisor Memory Forensics
One of the most fascinating developments in VM memory forensics is Actaeon (http://
www.s3.eurecom.fr/tools/actaeon) by Mariano Graziano, Andrea Lanzi, and Davide
Balzarotti. Given a physical memory dump of a host system, this tool enables analysis of
guest OSs in virtualization environments using Intel VT-x technology. This includes the
ability to locate memory resident hypervisors (benign or malicious) and nested virtual-
ization. Its current implementation allows VM introspection of 32-bit Windows guests
running under KVM, Xen, VMware Workstation, VirtualBox, and HyperDbg. Actaeon
is implemented as a patch to Volatility and it won first place in the 2013 Volatility Plugin
Contest (http://volatility-labs.blogspot.com/2013/08/results-are-in-for-1st-
annual.html).

     Converting Memory Dumps
     With the exception of Volatility, most memory analysis frameworks only support one or
     two of the file formats covered in the previous section. If you receive a memory dump
     in a format that’s not compatible with your desired analysis tool, you should consider
     converting it. As previously mentioned, the raw format is the most widely supported,
     so that often becomes the destination format during the conversion. Here’s a list of tools
     that can help you with these tasks:

        • MoonSols Windows Memory Toolkit (MWMT): This toolkit provides utilities
          to convert hibernation files and crash dumps into raw format. It also can convert
          hibernation files and raw files into crash dumps.
        • VMware vmss2core: The vmss2core.exe utility (https://labs.vmware.com/flings/
          vmss2core) can convert VMware saved state (.vmsn) or snapshot (.vmsn) files into
          crash dumps compatible with the Microsoft WinDBG or gdb.
        • Microsoft vm2dmp: As previously described, this tool can convert select Microsoft
          Hyper-V memory files into crash dumps (depending on the size of the memory
          and version of Hyper-V server).
        • Volatility imagecopy: The imagecopy plugin can copy out a raw memory dump
          from any of the following file formats: crash dump, hibernation file, VMware,
          VirtualBox, QEMU, Firewire, Mach-o, LiME, and EWF.
        • Volatility raw2dmp: The raw2dmp plugin can convert a raw memory dump into a
          Windows crash dump for analysis with Microsoft’s WinDBG debugger.

         Given the available choices, you should be well equipped to convert to or from any of
     the file formats you might encounter. Also, keep in mind it might be necessary to perform
     a two-step conversion to reach your end goal. For example, if you receive a hibernation
     file and need to analyze it in WinDBG (which accepts only crash dumps), then you can
     convert it to a raw format first and then from raw into a crash dump.
         The following commands show how to use the Volatility imagecopy and raw2dmp
     plugins. They both take an -O/--output-image option that specifies the path to the des-
     tination file. To convert a crash dump (or any other format) into a raw memory sample,
     use the following:
        $ python vol.py -f win7x64.dmp --profile=Win7SP0x64 imagecopy -O copy.raw
        Volatility Foundation Volatility Framework 2.4
        Writing data (5.00 MB chunks): |........[snip]........................|

        To convert a raw memory sample into a crash dump:
        $ python vol.py -f memory.raw --profile=Win8SP0x64 raw2dmp -O win8.dmp
        Volatility Foundation Volatility Framework 2.4
        Writing data (5.00 MB chunks): |........[snip]........................|

  The amount of time it takes for conversion depends on the size of your source memory
dump. You should see an indication of the progress printed on the terminal for each 5MB
chunk written to the output file.

Volatile Memory on Disk
Volatile data is often written to non-volatile storage as a matter of normal system opera-
tion, such as during hibernation and paging. It’s important to be aware of these alternate
sources of volatile memory, because in some cases it might be your only source (for
example, if a suspect’s laptop is not running when it’s seized). In fact, even if its running
and you can acquire memory from the live system, you might want to recover these alter-
nate sources of volatile data. They might provide valuable evidence of what happened on
the system during other time periods or pages of memory that were paged to secondary
storage, which you can use to correlate with current activity.
    The following scenario covers the technical aspects of where to locate volatile evidence
on disk and how to extract it. Forensic imaging (duplication) of hard disks is beyond
the scope of this book, as are the steps for maintaining proper chain of custody for the
evidence. Thus, we assume that you’ve taken care to research and abide by the laws in
your jurisdiction, if applicable to your investigation. Also, although there are various
commercial GUI products such as EnCase and FTK that provide point-and-click methods
of extracting files, we focus on using The Sleuth Kit (http://www.sleuthkit.org) because
it’s open-source and available to everyone.

Recovering the Hibernation File
If available, a system’s hibernation file will exist at \hiberfil.sys in the root directory
of the C: partition. Assuming that you have a raw image of the disk (image.dd in the
example), you first need to identify the starting sector of the NTFS partition. To do this,
you can use mmls in the following manner:
  $ mmls image.dd
  DOS Partition Table
  Offset Sector: 0
  Units are in 512-byte sectors

        Slot     Start         End            Length        Description
  00:   Meta     0000000000    0000000000     0000000001    Primary Table (#0)
  01:   -----    0000000000    0000002047     0000002048    Unallocated
  02:   00:00    0000002048    0031455231     0031453184    NTFS (0x07)
  03:   -----    0031455232    0031457279     0000002048    Unallocated

        As shown, the starting sector offset is 2048. You’ll provide this value as the -o param-
     eter to other The Sleuth Kit (TSK) utilities, such as fls. Remember, different disks will
     have different offsets, so 2048 is just the value for our example case. In the following
     command, you can see how to filter the output from a file listing on the root directory
     of the NTFS partition.
        $ fls -o 2048 image.dd | grep hiber
        r/r 36218-128-1:       hiberfil.sys

        The inode, or MFT number in this case, is 36218. Now all you need to do is supply the
     sector offset and the inode to the icat command in order to extract the file’s contents.
     Before doing so, make sure the destination media has enough free space to accommodate
     the hibernation file. The following command shows how to perform the extraction:
        $ icat –o 2048 image.dd 36218 > /media/external/hiberfil.sys

        $ file /media/external/hiberfil.sys
        /media/external/hiberfil.sys: data

       Now that you have recovered the hibernation file, you can begin to analyze it with
     Volatility. There is one caveat that we’ll explore next, regarding the ability to identify the
     proper profile.

     Querying the Registry for a Profile
     Often, you will receive evidence, such as a hard disk, without any details about the target
     system. For example, was it running 32-bit Windows 7 or 64-bit Windows Server 2012?
     You’ll need this information to select the proper Volatility profile. In many cases, you can
     simply run the kdbgscan plugin, but remember the debugger data block is nonessential
     and can be manipulated by attackers (see Chapter 3). If that happens, you’ll need a backup
     method for determining the system’s profile. In this case, you have access to the hard
     disk, which contains the registry hives, so you can leverage them to your advantage. The
     following commands show you how to extract the SYSTEM and SOFTWARE hives and then
     verify that you’ve recovered valid Microsoft Windows registry files.
        $ fls -o 2048 -rp image.dd | grep -i config/system$
        r/r 58832-128-3:      Windows/System32/config/SYSTEM

        $ fls -o 2048 -rp image.dd | grep -i config/software$
        r/r 58830-128-3:      Windows/System32/config/SOFTWARE

        $ icat -o 2048 image.dd 58832 > /media/external/system
        $ icat -o 2048 image.dd 58830 > /media/external/software

        $ file /media/external/system /media/external/software

  system:   MS Windows registry file, NT/2000 or above
  software: MS Windows registry file, NT/2000 or above

   After you dump the appropriate hive files, you can analyze them with an offline reg-
istry parser. In this case, we use reglookup (an open-source tool from: http://projects
.sentinelchicken.org/reglookup). In particular, you can look for the ProductName value in
the SOFTWARE hive and the PROCESSOR_ARCHITECTURE value in the SYSTEM hive, as shown here:
  $ reglookup -p "Microsoft/Windows NT/CurrentVersion"
       /media/external/software | grep ProductName
  /Microsoft/Windows NT/CurrentVersion/ProductName,SZ,Windows 7 Professional,

  $ reglookup
      -p "ControlSet001/Control/Session Manager/Environment/PROCESSOR_ARCHITECTURE"
      /media/external/system
  /ControlSet001/Control/[snip]/PROCESSOR_ARCHITECTURE,SZ,AMD64,

   In the output, the target system was running Windows 7 Professional on an AMD64
processor. Thus, the profile would be Win7SP0x64 or Win7SP1x64. You could further
distinguish between the service packs by querying the CSDVersion value in the registry.

Recovering the Page File(s)
We often ask students in our training class a trick question: If we asked you to recover the
page file, where would you look? Almost everyone responds with C:\pagefile.sys. Although
this answer is not technically incorrect, it’s also not thorough because a Windows system
can have up to 16 page files. Thus, you should always determine how many page files
you have and where they’re located before attempting to acquire them. You can do this
by querying the SYSTEM registry, as shown here:
  $ reglookup -p "ControlSet001/Control/Session Manager/Memory Management"
        -t MULTI_SZ /media/external/system
  PATH,TYPE,VALUE,MTIME
  /ControlSet001/Control/Session Manager/Memory
  Management/PagingFiles,MULTI_SZ,\??\C:\pagefile.sys,
  /ControlSet001/Control/Session Manager/Memory
  Management/ExistingPageFiles,MULTI_SZ,\??\C:\pagefile.sys,

   The target system has only one page file so C:\pagfile.sys happened to be the right
answer in this case. The file path is shown twice, because there are two values: PagingFiles
(available for use) and ExistingPageFiles (currently in use). If a system has more than
one, you’ll see the full list of path names. Recovering the page file(s) from the disk image
can be done like this:
  $ fls -o 2048 image.dd | grep pagefile
  r/r 58981-128-1:      pagefile.sys

  $ icat –o 2048 image.dd 58981 > /media/external/pagefile.sys

       Now that you’ve isolated the page file(s) from the disk image, you can move on to the
     analysis phases.

      WarninG
      Within the same key in the SYSTEM hive that we query for the page files, there is a
      ClearPageFileAtShutdown value. We’ve seen malware setting this DWORD value to 1
      as an anti-forensics technique, because it results in the page file being cleared when
      the system powers down. In this case, you might still be able to recover some volatile
      evidence from disk by carving freed/de-allocated blocks with TSK or another disk
      forensics suite.
         Also, starting with Windows 8.1, there’s a value named SavePageFileContents under
      CurrentControlSet\Control\CrashControl that specifies if Windows should preserve
      the contents of the page file during reboots.

     Analyzing the Page File(s)
     If you recall from earlier in the chapter, some software tools that run on live systems can
     collect page files(s) at the time of acquisition. Whether you’ve used one of those tools or
     extracted the file(s) from a disk image, the options for an in-depth analysis of page file
     contents are relatively limited. Remember that a page file is just an unordered set of puzzle
     pieces—without page tables to provide the necessary context, you can’t determine how
     they fit into the larger picture. Acquisition and Analysis of Windows Memory by Nicholas Paul
     Maclean (http://www.4tphi.net/fatkit/papers/NickMaclean2006.pdf) initially described
     the possibility of supplementing raw memory dump analysis with data from the page
     file(s) to provide a more complete view of physical memory. However, for the most part,
     the practical implementations of this technique have been unverified or inaccessible.
         HBGary Responder’s documentation states that it supports page file analysis. Also,
     WinDBG advertises support page file integration (see http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/
     library/windows/hardware/dn265151%28v=vs.85%29.aspx). Specifically, according to the
     documentation, you should be able to create a CAB file that contains a memory dump and
     page file(s) and analyze it with the debugger. However, a discussion on the OSR mailing list
     indicates that the claim is largely false (or simply outdated) (http://www.osronline.com/
     showthread.cfm?link=234512).
         Although page file analysis is on our roadmap, at the time of this writing, you can-
     not perform such an analysis with Volatility. Thus, your best investigative options cur-
     rently are those that do not involve context or structured analysis of the data—such as

strings, antivirus scans, or Yara signatures. In fact, Michael Matonis created a tool called
page_brute (see https://github.com/matonis/page_brute) that analyzes page files by split-
ting them into page-sized chunks and scanning each chunk with Yara rules. The default
set of Yara rules distributed with the tool can discover HTTP requests and responses,
SMTP message headers, FTP commands, and so on. As always, you can add to the default
rules or create your own rule sets to customize the scans.
   Let’s assume that you’re investigating the machine of a suspect who is accused of buy-
ing and selling controlled substances online. The suspect’s browser was configured not
to cache content to disk and not to maintain a history file. Furthermore, the computer
system was not running at the time of seizure, so all you have is a forensic disk image. By
locating and extracting the page file(s), you hope to find some evidence of the suspect’s
involvement in the alleged crime. You build the following Yara rule to assist your search:
  rule drugs
  {
      strings:
      $s0 = "silk road" nocase ascii wide
      $s1 = "silkroad" nocase ascii wide
      $s2 = "marijuana" nocase ascii wide
      $s3 = "bitcoin" nocase ascii wide
      $s4 = "mdma" nocase ascii wide

       condition:
       any of them
  }

    The rule named drugs will trigger on any page in the page file that contains one of the
listed strings. The following command shows how to execute the scan:
  $ python page_brute-BETA.py -r drugs.yar -f /media/external/pagefile.sys
  [+] - YARA rule of File type provided for compilation: drugs.yar
  ..... Ruleset Compilation Successful.
  [+] - PAGE_BRUTE running with the following options:
         [-] - PAGE_SIZE: 4096
         [-] - RULES TYPE: FILE
         [-] - RULE LOCATION: drugs.yar
         [-] - INVERSION SCAN: False
         [-] - WORKING DIR: PAGE_BRUTE-2014-03-24-12-49-57-RESULTS
         =================

      [snip]
           [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58641: drugs
           [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58642: drugs
           [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58643: drugs
           [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58646: drugs
           [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58652: drugs

                [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58663: drugs
                [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58670: drugs
                [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58684: drugs
                [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58685: drugs
                [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58686: drugs
                [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58687: drugs
                [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58688: drugs
                [!] FLAGGED BLOCK 58689: drugs
            [snip]

        The number following the FLAGGED BLOCK message is the index of the respective page
     in the page file. Each page that matches a signature extracts in the working directory
     (PAGE_BRUTE-2014-03-24-12-49-57-RESULTS) named according to the index. You can then
     individually analyze the extracted blocks or, for a quick initial look at the data, just run
     strings against the entire directory, like this:

        $ cd PAGE_BRUTE-2014-03-24-12-49-57-RESULTS/drugs
        $ strings * | less

        https://bitcoin.org/font/ubuntu-bi-webfont.ttf
        chrome://browser/content/urlbarBindings.xml#promobox
        https://coinmkt.com/js/libs/autoNumeric.js?v=0.0.0.8
        Bitcoin
        Getting
        https://bitcoin.org/font/ubuntu-ri-webfont.svg
        https://bitcoin.org/font/ubuntu-ri-webfont.woff
        wallet
        Z N
        http://howtobuybitcoins.info/img/miniflags/us.png
        http://silkroaddrugs.org/silkroad-drugs-complete-step-by-step-guide/#c-3207
        Location:
        you want to also check out Silk Roads biggest competitor the click
        silkroad6ownowfk.onion/categories/drugs-ecstasy/items
        http://silkroaddrugs.org/silkroad-drugs-complete-step-by-step-guide/#c-2587

        [snip]

        Despite the suspect’s attempt to minimize artifacts of his browsing history, you could
     still find evidence of the activity by examining the page file. The point is that it is much
     more difficult to hide or erase artifacts in memory as opposed to those on disk, especially
     when the OS transparently writes parts of the memory to disk during routine operations
     such as paging.

 NOTE
 Users running Windows 7 or later can optionally encrypt the system paging files with
 the Encrypting File System (EFS). Although it’s disabled by default, you can type
 fsutil behavior query EncryptPagingFile at an administrator command prompt to
 see the current status.
 On Linux, swap is actually a partition rather than a file (you can list the location with
 cat/proc/swaps or by looking in /etc/fstab). However, you’ll need a disk image to
 access the content. For Mac OS X, the swap is encrypted by default since 10.7. You can
 list the files in the /var/vm directory or query the status with the sysctl command, as
 shown here:
    $ ls -al /var/vm/*
    -rw------T 1 root    wheel   2147483648 Mar 2 11:24 /var/vm/sleepimage
    -rw------- 1 root    wheel     67108864 Apr 9 09:24 /var/vm/swapfile0
    -rw------- 1 root    wheel   1073741824 Apr 28 22:28 /var/vm/swapfile1
    -rw------- 1 root    wheel   1073741824 Apr 28 22:28 /var/vm/swapfile2

    $ sysctl vm.swapusage
    vm.swapusage: total = 2048.00M   used = 1061.00M   free = 987.00M   (encrypted)

Crash Dump Files
Many systems are configured to write crash dumps to disk upon a BSOD. Thus, you might
want to check for files created during previous crashes that might not have been deleted.
By default, they’re saved to %SystemRoot%\MEMORY.DMP; however, you can change the path
by editing the CurrentControlSet\Control\CrashControl key within the SYSTEM registry
hive. While you’re at it, also check the Windows Error Reporting (Dr. Watson) paths in the
Software\Microsoft\Windows\Windows Error Reporting key of both HKEY_CURRENT_USER
and HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE. You’re likely to only find user-mode (rather than complete) memory
dumps there, but they can still be a valuable source of volatile data during periods of
system instability.

 NOTE
 Keep in mind that if the target system has Volume Shadow Copy Service (VSS) enabled,
 that these alternate sources of volatile evidence might also be available and contain
 data from previous time periods.

     Summary
     Acquiring physical memory accurately takes proper planning, robust tools, and adher-
     ence to best practices. Carefully consider your options based on the environment and
     specifics of each job before choosing a technique or software suite, because your analysis
     capabilities rely on successful acquisition. Also remember that memory evidence is often
     found on non-volatile media and it comes in various “shapes and sizes,” so to speak. Be
     aware of the different formats, how to convert between the formats (if needed), and the
     challenges that each type of memory sample presents.
