                                                                         Foreword

The make utility is an enticing servant, always there and always accommodating. Like
the indispensable sidekicks found in many novels and movies, make starts out as the
underappreciated supplicant to whom you throw a few odd jobs, and then gradually
takes over the entire enterprise.
I had reached the terminal stage of putting make at the center of every project I
touched when Steve Talbott, my supervisor and the author of the original O’Reilly
classic Managing Projects with make, noticed my obsession and asked me to write the
second edition. It proved to be a key growth experience for me (as well as a pretty
wild ride) and my entry into the wonderful world of O’Reilly, but we didn’t really
think about how long the result would stay on the market. Thirteen years for one
edition?
Enthralled in the memories of those days long ago when I was a professional techni-
cal writer, I’ll indulge myself with a bulleted list to summarize the evolution of make
since the second edition of Managing Projects with make hit the stands:
 • The GNU version of make, already the choice of most serious coders when the
   second edition of the book came out, overran the industry and turned into the
   de facto standard.
 • The rise of GNU/Linux made the GNU compiler tool chain even more com-
   mon, and that includes the GNU version of make. As just one example, the Linux
   kernel itself relies heavily on extensions provided by GNU make, as documented
   in Chapter 11 of this book.
 • The adoption of a variant of BSD (Darwin) as the core of Mac OS X continues
   the trend toward the dominance of the GNU tool chain and GNU make.
 • More and more tricks are being discovered for using make in a robust, error-free,
   portable, and flexible way. Standard solutions to common problems on large
   projects have grown up in the programming community. It’s time to move many
   of these solutions from the realm of folklore to the realm of documented prac-
   tices, as this book does.

                                                                                     xi

  • In particular, new practices are required to adapt make to the C++ and Java™
    languages, which did not exist when make was invented. To illustrate the shifting
    sands of time, the original make contained special features to support two vari-
    ants of FORTRAN—of which vestiges remain!—and rather ineffective integra-
    tion with SCCS.)
  • Against all odds, make has remained a critical tool for nearly all computer devel-
    opment projects. None of make’s many (and insightful) critics would have pre-
    dicted this 13 years ago. Over these years, replacements sprang up repeatedly, as
    if dragon’s teeth had been sown. Each new tool was supposed to bypass the limi-
    tations in make’s design, and most were indeed ingenious and admirable. Yet the
    simplicity of make has kept it supreme.
As I watched these trends, it had been in the back of my mind for about a decade to
write a new edition of Managing Projects with make. But I sensed that someone with
a broader range of professional experience than mine was required. Finally, Robert
Mecklenburg came along and wowed us all at O’Reilly with his expertise. I was
happy to let him take over the book and to retire to the role of kibitzer, which earns
me a mention on the copyright page of this book. (Incidentally, we put the book
under the GNU Free Documentation License to mirror the GPL status of GNU make.)
Robert is too modest to tout his Ph.D., but the depth and precision of thinking he
must have applied to that endeavor comes through clearly in this book. Perhaps
more important to the book is his focus on practicality. He’s committed to making
make work for you, and this commitment ranges from being alert about efficiency to
being clever about making even typographical errors in makefiles self-documenting.
This is a great moment: the creation of a new edition of one of O’Reilly’s earliest and
most enduring books. Sit back and read about how an unassuming little tool at the
background of almost every project embodies powers you never imagined. Don’t set-
tle for creaky and unsatisfying makefiles—expand your potential today.
                                                                                    —Andy Oram
                                                                            Editor, O’Reilly Media
                                                                                  August 19, 2004

xii   |   Foreword

