                                                                               Preface

The Road to the Third Edition
My first exposure to make was as an undergraduate at Berkeley in 1979. I was thrilled
to be working with the “latest” equipment: a DEC PDP 11/70 with 128 kilobytes of
RAM, an ADM 3a “glass tty,” Berkeley Unix, and 20 other simultaneous users!
Once, when an assignment was due, I remember timing how long it took to log in—
five minutes from typing my username until I got a prompt.
After leaving school, it was 1984 before I got to work on Unix again. This time it was
as a programmer at NASA’s Ames Research Center. We purchased one of the first
microcomputer-based Unix systems, a 68000 (not a 68010 or 20) that had a mega-
byte of RAM and Unix Version 7—with only six simultaneous users. My last project
there was an interactive satellite data analysis system written in C with a yacc/lex
command language, and, of course, make.
By 1988, I had gone back to school and was working on a project to build a spline-
based geometric modeler. The system consisted of about 120,000 lines of C, spread
across 20 or so executables. The system was built using makefile templates that were
expanded into normal makefiles by a hand-rolled tool call genmakefile (similar in
spirit to imake). The tool performed simple file inclusion, conditional compilation,
and some custom logic to manage source and binary trees. It was a common belief in
those days that make required such a wrapper to be a complete build tool. Several
years earlier, I had discovered the GNU project and GNU make and realized that the
wrapper program was probably unnecessary. I rebuilt the build system without the
templates or a generator. To my chagrin, I wound up maintaining the build system
for the next four years (a pattern I foolishly repeat to this day). The build system was
portable to five flavors of Unix and included separate source and binary trees, auto-
mated nightly builds, and support for partial checkouts by developers with the build
system filling in the missing objects.
My next interesting encounter with make came in 1996, working on a commercial
CAD system. It was my job to port 2 million lines of C++ (and 400,000 lines of Lisp)

                                                                                     xiii

from Unix to Windows NT, using the Microsoft C++ compiler. That’s when I dis-
covered the Cygwin project. As an important byproduct of the port, I reworked the
build system to support NT. This build system also supported separate source and
binary trees, many flavors of Unix, several varieties of graphics support, automated
nightly builds and tests, and partial developer checkouts with reference builds.
In 2000, I began working in Java writing laboratory information management sys-
tems. This was one of the first really different development environments I’d worked
in for many years. Most of the programmers came from a Windows background and
many seemed to know Java as their first programming language. The build environ-
ment consisted almost entirely of the project file generated by a commercial Java
Integrated Development Environment (IDE). Although the project file was checked
in, it rarely worked “out of the box” and programmers often sat in each other’s cubes
working through build problems.
Of course, I began to write a build system using make, but an odd thing happened.
Many of the developers were reluctant to use any command-line tool. Further, many
did not have a firm grasp of such concepts as environment variables, command-line
options, or an understanding of the tools used to build programs. The IDE hid all of
these issues. To address these issues, the build system I was writing became more
complex. I began to add better error messages, precondition checking, management
of the developer’s machine configuration, and support for IDEs.
Along the way, I’d read the GNU make manual several dozen times. As I looked for
more material, I found the second edition of this book. It was filled with valuable
material, but was sadly lacking in details of GNU make. That wasn’t surprising, con-
sidering its age. The volume had stood the test of time, but by 2003 needed updat-
ing. The third edition focuses primarily on GNU make. As Paul Smith (the GNU make
maintainer) writes: “Don’t hassle with writing portable ‘makefiles’, use a portable
make instead!”

What’s New in This Edition
Almost all the material in this book is new. I’ve divided the material into three parts.
Part I, Basic Concepts, provides a moderately detailed examination of the GNU make
features and how to use them.
Chapter 1, How to Write a Simple Makefile, is a brief introduction to make with a sim-
ple, but complete example. It explains the basic concepts of make such as targets and
prerequisites, and covers the syntax of makefiles. This should be sufficient to get you
going with your first makefiles.
Chapter 2, Rules, discusses the structure and syntax of rules. Explicit rules and pat-
tern rules are covered in great detail along with old-fashioned suffix rules. Special tar-
gets and simple dependency generation are also discussed here.

xiv |   Preface

Chapter 3, Variables and Macros, covers simple and recursive variables. This chapter
also discusses how makefiles are parsed, when variables are expanded, and the direc-
tives for conditional makefile processing.
Chapter 4, Functions, examines the wide variety of built-in functions supported by
GNU make. User-defined functions are introduced here, with numerous examples
ranging from the trivial to illustrations of advanced concepts.
Chapter 5, Commands, explains the details of command scripts, covering how they
are parsed and evaluated. Here we also discuss command modifiers, checking com-
mand exit status, and the command environment. We explore the problems of com-
mand-line limits and some ways to work around these problems. At this point, you
will know all the GNU make features discussed in this book.
Part II, Advanced and Specialized Topics, covers larger topics, such as using make on
large projects, portability, and debugging.
Chapter 6, Managing Large Projects, discusses many issues encountered when build-
ing large projects in make. The first topic is the use of recursive invocations of make, as
well as how to implement these makefiles with a single, nonrecursive makefile. In
addition, other issues of large systems are discussed, such as filesystem layout, com-
ponent management, and automated building and testing.
Chapter 7, Portable Makefiles, discusses issues with portability of makefiles, prima-
rily between various flavors of Unix and Windows. The Cygwin Unix emulation
environment is discussed in some detail, along with issues arising from nonportable
filesystem features and tools.
Chapter 8, C and C++, provides specific examples of how to separate source and
binary trees and how to create read-only source trees. Dependency analysis is revis-
ited, with an emphasis on language-specific solutions. This chapter and the next tie
in closely with many issues raised in Chapter 1.
Chapter 9, Java, explains how to apply make to Java-based development environ-
ments. Techniques for managing the CLASSPATH variable, compiling large numbers of
files, creating jars, and constructing Enterprise JavaBeans (EJBs) are introduced.
Chapter 10, Improving the Performance of make, begins by reviewing the perfor-
mance characteristics of several make operations to provide context for how to write
efficient makefiles. Techniques for identifying and reducing bottlenecks are dis-
cussed. The GNU make parallel jobs feature is described in some detail.
Chapter 11, Example Makefiles, provides two complex examples of real makefiles.
The first is the makefile used to create this book. It is interesting, partly due to a fairly
extreme degree of automation and partly because it applies make to a nontraditional
domain. The other example consists of excerpts from the Linux 2.6 kbuild system.

                                                                                   Preface |   xv

Chapter 12, Debugging Makefiles, delves into the black art of fixing broken makefiles.
We introduce techniques for discovering what make is doing under the covers and
how to ease development pains.
Part III, Appendixes, includes supplemental material.
Appendix A, Running make, provides a reference guide to GNU make’s command-line
options.
Appendix B, The Outer Limits, explores the limits of GNU make with two unlikely
capabilities: managing data structures and performing arithmetic.
Appendix C, GNU Free Documentation License—GNU Project—Free Software Foun-
dation (FSF), contains the GNU Free Documentation License, under which the text
of the book is distributed.

Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
     Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, file extensions, path-
     names, and directories
Constant width
    Indicates source code commands, command-line options, the contents of files,
    or the output from commands
Constant width bold
    Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user
Constant width italic
    Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values

Using Code Examples
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, you may use the code in
this book in your programs and documentation. You do not need to contact O’Reilly
for permission unless you’re reproducing a significant portion of the code. For exam-
ple, writing a program that uses several chunks of code from this book does not require
permission. Selling or distributing a CD-ROM of examples from O’Reilly books does
require permission. Answering a question by citing this book and quoting example
code does not require permission. Incorporating a significant amount of example code
from this book into your product’s documentation does require permission.
O’Reilly appreciates, but does not require, attribution. An attribution usually
includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “Managing Projects

xvi |   Preface

with GNU Make, Third Edition, by Robert Mecklenburg. Copyright 2005 O’Reilly
Media, Inc., 0-596-00610-1.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given
above, feel free to contact O’Reilly at permissions@oreilly.com.

Comments and Questions
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
    O’Reilly Media, Inc.
    1005 Gravenstein Highway North
    Sebastopol, CA 95472
    (800) 998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
    (707) 829-0515 (international or local)
    (707) 829-0104 (fax)
O’Reilly maintains a web page for this book, which lists errata, examples, and any
additional information. You can access this page at:
    http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/make3
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to:
    bookquestions@oreilly.com
For more information about O’Reilly books, conferences, Resource Centers, and the
O’Reilly Network, see O’Reilly’s web site at:
    http://www.oreilly.com

Acknowledgments
I’d like to thank Richard Stallman for providing a vision and the belief that it can
come true. Of course, without Paul Smith, GNU make would not exist in its current
form today. Thank you.
I’d like to thank my editor, Andy Oram, for his unflagging support and enthusiasm.
Cimarron Software deserves my thanks for providing an environment that encour-
aged me to begin this project. Realm Systems also deserves thanks for providing an
environment that encouraged me to finish the project. In particular, I’d like to thank
Doug Adamson, Cathy Anderson, and Peter Bookman.
Thanks to my reviewers, Simon Gerraty, John Macdonald, and Paul Smith, who pro-
vided many insightful comments and corrected many embarrassing errors.
The following people deserve thanks for valuable contributions to this work: Steve
Bayer, Richard Bogart, Beth Cobb, Julie Daily, David Johnson, Andrew Morton,
Richard Pimentel, Brian Stevens, and Linus Torvalds. Many thanks to the cabal that

                                                                                  Preface |   xvii

provided a safe haven in stormy seas: Christine Delaney, Tony Di Sera, John Major,
and Daniel Reading.
Finally, my profound gratitude and love goes to my wife, Maggie Kasten, and our
children, William and James, for their support, encouragement, and love during the
last sixteen months. Thank you for sharing this with me.

xviii |   Preface

