and JPG. Opaque formats include proprietary formats that can be read and edited
only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/or pro-
cessing tools are not generally available, and the machine-generated HTML, Post-
Script or PDF produced by some word processors for output purposes only.
The “Title Page” means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus such following
pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this License requires to appear in
the title page. For works in formats which do not have any title page as such, “Title
Page” means the text near the most prominent appearance of the work’s title, pre-
ceding the beginning of the body of the text.
A section “Entitled XYZ” means a named subunit of the Document whose title either
is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following text that translates XYZ in
another language. (Here XYZ stands for a specific section name mentioned below,
such as “Acknowledgements”, “Dedications”, “Endorsements”, or “History”.) To
“Preserve the Title” of such a section when you modify the Document means that it
remains a section “Entitled XYZ” according to this definition.
The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which states
that this License applies to the Document. These Warranty Disclaimers are consid-
ered to be included by reference in this License, but only as regards disclaiming war-
ranties: any other implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and
has no effect on the meaning of this License.

2. VERBATIM COPYING
You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially or
noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices, and the license
notice saying this License applies to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and
that you add no other conditions whatsoever to those of this License. You may not
use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying of the
copies you make or distribute. However, you may accept compensation in exchange
for copies. If you distribute a large enough number of copies you must also follow
the conditions in section 3.
You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may
publicly display copies.

3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have printed cov-
ers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the Document’s license notice
requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly and
legibly, all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover
Texts on the back cover. Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify you as the

                                                                   3. COPYING IN QUANTITY |   265

