publisher of these copies. The front cover must present the full title with all words of
the title equally prominent and visible. You may add other material on the covers in
addition. Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the
title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim copy-
ing in other respects.
If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you should put
the first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the
rest onto adjacent pages.
If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more than
100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along with each
Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a computer-network location
from which the general network-using public has access to download using public-
standard network protocols a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of
added material. If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps,
when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this Trans-
parent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location until at least one year
after the last time you distribute an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or
retailers) of that edition to the public.
It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document well
before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them a chance to provide
you with an updated version of the Document.

4. MODIFICATIONS
You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the condi-
tions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified Version
under precisely this License, with the Modified Version filling the role of the Docu-
ment, thus licensing distribution and modification of the Modified Version to who-
ever possesses a copy of it. In addition, you must do these things in the Modified
Version:
 1. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from that of the
    Document, and from those of previous versions (which should, if there were
    any, be listed in the History section of the Document). You may use the same
    title as a previous version if the original publisher of that version gives permis-
    sion.
 2. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities responsible for
    authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version, together with at least
    five of the principal authors of the Document (all of its principal authors, if it has
    fewer than five), unless they release you from this requirement.
 3. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified Version, as the
    publisher.

 4. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
 5. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to the other
    copyright notices.
 6. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving the pub-
    lic permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this License, in the
    form shown in the Addendum below.
 7. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and required
    Cover Texts given in the Document’s license notice.
 8. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
 9. Preserve the section Entitled “History”, Preserve its Title, and add to it an item
    stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the Modified Ver-
    sion as given on the Title Page. If there is no section Entitled “History” in the
    Document, create one stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Docu-
    ment as given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified Ver-
    sion as stated in the previous sentence.
10. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public access to
    a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network locations given
    in the Document for previous versions it was based on. These may be placed in
    the “History” section. You may omit a network location for a work that was
    published at least four years before the Document itself, or if the original pub-
    lisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
11. For any section Entitled “Acknowledgements” or “Dedications”, Preserve the
    Title of the section, and preserve in the section all the substance and tone of each
    of the contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.
12. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their text and
    in their titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered part of the
    section titles.
13. Delete any section Entitled “Endorsements”. Such a section may not be included
    in the Modified Version.
14. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled “Endorsements” or to conflict
    in title with any Invariant Section.
15. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.
If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices that qual-
ify as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from the Document, you
may at your option designate some or all of these sections as invariant. To do this,
add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version’s license
notice. These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.
You may add a section Entitled “Endorsements”, provided it contains nothing but
endorsements of your Modified Version by various parties—for example, statements

                                                                        4. MODIFICATIONS |   267

