of peer review or that the text has been approved by an organization as the authorita-
tive definition of a standard.
You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a passage of
up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover Texts in the
Modified Version. Only one passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover
Text may be added by (or through arrangements made by) any one entity. If the Doc-
ument already includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of, you may not
add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit permission from the previ-
ous publisher that added the old one.
The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give permis-
sion to use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorsement of any
Modified Version.

5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License,
under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions, provided that you
include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of all of the original docu-
ments, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in
its license notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.
The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple identi-
cal Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there are multiple Invari-
ant Sections with the same name but different contents, make the title of each such
section unique by adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number. Make the
same adjustment to the section titles in the list of Invariant Sections in the license
notice of the combined work.
In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled “History” in the vari-
ous original documents, forming one section Entitled “History”; likewise combine
any sections Entitled “Acknowledgements”, and any sections Entitled “Dedica-
tions”. You must delete all sections Entitled “Endorsements.”

6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this License in the
various documents with a single copy that is included in the collection, provided that
you follow the rules of this License for verbatim copying of each of the documents in
all other respects.

