You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it individu-
ally under this License, provided you insert a copy of this License into the extracted
document, and follow this License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of
that document.

7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT
WORKS
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and indepen-
dent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is
called an “aggregate” if the copyright resulting from the compilation is not used to
limit the legal rights of the compilation’s users beyond what the individual works
permit. When the Document is included in an aggregate, this License does not apply
to the other works in the aggregate which are not themselves derivative works of the
Document.
If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of the Docu-
ment, then if the Document is less than one half of the entire aggregate, the Docu-
ment’s Cover Texts may be placed on covers that bracket the Document within the
aggregate, or the electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic
form. Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that bracket the whole aggre-
gate.

8. TRANSLATION
Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute translations
of the Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing Invariant Sections with
translations requires special permission from their copyright holders, but you may
include translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the original ver-
sions of these Invariant Sections. You may include a translation of this License, and
all the license notices in the Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that
you also include the original English version of this License and the original versions
of those notices and disclaimers. In case of a disagreement between the translation
and the original version of this License or a notice or disclaimer, the original version
will prevail.
If a section in the Document is Entitled “Acknowledgements”, “Dedications”, or
“History”, the requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title (section 1) will typically
require changing the actual title.

                                                                           8. TRANSLATION |   269

