                                Preface
“If popular culture has taught us anything, it is that someday mankind must face and
destroy the growing robot menace.”
     Daniel H. Wilson, How to Survive a Robot Uprising
The past several years have seen huge strides in computer security, particularly in
the field of software vulnerabilities. It seems as though every stop at the bookstore
introduces a new title on topics such as secure development or exploiting software.
     Books that cover application security tend to do so from the perspective of
software designers and developers and focus on techniques to prevent software
vulnerabilities from occurring in applications. These techniques start with solid
security design principles and threat modeling and carry all the way through to
implementation best practices and defensive programming strategies. Although
they serve as strong defensive foundations for application development, these
resources tend to give little treatment to the nature of vulnerabilities; instead, they
focus on how to avoid them. What’s more, every development team can’t start
rebuilding a secure application from the ground up. Real people have to deal with
huge existing codebases, in-place applications, and limited time and budget.
Meanwhile, the secure coding mantra seems to be “If it smells bad, throw it out.”
That’s certainly necessary in some cases, but often it’s too expensive and time
consuming to be reasonable. So you might turn your attention to penetration testing
and ethical hacking instead. A wide range of information on this topic is available,
and it’s certainly useful for the acid test of a software system. However, even the
most technically detailed resources have a strong focus on exploit development and
little to no treatment on how to find vulnerabilities in the first place. This still leaves
the hanging question of how to find issues in an existing application and how to get
a reasonable degree of assurance that a piece of software is safe.

                                       Preface

    This problem is exactly the one faced by those in the field of professional
software security assessment. People are growing more concerned with building
and testing secure systems, but very few resources address the practice of finding
vulnerabilities. After all, this process requires a deep technical understanding of
some very complex issues and must include a systematic approach to analyzing an
application. Without formally addressing how to find vulnerabilities, the software
security industry has no way of establishing the quality of a software security
assessment or training the next generation in the craft. We have written this book in
the hope of answering these questions and to help bridge the gap between secure
software development and practical post-implementation reviews. Although this
book is aimed primarily at consultants and other security professionals, much of
the material will have value to the rest of the IT community as well. Developers can
gain insight into the subtleties and nuances of how languages and operating
systems work and how those features can introduce vulnerabilities into an application
that otherwise appears secure. Quality assurance (QA) personnel can use some of
the guidelines in this book to ensure the integrity of in-house software and cut
down on the likelihood of their applications being stung by a major vulnerability.
Administrators can find helpful guidelines for evaluating the security impact of
applications on their networks and use this knowledge to make better decisions
about future deployments. Finally, hobbyists who are simply interested in learning
more about how to assess applications will find this book an invaluable resource
(we hope!) for getting started in application security review or advancing their cur-
rent skill sets.

Prerequisites
The majority of this book has been targeted at a level that any moderately experienced
developer should find approachable. This means you need to be fairly comfortable
with at least one programming language, and ideally, you should be familiar with
basic C/C++ programming. At several stages throughout the book, we use Intel
assembly examples, but we have attempted to keep them to a minimum and translate
them into approximate C code when possible. We have also put a lot of effort into
making the material as platform neutral as possible, although we do cover platform
specifics for the most common operating systems. When necessary, we have tried to
include references to additional resources that provide background for material that
can’t be covered adequately in this book.

How to Use This Book
Before we discuss the use of this book, we need to introduce its basic structure. The
book is divided into three different parts:

                                         Preface

    • Part I: Introduction to Software Security Assessment (Chapters 1–4)—These
      chapters introduce the practice of code auditing and explain how it fits into
      the software development process. You learn about the function of design
      review, threat modeling, and operational review—tools that are useful for
      evaluating an application as a whole, and not just the code. Finally, you learn
      some generic high-level methods for performing a code review on any
      application, regardless of its function or size.
    • Part II: Software Vulnerabilities (Chapters 5–13)—These chapters shift the focus of
      the book toward practical implementation review and address how to find
      specific vulnerabilities in an application’s codebase. Major software
      vulnerability classes are described, and you learn how to discover high-risk
      security flaws in an application. Numerous real-world examples of security
      vulnerabilities are given to help you get a feel for what software bugs look like
      in real code.
    • Part III: Software Vulnerabilities in Practice (Chapters 14–18)—The final portion of
      the book turns your attention toward practical uses of lessons learned from
      the earlier chapters. These chapters describe a number of common application
      classes and the types of bugs they tend to be vulnerable to. They also show
      you how to apply the technical knowledge gained from Part II to real-world
      applications. Specifically, you look at networking, firewalling technologies,
      and Web technologies. Each chapter in this section introduces the common
      frameworks and designs of each application class and identifies where flaws
      typically occur.
You’ll get the most value if you read this book straight through at least once so that
you can get a feel for the material. This approach is best because we have tried to
use each section as an opportunity to highlight techniques and tools that help you
in performing application assessments. In particular, you should pay attention to
the sidebars and notes we use to sum up the more important concepts in a section.
    Of course, busy schedules and impending deadlines can have a serious impact
on your time. To that end, we want to lay out a few tracks of focus for different types
of reviews. However, you should start with Part 1 (Chapters 1–4) because it estab-
lishes a foundation for the rest of the book. After that, you can branch out to the fol-
lowing chapters:
    • UNIX track (Chapters 5–10, 13)—This chapter track starts off by covering common
      software vulnerability classes, such as memory corruption, program control
      flow, and specially formatted data. Then UNIX-centered security problems that
      arise because of quirks in the various UNIX operating systems are addressed.
      Finally, this track ends with coverage of synchronization vulnerabilities
      common to most platforms.

                                          Preface

     • Windows track (Chapters 5–8, 11–13)—This track starts off similarly to the UNIX
       track, by covering platform-neutral security problems. Then two chapters specif-
       ically address Windows APIs and their related vulnerabilities. Finally, this track
       finishes with coverage of common synchronization vulnerabilities.
     • Web track (Chapters 8, 13, 17, 18)—Web auditing requires understanding
       common security vulnerabilities as well as Web-based frameworks and
       languages. This track discusses the common vulnerability classes that pertain
       to Web-based languages, and then finishes off with the Web-specific chapters.
       Although the UNIX and Windows chapters aren’t listed here, reading them
       might be necessary depending on the Web application’s deployment
       environment.
     • Network application track (Chapters 5–8, 13, 16)—This sequence of chapters best
       addresses the types of vulnerabilities you’re likely to encounter with network
       client/server applications. Notice that even though Chapter 16 is targeted at
       selected application protocols, it has a section for generic application protocol
       auditing methods. Like the previous track, UNIX or Windows chapters might
       also be relevant, depending on the deployment environment.
     • Network analysis track (Chapters 5–8, 13–16)—This track is aimed at analyzing
       network analysis applications, such as firewalls, IPSs, sniffers, routing software,
       and so on. Coverage includes standard vulnerability classes along with popular
       network-based technologies and the common vulnerabilities in these products.
       Again, the UNIX and Windows chapters would be a good addition to this track,
       if applicable.

            Acknowledgments
Mark: To my family, friends, and colleagues, for supporting me and providing
encouragement throughout this endeavor.

John: To my girlfriend Jess, my family and friends, Neohapsis, Vincent Howard,
Dave Aitel, David Leblanc, Thomas Lopatic, and Howard Kirk.

Justin: To my wife Cat, my coworkers at Neohapsis, my family and friends, and
everyone at a three-letter agency who kept me out of trouble.

We would collectively like to thank reviewers, friends, and colleagues who have
given invaluable feedback, suggestions, and comments that helped shape this book
into the finished product you see today. In particular, we would like to acknowledge
Neel Mehta, Halvar Flake, John Viega, and Nishad Herath for their tireless efforts in
reviewing and helping to give us technical and organizational direction. We’d also
like to thank the entire publishing team at Addison-Wesley for working with us to
ensure the highest-quality finished product possible.

This page intentionally left blank
      PART I
INTRODUCTION TO SOFTWARE
   SECURITY ASSESSMENT
This page intentionally left blank
