                      Chapter 2
                        Design Review

“Sure. Each one of us is wearing an unlicensed nuclear accelerator on our back. No problem.”
    Bill Murray as Dr. Peter Venkman, Ghostbusters (1984)

Introduction
Computer security people tend to fall into one of two camps on design review. People from
a formal development background are usually receptive to the design review process. This
is only natural, as it maps closely to most formal software development methodologies.
The design review process can also seem to be less trouble than reviewing a large applica-
tion code base manually.
    In the other camp are code auditors who delight in finding the most obscure and com-
plex vulnerabilities. This crowd tends to look at design review as an ivory-tower construct
that just gets in the way of the real work. Design review’s formalized process and focus on
documentation come across as a barrier to digging into the code.
    The truth is that design review falls somewhere between the views of these two camps,
and it has value for both. Design review is a useful tool for identifying vulnerabilities in
application architecture and prioritizing components for implementation review. It doesn’t

replace implementation review, however; it’s just a component of the complete review
process. It makes identifying design flaws a lot easier and provides a more thorough
analysis of the security of a software design. In this capacity, it can make the entire
review process more effective and ensure the best return for the time you invest.
    This chapter gives you some background on the elements of software design
and design vulnerabilities, and introduces a review process to help you identify
security concerns in a software design.

Software Design Fundamentals
Before you tackle the subject of design review, you need to review some fundamentals
of software design. Many of these concepts tie in closely with the security considera-
tions addressed later in the chapter, particularly in the discussion of threat modeling.
The following sections introduce several concepts that help establish an application’s
functional boundaries with respect to security.

Algorithms
Software engineering can be summed up as the process of developing and
implementing algorithms. From a design perspective, this process focuses on
developing key program algorithms and data structures as well as specifying
problem domain logic. To understand the security requirements and vulnerabil-
ity potential of a system design, you must first understand the core algorithms
that comprise a system.

Problem Domain Logic
Problem domain logic (or business logic) provides rules that a program follows as it
processes data. A design for a software system must include rules and processes for
the main tasks the software carries out. One major component of software design is
the security expectations associated with the system’s users and resources. For
example, consider banking software with the following rules:
     ■ A person can transfer money from his or her main account to any valid
       account.
     ■ A person can transfer money from his or her money market account to any
       valid account.
     ■ A person can transfer money from his or her money market account only once
       a month.
     ■ If a person goes below a zero balance in his or her main account, money is
       automatically transferred from his or her money market account to cover the
       balance, if that money is available.

    This example is simple, but you can see that bank customers might be able to
get around the once-a-month transfer restriction on money market accounts. They
could intentionally drain their main account below zero to “free” money from their
monkey market accounts. Therefore, the design for this system has an oversight
that bank customers could potentially exploit.

Key Algorithms
Often programs have performance requirements that dictate the choice of algorithms
and data structures used to manage key pieces of data. Sometimes it’s possible to
evaluate these algorithm choices from a design perspective and predict security
vulnerabilities that might affect the system.
    For example, you know that a program stores an incoming series of records in a
sorted linked list that supports a basic sequential search. Based on this knowledge,
you can foresee that a specially crafted huge list of records could cause the program
to spend considerable time searching through the linked list. Repeated focused
attacks on a key algorithm such as this one could easily lead to temporary or even
permanent disruption of a server’s functioning.

Abstraction and Decomposition
Every text on software design inevitably covers two essential concepts: abstraction
and decomposition. You are probably familiar with these concepts already, but if
not, the following paragraphs give you a brief overview.
    Abstraction is a method for reducing the complexity of a system to make it
more manageable. To do this, you isolate only the most important elements and
remove unnecessary details. Abstractions are an essential part of how people
perceive the world around them. They explain why you can see a symbol such as
☺ and associate it with a smiling face. Abstractions allow you to generalize a
concept, such as a face, and group-related concepts, such as smiling faces and
frowning faces.
    In software design, abstractions are how you model the processes an application
will perform. They enable you to establish hierarchies of related systems, concepts,
and processes—isolating the problem domain logic and key algorithms. In effect,
the design process is just a method of building a set of abstractions that you can
develop into an implementation. This process becomes particularly important when
a piece of software must address the concerns of a range of users, or its implemen-
tation must be distributed across a team of developers.
    Decomposition (or factoring) is the process of defining the generalizations and
classifications that compose an abstraction. Decomposition can run in two different
directions. Top-down decomposition, known as specialization, is the process of break-
ing a larger system into smaller, more manageable parts. Bottom-up decomposition,

called generalization, involves identifying the similarities in a number of components
and developing a higher-level abstraction that applies to all of them.
     The basic elements of structural software decomposition can vary from language
to language. The standard top-down progression is application, module, class, and
function (or method). Some languages might not support every distinction in this list
(for example, C doesn’t have language support for classes); other languages add more
distinctions or use slightly different terminology. The differences aren’t that impor-
tant for your purposes, but to keep things simple, this discussion generally sticks to
modules and functions.

Trust Relationships
In Chapter 1, “Software Vulnerability Fundamentals,” the concept of trust and how it
affects system security was introduced. This chapter expands on that concept to
state that every communication between multiple parties must have some degree of
trust associated with it. This is referred to as a trust relationship. For simple commu-
nications, both parties can assume complete trust—that is, each communicating
party allows other parties participating in the communication complete access to its
exposed functionality. For security purposes, however, you’re more concerned with
situations in which communicating parties should restrict their trust of one another.
This means parties can access only a limited subset of each other’s functionality. The
limitations imposed on each party in a communication define a trust boundary
between them. A trust boundary distinguishes between regions of shared trust,
known as trust domains. (Don’t worry if you’re a bit confused by these concepts;
some examples are provided in the next section.)
    A software design needs to account for a system’s trust domains, boundaries,
and relationships; the trust model is the abstraction that represents these concepts
and is a component of the application’s security policy. The impact of this model is
apparent in how the system is decomposed, as trust boundaries tend to be module
boundaries, too. The model often requires that trust not be absolute; instead, it
supports varying degrees of trust referred to as privileges. A classic example is the
standard UNIX file permissions, whereby a user can provide a limited amount of
access to a file for other users on the system. Specifically, users can dictate whether
other users are allowed to read, write, or execute (or any combination of these per-
missions) the file in question, thus extending a limited amount of trust to other
users of the system.

Simple Trust Boundaries
As an example of a trust relationship, consider a basic single-user OS, such as
Windows 98. To keep the example simple, assume that there’s no network involved.
Windows 98 has basic memory protection and some notion of users but offers no

measure of access control or enforcement. In other words, if users can log in to a
Windows 98 system, they are free to modify any files or system settings they
please. Therefore, you have no expectation of security from any user who can log
on interactively.
    You can determine that there are no trust boundaries between interactive users
of the same Windows 98 system. You do, however, make an implicit assumption
about who has physical access to the system. So you can say that the trust bound-
ary in this situation defines which users have physical access to the system and
which do not. That leaves you with a single domain of trusted users and an implicit
domain that represents all untrusted users.
    To complicate this example a bit, say you’ve upgraded to a multiuser OS,
such as Windows XP Professional. This upgrade brings with it a new range of
considerations. You expect that two normally privileged users shouldn’t be able
to manipulate each other’s data or processes. Of course, this expectation
assumes you aren’t running as an administrative user. So now you have an expec-
tation of confidentiality and integrity between two users of the system, which
establishes their trust relationship and another trust boundary. You also have to
make allowances for the administrative user, which adds another boundary:
Nonadministrative users can’t affect the integrity or configuration of the system.
This expectation is a natural progression that’s necessary to enforce the bound-
ary between users. After all, if any user could affect the state of the system, you
would be right back to a single-user OS. Figure 2-1 is a graphical representation
of this multiuser OS trust relationship.

                                                         Administrative User
                              Physical Access Boundary

                                                               Administrative Privilege Boundary

      The Rest of the World

                                                           Normal User 1

                                                                                     Implicit Boundaries
                                                                                       Between Users

                                                           Normal User 2

Figure 2-1    Simple trust boundaries

    Now take a step back and consider something about the nature of trust. That is,
every system must eventually have some absolutely trusted authority. There’s no way

around this because someone must be responsible for the state of the system. That’s
why UNIX has a root account, and Windows has an administrator account. You can, of
course, apply a range of controls to this level of authority. For instance, both UNIX and
Windows have methods of granting degrees of administrative privilege to different
users and for specific purposes. The simple fact remains, however, that in every trust
boundary, you have at least one absolute authority that can assume responsibility.

Complex Trust Relationships
So far, you’ve looked at fairly simple trust relationships to get a sense of the problem
areas you need to address later. However, some of the finer details have been glossed
over. To make the discussion a bit more realistic, consider the same system con-
nected to a network.
    After you hook a system up to a network, you have to start adding a range of dis-
tinctions. You might need to consider separate domains for local users and remote
users of the system, and you’ll probably need a domain for people who have net-
work access to the system but aren’t “regular” users. Firewalls and gateways further
complicate these distinctions and allow more separations.
    It should be apparent that defining and applying a trust model can have a huge
impact on any software design. The real work begins before the design process is
even started. The feasibility study and requirements-gathering phases must ade-
quately identify and define users’ security expectations and the associated factors of
the target environment. The resulting model must be robust enough to meet these
needs, but not so complex that it’s too difficult to implement and apply. In this way,
security has to carefully balance the concerns of clarity with the need for accuracy.
When you examine threat modeling later in this chapter, you take trust models into
account by evaluating the boundaries between different system components and the
rights of different entities on a system.

Chain of Trust
Chapter 1 also introduced the concept of transitive trust. Essentially, it means that if
component A trusts component B, component A must implicitly trust all components
trusted by component B. This concept can also be called a chain of trust relationship.
     A chain of trust is a completely viable security construct and the core of many
systems. Consider the way certificates are distributed and validated in a typical
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) connection to a Web server. You have a local database of
signatures that identifies providers you trust. These providers can then issue a cer-
tificate to a certificate authority (CA), which might then be extended to other
authorities. Finally, the hosting site has its certificate signed by one of these authori-
ties. You must follow this chain of trust from CA to CA when you establish an SSL
connection. The traversal is successful only when you reach an authority that’s in
your trusted database.

    Now say you want to impersonate a Web site for some nefarious means. For
the moment, leave Domain Name System (DNS) out of the picture because it’s
often an easy target. Instead, all you want to do is find a way to manipulate the
certificate database anywhere in the chain of trust. This includes manipulating
the client certificate database of visitors, compromising the target site directly, or
manipulating any CA database in the chain, including a root CA.
    It helps to repeat that last part, just to make sure the emphasis is clear. The
transitive nature of the trust shared by every CA means that a compromise of any
CA allows an attacker to impersonate any site successfully. It doesn’t matter if the
CA that issued the real certificate is compromised because any certificate issued
by a valid CA will suffice. This means the integrity of any SSL transaction is only
as strong as the weakest CA. Unfortunately, this method is the best that’s available
for establishing a host’s identity.
    Some systems can be implemented only by using a transitive chain of trust. As
an auditor, however, you want to look closely at the impact of choosing this trust
model and determine whether a chain of trust is appropriate. You also need to
follow trusts across all the included components and determine the real exposure
of any component. You’ll often find that the results of using a chain of trust are
complex and subtle trust relationships that attackers could exploit.

Defense in Depth
Defense in depth is the concept of layering protections so that the compromise of one
aspect of a system is mitigated by other controls. Simple examples of defense in depth
include using low privileged accounts to run services and daemons, and isolating dif-
ferent functions to different pieces of hardware. More complex examples include net-
work demilitarized zones (DMZs), chroot jails, and stack and heap guards.
     Layered defenses should be taken into consideration when you’re prioritizing
components for review. You would probably assign a lower priority to an
intranet-facing component running on a low privileged account, inside a chroot
jail, and compiled with buffer protection. In contrast, you would most likely
assign a higher priority to an Internet-facing component that must run as root.
This is not to say that the first component is safe and the second isn’t. You just
need to look at the evidence and prioritize your efforts so that they have the most
impact. Prioritizing threats is discussed in more detail in “Threat Modeling” later
on in this chapter.

Principles of Software Design
The number of software development methodologies seems to grow directly in pro-
portion to the number of software developers. Different methodologies suit differ-
ent needs, and the choice for a project varies based on a range of factors.

Fortunately, every methodology shares certain commonly accepted principles. The
four core principles of accuracy, clarity, loose coupling, and strong cohesion (dis-
cussed in the following sections) apply to every software design and are a good
starting point for any discussion of how design can affect security.

Accuracy
Accuracy refers to how effectively design abstractions meet the associated require-
ments. (Remember the discussion on requirements in Chapter 1.) Accuracy includes
both how correctly abstractions model the requirements and how reasonably they can
be translated into an implementation. The goal is, of course, to provide the most accu-
rate model with the most direct implementation possible.
    In practice, a software design might not result in an accurate translation into an
implementation. Oversights in the requirements-gathering phase could result in a
design that misses important capabilities or emphasizes the wrong concerns. Fail-
ures in the design process might result in an implementation that must diverge
drastically from the design to meet real-world requirements. Even without failures
in the process, expectations and requirements often change during the implementa-
tion phase. All these problems tend to result in an implementation that can diverge
from the intended (and documented) design.
    Discrepancies between a software design and its implementation result in
weaknesses in the design abstraction. These weaknesses are fertile ground for a
range of bugs to creep in, including security vulnerabilities. They force developers
to make assumptions outside the intended design, and a failure to communicate
these assumptions often creates vulnerability-prone situations. Watch for areas
where the design isn’t adequately defined or places unreasonable expectations on
programmers.

Clarity
Software designs can model extremely complex and often confusing processes. To
achieve the goal of clarity, a good design should decompose the problem in a reason-
able manner and provide clean, self-evident abstractions. Documentation of the
structure should also be readily available and well understood by all developers
involved in the implementation process.
     An unnecessarily complex or poorly documented design can result in vulnera-
bilities similar to those of an inaccurate design. In this case, weaknesses in the
abstraction occur because the design is simply too poorly understood for an
accurate implementation. Your review should identify design components that are
inadequately documented or exceptionally complex. You see examples of this prob-
lem throughout the book, especially when variable relationships are tackled in
Chapter 7, “Program Building Blocks.”

Loose Coupling
Coupling refers to the level of communication between modules and the degree to
which they expose their internal interfaces to each other. Loosely coupled modules
exchange data through well-defined public interfaces, which generally leads to
more adaptable and maintainable designs. In contrast, strongly coupled modules
have complex interdependencies and expose important elements of their internal
interfaces.
    Strongly coupled modules generally place a high degree of trust in each other
and rarely perform data validation for their communication. The absence of well-
defined interfaces in these communications also makes data validation difficult and
error prone. This tends to lead to security flaws when one of the components is mal-
leable to an attacker’s control. From a security perspective, you want to look out for
any strong intermodule coupling across trust boundaries.

Strong Cohesion
Cohesion refers to a module’s internal consistency. This consistency is primarily
the degree to which a module’s interfaces handle a related set of activities. Strong
cohesion encourages the module to handle only closely related activities. A side
effect of maintaining strong cohesion is that it tends to encourage strong
intramodule coupling (the degree of coupling between different components of a
single module).
     Cohesion-related security vulnerabilities can occur when a design fails to
decompose modules along trust boundaries. The resulting vulnerabilities are simi-
lar to strong coupling issues, except that they occur within the same module. This is
often a result of systems that fail to incorporate security in the early stages of their
design. Pay special attention to designs that address multiple trust domains within
a single module.

Fundamental Design Flaws
Now that you have a foundational understanding, you can consider a few examples
of how fundamental design concepts affect security. In particular, you need to see
how misapplying these concepts can create security vulnerabilities. When reading
the following examples, you’ll notice quickly that they tend to result from a combina-
tion of issues. Often, an error is open to interpretation and might depend heavily on
the reviewer’s perspective. Unfortunately, this is part of the nature of design flaws.
They usually affect the system at a conceptual level and can be difficult to categorize.
Instead, you need to concentrate on the issue’s security impact, not get caught up in
the categorization.

Exploiting Strong Coupling
This section explores a fundamental design flaw resulting from a failure to
decompose an application properly along trust boundaries. The general issue is
known as the Shatter class of vulnerabilities, originally reported as part of independ-
ent research conducted by Chris Paget. The specific avenue of attack takes advantage
of certain properties of the Windows GUI application programming interface (API).
The following discussion avoids many details in order to highlight the design specific
nature of Shatter vulnerabilities. Chapter 12, “Windows II: Interprocess Communica-
tion,” provides a much more thorough discussion of the technical details associated
with this class of vulnerabilities.
    Windows programs use a messaging system to handle all GUI-related events;
each desktop has a single message queue for all applications associated with it.
So any two processes running on the same desktop can send messages to each
other, regardless of the user context of the processes. This can cause an issue
when a higher privileged process, such as a service, is running on a normal
user’s desktop.
    The Windows API provides the SetTimer() function to schedule sending a
WM_TIMER message. This message can include a function pointer that is invoked
when the default message handler receives the WM_TIMER message. This creates a sit-
uation in which a process can control a function call in any other process that
shares its desktop. An attacker’s only remaining concern is how to supply code for
execution in the target process.
    The Windows API includes a number of messages for manipulating the content
of window elements. Normally, they are used for setting the content of text boxes
and labels, manipulating the Clipboard’s content, and so forth. However, an
attacker can use these messages to insert data into the address space of a target
process. By combining this type of message with the WM_TIMER message, an attacker
can build and run arbitrary code in any process on the same desktop. The result is a
privilege escalation vulnerability that can be used against services running on the
interactive desktop.
    After this vulnerability was published, Microsoft changed the way the WM_TIMER
message is handled. The core issue, however, is that communication across a desk-
top must be considered a potential attack vector. This makes more sense when you
consider that the original messaging design was heavily influenced by the concerns
of single-user OS. In that context, the design was accurate, understandable, and
strongly cohesive.
    This vulnerability demonstrates why it’s difficult to add security to an existing
design. The initial Windows messaging design was sound for its environment, but
introducing a multiuser OS changed the landscape. The messaging queue now
strongly couples different trust domains on the same desktop. The result is new
types of vulnerabilities in which the desktop can be exploited as a public interface.

Exploiting Transitive Trusts
A fascinating Solaris security issue highlights how attackers can manipulate a
trusted relationship between two components. Certain versions of Solaris included
an RPC program, automountd, that ran as root. This program allowed the root user
to specify a command to run as part of a mounting operation and was typically
used to handle mounting and unmounting on behalf of the kernel. The automountd
program wasn’t listening on an IP network and was available only through three
protected loopback transports. This meant the program would accept commands
only from the root user, which seems like a fairly secure choice of interface.
     Another program, rpc.statd, runs as root and listens on Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP) interfaces. It’s used as part of the
Network File System (NFS) protocol support, and its purpose is to monitor NFS
servers and send out a notification in case they go down. Normally, the NFS lock
daemon asks rpc.statd to monitor servers. However, registering with rpc.statd
requires the client to tell it which host to contact and what RPC program number to
call on that host.
     So an attacker can talk to a machine’s rpc.statd and register the automountd
program for receipt of crash notifications. Then the attacker tells rpc.statd that the
monitored NFS server has crashed. In response, rpc.statd contacts the
automountd daemon on the local machine (through the special loopback interface)
and gives it an RPC message. This message doesn’t match up to what automountd
is expecting, but with some manipulation, you can get it to decode into a valid
automountd request. The request comes from root via the loopback transport, so
automountd thinks it’s from the kernel module. The result is that it carries out a
command of the attacker’s choice.
     In this case, the attack against a public interface to rpc.statd was useful
only in establishing trusted communication with automountd. It occurred
because an implicit trust is shared between all processes running under the same
account. Exploiting this trust allowed remote attackers to issue commands to the
automountd process. Finally, assumptions about the source of communication
caused developers to be lenient in the format automountd accepts. These issues,
combined with the shared trust between these modules, resulted in a remote
root-level vulnerability.

Failure Handling
Proper failure handling is an essential component of clear and accurate usability in
a software design. You simply expect an application to handle irregular conditions
properly and provide users with assistance in solving problems. However, failure
conditions can create situations in which usability and security appear to be in
opposition. Occasionally, compromises must be made in an application’s function-
ality so that security can be enforced.

    Consider a networked program that detects a fault or failure condition in data it
receives from a client system. Accurate and clear usability dictates that the applica-
tion attempt to recover and continue processing. When recovery isn’t possible, the
application should assist users in diagnosing the problem by supplying detailed
information about the error.
    However, a security-oriented program generally takes an entirely different
approach, which might involve terminating the client session and providing the
minimum amount of feedback necessary. This approach is taken because a program
designed around an ideal of security assumes that failure conditions are the result
of attackers manipulating the program’s input or environment. From that perspec-
tive, the attempt to work around the problem and continue processing often plays
right into an attacker’s hands. The pragmatic defensive reaction is to drop what’s
going on, scream bloody murder in the logs, and abort processing. Although this
reaction might seem to violate some design principles, it’s simply a situation in
which the accuracy of security requirements supersedes the accuracy and clarity of
usability requirements.

Enforcing Security Policy
Chapter 1 discussed security expectations and how they affect a system. Now you can
take those concepts and develop a more detailed understanding of how security
expectations are enforced in a security policy. Developers implement a security policy
primarily by identifying and enforcing trust boundaries. As an auditor, you need to
analyze the design of these boundaries and the code implementing their enforcement.
In order to more easily address the elements of the security policy, enforcement is bro-
ken up into six main types discussed in the following sections.

Authentication
Authentication is the process by which a program determines who a user claims to
be and then checks the validity of that claim. A software component uses authenti-
cation to establish the identity of a peer (client or server) when initiating communi-
cation. A classic example is requiring the user of a Web site to enter a username
and password. Authentication isn’t just for human peers, either, as you can see in
the previous discussion of SSL certificates. In that example, the systems authenti-
cated with each other to function safely over an untrustworthy interface.

Common Vulnerabilities of Authentication
One notable design oversight is to not require authentication in a situation that war-
rants it. For example, a Web application presents a summary of sensitive corporate
accounting information that could be useful for insider trading. Exposing that

information to arbitrary Internet users without asking for some sort of authentication
would be a design flaw. Note that “lack of authentication” issues aren’t always obvi-
ous, especially when you’re dealing with peer modules in a large application. Often
it’s difficult to determine that an attacker can get access to a presumably internal
interface between two components.
     Typically, the best practice is to centralize authentication in the design, espe-
cially in Web applications. Some Web applications require authentication for users
who come in through a main page but don’t enforce authentication in follow-on
pages. This lack of authentication means you could interact with the application
without ever having to enter a username or password. In contrast, centralized
authentication mitigates this issue by validating every Web request within the pro-
tected domain.

Untrustworthy Credentials
Another common mistake happens when some authentication information is pre-
sented to the software, but the information isn’t trustworthy. This problem often
happens when authentication is performed on the client side, and an attacker can
completely control the client side of the connection. For example, the SunRPC
framework includes the AUTH_UNIX authentication scheme, which basically
amounts to fully trusting the client system. The client simply passes along a record
that tells the server what the user and group IDs are, and the server just accepts
them as fact.
    UNIX systems used to include a RPC daemon called rexd (remote execute dae-
mon). The purpose of this program was to let a remote user run a program on the
system as a local user. If you were to connect to the rexd system and tell the rexd
program to run the /bin/sh command as the user bin, the program would run a
shell as bin and let you interact with it. That’s about all there was to it, with the
exception that you couldn’t run programs as the root user. Typically, getting around
this restriction takes only a few minutes after you have a shell running as bin. More
recently, a remote root flaw was exposed in the default installation of sadmind on
Solaris; it treated the AUTH_UNIX authentication as sufficient validation for running
commands on behalf of the client.

        Note
        The bug in sadmind is documented at www.securityfocus.com/bid/
        2354/info.

   Many network daemons use the source IP address of a network connection or
packet to establish a peer’s identity. By itself, this information isn’t a sufficient cre-
dential and is susceptible to tampering. UDP can be trivially spoofed, and TCP
connections can be spoofed or intercepted in various situations. UNIX provides

multiple daemons that honor the concept of trusted hosts based on source address.
These daemons are rshd and rlogind, and even sshd can be configured to honor
these trust relationships. By initiating, spoofing, or hijacking a TCP connection
from a trusted machine on a privileged port, an attacker can exploit the trust rela-
tionship between two machines.
Insufficient Validation
An authentication system can be close to sufficient for its environment but still
contain a fundamental design flaw that leaves it exposed. This problem isn’t likely to
happen with the typical authentication design of requiring username/password/
mom’s maiden name, as it’s easy to think through the consequences of design
decisions in this type of system.
    You’re more likely to see this kind of design flaw in programmatic authentication
between two systems. If a program makes use of existing authentication mechanisms,
such as certificates, design-level problems can arise. First, many distributed
client/server applications authenticate in only one direction: by authenticating only the
client or only the server. An attacker can often leverage this authentication scheme to
masquerade as the unauthenticated peer and perform subtle attacks on the system.
    Homemade authentication with cryptographic primitives is another issue you
might encounter. From a conceptual standpoint, making your own authentication
seems simple. If you have a shared secret, you give the peer a challenge. The peer
then sends back a value that could be derived only from a combination of the chal-
lenge and shared secret. If you’re using public and private keys, you send a chal-
lenge to a peer, encrypting it with the peer’s public key, and anticipate a response
that proves the peer was able to decrypt it.
    However, there’s plenty of room for error when creating authentication proto-
cols from scratch. Thomas Lopatic found an amusing vulnerability in the FWN/1
protocol of Firewall-1. Each peer sends a random number R1 and a hash of that ran-
dom number with a shared key, Hash(R1+K). The receiving peer can look at the ran-
dom number that was sent, calculate the hash, and compare it with the transmitted
value. The problem is that you can simply replay the R1 and Hash(R1+K) values to
the server because they’re made using the same shared symmetric key.

Authorization
Authorization is the process of determining whether a user on the system is permit-
ted to perform a specific operation within a trust domain. It works in concert with
authentication as part of an access control policy: Authentication establishes who a
user is, and authorization determines what that user is permitted to do. There are
many formal designs for access control systems, including discretionary access con-
trol, mandatory access control, and role-based access control. In addition, several
technologies are available for centralizing access control into various frameworks,

operating systems, and libraries. Because of the complexity of different access control
schemes, it’s best to begin by looking at authorization from a general perspective.

Common Vulnerabilities of Authorization
Web applications are notorious for missing or insufficient authorization. Often, you
find that only a small fraction of a Web site’s functionality does proper authoriza-
tion checks. In these sites, pages with authorization logic are typically main menu
pages and major subpages, but the actual handler pages omit authorization checks.
Frequently, it’s possible to find a way to log in as a relatively low-privileged user,
and then be able to access information and perform actions that don’t belong to
your account or are intended for higher-privileged users.
Authorities That Aren’t Secure
Omitting authorization checks is obviously a problem. You can also run into situa-
tions in which the logic for authorization checks is inconsistent or leaves room for
abuse. For example, say you have a simple expense-tracking system, and each user
in the company has an account. The system is preprogrammed with the corporate
tree so that it knows which employees are managers and who they manage. The
main logic is data driven and looks something like this:
Enter New Expense
for each employee you manage
    View/Approve Expenses

    This system is fairly simple. Assuming that the initial corporate tree is popu-
lated correctly, managers can review and approve expenses of their subordinates.
Normal employees see only the Enter New Expense menu entry because they aren’t
in the system as managing other employees.
    Now say that you constantly run into situations in which employees are officially
managed by one person, but actually report to another manager for day-to-day issues.
To address this problem, you make it possible for each user to designate another user
as his or her “virtual” manager. A user’s virtual manager is given view and approve
rights to that user’s expenses, just like the user’s official manager. This solution might
seem fine at first glance, but it’s flawed. It creates a situation in which employees can
assign any fellow employee as their virtual manager, including themselves. The result-
ing virtual manager could then approve expenses without any further restrictions.
    This simple system with an obvious problem might seem contrived, but it’s
derived from problems encountered in real-world applications. As the number of
users and groups in an application grows and the complexity of the system grows, it
becomes easy for designers to overlook the possibility of potential abuse in the
authorization logic.

Accountability
Accountability refers to the expectation that a system can identify and log activities
that users of the system perform. Nonrepudiation is a related term that’s actually a
subset of accountability. It refers to the guarantee that a system logs certain user
actions so that users can’t later deny having performed them. Accountability, along
with authorization and authentication, establishes a complete access control policy.
Unlike authentication and authorization, accountability doesn’t specifically enforce
a trust boundary or prevent a compromise from occurring. Instead, accountability
provides data that can be essential in mitigating a successful compromise and per-
forming forensic analysis. Unfortunately, accountability is one of the most over-
looked portions of secure application design.

Common Vulnerabilities of Accountability
The most common accountability vulnerability is a system’s failure to log operations
on sensitive data. In fact, many applications provide no logging capability whatso-
ever. Of course, many applications don’t handle sensitive data that requires logging.
However, administrators or end users—not developers—should determine whether
logging is required.
    The next major concern for accountability is a system that doesn’t adequately
protect its log data. Of course, this concern might also be an authorization, confi-
dentiality, or integrity issue. Regardless, any system maintaining a log needs to
ensure the security of that log. For example, the following represents a simple text-
based log, with each line including a timestamp followed by a log entry:
20051018133106 Logon Failure: Bob
20051018133720 Logon Success: Jim
20051018135041 Logout: Jim

    What would happen if you included user-malleable strings in the log entry?
What’s to prevent a user from intentionally sending input that looks like a log
entry? For instance, say a user supplied “Bob\n20051018133106 Logon Success:
Greg” as a logon name. It looks like a harmless prank, but it could be used for mali-
cious activity. Attackers could use fake entries to cover malicious activity or
incriminate an innocent user. They might also be able to corrupt the log to the point
that it becomes unreadable or unwriteable. This corruption could create a denial-of-
service condition or open pathways to other vulnerabilities. It might even provide
exploitable pathways in the logging system itself.
    Manipulating this log isn’t the only problem. What happens when attackers can
read it? At the very least, they would know at what times every user logged in and
logged out. From this data, they could deduce login patterns or spot which users have
a habit of forgetting their passwords. This information might seem harmless, but it

can be useful in staging a larger attack. Therefore, unauthorized users shouldn’t be
able to read or modify the contents of a system log.

Confidentiality
Chapter 1 described confidentiality as the expectation that only authorized parties can
view data. This requirement is typically addressed through access control mechanisms,
which are covered by authentication and authorization. However, additional measures
must be taken when communication is performed over a channel that’s not secure. In
these cases, encryption is often used to enforce confidentiality requirements.
     Encryption is the process of encoding information so that it can’t be read by a
third party without special knowledge, which includes the encryption process and
usually some form of key data. Key data is a piece of data known only to the parties
who are authorized to access the information.
     The topic of validating cryptographic algorithms and processes is not covered in
this book because the mathematics involved are extremely complex and encompass
an entire field of study. However, the knowledge you need to identify certain vul-
nerabilities in implementing and applying cryptography is covered throughout this
book, including memory management issues in cryptographic message handling
and how to validate specification requirements against an implementation.
     Your biggest concern from a design perspective is in determining if a particular
cryptographic protocol is applied correctly. The protocol must be strong enough for
the data it’s protecting and must be used in a secure manner. If you’re interested in
more information on the appropriate use of cryptography, you can read Practical
Cryptography (Wiley, 2003) by Bruce Schneier and Niels Ferguson. If your interest
lies in algorithms and implementation, consider Bruce Schneier’s other book,
Applied Cryptography (Wiley, 1996).

Encryption Algorithms
Encryption has a long history, dating all the way back to ancient cultures. However,
because you’re concerned with modern cryptographic protocols that can be used to
protect data communications effectively, this chapter focuses on two major classes
of encryption: symmetric and asymmetric.
     Symmetric encryption (or shared key encryption) refers to algorithms in which
all authorized parties share the same key. Symmetric algorithms are generally the
simplest and most efficient encryption algorithms. Their major weakness is that
they require multiple parties to have access to the same shared secret. The alterna-
tive is to generate and exchange a unique key for each communication relationship,
but this solution quickly results in an untenable key management situation. Fur-
ther, asymmetric encryption has no means for verifying the sender of a message
among any group of shared key users.

    Asymmetric encryption (or public key encryption) refers to algorithms in which
each party has a different set of keys for accessing the same encrypted data. This is
done by using a public and private key pair for each party. Any parties wanting to com-
municate must exchange their public keys in advance. The message is then encrypted
by combining the recipient’s public key and the sender’s private key. The resulting
encrypted message can be decrypted only by using the recipient’s private key.
    In this manner, asymmetric encryption simplifies key management, doesn’t
require exposing private keys, and implicitly verifies the sender of a message. How-
ever, these algorithms are more complex and tend to be computationally intensive.
Therefore, asymmetric algorithms are typically used to exchange a symmetric key
that’s then used for the duration of a communication session.

Block Ciphers
Block ciphers are symmetric encryption algorithms that work on fixed-size blocks of
data and operate in a number of modes. You should be aware of some considerations
for their use, however. One consideration is whether the block cipher encrypts each
block independently or uses output from the previous block in encrypting the cur-
rent block. Ciphers that encrypt blocks independently are far more vulnerable to
cryptanalytic attacks and should be avoided whenever possible. Therefore, a cipher
block chaining (CBC) mode cipher is the only appropriate fixed-block cipher in gen-
eral use. It performs an XOR operation with the previous block of data, resulting in
negligible performance overhead and much higher security than modes that handle
blocks independently.

Stream Ciphers
One of the most inconvenient aspects of block ciphers is that they must handle
fixed-size chunks of data. Any data chunks larger than the block size must be
fragmented, and anything smaller must be padded. This requirement can add
complexity and overhead to code that handles something like a standard
TCP socket.
    Fortunately, block ciphers can run in modes that allow them to operate on arbi-
trarily sized chunks of data. In this mode, the block cipher performs as a stream
cipher. The counter (CTR) mode cipher is the best choice for a stream cipher. Its
performance characteristics are comparable to CBC mode, but it doesn’t require
padding or fragmentation.

Initialization Vectors
An initialization vector (IV) is a “dummy” block of data used to start a block cipher.
An IV is necessary to force the cipher to produce a unique stream of output, regard-
less of identical input. The IV doesn’t need to be kept private, although it must be
different for every new cipher initialization with the same key. Reusing an IV causes

information leakage with a CBC cipher in only a limited number of scenarios;
however, it severely degrades the security of other block ciphers. As a general rule,
IV reuse should be considered a security vulnerability.

Key Exchange Algorithms
Key exchange protocols can get complicated, so this section just provides some sim-
ple points to keep in mind. First, the implementation should use a standard key
exchange protocol, such as RSA, Diffie-Hellman, or El Gamal. These algorithms
have been extensively validated and provide the best degree of assurance.
    The next concern is that the key exchange is performed in a secure manner,
which means both sides of the communication must provide some means of
identification to prevent man-in-the-middle attacks. All the key exchange algo-
rithms mentioned previously provide associated signature algorithms that can be
used to validate both sides of the connection. These algorithms require that both
parties have already exchanged public keys or that they are available through
some trusted source, such as a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) server.

Common Vulnerabilities of Encryption
Now that you have some background on the proper use of encryption, it’s important
to understand what can go wrong. Homemade encryption is one of the primary
causes of confidentiality-related vulnerabilities. Encryption is extremely complicated
and requires extensive knowledge and testing to design and implement properly.
Therefore, most developers should restrict themselves to known algorithms, proto-
cols, and implementations that have undergone extensive review and testing.
Storing Sensitive Data Unnecessarily
Often a design maintains sensitive data without any real cause, typically because of
a misunderstanding of the system requirements. For instance, validating a pass-
word doesn’t require storing the password in a retrievable form. You can safely store
a hash of the password and use it for comparison. If it’s done correctly, this method
prevents the real password from being exposed. (Don’t worry if you aren’t familiar
with hashes; they are introduced in “Hash Functions” later in this chapter.)
     Clear-text passwords are one of the most typical cases of storing data unneces-
sarily, but they are far from the only example of this problem. Some application
designs fail to classify sensitive information properly or just store it for no under-
standable reason. The real issue is that any design needs to classify the sensitivity of
its data correctly and store sensitive data only when absolutely required.
Lack of Necessary Encryption
Generally, a system doesn’t provide adequate confidentiality if it’s designed to
transfer clear-text information across publicly accessible storage, networks, or
unprotected shared memory segments. For example, using TELNET to exchange

sensitive information would almost certainly be a confidentiality-related design
vulnerability because TELNET does not encrypt its communication channel.
    In general, any communication with the possibility of containing sensitive infor-
mation should be encrypted when it travels over potentially compromised or public
networks. When appropriate, sensitive information should be encrypted as it’s
stored in a database or on disk. Encryption requires a key management solution of
some sort, which can often be tied to a user-supplied secret, such as a password. In
some situations, especially when storing passwords, hashed values of sensitive data
can be stored in place of the actual sensitive data.
Insufficient or Obsolete Encryption
It’s certainly possible to use encryption that by design isn’t strong enough to pro-
vide the required level of data security. For example, 56-bit single Digital Encryption
Standard (DES) encryption is probably a bad choice in the current era of inexpen-
sive multigigahertz computers. Keep in mind that attackers can record encrypted
data, and if the data is valuable enough, they can wait it out while computing power
advances. Eventually, they will be able to pick up a 128 q-bit quantum computer at
Radio Shack, and your data will be theirs (assuming that scientists cure the aging
problem by 2030, and everyone lives forever).
     Jokes aside, it’s important to remember that encryption implementations do age
over time. Computers get faster, and mathematicians find devious new holes in
algorithms just as code auditors do in software. Always take note of algorithms and
key sizes that are inadequate for the data they protect. Of course, this concern is a
moving target, so the best you can do is keep abreast of the current recommended
standards. Organizations such as the National Institute for Standards and Technol-
ogy (NIST; www.nist.gov) do a good job of publishing generally accepted criteria for
algorithms and key sizes.
Data Obfuscation Versus Data Encryption
Some applications—and even industry-wide security standards—don’t seem to dif-
ferentiate between data obfuscation and data encryption. Put simply, data is obfus-
cated when attackers have access to all the information they need to recover
encoded sensitive data. This situation typically occurs when the method of encod-
ing data doesn’t incorporate a unique key, or the key is stored in the same trust
domain as the data. Two common examples of encoding methods that don’t incor-
porate a unique key are ROT13 text encoding and simple XOR mechanisms.
     The problem of keys stored in the same context as data is a bit more confusing
but not necessarily less common. For example, many payment-processing applica-
tions store sensitive account holder information encrypted in their databases, but
all the processing applications need the keys. This requirement means that stealing
the backup media might not give attackers the account data, but compromising any
payment server can get them the key along with the encrypted data. Of course, you

could add another key to protect the first key, but all the processing applications
would still require access. You could layer as many keys as you like, but in the end,
it’s just an obfuscation technique because each processing application needs to
decrypt the sensitive data.

        Note
        The PCI (Payment Card Industry) 1.0 Data Security Requirement is
        part of an industry-wide standard to help ensure safe handling of
        payment card data and transactions. These requirements are a
        forward-thinking move for the industry, and many of them are
        consistent with best security practices. However, the standard
        contains requirements that create exactly the confidentiality issue
        described in this chapter. In particular, the requirements allow
        storing encrypted data and the key in the same context, as long as
        the key is encrypted by another key residing in the same context.

    One final point is that security by obscurity (or obfuscation) has earned a bad
reputation in the past several years. On its own, it’s an insufficient technique for
protecting data from attackers; it simply doesn’t provide a strong enough level of
confidentiality. However, in practice, obfuscation can be a valuable component of
any security policy because it deters casual snoopers and can often slow down dedi-
cated attackers.

Integrity
Chapter 1 defined integrity as the expectation that only authorized parties are able
to modify data. This requirement, like confidentiality, is typically addressed
through access control mechanisms. However, additional measures must be taken
when communication is performed over a channel that’s not secure. In these cases,
certain cryptographic methods, discussed in the following sections, are used to
ensure data integrity.

Hash Functions
Cryptographic data integrity is enforced through a variety of methods, although
hash functions are the basis of most approaches. A hash function (or “message
digest function”) accepts a variable-length input and generates a fixed-size output.
The effectiveness of a hash function is measured primarily by three requirements.
The first is that it must not be reversible, meaning that determining the input
based only on the output should be computationally infeasible. This requirement is
known as the “no pre-image” requirement. The second requirement is that the
function not have a second pre-image, which means that given the input and the

output, generating an input with the same output is computationally infeasible.
The final requirement, and the strongest, is that a hash must be relatively collision
free, meaning that intentionally generating the same output for differing inputs
should be computationally infeasible.
    Hash functions provide the foundation of most programmatic integrity protec-
tion. They can be used to associate an arbitrary set of data with a unique, fixed-size
value. This association can be used to avoid retaining sensitive data and to vastly
reduce the storage required to validate a piece of data. The simplest forms of hash
functions are cyclic redundancy check (CRC) routines. They are fast and efficient
and offer a moderate degree of protection against unintentional data modification.
However, CRC functions aren’t effective against intentional modification, which
makes them unusable for security purposes. Some popular CRC functions include
CRC-16, CRC-32, and Adler-32.
    The next step up from CRC functions are cryptographic hash functions. They
are far more computationally intensive, but they offer a high degree of protection
against intentional and unintentional modification. Popular hash functions include
SHA-1, SHA-256, and MD5. (Issues with MD5 are discussed in more detail in “Bait-
and-Switch Attacks” later in this chapter.)

Salt Values
Salt values are much the same as initialization vectors. The “salt” is a random value
added to a message so that two messages don’t generate the same hash value. As with
an IV, a salt value must not be duplicated between messages. A salt value must be stored
in addition to the hash so that the digest can be reconstructed correctly for compari-
son. However, unlike an IV, a salt value should be protected in most circumstances.
     Salt values are most commonly used to prevent precomputation-based attacks
against message digests. Most password storage methods use a salted hash value to
protect against this problem. In a precomputation attack, attackers build a diction-
ary of all possible digest values so that they can determine the original data value.
This method works only for fairly small ranges of input values, such as passwords;
however, it can be extremely effective.
     Consider a salt value of 32 random bits applied to an arbitrary password. This
salt value increases the size of a password precomputation dictionary by four billion
times its original value (232). The resulting precomputation dictionary would likely
be too large for even a small subset of passwords. Rainbow tables, developed by
Philippe Oechslin, are a real-world example of how a lack of a salt value leaves pass-
word hashes vulnerable to pre-computation attacks. Rainbow tables can be used to
crack most password hashes in seconds, but the technique works only if the hash
does not include a salt value. You can find more information on rainbow tables at
the Project RainbowCrack website: http://www.antsight.com/zsl/rainbowcrack/.

Originator Validation
Hash functions provide a method of validating message content, but they can’t
validate the message source. Validating the source of a message requires incorpo-
rating some form of private key into the hash operation; this type of function is
known as a hash-based message authentication code (HMAC) function. A MAC is
a function that returns a fixed-length value computed from a key and variable-
length message.
    An HMAC is a relatively fast method of validating a message’s content and
sender by using a shared secret. Unfortunately, an HMAC has the same weakness
as any shared key system: An attacker can impersonate any party in a conversation
by compromising only one party’s key.

Cryptographic Signatures
A cryptographic signature is a method of associating a message digest with a
specific public key by encrypting the message digest with the sender’s public
and private key. Any recipient can then decrypt the message digest by using the
sender’s public key and compare the resulting value against the computed mes-
sage digest. This comparison proves that the originator of the message must have
had access to the private key.

Common Vulnerabilities of Integrity
Integrity vulnerabilities are similar to confidentiality vulnerabilities. Most integrity
vulnerabilities can, in fact, be prevented by addressing confidentiality concerns.
However, some integrity-related design vulnerabilities, discussed in the following
sections, merit special consideration.
Bait-and-Switch Attacks
Commonly used hashing functions must undergo a lot of public scrutiny. However,
over time, weaknesses tend to appear that could result in exploitable vulnerabilities.
The bait-and-switch attack is typically one of the first weaknesses found in an aging
hash function. This attack takes advantage of a weak hash function’s tendency to
generate collisions over certain ranges of input. By doing this, an attacker can create
two inputs that generate the same value.
     For example, say you have a banking application that accepts requests to trans-
fer funds. The application receives the request, and if the funds are available, it
signs the transfer and passes it on. If the hashing function is vulnerable, attackers
could generate two fund transfers that produce the same digest. The first request
would have a small value, and the second would be much larger. Attackers could
then open an account with a minimum balance and get the smaller transfer
approved. Then they would submit the larger request to the next system and close
out their accounts before anyone was the wiser.

     Bait-and-switch attacks have been a popular topic lately because SHA-1 and
MD5 are starting to show some wear. The potential for collision vulnerabilities in
MD5 was identified as early as 1996, but it wasn’t until August 2004 that Xiaoyun
Wang, Dengguo Feng, Xuejia Lai, and Hongbo Yu published a paper describing suc-
cessful collisions with the MD5 algorithm. This paper was followed up in March
2005 by Arjen Lenstra, Xiaoyun Wang, and Benne de Weger. They successfully gen-
erated a colliding pair of X.509 certificates with different public keys, which is the
certificate format used in SSL transactions. More recently, Vlastimil Klima pub-
lished an algorithm in March 2006 that’s capable of finding MD5 collisions in an
extremely short time.
     The SHA family of algorithms is also under close scrutiny. A number of potential
attacks against SHA-0 have been identified; however, SHA-0 was quickly superseded
by SHA-1 and never saw significant deployment. The SHA-0 attack research has pro-
vided the foundation for identifying vulnerabilities in the SHA-1 algorithm, although
at the time of this writing, no party has successfully generated a SHA-1 collision. How-
ever, these issues have caused several major standards bodies (such as the U.S.-based
NIST) to initiate phasing out SHA-1 in favor of SHA-256 (also known as SHA-2).
     Of course, finding random collisions is much harder than finding collisions that
are viable for a bait-and-switch attack. However, by their nature, cryptographic
algorithms should be chosen with the intention that their security will be viable far
beyond the applicable system’s life span. This reasoning explains the shift in recent
years from hashing algorithms that had previously been accepted as relatively
secure. The impact of this shift can even be seen in password-hashing applications,
which aren’t directly susceptible to collision-based attacks, but are also being
upgraded to stronger hash functions.

Availability
Chapter 1 defined availability as the capability to use a resource when expected.
This expectation of availability is most often associated with reliability, and not
security. However, there are a range of situations in which the availability of a sys-
tem should be viewed as a security requirement.

Common Vulnerabilities of Availability
There is only one type of general vulnerability associated with a failure of availability—
the denial-of-service (DoS) vulnerability. A DoS vulnerability occurs when an attacker
can make a system unavailable by performing some unanticipated action.
    The impact of a DoS attack can be very dependant on the situation in which it
occurs. A critical system may include an expectation of constant availability, and
outages would represent an unacceptable business risk. This is often the case
with core business systems such as centralized authentication systems or flagship
websites. In both of these cases, a successful DoS attack could correspond

directly to a significant loss of revenue due to the business’s inability to function
properly without the system.
    A lack of availability also represents a security risk when an outage forces
requirements to be addressed in a less secure manner. For example, consider a
point-of-sale (PoS) system that processes all credit card transactions via a central
reconciliation server. When the reconciliation server is unavailable, the PoS system
must spool all of the transactions locally and perform them at a later time. An
attacker may have a variety of reasons for inducing a DoS between a PoS system and
the reconciliation server. The DoS condition may allow an attacker to make pur-
chases with stolen or invalid credit cards, or it may expose spooled cardholder infor-
mation on a less secure PoS system.

Threat Modeling
By now, you should have a good idea of how design affects the security of a software
system. A system has defined functionality that’s provided to its users but is bound
by the security policy and trust model. The next step is to turn your attention to
developing a process for applying this knowledge to an application you’ve been
tasked to review. Ideally, you need to be able to identify flaws in the design of a sys-
tem and prioritize the implementation review based on the most security-critical
modules. Fortunately, a formalized methodology called threat modeling exists for
just this purpose.
    In this chapter, you use a specific type of threat modeling that consists of a five-
phase process:
    ■ Information collection

    ■ Application architecture modeling

    ■ Threat identification

    ■ Documentation of findings

    ■ Prioritizing the implementation review

    This process is most effectively applied during the design (or a refactoring)
phase of development and is updated as modifications are made in later develop-
ment phases. It can, however, be integrated entirely at later phases of the SDLC. It
can also be applied after development to evaluate an application’s potential expo-
sure. The phase you choose depends on your own requirements, but keep in mind
that the design review is just a component of a complete application review. So
make sure you account for the requirements of performing the implementation and
operational review of the final system.
    This approach to threat modeling should help establish a framework for relating
many of the concepts you’ve already learned. This process can also serve as a

roadmap for applying many concepts in the remainder of this book. However, you
should maintain a willingness to adapt your approach and alter these techniques as
required to suit different situations. Keep in mind that processes and methodolo-
gies can make good servants but are poor masters.

         Note
         This threat-modeling process was originally introduced in Writing
         Secure Code, 2nd Edition (Microsoft Press, 2002) by Michael Howard
         and David Le Blanc. It was later expanded and refined in Threat
         Modeling (Microsoft Press, 2004) by Frank Swiderski and Window
         Snyder.

Information Collection
The first step in building a threat model is to compile all the information you can
about the application. You shouldn’t put too much effort into isolating security-
related information yet because at this phase you aren’t certain what’s relevant to
security. Instead, you want to develop an understanding of the application and get
as much information as possible for the eventual implementation review. These are
the key areas you need to identify by the end of this phase:
     ■ Assets—Assets include anything in the system that might have value to attack-
       ers. They could be data contained in the application or an attached database,
       such as a database table of user accounts and passwords. An asset can also be
       access to some component of the application, such as the capability to run
       arbitrary code on a target system.
     ■ Entry points—Entry points include any path through which an attacker can
       access the system. They include any functionality exposed via means such as
       listening ports, Remote Procedure Call (RPC) endpoints, submitted files, or
       any client-initiated activity.
     ■ External entities—External entities communicate with the system via its entry
       points. These entities include all user classes and external systems that inter-
       act with the application.
     ■ External trust levels—External trust levels refer to the privileges granted to an
       external entity, as discussed in “Trust Relationships” earlier in this chapter. A
       complex system might have several levels of external trust associated with dif-
       ferent entities, whereas a simple application might have nothing more than a
       concept of local and remote access.
     ■ Major components—Major components define the structure of an application
       design. Components can be internal to the application, or they might represent

      external module dependencies. The threat-modeling process involves decompos-
      ing these components to isolate their security-relevant considerations.
    ■ Use scenarios—Use scenarios cover all potential applications of the system.
      They include a list of both authorized and unauthorized scenarios.

Developer Interviews
In many situations, you can save yourself a lot of time by going straight to the horse’s
mouth, as it were. So if you have access to the developers, be sure to use this access to
your advantage. Of course, this option might not be available. For instance, an inde-
pendent vulnerability researcher rarely has access to the application’s developers.
    When you approach a system’s developers, you should keep a few points in
mind. First, you’re in a position to criticize work they have put a lot of time and effort
into. Make it clear that your goal is to help improve the security of their application,
and avoid any judgmental or condescending overtones in your approach. After you
have a decent dialogue going, you still need to verify any information you get against
the application’s implementation. After all, the developers might have their own mis-
conceptions that could be a contributing factor to some vulnerabilities.

Developer Documentation
A well-documented application can make the review process faster and more thor-
ough; however, there’s one major catch to this convenience. You should always be
cautious of any design documentation for an existing implementation. The reason
for this caution isn’t usually deceitful or incompetent developers; it’s just that too
many things change during the implementation process for the result to ever match
the specifications perfectly.
     A number of factors contribute to these inconsistencies between specifications
and the implementation. Extremely large applications can often drift drastically
from their specifications because of developer turnover and minor oversights com-
pounded over time. Implementations can also differ simply because two people
rarely have exactly the same interpretation of a specification. The bottom line is that
you should expect to validate everything you determine from the design against the
actual implementation.
     Keeping this caveat in mind, you still need to know how to wring everything you
can out of the documentation you get. Generally, you want anything you can get your
hands on, including design (diagrams, protocol specifications, API documentation,
and so on), deployment (installation guides, release notes, supplemental configura-
tion information, and so forth), and end-user documentation. In binary (and some
source code) reviews, end-user documentation is all you can get, but don’t underesti-
mate its value. This documentation is “customer-facing” literature, so it tends to be
fairly accurate and can offer a process-focused view that makes the system easier
to understand.

Standards Documentation
If you’re asked to examine an application that uses standardized network protocols
or file formats, a good understanding of how those protocols and file formats are
structured is necessary to know how the application should function and what
deficiencies might exist. Therefore, acquiring any published standards and related
documentation created by researchers and authors is a good idea. Typically, Inter-
net-related standards documents are available as requests for comments (RFCs,
available at www.ietf.org/rfc/). Open-source implementations of the same stan-
dards can be particularly useful in clarifying ambiguities you might encounter
when researching the technology a target application uses.

Source Profiling
Access to source code can be extremely helpful when you’re trying to gather infor-
mation on an application. You don’t want to go too deep at this phase, but having
the source code can speed up a lot of the initial modeling process. Source code can
be used to initially verify documentation, and you can determine the application’s
general structure from class and module hierarchies in the code. When the source
does not appear to be laid out hierarchically, you can look at the application startup
to identify how major components are differentiated at initialization. You can also
identify entry points by skimming the code to find common functions and objects,
such as listen() or ADODB.

System Profiling
System profiling requires access to a functional installation of the application, which
gives you an opportunity to validate the documentation review and identify elements
the documentation missed. Threat models performed strictly from documentation need
to skip this step and validate the model entirely during the implementation review.
    You can use a variety of methods for profiling an application. Here are a few
common techniques:
     ■ File system layout—Look at the application’s file system layout and make notes
       of any important information. This information includes identifying the per-
       mission structure, listing all executable modules, and identifying any relevant
       data files.
     ■ Code reuse—Look for any application components that might have come from
       another library or package, such as embedded Web servers or encryption
       libraries. These components could present their own unique attack surface
       and require further review.
     ■ Imports and exports—List the function import and export tables for every mod-
       ule. Look closely for any libraries used for establishing or managing external
       connections or RPC interfaces.

    ■ Sandboxing—Run the application in a sandbox so that you can identify every
      object it touches and every activity it performs. Use a sniffer and application
      proxies to record any network traffic and isolate communication. In Windows
      environments, the Filemon, Regmon, WinObj, and Process Explorer utilities
      (from www.sysinternals.com) are helpful for this activity.
    ■ Scanning—Probe the application on any listening ports, RPC interfaces, or
      similar external interfaces. Try grabbing banners to validate the protocols in
      use and identify any authentication requirements. For HTTP applications,
      try spidering links and identifying as many unique entry points as possible.

Application Architecture Modeling
After you have some background information, you need to begin examining the
application architecture. This phase involves familiarizing yourself with how the
software is structured and what components can affect its overall security. These
steps help identify design concerns and let you know where to focus your energies
during the implementation review. You build this knowledge by reviewing existing
documentation of the application model and developing new models as required.
Every piece of software is modeled to some extent during its development; the only
difference is whether the models are ever formally recorded. So you need to under-
stand the types of modeling in common use and how you can develop your own.

Unified Markup Language
Unified Markup Language (UML) is a specification developed by the Object Man-
agement Group (OMG; www.omg.org/uml/) to describe many different aspects of
how an application operates from a fairly high level. It includes diagrams to
describe information flow, interaction between components, different states the
application can be in, and more. Of particular interest in this phase are class dia-
grams, component diagrams, and use cases. The following list briefly describes
these types of diagrams so that you get a feel for what they’re trying to convey. If
you’re unfamiliar with UML, picking up one of the myriad books available on the
subject is strongly recommended. Because of UML’s complexity, explaining it in
depth is far beyond the scope of this chapter.

        Note
        UML has gone through several revisions. The currently accepted
        standard is UML 2.0.

    ■ Class diagrams—A class diagram is a UML diagram for modeling an object-
      oriented (OO) solution. Each object class is represented by a rectangle that

       includes the methods and attributes in the class. Relationships between
       objects are then represented by lines between classes. Lines with arrows on
       one end define parents in an inheritance hierarchy; unadorned lines (no
       arrows) with numbers near the ends indicate a cardinality relationship.
       Class diagrams can be helpful when you’re trying to understand relationships
       in a complex module. They essentially spell out how an application is modeled
       and how classes interact with each other. Realistically, however, you won’t
       encounter them all that often unless you’re performing in-house code reviews.
       By analyzing an OO solution, you can roughly construct class diagrams.
       Although doing so might seem like a waste of time, they can be useful when
       you need to come back and review the same software later or when you per-
       form an initial high-level review and then hand off various code-auditing tasks
       to other members of a team.
     ■ Component diagrams—Component diagrams divide a solution into its con-
       stituent components, with connectors indicating how they interact with each
       other. A component is defined as an opaque subsystem that provides an inde-
       pendent function for a solution. Examples of a component include a database,
       a parser of some description, an ordering system, and so forth. A component
       diagram offers a less complex view of a system than class diagrams do
       because components generally represent a complete self-contained subsys-
       tem, often implemented by many classes and modules.
       A component diagram exposes interfaces (denoted by protruding circles) and
       uses interfaces of other components (denoted by an empty semicircle). Com-
       ponents are tied together through these interface exposures or by means of
       association lines, which indicate that two components are inherently interre-
       lated and don’t rely on exposed interfaces. Component diagrams also allow
       two components to be joined together by realization. A realization simply
       means that the functionality required by one component is a subset of the
       functionality exposed by an interface of another component. Realization is
       represented by a dotted line.
       In an assessment, a component diagram can be valuable for defining the high-
       level view of a system and its intercomponent relationships. It can be espe-
       cially useful when you’re trying to develop the initial context of a threat model
       because it eliminates much of a system’s complexity and allows you to focus
       on the big picture.
     ■ Use cases—A use case is possibly the most nebulous component of the UML
       standard. There are no strict requirements for what a use case should look like
       or include. It can be represented with text or graphics, and developers choose
       which they prefer. Fundamentally, a use case is intended to describe how an

      application should be used, so a good set of use cases can come in handy.
      After all, when you know what an application should be doing, addressing
      what it shouldn’t be doing is easier. When reviewing use cases, keep an eye
      out for any developer assumptions about the system’s behavior.

Data Flow Diagrams
A number of diagramming tools can aid in understanding a system, but the data
flow diagram (DFD) is one of the most effective for security purposes. These dia-
grams are used to map how data moves through a system and identify any affected
elements. If done properly, the DFD modeling process accounts not only for the
application functionality exposed directly to external sources, but also the function-
ality that’s exposed indirectly. This modeling process also accounts for mitigating
factors in a system’s design, such as additional security measures enforcing trust
boundaries. Figure 2-2 shows the five main elements of a DFD, which are summa-
rized in the following list:

                                                              Data store
                     Single processes

                     Multiple processes                     External entity

     Flow                                  Boundary
                         Data flow                          Trust boundary

Figure 2-2   DFD elements

    ■ Processes—Processes are opaque logic components with well-defined input and
      output requirements. They are represented with a circle, and groups of related
      processes are represented by a circle with a double border. Multiple process
      groups can be further decomposed in additional DFDs for each single process.
      Although processes aren’t typically assets, they can be in some contexts.
    ■ Data stores—Data stores are information resources the system uses, such as files
      and databases. They are represented by open-ended rectangular boxes. Usually,
      anything represented in this way in a DFD is considered a system asset.
    ■ External entities—These elements, described previously in “Information Collec-
      tion,” are “actors” and remote systems that communicate with the system over
      its entry points. They are represented by closed rectangles. Identifying external

       entities helps you isolate system entry points quickly and determine what
       assets are externally accessible. External entities might also represent assets
       that need to be protected, such as a remote server.
     ■ Data flow—The flow of data is represented by arrows. It indicates what data is
       sent through what parts of the system. These elements can be useful for dis-
       covering what user-supplied data can reach certain components so that you
       can target them in the implementation review.
     ■ Trust boundary—Trust boundaries are the boundaries between different enti-
       ties in the system or between entire systems. They are represented by a dotted
       line between the two components.
     Figure 2-3 shows how you can use DFD elements to model a system. It repre-
sents a simplified model of a basic Web application that allows users to log in and
access resources stored in a database. Of course, DFDs look different at various
levels of an application. A simple, high-level DFD that encapsulates a large system
is referred to as a context diagram. The Web site example is a context diagram
because it represents a high-level abstraction that encapsulates a complex system.

                    Internet DMZ Interface        Database DMZ Interface

                                                        Database query
                    HTTPS request                                            Database

                     HTTP request
      User                            Web application    Database response
                    HTTP response

                   HTTPS response

Figure 2-3   A DFD context diagram

     However, your analysis generally requires you to decompose the system further.
Each successive level of decomposition is labeled numerically, starting from zero. A
level-0 diagram identifies the major application subsystems. The major subsystems
in this Web application are distinguished by the user’s authentication state. This
distinction is represented in the level-0 diagram in Figure 2-4.
     Depending on the complexity of a system, you may need to continue decompos-
ing. Figure 2-5 is a level-1 diagram of the Web application’s login process. Normally,
you would only progress beyond level-0 diagrams when modeling complex subsys-
tems. However, this level-1 diagram provides a useful starting point for using DFDs
to isolate design vulnerabilities.

                     Internet DMZ Interface                                           Database DMZ Interface

                                                                    Login process
                                    Login
                                                                                                   Database query

                                    Login status                                               Database response
              User

                                                                   ry
                                                                                                                             Database

                                                                da
                                                              un
                              Operation request
                                                           bo                                     Database query
                                                         er
                                                       us

                     Operation response                                                           Database response
                                                   d
                                                  te

                                                                      Authenticated
                                                 ica

                                                                       operations
                                               t
                                            en
                                            th
                                         Au

Figure 2-4     A DFD level-0 diagram of the login process

                            HTTP(S) Connection                                    Database Connection

                                                       Check for
                                                        HTTPS

                                                 HTTPS connection accepted
             Submit login request
                                                                           Query password salt for user

                     Redirect to HTTPS                                                   Return salt                        Database
                                                   Look-up user

                                                                                      Query for username with
                                                                                         salted password
                                                          Salt is valid
      User
                                                                                                       Return user record

                         Login accepted
                                                         Check
                                                        password

                                                                                  Invalid salt value

                            Login failed
                                                                   Invalid password

                                                                                 Access
                                                                                 denied

Figure 2-5     A DFD level-0 diagram of the login process

    When preparing for an implementation review, you can use these diagrams to
model application behavior and isolate components. For instance, Figure 2-6
shows the login process altered just a bit. Can you see where the vulnerability is?
The way the login process handles an invalid login has been changed so that it
now returns the result of each phase directly back to the client. This altered
process is vulnerable because attackers can identify valid usernames without
logging in successfully, which can be extremely useful in attempting a brute-force
attack against the authentication system.

                       HTTP(S) Connection                          Database Connection

                                         Check for
                                          HTTPS

             Submit login request      HTTPS connection accepted

                                                            Query password salt for user

               Redirect to HTTPS                                                                      Database

                                         Look-up user               Return salt

                                                                      Query for username with
                     Invalid user                                       salted password
                     name error             Salt is valid
     User

                                                                                     Return user record

              Invalid password error
                                            Check
                                           password

                   Login accepted

Figure 2-6   A DFD showing a login vulnerability

    By diagramming this system, you can more easily identify its security compo-
nents. In this example, it helped you isolate a vulnerability in the way the system
authenticates. Of course, the login example is still fairly simple; a more complex
system might have several layers of complexity that must be encapsulated in multiple
DFDs. You probably don’t want model all these layers, but you should decompose
different components until you’ve reached a point that isolates the security-relevant
considerations. Fortunately, there are tools to assist in this process. Diagramming
applications such as Microsoft Visio are useful, and the Microsoft Threat Modeling
Tool is especially helpful in this process.

Threat Identification
Threat identification is the process of determining an application’s security expo-
sure based on your knowledge of the system. This phase builds on the work you did
in previous phases by applying your models and understanding of the system to
determine how vulnerable it is to external entities. For this phase, you use a new
modeling tool called attack trees (or threat trees), which provide a standardized
approach for identifying and documenting potential attack vectors in a system.

Drawing an Attack Tree
The structure of an attack tree is quite simple. It consists of a root node, which
describes the attacker’s objective, and a series of subnodes that indicate ways of
achieving that objective. Each level of the tree breaks the steps into more detail until
you have a realistic map of how an attacker can exploit a system. Using the simple
Web application example from the previous section, assume it’s used to store per-
sonal information. Figure 2-7 shows a high-level attack tree for this application.

                                           1
                                           Adversary gains access to a user’s
                                           personal information

              1.1                         1.2                      1.3                 1.4
              Gain direct access          Login as target          Hijack user         Passively intercept
              to the database             user                     session             personal data

 1.1.1                                                                                 1.4.1                 1.4.2
                                             1.2.2                1.3.1
 Exploit a hole in    1.2.1                                                            Identify user         Sniff network
                                             Steal user           Steal user session
 system application   Brute-force login                                                connection            traffic for personal
                                             credentials          cookie
 or kernel                                                                             initiation            data

                                   1.2.1.2
          1.2.1.1
                                   Identify user
          Identify user name
                                   password

Figure 2-7    Attack tree example

    As you can see, the root node is at the top with several subnodes underneath.
Each subnode states an attack methodology that could be used to achieve the goal
stated in the root node. This process is further decomposed, as necessary, into
subnodes that eventually define an attack. Looking at this diagram, you should start
to notice the similarities between attack trees and DFDs. After all, an attack tree

isn’t developed in a vacuum. It’s best created by walking through a DFD and using
the attack tree to note specific concerns. As an example, notice how the branch
leading to subnode 1.2.1 follows the same reasoning pattern used previously in
analyzing the DFD of the flawed login process.
    As with DFDs, you want to continue decomposing attack trees only along
security-relevant paths. You need to use your judgment and determine what paths
constitute reasonable attack vectors and what vectors are unlikely. Before getting
into that topic, however, continue to the next section for a more detailed descrip-
tion of the attack tree structure.

Node Types
You might have noticed some strange markings in the lines connecting each node
to its children (such as nodes 1.2.1.1 and 1.2.1.2). The arc between these node con-
nectors indicates that the child nodes are AND nodes, meaning both conditions of
the child node must be met to continue evaluating the vector. A node without an
arc is simply an OR node, meaning either branch can be traversed without any
additional condition. Referring to Figure 2-7, look at the brute-force login vector in
node 1.2.1. To traverse past this node, you must meet the following conditions in
the two subnodes:
     ■ Identify username

     ■ Identify user password

    Neither step can be left out. A username with no password is useless, and a
password without the associated username is equally useless. Therefore, node 1.2.1
is an AND node.
    Conversely, OR nodes describe cases in which an objective can be reached by
achieving any one of the subnodes. So the condition of just a single node must be
met to continue evaluating the child nodes. Referring to Figure 2-7 again, look at the
objective “Log in as target user” in node 1.2. This objective can be achieved with
either of the following approaches:
     ■ Brute-force login

     ■ Steal user credentials

    To log in as the user, you don’t have to achieve both goals; you need to achieve
only one. Therefore, they are OR nodes.

Textual Representation
You can represent attack trees with text as well as graphics. Text versions convey
identical information as the graphical versions but sometimes aren’t as easy to visu-
alize (although they’re more compact). The following example shows how you
would represent the attack tree from Figure 2-7 in a text format:

1. Adversary gains access to a user’s personal information
    OR    1.1 Gain direct access to the database
                1.1.1 Exploit a hole in system application or kernel
          1.2 Log in as target user
                OR   1.2.1 Brute-force login
                     AND 1.2.1.1 Identify username
                         1.2.1.2 Identify user password
                     1.2.2 Steal user credentials
          1.3 Hijack user session
                     1.3.1 Steal user session cookie
          1.4 Passively intercept personal data
                AND 1.4.1 Identify user connection initiation
                     1.4.2 Sniff network traffic for personal data

    As you can see, all the same information is present. First, the root node objec-
tive is stated as the heading of the attack tree, and its immediate descendants are
numbered and indented below the heading. Each new level is indented again and
numbered below its parent node in the same fashion. The AND and OR keywords
are used to indicate whether nodes are AND or OR nodes.

Threat Mitigation
Part of the value of an attack tree is that it allows you to track potential threats.
However, tracking threats isn’t particularly useful if you have no way of identifying
how they are mitigated. Fortunately, attack trees include a special type of node for
addressing that concern: a circular node. Figure 2-8 shows a sample attack tree with
mitigating factors in place.
    Three mitigation nodes have been added to this attack tree to help you realize
that these vectors are less likely avenues of attack than the unmitigated branches.
The dashed lines used in one mitigation node are a shorthand way to identify a
branch as an unlikely attack vector. It doesn’t remove the branch, but it does
encourage you to direct your focus elsewhere.
    One final note on mitigation: You don’t want to look for it too early. Identifying
mitigating factors is useful because it can prevent you from pursuing an unlikely
attack vector. However, you don’t want to get lulled into a false sense of security
and miss a likely branch. So consider mitigation carefully, and make sure you per-
form some validation before you add it to your attack tree.

                                               1
                                               Threat: Adversary gains access to a
                                               user’s personal information

                  1.1                         1.2                  1.3                   1.4
                  Gain direct access          Login as target      Hijack user           Passively intercept
                  to the database             user                 session               personal data

     1.1.1                                                                              1.4.1                  1.4.2
                                                   1.2.2           1.3.1
     Exploit a hole in    1.2.1                                                         Identify user          Sniff network
                                                   Steal user      Steal user session
     system application   Brute-force login                                             connection             traffic for personal
                                                   credentials     cookie
     or kernel                                                                          initiation             data

                                       1.2.1.2
               1.2.1.1
                                       Identify user
               Identify user name
                                       password

         System
       patches are                                                     HTTPS is             HTTPS is
        kept up to                                                     required             required
           date

Figure 2-8        An attack tree with mitigation nodes

Documentation of Findings
Now that the investigative work is done, you need to document what you discovered.
In the documentation phase, you will review the threats you uncovered in the previous
phase and present them in a formal manner. For each threat you uncovered, you need to
provide a brief summary along with any recommendations for eliminating the threat. To
see how this process works, use the “Brute-force login” threat (node 1.2.1) from your
sample attack tree. This threat could allow an attacker to log in with another user’s
credentials. The documentation of your threat summary would look similar to Table 2-1.
Table 2-1
Threat Summary
Threat                              Brute-force login.
Affected Component                  Web application login component.
Description                         Clients can brute-force attack usernames and passwords by repeatedly
                                    connecting and attempting to log in. This threat is increased because the
                                    application returns different error messages for invalid username and
                                    passwords, making usernames easier to identify.

Result                  Untrusted clients can gain access to a user account and, therefore, read or
                        modify sensitive information.
Mitigation Strategies   Make error messages ambiguous so that an attacker doesn’t know whether
                        the username or password is invalid. Lock the user account after repeated
                        failed login attempts. (Three or five attempts would be appropriate.)

    All the information for the brute-force login threat is neatly summarized in a
table. In the next part of this phase, you extend this table to include some additional
information on the risk of the threat.

DREAD Risk Ratings
Real-world applications are generally much larger and more complex in both design
and implementation than the examples used in this chapter. Increased size and com-
plexity creates a broad spectrum of attack vectors in a variety of user classes. As a
result, you can usually come up with a long list of potential threats and possible recom-
mendations to help mitigate those threats. In a perfect world, designers could system-
atically go about addressing each threat and fixing potential issues, closing each attack
vector as necessary. However, certain business realities might not allow mitigating
every identified vector, and almost certainly not all at once. Clearly, some sort of priori-
tization is needed to help address the more serious vectors before worrying about the
less important ones. By assigning a threat severity rating, you can rank each uncovered
threat based on the risk it poses to the security of the application and associated sys-
tems. This rating can then be used as a guideline for developers to help decide which
issues take precedence.
     You can choose to rate threats in a number of different ways. What’s most
important is that you incorporate the exposure of the threat (how easy is it to
exploit and who the vector is available to) and the amount of damage incurred
during a successful exploit. Beyond that, you might want to add components
that are more pertinent to your environment and business processes. For this
chapter’s threat-modeling purposes, the DREAD rating system developed by
Microsoft is used. No model is perfect, but this one provides a fairly good balance
of commonly accepted threat characteristics. These characteristics are briefly
summarized as follows:
    ■ Damage potential—What are the repercussions if the threat is exploited
      successfully?
    ■ Reproducibility—How easy is it to reproduce the attack in question?

    ■ Exploitability—How difficult is it to perform the attack?

    ■ Affected users—If a successful attack is carried out, how many users would be
      affected and how important are they?
    ■ Discoverability—How difficult is it to spot the vulnerability?

    Each category can be given a score between 1 and 10 (1 being the lowest, 10 the
highest). Category scores are then totaled and divided by 5 for an overall threat rat-
ing. A rating of 3 or below can be considered a low-priority threat, 4 to 7 as a
medium-priority threat, and 8 or greater as a high-priority threat.

         Note
         The DREAD model is also useful in rating implementation and oper-
         ational vulnerabilities. In fact, you can use DREAD as your general-
         purpose rating system over the entire course of an application
         review.

    One of the benefits of the DREAD rating system is that it provides a range of
detail you can use when presenting results to business decision makers. You can
give them a concise threat assessment, with just the total threat rating and the
category it falls into. You could also present more detailed information, such as
individual scores for the five threat categories. You might even want to give them
a full report, including the model documentation and an explanation of how you
arrived at the scores for each category. Regardless of your choice, it’s a good idea
to have information available at each level of detail when making a presentation
to clients or senior management.
    Table 2-2 is an example of applying a DREAD rating to the brute-force login threat.
Table 2-2
Threat Summary with DREAD Rating
Threat                  Brute-force login.
Affected Component      Web application login component.
Description             Clients can brute-force attack usernames and passwords by repeatedly
                        connecting and attempting to log in. This threat is increased because the
                        application returns a different error message for an invalid username
                        than a valid one, making usernames easier to identify.
Result                  Untrusted clients can gain access to a user account and, therefore, read or
                        modify sensitive information.
Mitigation Strategies   Make error messages ambiguous so that an attacker doesn’t know whether
                        the username or password is invalid.
                        Lock the user account after repeated failed login attempts. (Three to five
                        attempts would be appropriate.)
Risk                    Damage potential: 6
                        Reproducibility: 8
                        Exploitability: 4
                        Affected users: 5
                        Discoverability: 8
                        Overall: 6.2

Automatic Threat-Modeling Documentation
As you can see, quite a lot of documentation is involved in the threat-modeling
process (both text and diagrams). Thankfully, Frank Swiderski (co-author of the
previously mentioned Threat Modeling) has developed a tool to help with creating
various threat-modeling documents. It’s available as a free download at
http://msdn.microsoft.com/security/securecode/threatmodeling/. The tool
makes it easy to create DFDs, use cases, threat summaries, resource summaries,
implementation assumptions, and many other documents you’re going to need.
Furthermore, the documentation is organized into a tree structure that’s easy to
navigate and maintain. The tool can output all your documentation as HTML or
another output form of your choosing, using Extensible Stylesheet Language
Transformations (XSLT) processing. Familiarizing yourself with this tool for
threat-modeling documentation is strongly recommended.

Prioritizing the Implementation Review
Now that you’ve completed and scored your threat summaries, you can finally
turn your attention to structuring the implementation review. When developing
your threat model, you should have decomposed the application according to a
variety of factors, including modules, objects, and functionality. These divisions
should be reflected in the Affected Components entry in each individual threat
summary. The next step is to make a list of components at the appropriate level
of decomposition; exactly what level is determined by the size of the application,
number of reviewers, time available for review, and similar factors. However, it’s
usually best to start at a high level of abstraction, so you only need to consider a
handful of components. In addition to the component names, you need another
column on your list for risk scores associated with each component.
     After you have this component list, you simply identify which component a
threat summary belongs to and add the risk score for that summary to the associated
component. After you’ve totaled your list of summaries, you’ll have a score for the
risk associated with each component. Generally, you want to start your assessment
with the highest scoring component and continue proceeding from highest to lowest.
You might also need to eliminate some components due to time, budget, or other
constraints. So it’s best to start eliminating from the lowest scoring components. You
can apply this scoring process to the next level of decomposition for a large applica-
tion; although that starts to get into the implementation review process, which is
covered in detail in Chapter 4, “Application Review Process.”
     Using a scoring list can make it a lot easier to prioritize a review, especially for a
beginner. However, it isn’t necessarily the best way to get the job done. An experi-
enced auditor will often be able to prioritize the review based on their understanding
of similar applications. Ideally, this should line up with the threat summary scores,

but sometimes that isn’t the case. So it’s important to take the threat summaries into
account, but don’t cling to them when you have a reason to follow a better plan.

Summary
This chapter has examined the essential elements of application design review.
You’ve seen that security needs to be a fundamental consideration in application
design and learned how decisions made in the design process can dramatically
affect an application’s security. You have also learned about several tools for under-
standing the security and vulnerability potential of an application design.
    It’s important that you not treat the design review process as an isolated
component. The results of the design review should progress naturally into the
implementation review process, discussed in depth in Chapter 4.

