                      Chapter 3
               Operational Review

“Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform
without thinking.”
    Alfred North Whitehead

Introduction
Operational vulnerabilities are the result of issues in an application’s configuration or
deployment environment. These vulnerabilities can be a direct result of configuration
options an application offers, such as default settings that aren’t secure, or they might be
the consequence of choosing less secure modes of operation. Sometimes these vulnerabili-
ties are caused by a failure to use platform security measures properly, such as file system
and shared object permissions. Finally, an operational vulnerability could be outside the
developer’s direct control. This problem occurs when an application is deployed in a
manner that’s not secure or when the base platform inherits vulnerabilities from the
deployment environment.
     The responsibility for preventing these vulnerabilities can fall somewhere between
the developer and the administrative personnel who deploy and maintain the system.

Shrink-wrapped commercial software might place most of the operational security
burden on end users. Conversely, you also encounter special-purpose systems,
especially embedded devices and turnkey systems, so tightly packaged that devel-
opers control every aspect of their configuration.
     This chapter focuses on identifying several types of operational vulnerabilities
and preventive measures. Concrete examples should help you understand the sub-
tle patterns that can lead to these vulnerabilities. The goal is to help you understand
how to identify these types of vulnerabilities, not present an encyclopedia of poten-
tial issues. Technologies are varied and change often, but with a little practice, you
should be able to spot the commonalities in any operational vulnerability, which
helps you establish your own techniques for identifying vulnerabilities in the
systems you review.

Exposure
When reviewing application security, you need to consider the impact of the
deployment environment. This consideration might be simple for an in-house appli-
cation with a known target. Popular commercial software, on the other hand, could
be deployed on a range of operating systems with unknown network profiles. When
considering operational vulnerabilities, you need to identify these concerns and
make sure they are adequately addressed. The following sections introduce the ele-
ments of an application’s environment that define its degree of exposure to various
classes of users who have access to and, therefore, are able to attack the application.

Attack Surface
Chapter 2, “Design Review,” covered the threat-modeling concepts of assets and
entry points. These concepts can be used to define an application’s attack surface,
the collection of all entry points that provide access to an asset. At the moment,
how this access is mitigated isn’t a concern; you just need to know where the
attack surface is.
    For the purposes of this chapter, the discussions of trust models and threats
have been simplified because operational vulnerabilities usually occur when the
attack surface is exposed unnecessarily. So it helps to bundle the complexities into
the attack surface and simply look for where it can be eliminated.
    The actual process of minimizing the attack surface is often referred to as “host
hardening” or “application hardening.” Hardening specific platforms isn’t covered
in this book, as better resources are dedicated to hardening a particular platform.
Instead, this chapter focuses on several general operational vulnerabilities that
occur because software deployment and configuration aren’t secure.

                                        Exposure

Insecure Defaults
Insecure defaults are simply preconfigured options that create an unnecessary risk
in a deployed application. This problem tends to occur because a software or device
vendor is trying to make the deployment as simple and painless as possible—which
brings you back to the conflict between usability and security.
    Any reader with a commercial wireless access point has probably run into this
same issue. Most of these devices are preconfigured without any form of connec-
tion security. The rationale is that wireless security is buggy and difficult to config-
ure. That’s probably true to an extent, but the alternative is to expose your wireless
communications to anyone within a few hundred yards. Most people would rather
suffer the inconvenience of struggling with configuration than expose their wireless
communications.
    As a reviewer, two types of vulnerable default settings should concern you the
most. The first is the application’s default settings, which include any options that
can reduce security or increase the application’s attack surface without the user’s
explicit consent. These options are discussed in more detail in the remainder of this
chapter, but a few obvious installation considerations are prompting for passwords
versus setting defaults, enabling more secure modes of communication, and enforc-
ing proper access control.
    You also need to consider the default settings of the base platform and operating
system. Examples of this measure include ensuring that the installation sets ade-
quate file and object permissions or restricting the verbs allowed in a Web request.
The process can get a bit complicated if the application is portable across a range of
installation targets, so be mindful of all potential deployment environments. In fact,
one of main contributors to insecure defaults in an application is that the software is
designed and built to run on many different operating systems and environments; a
safe setting on one operating system might not be so safe on another.

Access Control
Chapter 2 introduced access control and how it affects an application’s design. The
effects of access control, however, don’t stop at the design. Internally, an application
can manage its own application-specific access control mechanisms or use features
the platform provides. Externally, an application depends entirely on the access con-
trols the host OS or platform provides (a subject covered in more depth later in
Chapter 9, “Unix I: Privileges and Files,” and Chapter 11, “Windows I: Objects and
the File System”).
    Many developers do a decent amount of scripting; so you probably have a few
scripting engines installed on your system. On a Windows system, you might have
noticed that most scripting installations default to a directory right off the root. As
an example, in a typical install of the Python interpreter on a Windows system, the

default installation path is C:\Python24, so it’s installed directly off the root direc-
tory of the primary hard drive (C:). This installation path alone isn’t an issue until
you take into account default permissions on a Windows system drive. These per-
missions allow any user to write to a directory created off the root (permission
inheritance is explained in more detail in Chapter 11). Browsing to C:\Python24,
you find python.exe (among other things), and if you look at the imported dynamic
link libraries (DLLs) that python.exe uses, you find msvcr71.dll listed.

        Note
        For those unfamiliar with basic Windows binary layout, an import
        is a required library containing routines the application needs to
        function correctly. In this example, python.exe needs routines
        implemented in the msvcr71 library. The exact functions python.exe
        requires are also specified in the imports section.

    Chapter 11 explains the particulars of how Windows handles imported. What’s
important to this discussion is that you can write your own msvcr71.dll and store it
in the C:\Python24 directory, and then it’s loaded when anyone runs python.exe.
This is possible because the Windows loader searches the current directory for
named DLLs before searching system directories. This Windows feature, however,
could allow an attacker to run code in the context of a higher privileged account,
which would be particularly useful on a terminal server, or in any shared computing
environment.
    You could have the same problem with any application that inherits permis-
sions from the root drive. The real problem is that historically, Windows developers
have often been unaware of the built-in access control mechanisms. This is only nat-
ural when you consider that Windows was originally a single-user OS and has since
evolved into a multiuser system. So these problems might occur when developers
are unfamiliar with additional security considerations or are trying to maintain
compatibility between different versions or platforms.

Unnecessary Services
You’ve probably heard the saying “Idle hands are the devil’s playthings.” You might not
agree with it in general, but it definitely applies to unnecessary services. Unnecessary
services include any functionality your application provides that isn’t required for its
operation. These capabilities often aren’t configured, reviewed, or secured correctly.
    These problems tend to result from insecure default settings but might be
caused by the “kitchen sink mentality,” a term for developers and administrators
who include every possible capability in case they need it later. Although this
approach might seem convenient, it can result in a security nightmare.

                                         Exposure

    When reviewing an application, make sure you can justify the need for each
component that’s enabled and exposed. This justification is especially critical when
you’re reviewing a deployed application or turnkey system. In this case, you need to
look at the system as a whole and identify anything that isn’t needed.
    The Internet Information Services (IIS) HTR vulnerabilities are a classic exam-
ple of exposing a vulnerable service unnecessarily. HTR is a scripting technology
Microsoft pioneered that never gained much following, which can be attributed to
the release of the more powerful Active Server Pages (ASP) shortly after HTR. Any
request made to an IIS server for a filename with an .htr extension is handled by
the HTR Internet Server API (ISAPI) filter.

        Note
        ISAPI filters are IIS extension modules that can service requests
        based on file extensions.

     From 1999 through 2002, a number of researchers identified HTR vulnerabili-
ties ranging from arbitrary file reading to code execution. None of these vulnerabili-
ties would have been significant, however, if this rarely used handler had simply
been disabled in the default configuration.

Secure Channels
A secure channel is any means of communication that ensures confidentiality
between the communicating parties. Usually this term is used in reference to
encrypted links; however, even a named pipe can be considered a secure channel if
access control is used properly. In either case, what’s important is that only the cor-
rect parties can view or alter meaningful data in the channel, assuming, of course,
that the parties have already been authenticated by some means.
    Sometimes the need for secure channels can be determined during the design of
an application. You might know before deployment that all communications must
be conducted over secure channels, and the application must be designed and
implemented in this way. More often, however, the application design must account
for a range of possible deployment requirements.
    The most basic example of a secure channel vulnerability is simply not using a
secure channel when you should. Consider a typical Web application in which you
authenticate via a password, and then pass a session key for each following transac-
tion. (This topic is explained in more detail in Chapter 17, “Web Applications.”) You
expect password challenges to be performed over Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), but what
about subsequent exchanges? After all, attackers would like to retrieve your password,
but they can still get unrestricted access to your session if they get the session cookie.

    This example shows that the need for secure channels can be a bit subtle. Every-
one can agree on the need to protect passwords, but the session key might not be
considered as important, which is perfectly acceptable sometimes. For example,
most Web-based e-mail providers use a secure password exchange, but all remain-
ing transactions send session cookies in the clear. These providers are offering a
free service with a minimal guarantee of security, so it’s an acceptable business risk.
For a banking application, however, you would expect that all transactions occur
over a secure channel.

Spoofing and Identification
Spoofing occurs whenever an attacker can exploit a weakness in a system to imper-
sonate another person or system. Chapter 2 explained that authentication is used
to identify users of an application and potentially connected systems. However,
deploying an application could introduce some additional concerns that the appli-
cation design can’t address directly.
     The TCP/IP standard in most common use doesn’t provide a method for
preventing one host from impersonating another. Extensions and higher layer
protocols (such as IPsec and SSL) address this problem, but at the most basic
level, you need to assume that any network connection could potentially be
impersonated.
     Returning to the SSL example, assume the site allows only HTTPS connections.
Normally, the certificate for establishing connections would be signed by a trusted
authority already listed in your browser’s certificate database. When you browse to
the site, the name on the certificate is compared against the server’s DNS name; if
they match, you have a reasonable degree of certainty that the site hasn’t been
spoofed.
     Now change the example a bit and assume that the certificate isn’t signed by a
default trusted authority. Instead, the site’s developer has signed the certificate.
This practice is fairly common and perfectly acceptable if the site is on a corporate
intranet. You simply need to ensure that every client browser has the certificate
added to its database.
     If that same site is on the public Internet with a developer-signed certificate,
however, it’s no longer realistic to assume you can get that certificate to all poten-
tial clients. The client, therefore, has no way of knowing whether the certificate
can be trusted. If users browse to the site, they get an error message stating that
the certificate isn’t signed by a trusted authority; the only option is to accept the
untrusted certificate or terminate the connection. An attacker capable of spoofing
the server could exploit this situation to stage man-in-the-middle attacks and then
hijack sessions or steal credentials.

                               Web-Specific Considerations

Network Profiles
An application’s network profile is a crucial consideration when you’re reviewing
operational security. Protocols such as Network File System (NFS) and Server Mes-
sage Block (SMB) are acceptable inside the corporate firewall and generally are an
absolute necessity. However, these same types of protocols become an unacceptable
liability when they are exposed outside the firewall. Application developers often
don’t know the exact environment an application might be deployed in, so they
need to choose intelligent defaults and provide adequate documentation on security
concerns.
    Generally, identifying operational vulnerabilities in the network profile is easier
for a deployed application. You can simply look at what the environment is and
identify any risks that are unacceptable, and what protections are in place. Obvious
protections include deploying Internet-facing servers inside demilitarized zones
(DMZs) and making sure firewall rule sets are as strict as reasonably possible.
    Network profile vulnerabilities are more difficult to tackle when the environ-
ment is unknown. As a reviewer, you need to determine the most hostile potential
environment for a system, and then review the system from the perspective of that
environment. You should also ensure that the default configuration supports a
deployment in this type of environment. If it doesn’t, you need to make sure the
documentation and installer address this problem clearly and specifically.

Web-Specific Considerations
The World Wide Web—more specifically, HTTP and HTTPS services—has become
one of the most ubiquitous platforms for application development. The proliferation
of Web services and applications is almost single-handedly responsible for the
increased awareness of network security and vulnerabilities. For this reason, Web
security warrants certain special considerations.

HTTP Request Methods
A Web application can be tightly restricted in which requests and operations are
allowed; however, in practice, this restriction often isn’t applied. For example, the
server might support a number of HTTP methods, but all the application requires is
the HTTP GET, POST, and HEAD requests. When reviewing a deployed or embedded
Web application, you should ensure that only the necessary request methods are
allowed. In particular, question whether TRACE, OPTIONS, and CONNECT requests
should be allowed. If you are unfamiliar with these methods, you can find a lot more
information in Chapter 17.

Directory Indexing
Many Web servers enable directory indexing by default. This setting has no effect in
directories that provide an index file; however, it can expose valuable information to
directories with no index. Often, these directories contain include and configura-
tion files, or other important details on the application’s structure, so directory
indexing should be disabled by default.

File Handlers
When you try to run a file, it’s obvious if the proper handler hasn’t been installed.
The server simply won’t run the file, and instead it returns the source or binary
directly. However, handler misconfiguration could happen in a number of less obvi-
ous situations. When machines are rebuilt or replaced, the correct handlers might
not be installed before the application is deployed. Developers might also establish
conventions for naming include files with different extensions. For example, Classic
ASP and PHP: Hypertext Processor (PHP) include files are often named with an
.inc extension, which is not interpreted by the default handlers in PHP or ASP.
Because the include file isn’t intended to be requested directly, developers and
administrators might not realize it’s vulnerable.
     Both situations can result in a source or binary file disclosure, which allows attack-
ers to download the raw source or binary code and get detailed information on the
application’s internal structure. In addition, PHP and other scripting languages com-
monly use include files to provide database account credentials and other sensitive
information, which can make source disclosure vulnerabilities particularly dangerous.
     This problem needs to be approached from three sides. First, developers need to
choose a set of extensions to be used for all source and binary files. Second, the
Web server should be configured with handlers for all appropriate file types and
extensions. Finally, the only files in the Web tree should be those that must be
retrieved by Web requests. Include files and supporting libraries should be placed
outside the Web tree. This last step prevents attackers from requesting files directly
that are only intended to be included.
     An important extension to the last step is applicable when Web applications deal
with uploaded content from clients. Applications commonly allow clients to upload
files, but doing so has potentially dangerous consequences, especially if the directory
where files are uploaded is within the Web tree. In this case, clients might be able to
request the file they just uploaded; if the file is associated with a handler, they can
achieve arbitrary execution. As an example, consider a PHP application that stores
uploaded files in /var/www/webapp/tmpfiles/, which can be browsed via the
HTTP URI /webapp/tmpfiles/. If the client uploads a file called evil.php and then
requests /webapp/tmpfiles/evil.php in a browser, the Web server will likely
recognize that the file is a PHP application and run code within the file’s PHP tags.

                                Web-Specific Considerations

Authentication
Web applications might not perform authentication internally; this process might
be handled externally through the HTTP authentication protocol, an authenticating
reverse proxy, or a single sign-on (SSO) system. With this type of authentication, it
is especially important to make sure the external authentication mechanism is con-
figured correctly and performs authentication in a safe manner. For example, a
reverse-proxy device might add headers that include the current account name and
user information. However, attackers could discover a request path that doesn’t
pass through the reverse proxy, which would allow them to set the account headers
to whatever they want and impersonate any user on the system.

Default Site Installations
Some Web servers include a number of sample sites and applications as part of a
default installation. The goal is to provide some reference for configuring the server
and developing modules. In practice, however, these sample sites are a rather severe
case of unnecessary services and insecure defaults. Numerous security problems
have been caused by installing sample Web applications and features. For example,
ColdFusion’s Web-scripting technologies used to install several sample applications
by default that allowed clients to upload files and run arbitrary code on the system.

         Note
         This ColdFusion bug ties in with some of the previous discussion
         on spoofing and identification. The sample applications were acces-
         sible only to clients who connected from the same machine where
         ColdFusion was installed. However, the way they verified whether
         the client was connecting locally was to check the HTTP HOST vari-
         able, which is completely controlled by the client. As a result, any
         client could claim to be connecting locally and access sample scripts
         with the dangerous functionality. This bug is documented at
         www.securityfocus.com/bid/3154/info.

Overly Verbose Error Messages
Most Web servers return fairly verbose error messages that assist in diagnosing any
problems you encounter. Web application platforms also provide detailed exception
information to assist developers in debugging code. These capabilities are essential
when developing a system, but they can be a serious operational vulnerability in a
deployed system.
    The burden of end-user error reporting should rest primarily on application devel-
opers. The application level has the correct context to determine what information is

appropriate to display to end users. Configuration of the base platform should always
be performed under the assumption that the application is filtering and displaying
any end-user error information. This way, the deployed system can be configured to
report the minimum necessary information to client users and redirect any required
details to the system log.

Public-Facing Administrative Interfaces
Web-based administration has become popular for Web applications and network
devices. These administrative interfaces are often convenient, but they are rarely
implemented with potentially malicious users in mind. They might use weak default
passwords, not perform sufficient authentication, or have any number of other vul-
nerabilities. Therefore, they should be accessible only over restricted network seg-
ments when possible and never exposed to Internet-facing connections.

Protective Measures
A range of additional protective measures can affect an application’s overall security.
In consultant speak, they are often referred to as mitigating factors or compensating
controls; generally, they’re used to apply the concept of defense in depth mentioned
in Chapter 2. These measures can be applied during or after the development
process, but they tend to exist outside the software itself.
    The following sections discuss the most common measures, but they don’t form
an exhaustive list. For convenience, these measures have been separated into
groups, depending on whether they’re applied during development, to the deployed
host, or in the deployed network. One important consideration is that most of these
measures include software, so they could introduce a new attack surface or even
vulnerabilities that weren’t in the original system.

Development Measures
Development protective measures focus on using platforms, libraries, compiler
options, and hardware features that reduce the probability of code being exploited.
These techniques generally don’t affect the way code is written, although they often
influence the selection of one platform over another. Therefore, these measures are
viewed as operational, not implementation measures.

Nonexecutable Stack
The classic stack buffer overflow is quite possibly the most often-used software vul-
nerability in history, so hardware vendors are finally trying to prevent them at the
lowest possible level by enforcing the nonexecutable protection on memory pages.

This technique is nothing new, but it’s finally becoming common in inexpensive
commodity hardware, such as consumer PCs.
    A nonexecutable stack can make it harder to exploit a memory management
vulnerability, but it doesn’t necessarily eliminate it because the exploit might not
require running code from the stack. It might simply involve patching a stack vari-
able or the code execution taking advantage of a return to libc style attack. These
vulnerabilities are covered in more detail in Chapter 5, “Memory Corruption,” but
for now, it’s important to understand where the general weaknesses are.

Stack Protection
The goal of the classic stack overflow is to overwrite the instruction pointer. Stack
protection prevents this exploit by placing a random value, called a “canary,”
between stack variables and the instruction pointer. When a function returns, the
canary is checked to ensure that it hasn’t changed. In this way, the application can
determine whether a stack overflow has occurred and throw an exception instead of
running potentially malicious code.
     Like a nonexecutable stack, stack protection has its share of weaknesses. It
also doesn’t protect against stack variable patching (although some implementa-
tions reorder variables to prevent the likelihood of this problem). Stack protection
mechanisms might also have issues with code that performs certain types of
dynamic stack manipulation. For instance, LibSafePlus can’t protect code that uses
the alloca() call to resize the stack; this problem can also be an undocumented
issue in other implementations. Worse yet, some stack protections are vulnerable
to attacks that target their implementation mechanisms directly. For example, an
early implementation of Microsoft’s stack protection could be circumvented by
writing past the canary and onto the current exception handler.
     No form of stack protection is perfect, and every implementation has types of
overflows that can’t be detected or prevented. You have to look at your choices and
determine the advantages and disadvantages. Another consideration is that it’s not
uncommon for a development team to enable stack protection and have the appli-
cation stop functioning properly. This problem happens because of stack overflows
occurring somewhere in the application, which may or may not be exploitable.
Unfortunately, developers might have so much trouble tracking down the bugs that
they choose to disable the protection entirely. You might need to take this possibil-
ity into account when recommending stack protection as an easy fix.

Heap Protection
Most program heaps consist of a doubly linked list of memory chunks. A generic
heap exploit attempts to overwrite the list pointers so that arbitrary data can be
written somewhere in the memory space. The simplest form of heap protection
involves checking that list pointers reference valid heap chunks before performing
any list management.

    Simple heap protection is fairly easy to implement and incurs little performance
overhead, so it has become common in the past few years. In particular, Microsoft’s
recent OS versions include a number of heap consistency-checking mechanisms to
help minimize the damage heap overwrites can do. The GNU libc also has some
capabilities to protect against common exploitation techniques; the memory man-
agement routines check linked list values and validate the size of chunks to a cer-
tain degree. Although these mechanisms are a step in the right direction, heap
overflows can still be exploited by manipulating application data rather than heap
structures.

Address Space Layout Randomization
When an application is launched in most contemporary operating systems, the
loader organizes the program and required libraries into memory at the same
locations every time. Customarily, the program stack and heap are put in identical
locations for each program that runs. This practice is useful for attackers exploit-
ing a memory corruption vulnerability; they can predict with a high degree of
accuracy the location of key data structures and program components they want
to manipulate or misuse. Address space layout randomization (ASLR) technolo-
gies seek to remove this advantage from attackers by randomizing where different
program components are loaded at in memory each time the application runs. A
data structure residing at address 0x12345678 during one program launch might
reside at address 0xABCD5678 the next time the program is started. Therefore,
attackers can no longer use hard-coded addresses to reliably exploit a memory
corruption flaw by targeting specific structures in memory. ASLR is especially
effective when used with other memory protection schemes; the combination of
multiple measures can turn a bug that could previously be exploited easily into a
very difficult target. However, ASLR is limited by a range of valid addresses, so it
is possible for an attacker to perform a repeated sequence of exploit attempts and
eventually succeed.

Registered Function Pointers
Applications might have long-lived functions pointers at consistent locations in a
process’s address space. Sometimes these pointers are defined at compile time and
never change for a given binary; exception handlers are one of the most common
examples. These properties make long-lived function pointers an ideal target for
exploiting certain classes of vulnerabilities. Many types of vulnerabilities are simi-
lar, in that they allow only a small value to be written to one arbitrary location, such
as attacks against heap management functions.
     Function pointer registration is one attempt at preventing the successful exploit
of these types of vulnerabilities. It’s implemented by wrapping function pointer
calls in some form of check for unauthorized modification. The exact details of the

check might vary in strength and how they’re performed. For example, the compiler
can place valid exception handlers in a read-only memory page, and the wrapper
can just make a direct comparison against this page to determine whether the
pointer is corrupt.

Virtual Machines
A virtual machine (VM) platform can do quite a bit to improve an application’s basic
security. Java and the .NET Common Language Runtime (CLR) are two popular VM
environments, but the technology is even more pervasive. Most popular scripting
languages (such as Perl, Python, and PHP) compile first to bytecode that’s then
interpreted by a virtual machine.
    Virtual machine environments are typically the best choice for most common
programming tasks. They generally provide features such as sized buffers and
strings, which prevent most memory management attacks. They might also include
additional protection schemes, such as the code access security (CAS) mentioned in
Chapter 1. These approaches usually allow developers to create more secure appli-
cations more quickly.
    The downside of virtual machines is that their implicit protection stops at low-
level vulnerabilities. VM environments usually have no additional protections
against exploiting vulnerabilities such as race conditions, formatted data manipula-
tion, and script injection. They might also provide paths to low-level vulnerabilities
in the underlying platform or have their own vulnerabilities.

Host-Based Measures
Host-based protections include OS features or supporting applications that can
improve the security of a piece of software. They can be deployed with the applica-
tion or be additional measures set up by end users or administrators. These addi-
tional protective measures can be useful in preventing, identifying, and mitigating
successful exploits, but remember that these applications are pieces of software.
They might contain vulnerabilities in their implementations and introduce new
attack surface to a system.

Object and File System Permissions
Permission management is the first and most obvious place to try reducing the
attack surface. Sometimes it’s done programmatically, such as permissions on a
shared memory object or process synchronization primitive. From an operational
perspective, however, you’re concerned with permissions modified during and after
application installation.

    As discussed earlier in this chapter, permission assignment can be complicated.
Platform defaults might not provide adequate security, or the developer might not be
aware of how a decision could affect application security. Typically, you need to per-
form at least a cursory review of all files and objects included in a software installation.

Restricted Accounts
Restricted accounts are commonly used for running an application with a public-
facing service. The intent of using this type of account is not to prevent a compro-
mise but to reduce the impact of the compromise. Therefore, these accounts have
limited access to the system and can be monitored more closely.
    On Windows systems, a restricted account usually isn’t granted network access
to the system, doesn’t belong to default user groups, and might be used with
restricted tokens. Sudhakar Govindavajhala and Andrew W. Appel of Princeton
University published an interesting paper, “Windows Access Control Demystified,”
in which they list a number of considerations and escalation scenarios for different
group privileges and service accounts. This paper is available at
http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~sudhakar/papers/winval.pdf.
    Restricted accounts generally don’t have a default shell on UNIX systems, so
attackers can’t log in with that account, even if they successfully set a password
through some application flaw. Furthermore, they usually have few to no privileges
on the system, so if they are able to get an interactive shell somehow, they can’t per-
form operations with much consequence. Having said that, attackers simply having
access to the system is often dangerous because they can use the system to “spring-
board” to other previously inaccessible hosts or perform localized attacks on the
compromised system to elevate privileges.
    Restricted accounts are useful, but they can be deployed carelessly. You need to
ensure that restricted accounts contain no unnecessary rights or privileges. It’s
also good to follow the rule of one account to one service because of the implicit
shared trust between all processes running under the same account, as discussed
in Chapter 2.

Chroot Jails
UNIX operating systems use the chroot command to change the root directory of a
newly executed process. This command is normally used during system startup or
when building software. However, chroot also has a useful security application: A
nonroot process can be effectively jailed to a selected portion of the file system by
running it with the chroot command.
    This approach is particularly effective because of UNIX’s use of the file system
as the primary interface for all system activity. An attacker who exploits a jailed
process is still restricted to the contents of the jailed file system, which prevents
access to most of the critical system assets.

    A chroot jail can improve security quite a bit; however, there are caveats. Any
process running under root privileges can usually escape the jail environment by
using other system mechanisms, such as the PTRACE debugging API, setting sys-
tem variables with sysctl, or exploiting some other means to allow the system to
run a new arbitrary process that’s not constrained to the chroot jail. As a result,
chroot jails are more effective when used with a restricted account. In addition, a
chroot jail doesn’t restrict network access beyond normal account permissions,
which could still allow enough attack surface for a follow-on attack targeted at
daemons listening on the localhost address.

System Virtualization
Security professionals have spent the past several years convincing businesses to
run one public-facing service per server. This advice is logical when you consider
the implicit shared trusts between any processes running on the same system. How-
ever, increases in processing power and growing numbers of services have made
this practice seem unnecessarily wasteful.
     Fortunately, virtualization comes to the rescue. Virtualization allows multiple
operating systems to share a single host computer. When done correctly, each host
is isolated from one another and can’t affect the integrity of other hosts except
through standard network interfaces. In this way, a single host can provide a high
level of segmentation but still make efficient use of resources.
     Virtualization is nothing new; it’s been around for decades in the mainframe
arena. However, most inexpensive microcomputers haven’t supported the features
required for true hardware virtualization—these features are known as the Popek
and Goldberg virtualization requirements. True hardware virtualization involves
capabilities that hardware must provide to virtualize access without requiring soft-
ware emulation. Software virtualization works, of course, but only recently has
commodity hardware become powerful enough to support large-scale virtualization.
     Virtualization will continue to grow, however. New commodity processors from
vendors such as Intel and AMD now have full hardware virtualization support, and
software virtualization has become more commonplace. You can now see a handful
of special cases where purpose-built operating systems and software are distributed
as virtual machine disk images. These concepts have been developing for more than
a decade through research in exokernels and para-virtualization, with commercial
products only now becoming available.
     For auditors, virtualization has advantages and disadvantages. It could allow an
application to be distributed in a strictly configured environment, or it might force a
poorly configured black box on users. The best approach is to treat a virtualized sys-
tem as you would any other system and pay special attention to anywhere the vir-
tual segmentation is violated. As virtualization grows more popular, however, it will
almost certainly introduce new and unique security concerns.

Enhanced Kernel Protections
All operating systems must provide some mechanism for user land applications to
communicate with the kernel. This interface is typically referred to as the system
call gateway, and it should be the only interface for manipulating base system
objects. The system call gateway is a useful trust boundary, as it provides a choke-
point into kernel operations. A kernel module can then intercept requested opera-
tions (or subsequent calls) to provide a level of access control that is significantly
more granular than normal object permissions.
     For example, you might have a daemon that you need to run as root, but this
daemon shouldn’t be able to access arbitrary files or load kernel modules. These
restrictions can be enforced only by additional measures taken inside the kernel.
An additional set of permissions can be mapped to the executable and user associ-
ated with the process. In this case, the kernel module would refuse the call if the
executable and user match the restricted daemon. This approach is an example of a
simple type of enhanced kernel protection; however, a number of robust implemen-
tations are available for different operating systems. SELinux is a popular module
for Linux and BSD systems, and Core Force (from Core Security) is a freely available
option for Windows 2000 and XP systems.
     There’s no question that this approach offers fine-grained control over exactly
what a certain process is allowed to do. It can effectively stop a compromise by
restricting the rights of even the most privileged accounts. However, it’s a fairly new
approach to security, so implementations vary widely in their capabilities and oper-
ation. This approach can also be difficult to configure correctly, as most applications
aren’t designed with the expectation of operating under such tight restrictions.

Host-Based Firewalls
Host-based firewalls have become extremely popular in recent years. They often
allow fine-grained control of network traffic, including per-process and per-user
configuration. This additional layer of protection can help compensate for any over-
looked network attack surface. These firewalls can also mitigate an attack’s effect
by restricting the network access of a partially compromised system.
    For the most part, you can view host-based firewalls in the same manner as
standard network firewalls. Given their limited purpose, they should be much less
complicated than a standard firewall, although per-process and per-user rules can
increase their complexity somewhat.

Antimalware Applications
Antimalware applications include antivirus and antispyware software. They are
usually signature-based systems that attempt to identify behaviors and attributes
associated with malicious software. They might even incorporate a degree of
enhanced kernel protection, host-based firewalling, and change monitoring. For the

most part, however, these applications are useful at identifying known malware
applications. Typically, they have less value in handling more specialized attacks or
unknown malware.
    Antimalware applications generally have little effect when auditing software
systems. The primary consideration is that a deployed system should have the
appropriate software installed and configured correctly.

File and Object Change Monitoring
Some security applications have methods of monitoring for changes in system
objects, such as configuration files, system binaries, and sensitive Registry keys.
This monitoring can be an effective way to identify a compromise, as some sensitive
portion of the system is often altered as a result of an exploit. More robust monitor-
ing systems actually maintain digests (or hashes) of sensitive files and system
objects. They can then be used to assist in forensic data analysis in the event of a
serious compromise.
    Change monitoring is a fairly reactive process by nature, so generally it isn’t
useful in preventing compromises. It can, however, prove invaluable in identifying,
determining the extent of, and mitigating a successful compromise. The most
important consideration for auditors is that most change-monitoring systems are
configured by default to monitor only base system objects. Adding monitoring
for application-specific components usually requires changes to the default
configuration.

Host-Based IDSs/IPSs
Host-based intrusion detection systems (IDSs) and intrusion prevention systems
(IPSs) tend to fall somewhere between host-based firewalls and antimalware appli-
cations. They might include features of both or even enhanced kernel protections
and file change monitoring. The details vary widely from product to product, but
typically these systems can be viewed as some combination of the host-based meas-
ures presented up to this point.

Network-Based Measures
An entire book could be devoted to the subject of secure network architecture.
After all, security is only one small piece of the puzzle. A good network layout
must account for a number of concerns in addition to security, such as cost, usabil-
ity, and performance. Fortunately, a lot of reference material is available on the
topic, so this discussion has been limited to a few basic concepts in the following
sections. If you’re not familiar with network fundamentals, you should start with a
little research on TCP/IP and the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model and
network architecture.

Segmentation
Any discussion of network security needs to start with segmentation. Network seg-
mentation describes how communication over a network is divided into groupings
at different layers. TCP/IP networks are generally segmented for only two reasons:
security and performance. For the purposes of this discussion, you’re most con-
cerned with the security impact of network segmentation.
    You can view network segmentation as a method of enforcing trust boundaries.
This enforcement is why security is an important concern when developing a net-
work architecture. You should also consider what OSI layer is used to enforce a
security boundary. Generally, beginning with the lowest layer possible is best. Each
higher layer should then reinforce the boundary, as appropriate. However, you
always encounter practical constraints on how much network security can be pro-
vided and limitations on what can be enforced at each layer.
Layer 1: Physical
The security of the physical layer is deceptively simple. Segmentation of this
layer is literally physical separation of the transmission medium, so security of
the physical layer is simply keeping the medium out of attackers’ hands. In the
past, that meant keeping doors locked, running cables through conduit, and not
lighting up unconnected ports. If any transmission media were outside your
immediate control, you just added encryption or protected at higher layers.
    Unfortunately, the rapid growth of wireless networking has forced many people
to reevaluate the notion of physical layer security. When you deploy a wireless net-
work, you expose the attack surface to potentially anyone in transmission range.
With the right antenna and receiver, an attacker could be a mile or more away.
When you consider this possibility with the questionable protection of the original
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) standard, it should be apparent that physical layer
security can get more complicated.
Layer 2: Data Link
Segmentation at the data link layer is concerned with preventing spoofing (imper-
sonating) hosts and sniffing traffic (capturing data transmitted by other hosts). Sys-
tems at this layer are identified via Media Address Control (MAC) addresses, and
the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) is used to identify MAC addresses associ-
ated with connected hosts. Switching is then used to route traffic to only the appro-
priate host.
     Network switches, however, run the gamut in terms of features and quality.
They might be vulnerable to a variety of ARP spoofing attacks that allow attackers
to impersonate another system or sniff traffic destined for other systems. Address
filtering can be used to improve security at this layer, but it should never be relied
on as the sole measure.

   Wireless media creates potential concerns at this layer, too, because they add
encryption and authentication to compensate for their inability to segment the
physical layer adequately. When choosing a wireless protection protocol, you have a
few options to consider. Although proprietary standards exist, open standards are
more popular, so this section focuses on them.
   WEP was the original standard for wireless authentication and encryption;
however, its design proved vulnerable to cryptanalytic attacks that were further
aggravated by weaknesses in a number of implementations. Wi-Fi Protected Access
(WPA) is a more robust standard that provides more secure key handling with the
same base encryption capabilities as WEP (which allows it to operate on existing
hardware). However, WPA was intended as only an interim measure and has been
superseded by WPA2, which retains the essential key-handling improvements of
WPA and adds stronger encryption and digest capabilities.
Layer 3: Network
Security and segmentation at the network layer are typically handled via IP filtering
and, in some cases, the IP Security (IPsec) protocol. Any meaningful discussion of
IPsec is beyond the scope of this book, but it’s important to note exactly what it is.
IPsec is a component of the IPv6 specification that has been back-ported to the current
IPv4. It provides automatic encryption and authentication for TCP/IP connections at
the network layer. Although IPsec does have some appealing security capabilities, its
adoption has been slow, and different technologies have been developed to address
many of the areas it was intended for. However, adoption is continuing to grow, and a
properly deployed IPsec environment is extremely effective at preventing a range of
network attacks, including most sniffing and spoofing attacks.
    IP filtering is a fairly simple method of allowing or denying packets based only
on the protocol, addresses, and ports. This method allows traffic to be segmented
according to its function, not just the source and destination. This type of filtering is
easy to implement, provides fast throughput, and has fairly low overhead. At this
point, IP filtering is practically a default capability expected in almost any network-
enabled system, such as a router or an OS. The disadvantage of IP filtering is that it
maintains no connection state. It can’t discriminate based on which side is estab-
lishing the connection or whether the communication is associated with an active
connection. Therefore, a simple IP filter must allow inbound traffic to any port
where it allows outbound traffic.
Layer 4: Transport
The transport layer is what most people think of when they discuss network secu-
rity architecture. This layer is low enough to be common to all TCP/IP applications
but high enough that you can determine connection state. The addition of state
allows a firewall to determine which side is initiating the connection and establishes
the fundamental concept of an internal and external network.

    Firewalls, which are devices that filter traffic at the network and transport layers,
are the primary method of segmenting a network for security purposes. The simplest
firewall has only two interfaces: inside and outside. The simplest method of fire-
walling is to deny all inbound traffic and allow all outbound traffic. Most host-based
firewalls and personal firewalls are configured this way by default.
    Firewalls get interesting, however, when you use them to divide a network
according to functional requirements. For example, say you know that employees
on your network need only outbound Web access. You can allow only TCP ports
80 and 443 outbound and deny all the rest. The company Web site is hosted
locally, so you need to add TCP port 80 inbound to the Web server. (Note: A num-
ber of other likely services, most notably DNS, have been ignored to keep this
example simple.) However, you don’t like the idea of having an opening straight
into the internal network via TCP port 80. The solution is to deploy the Web
server inside a demilitarized zone (DMZ). A DMZ uses a third interface from the
firewall containing its own set of rules. First, assume that the DMZ is configured
to deny any connections by default, which lets you start with a clean slate. Next,
you need to move the Web server into the DMZ, remove the deny inbound rule for
port 80, and replace it with a rule that allows inbound traffic from the external
network to the Web server in the DMZ on TCP port 80. Figure 3-1 shows an exam-
ple of this network.

                                                                            Web Server DMZ

                                                     Inbound: TCP Port 80
                                                     Outbound: None

             Internet                                 Inbound: None
                                                      Outbound: TCP Ports 80, 443

                                                                     Internal Network
Figure 3-1     Simple DMZ example

    This example, although simple, conveys the basics of transport-layer segmenta-
tion. What’s important to understand is that the network should be segmented by
function as much as reasonably possible. Continuing the example, what if the Web
server is backed by a database on a separate system? The database might contain
particularly sensitive customer information that shouldn’t be located inside the
DMZ. However, migrating the database to the internal network requires opening

connectivity from the DMZ into the internal network, which might not be an
acceptable risk, either. In this case, adding a second DMZ containing a data tier for
the Web front end might be necessary.
    When reviewing an in-place application, you need to take these environmental
considerations into account. There will always be legitimate reasons to prevent a
deployment from having the ideal segmentation. However, you should aware of
these contributing factors and determine whether the environment is adequately
segmented for the application’s security requirements.
Layers 5 and 6: Session and Presentation
Some layers of the OSI model don’t map cleanly to TCP/IP; for example, the session
and presentation layer generally get pushed up into the TCP/IP application layer.
However, collectively these layers provide a useful distinction for certain applica-
tion protocols. Platform-specific features, such as RPC interfaces and named pipes,
are generally accepted as session- and presentation-layer protocols. Security on
these interfaces is typically handled programmatically and should be addressed via
the platform’s native access control mechanisms.
    Secure Socket Layer/Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) is another protocol
that’s more appropriately discussed in terms of the session or presentation layer.
The “Secure Channels” section earlier in this chapter discussed how SSL can be
used to create a secure encrypted channel. SSL/TLS also supports certificate-based
authentication, which can reduce an application’s attack surface by enforcing
authentication below the application layer.
Layer 7: Application
Application-layer security is an interesting mix, and most of this book is devoted to
it. However, application-layer proxies fall squarely into the category of operational
protective measures. If you’ve spent any time in network security, you’ve probably
heard numerous discussions of the value of heterogeneous (or mixed) networks. On
the positive side, a heterogeneous environment is much less prone to silver bullet
attacks, in which an attacker can compromise the bulk of a network by taking
advantage of a single vulnerability. However, a homogeneous environment is usu-
ally easier and less expensive to manage.
     Application-layer gateways are interesting because they add extra network
diversity in just the right location. Some of the first popular application gateways
were simply validating HTTP reverse proxies. They sat in front of vulnerability-
prone Web servers and denied malformed Web traffic, which provided moderate
protection against Web server attacks. Newer Web application gateways have added
a range of capabilities, including sitewide authentication, exploit detection, and
fine-grained rule sets.
     Overall, application gateways are no substitute for properly coded applications.
They have significant limitations, and configuring rules for the most effective

protection requires more effort than assessing and fixing a potentially vulnerable
application. However, these gateways can increase a network’s diversity, provide an
extra layer of assurance, and add a layer of protection over a questionable third-
party application.

Network Address Translation (NAT)
Network Address Translation (NAT) provides a method of mapping a set of internal
addresses against a different set of external addresses. It was originally developed
to make more efficient use of the IPv4 address space by mapping a larger number of
private, internal network addresses to a much smaller number of external
addresses.
    NAT wasn’t intended to provide security, but it does have some implicit security
benefits. A NAT device must be configured with explicit rules to forward inbound
connections; this configuration causes inbound connectivity to be implicitly denied.
NAT also conceals the internal address space from the external network, ensuring
some extra security against internal network mapping.
    NAT can offer additional protection, but generally, this isn’t its intended pur-
pose. Depending on the implementation, NAT devices might allow attacks that
establish internal connections, spoof internal addresses, or leak addresses on the
private network. Therefore, NAT shouldn’t be relied on alone; it should be viewed
as a supplementary measure.

Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)
A virtual private network (VPN) provides a virtual network interface connected to
a remote network over an encrypted tunnel. This approach has become popular
and is quickly replacing dial-in business connections and leased lines. The advan-
tage of a VPN is that it presents an interface that’s almost identical to that of a
directly connected user, which makes it convenient for end users and network
administrators.
    The main disadvantage of a VPN is that typically, the client system is outside of
the network administrators’ physical control, which creates the potential for a much
larger attack surface than a normal internal system does. VPN segments need to be
monitored more closely, and administrators must enforce additional client precau-
tions. These precautions usually include denying VPN clients access to their local
network (split tunneling) while connected and restricting access to certain internal
resources over the VPN.

Network IDSs/IPSs
Network IDSs and IPSs are devices that attempt to identify malicious network
traffic and potentially terminate or deny connectivity based on detected hostile
activity. The first systems were primarily signature-based engines that looked for

                                      Summary

specific traffic associated with known attacks. Newer systems attempt to identify
and alert administrators to anomalous traffic patterns in addition to known hos-
tile patterns.
     There’s quite a bit of literature and debate on the proper approach to IDS and
IPS deployment and configuration. The details are specific to the network environ-
ment. However, the best generally accepted practices require segmenting the net-
work first to isolate different functional areas and points of highest risk. IDS
sensors are then deployed to take advantage of segmentation in identifying poten-
tial attacks or compromises.

Summary
Application security extends beyond the code to encompass the operational envi-
ronment and mode in which applications function. In this chapter, you have looked
at external system details that affect how secure an application is in a deployment
environment. When conducting audits on an application, you need to consider the
target deployment environment (if one is available) and the application’s default
configuration parameters. Unsafe or unnecessary exposure of the application can
lead to vulnerabilities that are entirely independent of the program code.

This page intentionally left blank
