                       Chapter 4
 Application Review Process

“Ah, my ridiculously circuitous plan is one quarter complete!”
    Robot Devil, Futurama

Introduction
You no doubt purchased this book with the expectation of delving into the technical
details of application security vulnerabilities, but first you need to understand the
process of application review and its logistical and administrative details. After all,
technical prowess doesn’t matter if a review is structured so poorly that it neglects the
important application attack surface and vulnerable code paths. Having some degree of
structured process in planning and carrying out an application assessment is essential.
Of course, your review may have some unique requirements, but this chapter gives you
a framework and tools you can adapt to your own process. By incorporating these ele-
ments, you should be able to get the best results for the time you invest in any
application review.

Overview of the Application Review Process
Conducting an application security review can be a daunting task; you’re pre-
sented with a piece of software you aren’t familiar with and are expected to
quickly reach a zenlike communion with it to extract its deepest secrets. You
must strike a balance in your approach so that you uncover design, logic, opera-
tional, and implementation flaws, all of which can be difficult to find. Of course,
you will rarely have enough time to review every line of an application. So you
need understand how to focus your efforts and maintain good coverage of the
most security-relevant code.

Rationale
To be successful, any process you adopt must be pragmatic, flexible, and results
driven. A rigid methodology that provides a reproducible detailed step-by-step pro-
cedure is definitely appealing, especially for people trying to manage code reviews
or train qualified professionals. For a number of reasons, however, such a rigid
approach isn’t realistic. It’s borne out of a fundamental misunderstanding of code
review because it overlooks two simple truths. The first is that code review is a funda-
mentally creative process.
     It might seem as though this point couldn’t possibly be true because reading
other people’s code doesn’t seem particularly creative. However, to find vulnerabili-
ties in applications, you must put yourself in the developer’s shoes. You also need to
see the unexpressed possibilities in the code and constantly brainstorm for ways
that unexpected things might happen.
     The second truth is that code review is a skill. Many people assume that code
review is strictly a knowledge problem. From this perspective, the key to effective
code review is compiling the best possible list of all things that could go wrong. This
list is certainly an important aspect of code review, but you must also appreciate the
considerable skill component. Your brain has to be able to read code in a way that
you can infer the developer’s intentions yet hypothesize ways to create situations
the developer didn’t anticipate.
     Furthermore, you have to be proficient and flexible with programming lan-
guages so that you can feel at home quickly in someone else’s application. This kind
of aptitude takes years to develop fully, much like learning a foreign language or
playing a musical instrument. There’s considerable overlap with related skills, such
as programming, and other forms of systems security analysis, but this aptitude has
unique elements as well. So it’s simply unrealistic to expect even a seasoned devel-
oper to jump in and be a capable auditor.
     Accepting these truths, having a process is still quite valuable, as it makes you
more effective. There’s a lot to be done in a typical security review, and it’s easy to over-
look tasks when you’re under a time crunch. A process gives your review structure,

                                    Preassessment

which helps you prioritize your work and maintain a consistent level of thoroughness
in your analysis. It also makes your assessments approachable from a business per-
spective, which is critical when you need to integrate your work with timelines and
consulting or development teams.

Process Outline
The review process described in this chapter is open ended, and you can adapt it as
needed for your own requirements. This discussion should arm you with the tools
and knowledge you need to do a formal review, but it’s left flexible enough to handle
real-world application assessments. This application review process is divided into
four basic phases:
     1. Preassessment—This phase includes planning and scoping an application
        review, as well as collecting initial information and documentation.
     2. Application review—This phase is the primary phase of the assessment. It can
        include an initial design review of some form, and then proceed to a review
        of the application code, augmented with live testing, if appropriate. The
        review isn’t rigidly structured into distinct design, logic, implementation,
        and operational review phases. Instead, these phases are simultaneous
        objectives reached by using several strategies. The reason for this approach
        is simply that the assessment team learns a great deal about the application
        over the course of the assessment.
     3. Documentation and analysis—This phase involves collecting and documenting
        the results of the review as well as helping others evaluate the meaning of
        the results by conducting risk analysis and suggesting remediation methods
        and their estimated costs.
     4. Remediation support—This phase is a follow-up activity to assist those who
        have to act based on your findings. It includes working with developers and
        evaluating their fixes or possibly assisting in reporting any findings to a
        third party.
    This process is intended to apply to reviews that occur with some form of
schedule, perhaps as part of a consulting engagement, or reviews of an in-house
application by developers or security architects. However, it should be easy to
apply to more free-form projects, such as an open-ended, ongoing review of an
in-house application or self-directed vulnerability research.

Preassessment
Before you perform the actual review, you need to help scope and plan the assess-
ment. This process involves gathering key pieces of information that assist you in

later phases of your review. By gathering as much information as you can before
starting the assessment, you can construct a better plan of attack and achieve more
thorough coverage.

Scoping
When tasked with an application security review, first you need to ask what your
goal is. This question might seem simple, but numerous answers are possible.
Generally, a vulnerability researcher’s goal is to find the most significant vulnerabil-
ity in the shortest time. In contrast, an application security consultant is usually
concerned with getting the best application coverage the project’s budget allows.
Finally, a developer or security architect might have a more generous schedule when
conducting internal reviews and use that time to be as thorough as possible.
     The goal of a review might also be heavily colored by business concerns or less
tangible factors, such as company image. A company certainly isn’t inclined to
devote extensive time to a product that’s close to or even past its end of life (EOL).
However, a review might be required to meet regulatory concerns. That same com-
pany might also want a thorough review of its newest flagship financial manage-
ment application.
     When businesses commit to more thorough reviews, often you find that their
interests aren’t what you expect. A business is sometimes more concerned with
easy-to-detect issues, regardless of their severity. Their goal is more to avoid the
negative stigma of a published security issue than to address the ultimate technical
security of their product or service. So you aren’t meeting your client’s (or
employer’s) needs if you spend all your time on complex issues and miss the low-
risk but obvious ones. Focusing on low-risk issues seems like blasphemy to most
technical security people, but it’s often a reasonable business decision. For exam-
ple, assume you’re performing a source-code-based assessment on a bank’s Web-
facing account management application. What is the likelihood of someone blindly
finding a subtle authentication bypass that you found only by tracing through the
source code carefully? In contrast, think of how easily an attacker can find cross-site
scripting vulnerabilities—just with normal user access. So which issue do you think
is more likely to be identified and leveraged by a third party? The obvious answer is
cross-site scripting vulnerabilities, but that’s not what many auditors go after
because they want to focus on the more interesting vulnerabilities.
     That’s not to say you should ignore complex issues and just get the easy stuff.
After all, that advice would make this book quite short. However, you need to under-
stand the goals of your review clearly. You also need to have an appreciation for what
you can reasonably accomplish in a given timeframe and what confidence you can
have in your results. These details are influenced by two major factors: the type of
access you have to the application and the time you have available for review.

                                          Preassessment

Application Access
Application access is divided into the five categories listed in Table 4-1. These
distinctions are not, of course, absolute. There are always minor variations, such as
limited source access or inconsistencies between test environments and deployment
environments. However, these distinctions work well enough to cover most possibilities.

Table 4-1
Categories of Application Access
Category                        Description
Source only                     Only the source code has been supplied, with no build environment
                                or application binaries. You might be able to build a working binary
                                with some effort, although some required components typically
                                aren’t available. As a result, the review is generally done using only
                                static analysis. This type of access is common for contracted
                                application reviews, when the client can provide source but not a
                                functional build or testing environment.
Binary only                     Application binaries have been supplied, but no source code is
                                provided. The application review focuses on live analysis and
                                reverse engineering. This type of access is common when perform-
                                ing vulnerability research on closed-source commercial software.
Both source and binary access   Both a source tree and access to a working application build are
                                available. This type of access provides the most efficient review
                                possible. It’s most common for in-house application assessments,
                                although security- and cost- conscious clients provide this access for
                                contracted reviews, too.
Checked build                   You have an application binary and no source code, but the
                                application binary has additional debugging information.
                                This approach is often taken for contracted code reviews when a
                                client is unwilling to provide source but does want to expedite the
                                review process somewhat.
Strict black box                No direct access to the application source or binary is available.
                                Only external, blind testing techniques, such as black box and
                                fuzz- testing, are possible with this type of access. It’s common
                                when assessing Web applications (discussed more in Chapter 17,
                                “Web Applications”).

     This book focuses primarily on source-code-based application review.
Although the techniques discussed in this chapter can be applied to other types of
reviews, more information is generally better. The ideal assessment environment
includes source-based analysis augmented with access to functioning binaries and
a live QA environment (if appropriate). This environment offers the widest range
of assessment possibilities and results in the most time-effective review. The
remaining types of access in Table 4-1 are all viable techniques, but they generally

require more time for the same degree of thoroughness or have an upper limit on
the degree of thoroughness you can reasonably hope to achieve.

Timelines
In addition to application access, you need to determine how much time can be
allotted to a review. The timeline is usually the most flexible part of a review, so it’s
a good way to adjust the thoroughness. The most commonly used measure of
application size is thousands of lines of code (KLOC). It’s not an ideal way to meas-
ure an application’s complexity and size, but it’s a reasonable metric for general
use. A good reviewer ranges between 100 to 1,000 lines of code an hour, depending
on experience and details of the code. The best way to establish an effective base-
line for yourself is to keep track of how much time you spend reviewing different
components and get a feel for your own pacing.
    Code type and quality have a big impact on your review speed. Languages such as
C/C++ generally require close examination of low-level details because of the subtle
nature of many flaws. Memory-safe languages, such as Java, address some of these
issues, but they might introduce higher-level complexity in the form of expansive
class hierarchies and excessive layering of interfaces. Meanwhile, the quality of inter-
nal documentation and comments is a language-independent factor that can seriously
affect your review pacing. For this reason, you should look at some samples of the
application code before you attempt to estimate for your pace for a specific codebase.
    Overall code size affects the pace at which you can effectively review an
application. For instance, reviewing a 100KLOC application doesn’t usually take
twice as much time as a 50KLOC application. The reason is that the first
50KLOC give you a feel for the code, allow you to establish common vulnerability
patterns, and let you pick up on developer idioms. This familiarity enables you to
review the remainder of the application more efficiently. So be sure to account
for these economies of scale when determining your timelines.
    In the end, balancing coverage with cost is usually the ultimate factor in deter-
mining your timeline. In a perfect world, every application should be reviewed as
thoroughly as possible, but this goal is rarely feasible in practice. Time and budg-
etary constraints force you to limit the components you can review and the depth
of coverage you can devote to each component. Therefore, you need to exercise
considerable judgment in determining where to focus your efforts.

Information Collection
The first step in reviewing an application is learning about the application’s purpose
and function. The discussion of threat modeling in Chapter 2 included a number of
sources for information collection. This component of your review should encapsulate
that portion of the threat model. To recap, you should focus on collecting information
from these sources:

   ■ Developer interviews

   ■ Developer documentation

   ■ Standards documentation

   ■ Source profiling

   ■ System profiling

Application Review
People’s natural inclination when approaching code review is to try to structure
it like a waterfall-style development process. This means starting with a struc-
tured design review phase and adhering to a formal process, including DFDs and
attack trees. This type of approach should give you all the information you need
to plan and perform an effective targeted review. However, it doesn’t necessarily
result in the most time-effective identification of high and intermediate level
design and logic vulnerabilities, as it overlooks a simple fact about application
reviews: The time at which you know the least about an application is the beginning of
the review.
     This statement seems obvious, but people often underestimate how much one
learns over the course of a review; it can be a night and day difference. When you
first sit down with the code, you often can’t see the forest for the trees. You don’t
know where anything is, and you don’t know how to begin. By the end of a review,
the application can seem almost like a familiar friend. You probably have a feel for
the developers’ personalities and can identify where the code suffers from neglect
because everyone is afraid to touch it. You know who just read a book on design
patterns and decided to build the world’s most amazing flexible aspect-oriented
turbo-logging engine—and you have a good idea which developer was smart enough
to trick that guy into working on a logging engine.
     The point is that the time you’re best qualified to find more abstract design
and logic vulnerabilities is toward the end of the review, when you have a detailed
knowledge of the application’s workings. A reasonable process for code review
should capitalize on this observation.
     A design review is exceptional for starting the process, prioritizing how the
review is performed, and breaking up the work among a review team. However, it’s
far from a security panacea. You’ll regularly encounter situations, such as the ones
in the following list, where you must skip the initial design review or throw out the
threat model because it doesn’t apply to the implementation:
   ■ You might not have any design documentation to review. Unfortunately, this
     happens all the time.

     ■ The design documentation might be so outdated that it’s useless. Unfortunately,
       this happens all the time, too—particularly if the design couldn’t be reasonably
       implemented or simply failed to be updated with the ongoing application
       development.
     ■ There might be a third party who doesn’t want to give you access to design
       information for one reason or another (usually involving lawyers).
     ■ The developers might not be available for various reasons. They might even
       consider you the enemy.
     ■ Clients don’t want to pay for a design review. This isn’t a surprise, as clients
       rarely want to pay for anything. It’s more or less up to you as a professional
       to make sure they get the best bang for their buck—in spite of themselves.
       Time is expensive in consulting and development environments, so you’d
       better be confident that what you’re doing is the best use of your time.
    Accepting all the preceding points, performing a design review and threat
model first, whenever realistically possible, is still encouraged. If done properly, it
can make the whole assessment go more smoothly.

Avoid Drowning
This process has been structured based on extensive experience in performing
code reviews. Experienced auditors (your authors in particular) have spent years
experimenting with different methodologies and techniques, and some have
worked out better than others. However, the most important thing learned from
that experience is that it’s best to use several techniques and switch between
them periodically for the following reasons:
     ■ You can concentrate intensely for only a limited time.

     ■ Different vulnerabilities are easier to find from different perspectives.

     ■ Variety helps you maintain discipline and motivation.

     ■ Different people think in different ways.

Iterative Process
The method for performing the review is a simple, iterative process. It’s intended to
be used two or three times over the course of a work day. Generally, this method
works well because you can switch to a less taxing auditing activity when you start
to feel as though you’re losing focus. Of course, your work day, constitution, and
preferred schedule might prompt you to adapt the process further, but this method
should be a reasonable starting point.

     First, you start the application review with an initial preparation phase, in
which you survey what information you have available, make some key decisions
about your audit’s structure, and perform design review if adequate documentation
is available and you deem it to be time effective. After this initial phase, the cycle
has three basic steps:
      1. Plan—Take some time to decide what you’re going to do next. Select an
         auditing strategy; depending on the strategy, you might need to choose a
         goal or pick from a set of techniques.
      2. Work—Perform the auditing strategy you selected, taking extensive notes.
      3. Reflect—Take a moment to make sure you’re managing your time well and
         are still on track. Then figure out what you’ve learned from the work you
         just performed.
    These three steps are repeated until the end of the application review phase,
although the selection of auditing strategies changes as a result of the assessment
team understanding the codebase more thoroughly.

Initial Preparation
You need to get your bearings before you can start digging into the code in any
meaningful way. At this point, you should have a lot of information, but you proba-
bly don’t know exactly where to start or what to do with the information. The first
decision to make is how you’re going to handle the structure of your review. If you
don’t have much documentation, your decision is simple: You have to derive the
design from the implementation during the course of your review. If you have ade-
quate documentation, you can use it as a basic roadmap for structuring your review.
    There are three generalized approaches to performing an assessment: top-down,
bottom-up, and hybrid. The first two are analogous to the types of component
decomposition in software design. As in software design, the approach is deter-
mined by your understanding of the design at a particular level.

Top-Down Approach
The top-down (or specialization) approach mirrors the classical waterfall software
development process and is mostly an extension of the threat-modeling process
described in Chapter 2, “Design Review.” For this approach, you begin from your
general knowledge of the application contained in your threat model. You then
continue refining this model by conducting implementation assessments along the
security-relevant pathways and components identified in your model. This approach
identifies design vulnerabilities first, followed by logical implementation vulnerabili-
ties and then low-level implementation vulnerabilities. This technique is good if the
design documentation is completely accurate; however, any discrepancies between the

design and implementation could cause you to ignore security-relevant code paths. In
practice, these discrepancies are probable, so you need to establish some additional
checks for assessing the pathways your model identifies as not relevant to security.

Bottom-Up Approach
The bottom-up (or generalization) approach mirrors the other classic software-factoring
approach. The review proceeds from the implementation and attempts to establish
the lowest-level vulnerabilities first. A valuable aspect of this approach is that it
allows you to build an understanding of the application by assessing the codebase
first. You can then develop the higher-level threat models and design documenta-
tion later in the review process, when your understanding of the application is
greatest. The disadvantage is that this approach is slow. Because you’re working
entirely from the implementation first, you could end up reviewing a lot of code
that isn’t security relevant. However, you won’t know that until you develop a
higher-level understanding of the application.
     As part of a bottom-up review, maintaining a design model of the system
throughout the assessment is valuable. If you update it after each pass through the
iterative process, you can quickly piece together the higher-level organization. This
design model doesn’t have to be formal. On the contrary, it’s best to use a format
that’s easy to update and can capture potentially incomplete or incorrect informa-
tion. You can opt for DFD sketches and class diagrams, or you can use a simple text
file for recording your design notes. Choose the approach you consider appropriate
for the final results you need.

Hybrid Approach
The hybrid approach is simply a combination of the top-down and bottom-up
methods, but you alternate your approach as needed for different portions of an
application. When you lack an accurate design for the basis of your review
(which happens more often than not), the hybrid approach is the best option.
Instead of proceeding from a threat model, you use the information you gathered
to try to establish some critical application details. You do this by performing an
abbreviated modeling process that focuses on identifying the following high-
level characteristics (from the design review process):
      ■ General application purpose—What is the application supposed to do?

      ■ Assets and entry points—How does data get into the system, and what value
       does the system have that an attacker might be interested in?
      ■ Components and modules—What are the major divisions between the application’s
        components and modules?
      ■ Intermodule relationships—At a high level, how do different modules in the
        application communicate?

    ■ Fundamental security expectations—What security expectations do legitimate
       users of this application have?
    ■ Major trust boundaries—What are the major boundaries that enforce security
       expectations?
    These points might seem nebulous when you first encounter a large application,
but that’s why you can define them broadly at first. As you proceed, you can refine
your understanding of these details. It can also help to get a few complete design
reviews under your belt first. After all, it’s good to know how a process is supposed
to work before you try to customize and abbreviate it.

Plan
In the planning phase, you decide which auditing strategy you should use next. These
auditing strategies are described in detail and evaluated based on several criteria in
“Code-Auditing Strategies,” later in this chapter. However, you need to understand
some general concepts first, described in the following sections.

Consider Your Goals
Typically, you have several goals in an application assessment. You want to discover
certain classes of implementation bugs that are easy to find via sub-string searches
or the use of tools, especially bugs that are pervasive throughout the application.
Cross-site scripting and SQL injection are two common examples of these types of
bugs. You might analyze one or two instances in detail, but the real goal here is to be
as thorough as possible and try to come up with a list that developers can use to fix
them all in one mass effort. You also want to discover implementation bugs that
require a reasonable degree of understanding of the code, such as integer overflows,
where you have to know what’s going on at the assembly level but don’t necessarily
have to know what the code is trying to do at a higher level of abstraction.
    As your understanding develops, you want to discover medium-level logic and
algorithmic bugs, which require more knowledge of how the application works.
You also want to discover higher-level cross-module issues such as synchronization
and improper use of interfaces. If you’re using a top-down approach, you might be
able to ascertain such vulnerabilities working solely from design documentation
and developer input. If you’re using a bottom-up or hybrid approach, you will
spend time analyzing the codebase to create a working model of the application
design, be it formal or informal.

Pick the Right Strategy
The “Code-Auditing Strategies” section later in this chapter describes a number of
options for proceeding with your review. Most of these strategies work toward one
or more goals at the same time. It’s important to pick strategies that emphasize the

perspective and abstraction level of the part of the review you’re focusing on. Your
planning must account for the stages at which a strategy is best applied. If you can
perform a true top-down review, your progression is quite straightforward, and
your strategies proceed from the application’s general design and architecture into
specific implementation issues. However, in practice, you can almost never proceed
that cleanly, so this section focuses on considerations for a hybrid approach.
    The beginning of a hybrid review usually focuses on the simpler strategies while
trying to build a more detailed understanding of the codebase. As you progress, you
move to more difficult strategies that require more knowledge of the implementa-
tion but also give you a more detailed understanding of the application logic and
design. Finally, you should build on this knowledge and move to strategies that
focus on vulnerabilities in the application’s high-level design and architecture.

Create a Master Ideas List
As the review progresses, you need to keep track of a variety of information
about the code. Sometimes you can lose track of these details because of their
sheer volume. For this reason, maintaining a separate list of ways you could
exploit the system is suggested. This list isn’t detailed; it just includes ideas that
pop into your head while you’re working, which often represent an intuitive
understanding of the code. So it’s a good idea to capture them when they hit you
and test them when time is available.

Pick a Target or Goal
Reviewing a large codebase is overwhelming if you don’t have some way of break-
ing it up into manageable chunks. This is especially true at the beginning of an
assessment when you have so many possible approaches and don’t know yet what’s
best. So it helps to define targets for each step and proceed from there. In fact, some
code-auditing strategies described in this chapter require choosing a goal of some
sort. So pick one that’s useful in identifying application vulnerabilities and can be
reasonably attained in a period of two to eight hours. That helps keep you on track
and prevents you from getting discouraged. Examples of goals at the beginning of
an assessment include identifying all the entry points in the code and making lists
of known potentially vulnerable functions in use (such as unchecked string manipu-
lation functions). Later goals might include tracing a complex and potentially vul-
nerable pathway or validating the design of a higher-level component against the
implementation.

Coordinate
When reviewing a large application professionally, usually you work with other
auditors, so you must coordinate your efforts to prevent overlap and make the most
efficient use of your time. In these situations, it helps if the module coupling is

loose enough that you can pick individual pieces to review. That way, you can just
make notes on what potential vulnerabilities are associated with a set of module
interfaces, and one of your co-auditors can continue the process to review these
interfaces in his or her own analysis.
     Unfortunately, divisions aren’t always clean, and you might find yourself
reviewing several hundred KLOC of spaghetti code. Splitting up the work in these
situations might not be possible. If you can, however, you should work closely with
other auditors and communicate often to prevent too much overlap. Fortunately, a
little overlap can be helpful because some degree of double coverage is beneficial
for identifying vulnerabilities in complex code. Remember to maintain good notes
and keep each other informed of your status; otherwise, you can miss code or take
twice as long on the application.
     You also need to know when coordinated work just isn’t possible, particularly
for smaller and less modular applications. With these applications, the effort of
coordination can be more work than the review of the application itself. There’s no
way to tell you how to make this call because it depends on the application and the
team performing the review. You have to get comfortable with the people you work
with and learn what works best for them and you.

Work
The actual work step involves applying the code-auditing strategies described in this
chapter. This explanation sounds simple, but a lot of effort goes into the work step.
The following sections cover a handful of considerations you need to remember dur-
ing this step.

Working Papers
Regulated industries have established practices for dealing with working papers,
which are simply notes and documentation gathered during an audit. The informa-
tion security industry isn’t as formalized, but you should still get in the habit of tak-
ing detailed assessment notes. This practice might seem like a nuisance at first, but
you’ll soon find it invaluable. The following are a few reasons for maintaining good
working papers:
    ■ Notes help you to organize your work and ensure proper code coverage.

    ■ Working papers provide an easy way to transfer knowledge to another auditor
       and help distributing work among an auditing team.
    ■ Clients often expect a consultant to supply detailed documentation to justify
      vulnerability findings and provide proof of code coverage.
    ■ An application might require follow-up reviews, and working papers can dras-
      tically reduce the time needed to perform these reviews.

    Knowing the value of notes is one thing, but every auditor has his or her own style
of note taking. Some reviewers are happy with a simple text file; others use spread-
sheets that list modules and files. You can even create detailed spreadsheets listing
every class, function, and global object. Some reviewers develop special-purpose
interactive development environment (IDE) plug-ins with a database back end to help
in generating automated reports.
    In the end, how you take notes isn’t as important as what you’re recording, so
here are some guidelines to consider. First, your notes should be clear enough that a
peer could approximate your work if you aren’t available. Analogous to comments
in code, clear and verbose notes aren’t just for knowledge transfer, but also prove
useful when you have to revisit an application you haven’t seen in a while. Second,
your notes must be thorough enough to establish code coverage and support any
findings. This guideline is especially important for a consultant when dealing with
clients; however it is valuable for internal reviews as well.

Don’t Fall Down Rabbit Holes
Sometimes you get so caught up in trying to figure out a fascinating technical issue
that you lose track of what your goal is. You want to chase down that complex and
subtle vulnerability, but you risk neglecting the rest of the application. If you’re lucky,
your trip down the rabbit hole at least taught you a lot about the application, but that
won’t matter if you simply run out of time and can’t finish the review. This mistake is
fairly common for less experienced reviewers. They are so concerned with finding the
biggest show-stopping issue they can that they ignore much of the code and end up
with little to show for a considerable time investment. So make sure you balance your
time and set milestones that keep you on track. This might mean you have to ignore
some interesting possibilities to give your client (or employer) good coverage quality
within your deadline. Make note of these possible issues, and try to return to them if
you have time later. If you can’t, be sure to note their existence in your report.

Take Breaks as Needed
Your brain can perform only so much analysis, and it probably does a good chunk of
the heavy lifting when you aren’t even paying attention. Sometimes you need to
walk away from the problem and come back when your subconscious is done chew-
ing on it. Taking a break doesn’t necessarily mean you have to stop working. You
might just need to change things up and spend a little time on some simpler tasks
you would have to do anyway, such as applying a less taxing strategy or adding
more detail to your notes. This “break” might even be the perfect time to handle
some minor administrative tasks, such as submitting the travel expense reports you
put off for the past six months. However, sometimes a break really means a break.
Get up from your chair and poke your head into the real world for a bit.

Reflect
In the plan and work steps, you’ve learned about the value of taking notes and
recording everything you encounter in a review. In the reflect step, you should take
a step back and see what you’ve accomplished. It gives you an opportunity to assess
and analyze the information you have without getting tripped up by the details.
This step enables you to make clearer plans as your review continues.

Status Check
Look at where you are in this part of your review and what kind of progress you’re
making. To help you determine your progress, ask yourself the following questions:
    ■ What have you learned about the application?

    ■ Are you focusing on the most security-relevant components?

    ■ Have you gotten stuck on any tangents or gone down any rabbit holes?

    ■ Does your master ideas list have many plausible entries?

    ■ Have you been taking adequate notes and recorded enough detail for review
      purposes?
    ■ If you’re working from application models and documentation (or developing
      them as you work), do these models reflect the implementation accurately?
   Of course, this list of questions isn’t exhaustive, but it’s a good starting point.
You can add more questions based on the specific details of your review. Include
notes about possible questions on your master ideas list, and incorporate them into
your status check as appropriate.

Reevaluate
Sometimes plans fail. You might have started with the best of intentions and all the
background you thought you needed, but things just aren’t working. For example,
you started with a strict top-down review and found major discrepancies between
the design and the actual implementation, or your bottom-up or hybrid review is way
off the mark. In these cases, you need to reevaluate your approach and see where the
difficulties are stemming from. You might not have chosen the right goals, or you
could be trying to divide the work in a way that’s just not possible. The truth is that
your understanding of an application should change a lot over the course of a review,
so don’t be bothered if a change in your plan is required.
     Finally, don’t mistake not identifying any vulnerabilities for a weakness in your
plan. You could be reviewing a particularly well-developed application, or the vul-
nerabilities might be complex enough that you need a detailed understanding of the
application. So don’t be too quick to change your approach, either.

Peer Reviews
Getting input from another code auditor, if possible, is quite valuable. When you
look at the same code several times, you tend to get a picture in your head about
what it does and how it works. A fresh perspective can help you find things you
might not have seen otherwise because you hadn’t thought of them or simply
missed them for some reason. (As mentioned, glancing over a few lines of code
without fully considering their consequences can be easy, especially during all-
night code audits!) If you have another code reviewer who’s willing to look over
some of your work, by all means, compare notes. An interesting exercise is to look
at the same code without discussion, and then compare what you both came up
with. This exercise can help you see any inconsistencies between how either of you
thinks the code works. Usually, peer reviewing isn’t feasible for double-checking
your entire audit because basically, it means doing the audit twice. Therefore, peer
reviews should focus on parts of the code that are particularly complex or where
you might not be certain of your work.

Documentation and Analysis
After the hard work is over, you need to document your findings. This phase is
essentially the same as the final phase of the threat model from Chapter 2, and
you can use the same basic documentation process. Table 4-2 is an example of
the findings from Chapter 2 updated with the vulnerability’s implementation
details.

Table 4-2
Finding Summary
Threat                    Brute-force login
Affected component        Human resources management login component
Module details            login.php (lines 49–63)
Vulnerability class       Authentication bypass
Description               Different errors are returned for invalid usernames and passwords,
                          making usernames easier to identify. This error makes a successful
                          brute-force attack much more likely against users with weak or easily
                          guessed passwords.
Result                    Untrusted clients can gain access to user accounts and, therefore, read
                          or modify sensitive information.
Prerequisites             The application is located on the corporate intranet, limiting its
                          exposure.
Business impact           A malicious third party can access a user’s personal data, which could
                          be a violation of federal privacy regulations.

                               Documentation and Analysis

Proposed remediation     Make error messages ambiguous so an attacker doesn’t know whether
                         the username or password is invalid.
                         Lock the user account after repeated failed login attempts. (Three or
                         five attempts would be appropriate.)
Risk                     Damage potential: 6
                         Reproducibility: 8
                         Exploitability: 4
                         Affected users: 5
                         Discoverability: 8
                         Overall: 6.2

    This sample is certainly functional; however, it’s not the only approach. Your
level of detail can vary depending on your reasons for the audit and who the
report is for. The following list is considered useful information to support a
security finding:
   ■ Location of the vulnerability—This information (in Table 4-2’s Module details
     row) should be fairly specific. You should usually include the filename, func-
     tion name, and line number in the code. Sometimes a vulnerability spans
     many lines of code (and possibly several functions); in this case, you could
     omit a line number or give a range of line numbers. Also, you might choose to
     have one finding that represents a pervasive vulnerability, in which case this
     information would contain a large list of locations or refer to an external list
     generated by a tool or search.
   ■ Vulnerability class—A classification of sorts about the nature of the bug,
     whether it’s buffer overflow, integer overflow, unchecked copy, dangerous API
     use, or one of the other vulnerability classes discussed in this book.
   ■ Vulnerability description—This summary of the vulnerability should describe
     why the code you’re drawing attention to isn’t secure. In some cases (such as a
     generic buffer overflow), you need to write very little, but more complex or
     unique vulnerabilities might require expanding the description to include
     more specifics.
   ■ Prerequisites—This is a list of prerequisite conditions that need to be true for
     the vulnerability to be triggered. The list might include configuration
     options or technical factors that need to exist before the vulnerability is a
     problem.
   ■ Business impact—Most reviews need to put technical risks in the context of
     business risks. Specifying the business impact can be tricky, as it changes
     depending on who’s expected to deploy the application and how it will be
     used. However, business factors are what motivate the review, so your find-
     ings need to address these concerns.

      ■ Remediation—It is possible that this information might not be required in some
        cases, or it might only be a simple line or two explaining how the developers
        might want to fix the vulnerability. When working closely with a development
        team, however, the remediation section might be quite detailed and provide
        several options for addressing the vulnerability.
      ■ Risk—This rating is the risk determined from the vulnerability’s severity
        combined with the probability of exploit. The DREAD rating system from
        Chapter 2 encapsulates this information as the overall risk rating.
      ■ Severity—This information is the amount of damage that can be incurred if the
        vulnerability is exploited successfully. The DREAD rating system from
        Chapter 2 encapsulates severity in the damage potential and affected users
        risk factors.
      ■ Probability—This information is the likelihood of the vulnerability being
        exploited successfully. The DREAD rating system from Chapter 2 encapsu-
        lates probability in the reproducibility, discoverability, and exploitability
        risk factors.
    Generally, you need to include an overall summary of how the application
measured up. Was it extremely secure, making exploitable bugs difficult to find?
Or did it seem as though the developers weren’t aware of security considerations?
Assigning an overall “grade” can be subjective, so make sure you don’t come
across as judgmental or condescending. Instead, you should rely on your results
to convey the application’s quality, and try to express the trends you see and the
potential for future problems. After you have some experience, the summary
component will seem easier, as you should be able to get a feel for how securely
an application is developed.

Reporting and Remediation Support
A good application security assessment should not be an isolated event. Sometimes
the findings are just handed off and the job is done. However, most assessments
require some degree of follow-up and interaction with the development team.
Application security often isn’t well understood, so you might play a big part in car-
rying out remediation. In particular, the developers might need to be educated on
the nature of the vulnerabilities you identify. They might also need you to review
the proposed remediation and identify any issues that weren’t addressed ade-
quately or spot the introduction of new vulnerabilities.
    The remediation review can also introduce additional operational review
requirements, which often occurs with serious design vulnerabilities or pandemic
implementation issues. Severe issues might be too expensive or time consuming to

                                    Code Navigation

address adequately. Therefore, the development team might need your assistance in
identifying stopgap measures and operational protections that can provide
additional assurance.
    Vulnerability research has its own unique process, even though a researcher
typically has only one or two critical risk bugs that warrant publication. The
amount of work required to document, report, and support just one bug can easily
exceed the effort needed to support an internal assessment with 30 findings. The
issue must be documented technically and reported to third-party vendors, which
is usually fairly straightforward. A researcher generally constructs exploits for a
few platforms before contacting the vendor. This step is a final sanity check of the
analysis and unequivocally establishes the risk of the issue in case its exploitability
is disputed.
    The vendor typically asks for at least a month to fix the bug. At some point, the
researcher has to prepare information for publication, which must be scrutinized
and fact checked. Researchers might also be responsible for constructing intrusion
detection system (IDS) signatures and scanner checks or creating reliable exploits
suitable for penetration testers to use. Before publication, sometimes they’re asked
to verify the developer’s remediation, and they often help the marketing staff pre-
pare a press release to accompany any advisory. After the vulnerability is published,
the researcher occasionally explains the issue to reporters and addresses any issues
raised in response to the disclosure.

Code Navigation
There are a few basic ways to traverse through functions and modules in source
code, defined by where you start, what your goal is, and how you follow the code.
Borrowing some language from other disciplines, code navigation can be described
in terms of external flow sensitivity and tracing direction.

External Flow Sensitivity
When you review an entire application, you need to find different ways to
decompose it into more manageable parts. One of the easiest ways to do this is to
isolate the application code’s external flow, which refers to how execution pro-
ceeds from function to function, but not inside a function. It’s divided into two
categories: control-flow sensitive and data-flow sensitive. A brief example
should help illustrate what this concept means:

int bob(int c)
{
      if (c == 4)
          fred(c);
      if (c == 72)
          jim();
      for (; c; c—)
          updateglobalstate();
}

     Look at this example first in the context of ignoring external control flow and
data flow. This means you simply read this code from top to bottom; you don’t
branch out to any function calls. You might note that the code uses some sentinel
values to call fred() and jim() and seems to trust its input c. However, all your
analysis should be isolated to this function.
     Consider the same example from a control-flow sensitive viewpoint. In this
case, you start reading this function and see the call to fred(). Because you haven’t
seen fred() before, you pull it up and start checking it out. Then you trace into the
call to jim() and do the same for the call to updateglobalstate(). Of course, each
of these functions might call other unfamiliar functions, so your control-flow sensi-
tive approach requires evaluating each one. This approach could conceivably
involve reading dozens of functions before you finish this simple code path.
     Now say you follow only the data flow corresponding to the data in the c vari-
able and ignore any control flow that doesn’t affect this data directly. With this
approach, you trace through to the call to fred() because it passes the c variable.
However, this analysis simply ignores jim() because it doesn’t affect the data.
     Finally, if you were following control flow and data flow, you’d have some idea
of what the value of c might be coming into this function. You might have a certain
value in mind or a possible set of values. For example, if you know that c couldn’t
be 4, you wouldn’t bother reading fred(). If you suspected that c could be 72,
however, you need to trace into jim().
     If you haven’t done much code review, you would probably guess that the
most useful method combines control-flow sensitive and data-flow sensitive
approaches because you’d be closely following what could happen as the program
runs. It might surprise you to know that many experienced auditors rely primarily
on techniques that aren’t control-flow or data-flow sensitive. The reason they
have done so is to simplify the number of mental context switches they deal with
to make the most effective use of their time. Generally, it’s more effective to
review functions in isolation and trace the code flow only when absolutely
necessary.

        Note
        Flow analysis is an important concept in compiler design, and these
        characterizations between control flow and data flow have been
        simplified for the purposes of this discussion. However, real
        compiler theory is far more complex and should only be attempted
        by card carrying computer scientists.

Tracing Direction
When tracing code, you can follow one of two paths: forward-tracing, usually done to
evaluate code functionality, and back-tracing, usually done to evaluate code reachability.
    Forward-tracing can be done using any of the four types of flow sensitivity out-
lined previously. Forward traces that incorporate control flow and/or data flow start at
entry points, trust boundaries, or the first line of key algorithms. Forward traces that
ignore control flow and data flow start at the first line of a file or the top of a module
implementation. All four techniques are essential core processes for analyzing code.
    Back-tracing usually starts at a piece of code identified as a candidate point,
which represents a potential vulnerability in the system. Examples include issuing
dynamic SQL statements, using unbounded string copies, or accessing dynamically
generated file paths. Candidate points are usually identified through some form of
automated analysis or by going through the code with the grep utility to find known
vulnerable patterns. After identifying candidate points, the reviewer traces from
them back to the application’s entry points.
    The advantage of back-tracing is that it involves fewer code paths than for-
ward-tracing. The disadvantage is that it’s only as strong as your selection of can-
didate points, so you run the risk of overlooking exploitable pathways because
you didn’t consider valid candidate points. You also tend to miss logic-related
vulnerabilities entirely because they rarely map cleanly to algorithmically
detectable candidate points.

Code-Auditing Strategies
This section introduces a number of strategies for auditing code and explains
their strengths and weaknesses. Keep in mind that these strategies can (and
often must) be combined to suit the nuances of the application you’re reviewing.
Developing your own strategies based on the workflow you find most appealing
is encouraged, too.
    Three basic categories of code-auditing strategies are described in the following
sections, and all three have their value in different situations. The following list
summarizes the categories:

      ■ Code comprehension (CC) strategies—These strategies involve analyzing the
        source code directly to discover vulnerabilities and improve your understand-
        ing of the application.
      ■ Candidate point (CP) strategies—These strategies feature two distinct steps.
        First, create a list of potential issues through some mechanism or process.
        Second, examine the source code to determine the relevance of these issues.
      ■ Design generalization (DG) strategies—These strategies, a bit more flexible in
        nature, are intended for analyzing potential medium- to high-level logic and
        design flaws.
    Each strategy description in the following sections includes a scorecard so that you
can compare the finer points easily. Table 4-3 gives you a legend for understanding
these scorecards.

Table 4-3
Auditing Strategies Scorecard Legend
Start point              Where tracing begins for the strategy
End point                The goal for the strategy or where tracing ends
Tracing method           Defines the types of external code flow analysis and tracing direction
                         associated with the strategy
Goal                     Identifies the purpose of the strategy, meaning what general types of
                         vulnerabilities it targets
Difficulty               The difficulty of using the strategy; however, difficulty generally decreases
                         as you gain a better understanding of the code. These measures are
                         defined as follows:
                         Easy
                         Moderate
                         Hard
                         Very hard
Speed                    A measure of how quickly you can perform the strategy, which is often
                         affected by its difficulty. These measures are defined as follows:
                         Very slow
                         Slow
                         Medium
                         Fast
                         Very fast
Comprehension impact     A measure of how much this review strategy builds your understanding
                         of the application’s function, including the design and implementation.
                         Strategies with a higher comprehension impact are usually more
                         difficult but pay off by allowing you to identify more complex flaws.
                         These measures are defined as follows:

                        Very low
                        Low
                        Medium
                        High
                        Very high
Abstraction             Identifies the level at which the strategy operates, which determines the
                        types of vulnerabilities it identifies and the existing knowledge you need
                        to apply the strategy. These levels are defined as follows:
                        Basic implementation: Vulnerabilities in implementation that can be iden-
                        tified without understanding the application’s function or purpose;
                        includes simple buffer overflows, format strings, and so forth.
                        Complex implementation: More complex implementation vulnerabilities
                        that can be identified with some additional application context but
                        require no understanding of the function and purpose; includes integer
                        and typing issues, synchronization issues, and so on.
                        Implementation logic: Vulnerabilities identified from understanding the
                        application’s function at a module level but doesn’t necessarily require
                        knowing the high-level design abstractions.
                        Design: Vulnerabilities in an application’s abstract design.
                        Architectural: Vulnerabilities in the high-level interaction between an
                        application’s components or its relationship with other systems; includes
                        many classes of operational vulnerabilities.
Strengths               A summary of this strategy’s common strengths compared to other
                        strategies
Weaknesses              A summary of this strategy’s common weaknesses compared to other
                        strategies

Code Comprehension Strategies
Code comprehension strategies are organized around discovering vulnerabilities by
directly analyzing the code. Typically, success with these techniques require you to
read the code and understand it. They require higher degrees of concentration and
discipline than other techniques, but they pay dividends in terms of learning the
codebase. As noted in the previous bulleted list, the abbreviation “CC” is used for
the following discussion of these strategies.

Trace Malicious Input
The CC1 technique (see Table 4-4) is close to what most people think code review
involves. You start at an entry point to the system, where user-malleable informa-
tion can come in. You then trace the flow of code forward, performing limited data
flow analysis. You keep a set of possible “bad” inputs in the back of your mind as
you read the code and try to trace down anything that looks like a potential security
issue. This technique is an effective way to analyze code, but it requires some expe-
rience so that you know which functions to trace into.

Table 4-4
CC1: Trace Malicious Input
Start point              Data entry points
End point                Security vulnerabilities (open-ended)
Tracing method           Forward, control-flow sensitive, data-flow sensitive
Goal                     Discover security problems that can be caused by malicious input.
                         Use threat model and/or common vulnerability classes to help guide
                         analysis.
Difficulty               Hard
Speed                    Very slow
Comprehension impact     High
Abstraction              Basic implementation through implementation logic
Strengths                Inherent focus on security-relevant code
                         Can sometimes identify subtle or abstract flaws
                         Difficult to go off track
Weaknesses               Code and data paths balloon up quickly, especially in object-oriented
                         code
                         Easy to overlook issues
                         Requires focus and experience

     Generally, you focus your efforts on searching for any type of behavior that appears
unsafe: a vulnerability class you recognize, a failure to define a trust boundary where
it’s needed, and so forth. It’s hard to go too far off track with this technique because
you can usually keep yourself on the trail of malleable input data. However, overlook-
ing issues when you get tired or impatient can happen, as inevitably you start skipping
over functions you would have analyzed earlier in the day. Unfortunately, this strategy
is so time consuming that you’re certain to lose focus at some point.
     This kind of analysis can prove difficult in object-oriented code, especially
poorly designed object-oriented code. You’ll know quickly whether this is an issue
because the first user input you trace makes you open five or six source code files,
usually before the system manages to do anything with the input. In this case, you
need the assistance of accurate design documentation, including a fairly complete
threat model. Failing that, you should postpone your analysis and perform some
module or class review first to understand the system from an object-oriented
perspective.

Analyze a Module
The crux of the CC2 technique (see Table 4-5) is reading code line by line in a file.
Instead of drilling down into function calls and objects you encounter, or back-tracing
to see how functions are called, you take notes about any potential issues you spot.

Table 4-5
CC2: Analyze a Module
Start point              Start of a source file
End point                End of a source file
Tracing method           Forward, not control-flow sensitive, not data-flow sensitive
Goal                     Look at each function in a vacuum and document potential issues.
Difficulty               Very hard
Speed                    Slow
Comprehension impact     Very high
Abstraction              Basic implementation through design
Strengths                You learn the language of the application
                         Easier to analyze cohesive modules
                         Can find subtle and abstract flaws
Weaknesses               Mentally taxing
                         Constant documentation requires discipline
                         Easy to mismanage time

     You might not expect this, but many experienced code reviewers settle on the
CC2 technique as a core part of their approach. In fact, two of your authors typically
start reviewing a new codebase by finding the equivalent of the util/directory and
reading the framework and glue code line by line.
     This technique has great side benefits for future logic and design review
efforts because you pick up the language and idioms of the program and its cre-
ators. It might seem as though you’d miss issues left and right by not tracing the
flow of execution, but it actually works well because you aren’t distracted by
jumping around the code constantly and can concentrate on the code in front of
you. Furthermore, all the code in the same file tends to be cohesive, so you often
have similar algorithms to compare.
     This technique has tradeoffs as well. First, it’s taxing, and often you feel mental
fatigue kick in after too many continuous hours. Sometimes you stop being effective
a little while before you realize it, which can lead to missed vulnerabilities. The
other problem is that documenting every potential issue requires considerable disci-
pline, and maintaining the momentum for longer than four or five hours can be
hard. Generally, you should stop for the day at this point and switch to other types
of less intense analysis.
     This technique has another hidden flaw: It’s easy to go off track and review
code that isn’t security-relevant and isn’t teaching you anything about the applica-
tion. Unfortunately, you need to have a good feel for software review to know
whether you’re spending your time effectively. Even considering that, sometimes a
piece of code just catches your fancy and you follow it down the rabbit hole for the

next several hours. So make sure you’re sticking to your process when using this
review strategy and accurately assessing how valuable it is.

Analyze an Algorithm
The CC3 strategy (see Table 4-6) requires knowing enough of the system design to
be able to select a security-relevant algorithm and analyze its implementation. This
strategy is essentially the same as analyzing a module (CC2); however, you’re less
likely to go off track.

Table 4-6
CC3: Analyze an Algorithm
Start point                 Start of a key algorithm
End point                   End of that algorithm
Tracing method              Forward, not control-flow sensitive, not data-flow sensitive
Goal                        Look at the algorithm and identify any possible weakness in the design
                            or implementation.
Difficulty                  Very hard
Speed                       Slow
Comprehension impact        Very high
Abstraction                 Basic implementation through design
Strengths                   You can’t go off track
                            Can find subtle and abstract flaws
Weaknesses                  Mentally taxing
                            Lacks context

     Of course, the effectiveness of this strategy depends almost entirely on the
algorithm you select to analyze, so you need to choose something security relevant.
It’s best to focus your efforts on pervasive and security critical algorithms, such as
those that enforce the security model, implement cryptography, or are used in most
input processing.

Analyze a Class or Object
The CC4 strategy (see Table 4-7) is almost the same as analyzing a module (CC2,
Table 4-5), except you focus on a class implementation.

Table 4-7
CC4: Analyze a Class or Object
Start point                 An object
End point                   All references to that object examined
Tracing method              Forward, not control-flow sensitive, not data-flow sensitive

Goal                      Study the interface and implementation of an important object to find
                          vulnerabilities in how the system uses it.
Difficulty                Hard
Speed                     Slow
Comprehension impact      Very high
Abstraction               Basic implementation through design
Strengths                 Less likely to go off track than in module analysis
                          Can find subtle and abstract flaws
Weaknesses                Mentally taxing
                          Might lack context
                          More likely to go off track than in algorithm analysis

    This strategy is more effective than CC2 for object-oriented programs because
objects tend to be fairly cohesive. It’s also less prone to slipping off track, although
how much is determined by how cohesive and security relevant the object is. As
with CC2, you need to pay close attention when employing this review strategy.

Trace Black Box Hits
Chapter 1, “Software Vulnerability Fundamentals,” introduced black box testing
and fuzz-testing, and this chapter explains how they can affect the assessment
process. To recap, in black box testing, you manually feed an application with
different erroneous data to see how the program responds; fuzz-testing uses
tools to automate the blackbox testing process. You flag your black box input as a
“hit” when it causes the program to crash or disclose useful information it
shouldn’t. These hits are then traced to identify the vulnerabilities that caused
the abnormal behavior. Essentially, black box testing is a brute-force method for
finding vulnerabilities and isn’t very thorough; however, it might enable you to
catch “low-hanging fruit” in a short time. Occasionally, it will also help you find
extremely subtle vulnerabilities that are difficult to identify with code analysis.
    The CC5 strategy (See Table 4-8) provides a method for including black box and
fuzz-testing in a more detailed application assessment. The procedure for perform-
ing this strategy is fairly simple. It requires only a functioning version of the applica-
tion and identification of the entry points you want to target. Then you need to tailor
the types of inputs you generate from your fuzz-testing tool or manually iterate
through a smaller set of inputs. For example, if you’re auditing a Web server, and the
entry point is a TCP port 80 connection, you probably want to use an HTTP protocol
fuzzer. You might have additional knowledge of the implementation that enables you
to further alter your inputs and improve your chances of successful hits. Of course,
nonstandard or proprietary protocols or file formats might require far more effort in
generating a fuzzing tool. Luckily, you can simplify this task to some degree by using
frameworks such as SPIKE, discussed later in “Fuzz-Testing Tools.”

Table 4-8
CC5: Trace Black Box Hits
Start point                Data entry points
End point                  Security vulnerabilities (open-ended)
Trace method               Forward, control-flow sensitive, data-flow sensitive
Goal                       Trace an input path with an issue identified via black box (or fuzz)
                           input testing.
Difficulty                 Moderate
Speed                      Fast
Comprehension impact       Medium
Abstraction                Basic implementation through design
Strengths                  Traces some form of known issue
                           Easy to stay on track
                           Least mentally taxing of the code comprehension strategies
Weaknesses                 Ignores many potential paths based on limitations of the testing
                           approach
                           A large number of false-positives can result in a huge waste of time

         Note
         Ideally, black box analysis should be part of the QA process. How-
         ever, the QA process might not be broad enough to address the true
         range of potentially malicious input. So you should use any available
         QA testing harnesses but alter the input beyond the parameters they
         already check.

    The “Fault Injection” chapter of The Shellcoder’s Handbook (Wiley, 2004) covers
black box testing techniques extensively. It outlines a number of useful input gener-
ation methods, summarized in the following list:
      ■ Manual generation (black boxing)—This method involves manually adding input
        data that you intend to test for. Often it produces the most useful and targeted
        results.
      ■ Automated generation (fuzzing)—This method is good for testing products by
        using standard protocols, but bear in mind that it often neglects to account for
        extensions offered by the application you’re examining. This method is often
        useful in conjunction with manual generation; you can automatically test the
        standard protocol, and then use manual generation for extensions or discrep-
        ancies identified in other components of the review. Automated generation
        can still be used with nonstandard protocols, but it requires a framework such
        as SPIKE for automated generation.

    ■ Live capture—This method allows input to be altered (or mutated) in an existing
       communication. It’s particularly useful with state-based protocols because you
       can ignore a lot of required session setup and focus on vulnerabilities in later
       exchanges.

Candidate Point Strategies
Candidate point (CP) strategies are one of the fastest ways of identifying the most
common classes of vulnerabilities. These strategies focus on identifying idioms
and structured code patterns commonly associated with software vulnerabilities.
The reviewer can then back-trace from these candidate points to find pathways
allowing access from untrusted input. The simplicity of this approach makes can-
didate point strategies the basis for most automated code analysis. Of course, the
disadvantage is that these strategies don’t encourage a strong understanding of
the code and ignore vulnerabilities that don’t fit the rather limited candidate
point definitions.

General Candidate Point Approach
The CP1 strategy (see Table 4-9) is almost the opposite of a code comprehension
strategy. You start with the lowest-level routines that grant access to application
assets or could harbor a vulnerability. This process might involve using automated
tools to discover potentially unsafe code constructs or just a simple text search
based on your existing knowledge of the application and potential vulnerabilities.
You then trace backward through the code to see whether these routines expose any
vulnerabilities accessible from an application entry point.

Table 4-9
CP1: General Candidate Point Approach
Start point                  Potential vulnerabilities
End point                    Any form of user-malleable input
Tracing method               Backward, control-flow sensitive, data-flow sensitive
Goal                         Given a list of potential vulnerabilities, determine whether they are
                             exploitable
Difficulty                   Easy to moderate
Speed                        Medium
Comprehension impact         Low
Abstraction                  Basic implementation through complex implementation
Strengths                    Good coverage for known vulnerability classes
                             Isn’t too mentally taxing
                             Hard to go off track
                                                                                           continues…

Table 4-9    continued
CP1: General Candidate Point Approach
Weaknesses                   Biases the reviewer to confirming only a limited set of potential issues
                             Comprehension impact is much lower than with code comprehension
                             strategies
                             The results are only as good as your candidate points

      For example, say you use an analysis tool that reports the following:
util.c: Line 1293: sprintf() used on a stack buffer

   You would attempt to verify whether it’s really a bug. The function might look
something like this:
int construct_email(char *name, char *domain)
{
      char buf[1024];

      sprintf(buf, “%s@%s”, name, domain);

      ... do more stuff here ...
}

    You can’t determine whether this bug is exploitable until you verify that you can
control either the name or domain argument to this function, and that those strings
can be long enough to overflow buf. So you need to check each instance in which
construct_email() is called to verify whether it’s vulnerable. This verification
approach is actually fairly quick, but it has a number of drawbacks. Mainly, it’s an
incomplete approach; it improves your familiarity with the application, but it
doesn’t increase your understanding of how the application works. Instead, you
must rely on assumptions of what constitutes a vulnerability, and these assump-
tions might not reflect the code accurately. Therefore, using only this approach can
cause you to miss more complex vulnerabilities or even simple vulnerabilities that
don’t fit strict classifications.

Automated Source Analysis Tool
The CP2 strategy (see Table 4-10) can be used to generate candidate points, as dis-
cussed in the CP1 strategy. This strategy has gotten a lot of press in the past few
years, as software companies scramble to find simpler and less expensive methods
of securing their applications. The result has been an explosion in the number and
variety of source analysis tools.

Table 4-10
CP2: Automated Source Analysis Tool
Start point              Potential vulnerabilities
End point                Any form of user-malleable input
Tracing method           Backward, control-flow sensitive, data-flow sensitive
Goal                     Identify vulnerabilities based on a list of candidate points and code
                         paths obtained from automated analysis tools.
Difficulty               Easy to moderate
Speed                    Fast to very slow (depending on false-positive rate)
Comprehension impact     Very low
Abstraction              Basic implementation through complex implementation
Strengths                Good coverage for easily identified vulnerabilities
                         Isn’t mentally taxing
                         Hard to go off track
Weaknesses               Biases the reviewer to confirming only a limited set of potential issues
                         Comprehension impact is much lower than with code comprehension
                         strategies
                         The results are only as good as your search method

     Early source-code analysis systems were just simple lexical analyzers; they
searched for patterns matching potentially vulnerable source strings. Newer sys-
tems can actually perform a fairly detailed analysis of an application’s data flow and
identify several classes of vulnerabilities. These tools can be helpful in identifying
candidate points and even offer some level of analysis to speed up manual review of
identified candidates.
     The downside of automated source analysis tools is that they are in their
infancy. The current batch of tools require a high time and cost investment and have
inconsistent performance. Most tools require extensive configuration and have seri-
ous issues with identifying excessive false-positive candidate points. This problem
is so severe that the results of the tool are often ignored because of time required to
trace all the false-positive results.
     Finally, as a candidate point strategy, automated source analysis tools focus only
on a specific set of potentially vulnerable idioms. Therefore, they are limited in the
classes of vulnerabilities they can detect. Even the best automated source analysis
tools fail to identify simple vulnerabilities outside their parameters or complex vulner-
abilities that lack an easily defined direct relationship. These complex vulnerabilities
include most design and logic vulnerabilities in addition to many of the more complex
implementation vulnerabilities.
     Taking all the preceding points into account, there is still a lot of potential for
automated source analysis tools. The technology will certainly improve, and the long-
term benefits will eventually outweigh the downsides. In fact, many development

groups are already using automated analysis to augment manual code review and
internal quality control. This practice can be expected to grow as tools become more
flexible and can be integrated into the complete review process more effectively.

Simple Lexical Candidate Points
A wide range of vulnerabilities lend themselves to identification based on simple
pattern-matching schemes (the CP3 strategy shown in Table 4-11). Format string
vulnerabilities and SQL injection are two obvious examples. In identifying these
vulnerabilities, the reviewer uses a utility such as grep or findstr to generate a list
of candidate points from across a codebase. This list is then paired down based on
what the reviewer knows about the application design. For instance, you should be
able to eliminate the majority of these candidate points by simply identifying
whether they are in a module that handles any potentially malicious input. After the
list has been paired down, you use the general candidate point approach (CP1) to
identify any exploitable paths to this location.

Table 4-11
CP3: Simple Lexical Candidate Points
Start point                  Potential vulnerabilities
End point                    Any form of user-malleable input
Tracing method               Backward, control-flow sensitive, data-flow sensitive
Goal                         Identify potential vulnerabilities based on simple pattern matching,
                             and then trace to entry points for confirmation.
Difficulty                   Easy to moderate
Speed                        Fast to medium (depending on the number of points)
Comprehension impact         Low
Abstraction                  Basic implementation through complex implementation
Strengths                    Good coverage for known vulnerability classes
                             Isn’t too mentally taxing
                             Hard to go off track
Weaknesses                   Capable of confirming only a limited set of potential issues
                             Comprehension impact is almost nonexistent
                             The results are only as good as the search pattern

Simple Binary Candidate Points
As with source analysis, a range of candidate points can be identified fairly easily in
an application’s binary code (the CP4 strategy shown in Table 4-12). For example,
you can identify a starting list of candidate points for sign extension vulnerabilities
by listing the occurrences of the MOVSX instruction on an Intel binary executable.
You can also search for many equivalent source patterns in the binary; this method

is essential when you don’t have access to the application’s source code. You can
then pair down the list and trace in essentially the same manner you would for the
lexical candidate point strategy (CP3).

Table 4-12
CP4: Simple Binary Candidate Points
Start point                 Potential vulnerabilities
End point                   Any form of user-malleable input
Tracing method              Backward, control-flow sensitive, data-flow sensitive
Goal                        Identify potential vulnerabilities based on patterns in the application’s
                            binary code and then trace to entry points for confirmation.
Difficulty                  Easy to moderate
Speed                       Fast to medium (depending on the number of points)
Comprehension impact        Low
Abstraction                 Basic implementation through complex implementation
Strengths                   Good coverage for known vulnerability classes
                            Isn’t too mentally taxing
                            Hard to go off track
Weaknesses                  Capable of confirming only a limited set of potential issues
                            Comprehension impact is almost nonexistent
                            The results are only as good as the search pattern

Black Box-Generated Candidate Points
When black box testing returns results indicating software bugs, you need to work
backward from the fault point to find the cause. This strategy (CP5) is summarized
in Table 4-13.

Table 4-13
CP5: Black Box-Generated Candidate Points
Start point                 Potential vulnerabilities
End point                   Any form of user-malleable input
Tracing method              Backward, control-flow sensitive, data-flow sensitive
Goal                        Identify potential vulnerabilities based on patterns in the application
                            binary and then trace to entry points for confirmation.
Difficulty                  Easy to moderate
Speed                       Fast to medium (depending on the number of points)
Comprehension impact        Low
Abstraction                 Basic implementation through complex implementation

                                                                                           continues…

Table 4-13   continued
CP5: Black Box-Generated Candidate Points
Strengths                Good coverage for known vulnerability classes
                         Is not overly taxing mentally
                         Hard to go off track
Weaknesses               Only capable of confirming a limited set of potential issues
                         Comprehension impact is almost nonexistent
                         The results are only as good as the tool

     Most of the time, the black box method involves performing some level of crash
analysis. To perform this step, you probably need to be familiar with assembly code.
Many debuggers can correlate source code with assembly code to some degree, so if
you have source code available, you might not need to be as familiar with assembly
code. Sooner or later, however, a good auditor should be competent at reading and
interpreting assembly code. Fortunately, it’s something that you will almost certainly
pick up with experience, and you can take advantage of a lot of available literature
on assembly code for a variety of architectures. Because most popular software is
compiled for Intel platforms, you will probably want to learn this platform first. In
addition to books and online tutorials, you can find a comprehensive manual of the
Intel instruction set and programming guides from Intel at www.intel.com/design/
pentium4/manuals/index_new.htm.
     Now you have the challenge of tracing backward from a memory dump of where
the crash occurred to where in the code something went wrong. This topic could
warrant an entire chapter or more, but because it’s not the focus of this chapter (or
the book), just the basics are covered. First, some crash dumps are easy to find
because they crash precisely at the location where the bug is triggered. Consider this
following code, for example:
text:76F3F707                   movzx      ecx, word ptr [eax+0Ah]
text:76F3F70B                   dec        ecx
text:76F3F70C                   mov        edx, ecx
text:76F3F70E                   shr        ecx, 2
text:76F3F711                   lea        edi, [eax+19h]
text:76F3F714                   rep movsd
text:76F3F716                   mov        ecx, edx
text:76F3F718                   and        ecx, 3
text:76F3F71B                   rep movsb
text:76F3F71D                   pop        edi
text:76F3F71E                   pop        esi

    A huge memory copy will occur, assuming you can control the short integer
located at [eax+0Ah] and set that integer to 0. If it’s set to 0, the dec ecx instruction
causes an integer underflow, which results in a large memory copy.

        Note
        This type of bug is discussed in more detail in Chapter 6, “C Lan-
        guage Issues.” Don’t worry if you don’t understand it now. Just be
        aware that a huge memory copy occurs as a result, thus corrupting
        large amounts of program data.

     If you had fuzz-tested this bug, it would crash on the rep movsd instruction.
This bug is fairly straightforward to analyze via back-tracing because you know
instantly where the crash occurs.
     The remaining work is to figure out where [eax+0Ah] is populated. Usually you
search the immediate function where the application has crashed; failing that, you
might need to do more investigative work. In this case, you need to see where the
eax register was set and trace back to find where it was allocated. In object-oriented
code, references like this might refer to an object instantiation of a class, which
makes things more difficult (if you have only the binary to work with) because you
can’t see a direct path from the population of that memory location to a place where
it’s referenced and used. Thankfully, others—in particular, Halvar Flake—have done
work on dealing with object recognition in binaries and weeding out unwanted code
paths to help isolate activity in a certain part of the application. (Flake’s BinNavi
tool and objrec IDA plug-in are described in “Binary Navigation Tools,” later in this
chapter.) In this situation, a crash is analyzed with this basic procedure:
     1. Examine the instruction where the program crashed to see why the fault
        was generated. Was an invalid source operand read? Was an invalid destina-
        tion operation written to? Was an index to a memory location too large or
        too small? Was a loop counter not a sane value?
     2. Work backward to determine where the invalid operand came from. Look
        back in the local function to see where the relevant register was populated.
        Was it populated by a structure member? Was it set locally? Is it an argu-
        ment? For structure or object members, this step might involve quite a bit
        of work.
     3. Connect the invalid operand with some data fed into the program at the
        entry point you were fuzz-testing. Determine what part of the data caused
        the exception to occur.
    The second example of dealing with faults happens when the application
crashes at a seemingly random location. This can happen when memory corruption

occurs at some point in the program but the corrupted memory region isn’t
accessed (or accessed in such a way that a fault is generated) until much later in the
code. In fact, in the previous assembly example, imagine that you traced it back and
determined that [eax+0Ah] was set to 10 when a class was initialized and is never
changed. This crash then becomes mystifying because you have determined that
[eax+0Ah] is never set to 0, yet here it is crashing because it was set to 0! In this
case, what has likely happened is one of two things:
      ■ You corrupted memory somewhere early in the structure that eax points to.

      ■ You corrupted another buffer on the heap, and it has overwritten the structure
       eax points to.

     If the first case is true, when you fuzz the application again with the same input,
an identical crash will probably occur, but if the second case is true, the application
might crash somewhere totally different or not at all.
     So how do you find out what’s going on? Several tools are available to help you
discover the cause of a fault, depending on the nature of the vulnerability. The easiest
one to discover is when a buffer that’s not part of any sort of structure has been allo-
cated on the heap and overflowed. Although the random crashes seem like a problem
at first, you can isolate problems such as this one fairly quickly. Microsoft has a tool
named gflags that’s part of the Microsoft Debugging Tools for Windows (available at
www.microsoft.com/whdc/devtools/debugging/debugstart.mspx), which is useful in
this situation. In particular, you can use it to enable “heap paging” functionality in the
process you’re debugging. Essentially, heap paging causes each request for memory to
be allocated at the end of a page so that a guard page immediately follows the memory
allocated. So when a buffer overflow occurs, an attempt is made during the copy oper-
ation to write data to the guard page, thus triggering an exception. Therefore, you can
cause an exception to occur immediately when the bug is triggered.
     Custom memory allocators might be more difficult, however. One approach is
to intercept calls to the custom memory allocation routines and redirect them to sys-
tem allocation routines. The difficulty of this approach depends on the OS, whether
memory allocators are in a separate shared library, and whether they are externally
accessible symbols. Other solutions might include patching binary code to make
the custom memory allocators do nothing except call the real allocation routines.
Some of these methods can become messy and programming intensive, but your
choice depends on the testing environment and what tools you have available. For
example, in a UNIX environment, hijacking function calls to a shared library is
quite simple using the LD_PRELOAD functionality that UNIX linkers provide. You can
set this environment variable to direct the linker to load a library of your choosing
instead of the library function that’s intended to be called.

        Note
        The LD_PRELOAD linker functionality has been a target of security
        bugs in the past, and it’s discussed in more detail in the coverage of
        UNIX vulnerabilities in Chapter 10, “Unix II: Processes.”

     Another quick-and-dirty hack involves using a debugger to manually redirect
calls from one location to another to cause different allocation routines to be called.
For example, you could set a breakpoint in a debugger on a custom application, and
then set the instruction pointer to point to the system’s memory allocator whenever
the breakpoint is triggered. This method is tedious because allocations probably
occur hundreds of times in the application you’re examining; however, many
debuggers enable you to create scripts or carry out tasks automatically when a
breakpoint is triggered. For example, in the SoftICE debugger, you could issue the
following command:
bpx 12345678 DO “r eip malloc”

    This command sets a breakpoint on memory location 0x12345678 (assuming the
custom memory allocator is at that location). When the breakpoint is triggered, the
instruction pointer is changed to point to the malloc() routine instead.
    If you have corrupted a structure, you need to examine the effects of that cor-
ruption to understand how it occurred. Look for the offset of the lowest corrupted
structure member to get a more accurate location. Once you know the location, you
should be able to determine that the corruption occurred in one of the following
two ways:
    ■ A buffer in the structure was the target of an unsafe copy.

    ■ An array of some other data type (integers or pointers, perhaps) has been
     copied into unsafely because of an invalid index into that array or because it
     simply copied too many elements into the array.
    So you need to identify where the corrupted elements exist in the structure you
are examining. Doing this can cut down on time spent examining how the structure
is manipulated, as fixed-size data types being modified aren’t a concern. The way
certain offsets of the structure are accessed gives you a clear indication of what kind
of data is being stored there. Code indicating data buffers in a structure might look
something like this:
lea eax, [ebx+0FCh]
push [ebp + arg_0]
push eax
call strcpy

    Suppose you’re examining a crash because [ebx+124h] is supposed to be a
pointer, but instead it’s 0x41414141 because you have somehow corrupted the struc-
ture. Looking at the preceding code, you can see that [ebx+0FCh] is apparently a
string because it’s passed as the destination argument to strcpy(). You could then
trace back arg_0 and see whether you controlled it and whether it’s indeed the
result of the structure corruption.

Application-Specific Candidate Points
After you’ve spent some time with a codebase, you’ll start to notice recurring vul-
nerable patterns and programmatic idioms. Sometimes they are vulnerable utility
functions, such as a database wrapper or a string-handling routine. With the CP6
strategy (see Table 4-14), you focus on the similarities in these patterns and develop
simple methods of searching the code to generate candidate point lists. Usually this
strategy involves nothing more than creating a simple script of regular expression
tests in your language of choice. Although you might get sidetracked in the Perl ver-
sus Python versus Ruby versus flavor-of-the-month debate. It’s worth pointing out
that the cool kids are using Haskell.

Table 4-14
CP6: Application-Specific Candidate Points
Start point                  Potential vulnerabilities
End point                    Any form of user-malleable input
Tracing method               Backward, control-flow sensitive, data-flow sensitive
Goal                         Identify potential vulnerabilities based on patterns observed in the
                             review up to this point.
Difficulty                   Easy to moderate
Speed                        Fast
Comprehension impact         Very low
Abstraction                  Basic implementation through implementation logic
Strengths                    Good balance of speed and depth of coverage
                             Isn’t too mentally taxing
                             Hard to go off track
Weaknesses                   Requires a thorough understanding of the codebase
                             Comprehension impact is almost nonexistent
                             Biases the reviewer toward confirming only a limited set of potential issues

Design Generalization Strategies
Design generalization (DG) strategies focus on identifying logic and design vulnerabili-
ties by reviewing the implementation and inferring higher-level design abstractions.

After you have this understanding, you can use design generalization strategies to iden-
tify areas of overlapping trust where trust boundaries are required. This approach is a
variation on generalization in software design, in which higher-level interfaces and
components are developed by generalizing lower-level implementations. Generaliza-
tion strategies are used primarily as a follow-up component to other strategies because
they require a good understanding of the application’s implementation and function.

Model the System
Chapter 2 discussed threat modeling as a way to develop an abstraction for a system
by the process of factoring (top-down). However, there’s no reason you can’t run the
threat model in reverse and model the system by generalizing from the implementa-
tion (bottom-up), and then factoring back down into components you haven’t seen
yet. This DG1 strategy (see Table 4-15) can be extremely thorough and is highly
effective when you want to establish the most detailed knowledge of the system.
Unfortunately, it’s also slow, as it amounts to reverse-engineering the complete
design from the implementation. However, it’s the best method for identifying
design and architectural vulnerabilities from an existing implementation.

Table 4-15
DG1: Model the System
Start point              Beginning of module under review
End point                Security vulnerabilities (open-ended)
Tracing method           Varies
Goal                     Identify more abstract (logic and higher-level) vulnerabilities by
                         modeling the actual behavior of the system.
Difficulty               Hard
Speed                    Slow
Comprehension impact     Very high
Abstraction              Implementation logic through architectural
Strengths                Provides the most effective method for identifying logic and design
                         vulnerabilities
                         Can identify some types of operational vulnerabilities
                         Provides detailed knowledge of the application’s design and architecture
Weaknesses               Requires a strong understanding of the system implementation
                         Easy to go off track
                         Requires focus and experience
                         Can be time consuming

   Typically, you need to perform detailed modeling for only security-critical
components, such as the application’s security subsystem, input handling chain, or
other major framework components used throughout the application. However, an

application refactoring cycle does give you an opportunity to build a complete
model that has been validated against the implementation. This cycle introduces
overhead into the refactoring process, but it’s far less obtrusive than modeling after
the application is finished, and it can pay dividends in securing the application
design during and after refactoring.

Hypothesis Testing
The DG2 strategy (see Table 4-16) is simply the process of attempting to deter-
mine the design of smaller programmatic elements by making a hypothesis and
testing it through observations of the implementation. This strategy is especially
necessary for any medium to large applications because they are too large to
wrap your brain around at one time. Instead, you make a guess on what abstrac-
tion the implementation reflects, and then try to analyze the implementation in
the context of that assumption. If you’re right, you’ve successfully reverse-
engineered an element of the design from the implementation. If you’re wrong,
your efforts should give you enough context to make a more educated guess of
the correct purpose.

Table 4-16
DG2: Hypothesis Testing
Start point                     Beginning of code elements under review
End point                       Security vulnerabilities (open ended)
Tracing method                  Varies
Goal                        Identify more abstract (logic and higher level) vulnerabilities by
                            modeling the actual behavior of the system.
Difficulty                      Hard
Speed                           Medium
Comprehension impact            Very high
Abstraction                     Implementation logic through architectural
Strengths                   Is a faster method for identifying issues in the design of programming
                            elements
                            Helps build a good understanding of design aspects
                            Is well suited to identifying more complex and subtle issues
Weaknesses                  Easy to go off track
                            Poor assumptions can derail later elements of the review
                            Can be mentally taxing

Deriving Purpose and Function
The DG3 strategy outlined in Table 4-17 refers to the process of directly identify-
ing the abstraction an implementation represents. One of the best ways to

perform this strategy is by picking key programmatic elements and summarizing
them. For example, try to identify code elements that appear to enforce a trust
boundary. Then attempt to derive the associated trust levels, privileges, and
basic structure from the implementation. This method can require copious note
taking and some diagramming, and you might have a few missteps; however, at
the end, you should have a good understanding of the programmatic idioms
responsible for the component of the trust model you’re assessing. From this
understanding, you should be able to identify design and architectural issues in
this part of the model.

Table 4-17
DG3: Deriving Purpose and Function
Start point               Beginning of code elements under review
End point                 Security vulnerabilities (open-ended)
Trace method              Varies
Goal                      Identify more abstract (logic and higher level) vulnerabilities by
                          modeling the actually behavior of the system.
Difficulty                Hard
Speed                     Medium
Comprehension impact      Very high
Abstraction               Implementation logic through architectural
Strengths                 Focuses on the areas that are known to be security relevant
                          Helps build a more complete model of the application design and
                          architecture
                          Helps build a good understanding of individual design aspects
Weaknesses                Poor assumptions can derail later elements of the review
                          Mentally taxing

Design Conformity Check
As you review an application’s implementation, you’ll see a number of commonly
traveled code paths, and you should focus your design generalization efforts on
these areas. You need to look closely at the “gray areas” in these components—
parts of the design where a correct action is undefined in a certain case, thus
resulting in implementation-specific behavior. If you don’t have access to a formal
specification, you don’t know whether a piece of code is implementing defined
behavior; however, this might not matter. Essentially, your goal is to examine all
the oddball cases when some operation is performed on potentially untrusted
data. After you discover what the application is attempting to perform in a func-
tion or module, it becomes apparent when something incorrect is allowed to pass
through. This DG4 strategy is summarized in Table 4-18.

Table 4-18
DG4: Design Conformity Check
Start point                Beginning of module under review
End point                  End of module under review
Tracing method             Forward, control-flow sensitive, data-flow sensitive
Goal                       Identify vulnerabilities in the implementation caused by deviations
                           from the specification.
Difficulty                 Moderate
Speed                      Medium
Comprehension impact       Medium
Abstraction                Implementation logic through design
Strengths                  Hard to go off track
                           Provides a good balance of implementation and design understanding
                           Much easier than deriving function without a design
Weaknesses                 Misinterpretation of the design could result in overlooking
                           vulnerabilities
                           The quality of this strategy relies heavily on the original design’s
                           quality and accuracy

    This strategy is concerned with identifying vulnerabilities that result from
discrepancies between a design specification and an implementation. The design
specification is a guideline for what the application is supposed to do, but these
specifications are rarely followed to the letter. Design specifications often fail to
define behavior for every single case, resulting in “gray areas” that later develop-
ers must interpret. After you’re familiar with the application’s internals, you
should identify variances between the specification and implementation. You
need to identify the implications of that variance and how they could affect the
application’s security. Sometimes a specification policy breach has no security
impact; however, many security vulnerabilities are the result of specification
variances with unintended consequences.

         Note
         The term “policy breach,” not “security breach,” has been used in
         this discussion. In a policy breach, the application allows some
         condition to happen that shouldn’t be allowed according to the
         specification. Policy breaches often equate to security breaches,
         but not always.

    Determining the consequences is a matter of considering how the newly
discovered behavior might affect the rest of the system. This determination involves

                                  Code-Auditing Tactics

reading the code at each point affected by the policy breach and considering special
cases the underlying platform might present. For example, imagine auditing a Web
server that allows you to set arbitrary environment variables when receiving certain
malformed headers. (Usually, each header is prefixed with HTTP_ and then set as an
environment variable.) This behavior is most certainly a policy breach. To evaluate
the consequences, you need to read other parts of the system to determine how
attackers might be able to abuse this inconsistency with the specification. In this
case, you would probably discover that you could set arbitrary values for security-
relevant Common Gateway Interface (CGI) variables in a server-side application.
You might be able to set the AUTH_USER variable to fool an application into thinking
you had already authenticated or set REMOTE_HOST and REMOTE_ADDR to make it seem
as though you’re connecting locally and (as such) allowed to access sensitive data.
On UNIX systems, your knowledge of the operating system might suggest that set-
ting the special linker environment variables (such as LD_PRELOAD) could be
useful and result in running arbitrary code.

Code-Auditing Tactics
Now that you understand the basic review strategies, some general guidelines for
reviewing code are introduced. These guidelines aren’t hard-and-fast rules; rather,
they are invaluable techniques and tricks developed through years of experience.
These techniques help to ensure thorough coverage and understanding of even
the most subtle vulnerabilities. After all, it’s easy to make mistakes and skip a line
or two when assessing a massive codebase. Unfortunately, one or two lines can be
the difference between safe code and vulnerable code. However, by carefully
applying the strategies discussed earlier along with the following simple tactics,
your effectiveness should improve quickly.

Internal Flow Analysis
In the previous discussion on code flow, the strategies addressed intermodule
and interprocedural relationships. This code flow analysis is good for navigating
between functions, but when analyzing a code fragment, you need to perform
intraprocedural and intramodule analysis. These types of analysis require being
sensitive to both control flow and data flow within a function, regardless of how
you handle tracing outside the function. To see how this analysis works, walk
through a fairly simple code path in the following C function:
char *ReadString(int fd, int maxlength)
{
     int length;

      char *data;

      if(read_integer(fd, &length) < 0)
           return NULL;

      data = (char *)malloc(length + 1);

      if(data == NULL)
           return NULL;

      if(read(fd, data, length) < 0)
      {
           free(data);
           return NULL;
      }

      data[length] = ‘\0’;

      return data;
}

    This function simply reads a variable-length string from network input and
returns a pointer to it. It does this by reading an integer value representing the
length, and then reading a number of bytes equal to that value. However, even
this simple function has several potential code paths to examine. First, say
read_integer() fails. The code that runs would then look like this:

read_integer(fd, &length);
return NULL;

      Not much happens here, so look at where the call to read() fails instead:
read_integer(fd, &length);
data = malloc(length + 1);
read(fd, data, length);
free(data);
return NULL;

                                   Code-Auditing Tactics

    As you can see, there’s a major difference between handling a failure in
read_integer() and one in read(). This simple example shows how subtle changes
can drastically affect a code path in a way that’s not obvious. Functions in real-
world applications are usually more complicated and contain many code paths.
When examining a function you’ve identified and traversing the relevant code
paths, minimizing your chances of missing vulnerabilities is important. Many code
paths share common sections, so analyzing all the relevant ones isn’t quite as much
work as it seems. Also, you can usually handle reading several code paths at once.
For example, reading the previous function, you can safely ignore most of the error-
checking failures as not being relevant to security. However, be careful when you
make the distinction between what is and isn’t security relevant. Reviewers tend to
overlook code paths containing serious vulnerabilities in these two areas: error-
checking branches and pathological code paths.
    Error-checking branches are the code paths that are followed when validity
checks result in an error. They include the two paths shown in the preceding exam-
ples and typically cause a return from a function or exit from the program. In the
examples, these simple code paths could be dismissed easily, but remember that
they are still code paths. Even if triggering the error seems unlikely, it’s important
to see what happens when the error does occur because the error-handling code
belongs to a code path that’s hardly ever traversed and probably not as well tested
and audited. This topic is discussed more in Chapter 7, “Program Building Blocks.”
    Pathological code paths describe functions with many small and nonterminat-
ing branches (that is, branches that don’t result in abrupt termination of the current
function). These functions create an exponential number of similar code paths and
can be extremely difficult to trace. Going through these functions several times and
examining each code path in isolation is a good idea, as some paths can be triggered
by unexpected conditions. That is, it’s possible to trigger paths that make no sense
logically but aren’t prohibited by the implementation.

Subsystem and Dependency Analysis
A common misconception is that security code review should be targeted at modules
that deal directly with user input from a specified entry point. Although this approach
sounds reasonable, it could fail to account for all possible control flows and data flows
affected by the input. First, the application design might not allow easy separation of
the entry point and data parsing from the rest of the codebase. For instance, the rele-
vant data-parsing module might depend on several other system components. Second,
the application might not be especially modular in its implementation. Both reasons
result in the same problem—you can’t just pick relevant code paths and examine them
without much knowledge of the rest of the application. Therefore, you need to make an
early effort to identify module subsystems and dependencies and familiarize yourself
with their behavior.

     For example, large applications commonly use their own memory allocation
subsystems. These allocators might be wrappers to system memory allocators or com-
plete replacements, which fall back on the system allocator only when requesting large
blocks the application manages (the Apache Web server manages its memory in a sim-
ilar manner). Any variance between the system allocator’s and the custom allocator’s
behavior might be important, as you see later in Chapter 7.
     In addition to allocators, you might need to review a variety of common subsys-
tems more thoroughly, including the following:
      ■ String and binary data buffer handlers

      ■ String parsers

      ■ System API replacements (such as file manipulation APIs and network APIs)

      ■ Data storage subsystems (hash table classes, for example)

    You also need to be familiar with the quirks of any standard system functionality in
use. Later chapters cover these issues for both Windows and UNIX operating systems.
However, many less used functions aren’t mentioned. When you encounter system
functions you don’t know, learn exactly how that function works. After all, such func-
tions can often provide you with new security relevant quirks to look for in the future.

Rereading Code
Even the simple act of reading tends to be an iterative process. Often you need to
read the same code paths several times over to account for all the vulnerability
classes you need to consider. For example, one approach is to focus on integer-
related vulnerabilities, memory management vulnerabilities, and formatted data
vulnerabilities in one pass. Then you make another pass to focus on functional
audits (checking return values, error prone API calls, and so on). Finally, you could
make a pass to identify any synchronization vulnerabilities.
    There’s no metric to determine how many passes a piece of code requires. For
example, you don’t need to consider synchronization vulnerabilities if the code
doesn’t run in a multithreaded context, deal with asynchronous events, or modify
shared data. Exercise your own judgment in determining how many passes to
make; however, at least two passes are recommended because with only one pass,
you might miss subtle complexities in the code or make an obvious oversight.
    Especially complex code can be difficult to wrap your brain around, so you
might need several passes to understand what it’s doing. Even after reaching a thor-
ough understanding, it’s a good idea to go back later and check that your compre-
hension of the code is correct as well as complete. Security vulnerabilities usually
exist because of oversights in seemingly minor details that have a major impact on
the code. You need to keep asking questions about even simple-looking code. Are
global variables or structure members altered? Are return values or arguments not

                                  Code-Auditing Tactics

always initialized? Are return values ignored or misinterpreted because of typing
errors or incorrect calls? These questions are just a few things you need to consider
for each function you examine. The best way to make sure you cover all your bases
is to evaluate some code and then go back and make sure you didn’t miss anything.
Even Santa has to check his list twice!

Desk-Checking
Sometimes you see code that’s difficult to evaluate in your head. The code might have
too many variables coming from different places and being reassigned, or peculiar
code constructs with side effects that aren’t obvious. In these cases, desk-checking is
recommended. Desk-checking is a technique consisting of creating a table of all vari-
ables in a code fragment and then populating them with some initial values. They
should be values that you think the code might not handle correctly (such as those
gained from test cases, explained in the next section). Then you step through each line
of the function, updating each value according to the code. To see how this technique
works, first look at this simple code:
int read_line(int sock, char *buf, size_t length)
{
    int i, c = 0, n;

    for(i = 0; ; i++){
         n = read(sock, (void *)&c, 1);

         if(n != 1)
              return -1;

         if(c == ‘\n’)
              break;

         if(i < length)
              buf[i] = c;
    }

    buf[i] = ‘\0’;

    return 0;
}

    This code isn’t hard to understand just by looking at it, but it’s fine for demon-
stration purposes.

         Note
         If you think the code is hard to understand, don’t worry. After a
         little practice, you’ll probably recognize constructs such as this one
         more readily and be able to understand the code more easily.

    The function is supposed to read a line from a socket. It puts bytes it reads from
the line into the buf variable while it isn’t full, and then silently discards extraneous
data at the end of the line, thus returning at most a buffer of length bytes. Say you
aren’t too sure about evaluating whether this piece of code is secure and want to
verify your thoughts. You can do a desk-check of the function with a test case you
expect to be faulty. In this case, you want to see whether buf overflows when you
supply a long line, so you use the following test data:
buf = 4 byte buffer
length = 4
line being read = “ABCDEF\n”

      The desk-check of this function is shown in Table 4-19.

Table 4-19
Desk-Check of Algorithm
Statement                                      i           buf                    c
for(i = 0;                                     0           -                      -
n = read(sock, &c, 1);                         0           -                      A
if(i < length) buf[i] = c;                     0           buf[0] = ‘A’           A
i++;                                           1           -                      A
n = read(sock, &c, 1);                         1           -                      B
if(i < length) buf[i] = c;                     1           buf[1] = ‘B’           B
i++;                                           2           -                      B
n = read(sock, &c, 1);                         2           -                      C
if(i < length) buf[i] = c;                     2           buf[2] = ‘B’           C
i++;                                           3           -                      C
n = read(sock, &c, 1);                         3           -                      D
if(i < length) buf[i] = c;                     3           buf[3] = ‘B’           D

                                  Code-Auditing Tactics

i++;                                         4            -                     D
n = read(sock, &c, 1);                       4            -                     E
if(i < length) buf[i] = c;                   4            -                     E
i++;                                         5            -                     E
n = read(sock, &c, 1);                       5            -                     F
if(i < length) buf[i] = c;                   5            -                     F
i++;                                         6            -                     F
n = read(sock, &c, 1);                       6            -                     \n
if(c == ‘\n’) break;                         6            -                     \n
buf[i] = ‘\0’                                6            buf[6] = ‘\0’         \n

    The desk-check shows that the function does read at most length bytes into the
buffer supplied and then silently discard data afterward; however, a glitch is still
apparent in the last two lines of this desk-check. Can you see it? The NUL byte to
terminate the buffer is appended at an out-of-bounds location depending on how
big the supplied line is because the i variable is used incorrectly as an index for the
NUL termination. Any desk-check you do should roughly follow the format shown
in the table, with statements being executed on one side and columns for the state
of each relevant variable when the statement has been executed. Some statements
in the code were omitted for brevity when they didn’t affect the test case.
    As you can see, desk-checks can be a useful tool because they provide insight
into how the algorithm operates. They can help you catch vulnerabilities that are
easy to miss because they seem fine at first glance. However, desk-checks can be
cumbersome, especially when your test cases are complicated and involve a lot of
variables. Still, they are a necessary part of data validation, and you should use
them whenever you’re unsure of code you’re reading. Using your own shorthand
versions of desk-checking tables after you’re familiar with them can be convenient.
For example, you don’t have to write the statements in the far-left column if you can
keep track of them adequately.

Test Cases
Test cases are used for testing a program or small isolated part of code to see how it
handles certain inputs. Test cases can be carried out in a number of different ways:
writing software to interact with the program and supply the test data, entering val-
ues manually into a program using a debugger, or using desk-checking. The pur-
pose of test cases is to determine whether the program handles certain inputs
correctly or certain combinations of inputs. Checking every possible combination of
inputs usually isn’t feasible, so you need to choose cases that are the most useful.

Often this means boundary cases, in which inputs are unexpected or are treated
specially by the code in question. For example, say you have a function with this
prototype:
int Connection::ConnectionRead(int len);

   You want to test how well this function copes with unexpected input. To do this,
you need to identify ranges of values input variables can take and choose values
from those ranges to test the function. Some test cases might include the following:
      ■ Calling the ConnectionRead() function with len = small negative (-1, for
        example)
      ■ Calling the ConnectionRead()function with len = large negative value
        (0x80000000, for example)
      ■ Calling the ConnectionRead()function with len = 0

      ■ Calling the ConnectionRead()function with len = small positive value (10)

      ■ Calling the ConnectionRead()function with len = large positive value
        (0x7FFFFFFF, for example)
   The test cases have been classified based on the range of values len can take:
positive, negative, or 0.

         Note
         You have two tests for positive and negative values because you’re
         testing values close to the boundary conditions that constrain
         integers. These constraints are discussed in depth in Chapter 6.

    By using carefully chosen values from each range of possible values the input
can take (in this case, positive, negative, or 0), you get the best value from your tests
because you’re covering both expected and unexpected cases with the fewest tests
possible. After further inspection of the code, it might be more apparent that cer-
tain values seem like they’re going to cause major problems, so you might add those
values to your test cases later. For example, examine the function a little further:
class Connection {

      private:
           int sock;
           Buffer network_data;
           ...
};

                                Code-Auditing Tactics

int Connection::ConnectionRead(int len)
{
     int n;

     if(network_data.GrowBuffer(len) == 0)
         return -1;

     n = ::read(sock, network_data.BufferEnd(), len);

     return n;
}

class Buffer {
     private:
         unsigned char *data;
         size_t data_size, data_used;
         ...
};

#define EXTRA 1024

int Buffer::GrowBuffer(size_t length)
{
     size_t new_size;
     char *new_data;

     if(data_size – data_used >= length)
        return 1;

     new_size = length + data_used + EXTRA;

     if(new_size < length)      // check for integer overflow
        return 0;

     new_data = (unsigned char *)myrealloc(data, new_size);

      if(new_data == NULL)
          return 0;

      data_size = new_size;
      data = new_data;

      return 1;
}

void *myrealloc(void *data, size_t new_size)
{
      void *block;
      new_size = (new_size + 15) & 0xFFFFFFF0;

      block = realloc(data, new_size);

      return block;
}

    This fairly complicated code path has a subtle vulnerability. Specifically, an inte-
ger overflow can occur in myrealloc() when rounding up new_size (as shown in
the bold line), but because of an integer overflow check in GrowBuffer(), only a
select few values trigger the vulnerability. (Again, if the vulnerability isn’t clear to
you, don’t worry. Integer overflows are covered in more detail in Chapter 6.) The
exact value of len being passed to ConnectionRead() (or any function that calls the
GrowBuffer() function) to trigger the integer overflow depends on what the
data_used value is. If you assume it’s 0, the previous test cases don’t trigger the
integer overflow because of the following code snippet from GrowBuffer():
      new_size = length + data_used + EXTRA;

      if(new_size < length)        // check for integer overflow
          return 0;

    The EXTRA added to new_size causes an integer overflow when using the
test case of len = -1, and the large negative value test case doesn’t overflow and
realloc() simply fails. To trigger the bug (assuming data_used = 0), you need to
add a test case of something like len = 0xFFFFFBFF (the maximum representable

                                  Code-Auditing Tactics

integer with 1024 subtracted from it). The initial range of test cases you come up
with need to be tailored to the code you’re examining to make sure you catch all
the artificially created boundary cases occurring in the way the code works as
well as the logical boundary cases you originally devised.

Test Cases with Multiple Inputs
The previous example brings up an interesting point dealing with multiple inputs.
Before you examined the code in some depth, you cared about only one input as
far as test cases were concerned: the len variable passed to ConnectionRead().
However, in the real world, often you deal with multiple inputs to functions. The
problem is that having multiple inputs multiplies the number of test cases you
need, as shown in this formula:
tests = (set of cases)(number of inputs)

     The number of test cases can increase quickly. Furthermore, additional test
cases might surface; often variables that are multiple inputs to a function are related
in some way, a concept called “variable relationships” (discussed in Chapter 7).
Essentially, a lot of variables and inputs in a module are given meaning by how they
relate to other variables, so you might need to establish test cases to deal with
boundary cases for a relationship, in addition to boundary cases for variables in iso-
lation. The code you looked at previously is an example of such a test case; you must
test the boundary case for the relationship between len and data_used because
both those values must operate together to trigger the potential vulnerability.
     When building test cases for a function or code module, it’s up to you to
identify these relationships to make sure you have a complete set of test cases.
The more you perform test cases, the more quickly you can identify the problem
cases from looking at code, which speeds up the process. However, it’s worth the
time to work through all potential scenarios and verify whether the code handles
them correctly. Spotting problems automatically isn’t as thorough, and you might
miss a case or two. In addition, the number of boundary conditions you have
doesn’t necessarily correspond to the number of inputs you supply to a code
module because some variables take values indirectly from the input (such as
data_used, presumably).
     Say you have a large number of test cases and you want to get rid of some, if
possible. How do you do that while ensuring you’re testing all the necessary bound-
ary conditions you want to verify? There are two ways to go about cutting out extra-
neous test cases: constraint establishment and extraneous input thinning, explained
in the following sections.

    Treat Input as Hostile
    Often you encounter code that is dangerous because the developer thinks that
    certain externally supplied variables are safe and trusts their content implicitly.
    This approach is dangerous for several reasons:
       ■ A code path might exist that’s not accounted for, so less stringent input
         sanitation is done; therefore, the vulnerable code can be reached with
         variables in an unexpected state.
       ■ A new code path might be introduced in the future in which less stringent
         input sanitation is done; therefore, the vulnerable code can be reached with
         variables in an unexpected state.
       ■ The input sanitation might not work as effectively as the developer expects
         because of a logic or implementation error, so the vulnerable code can be
         reached with variables in an unexpected state.
    In general, you should be wary of input data from other modules. You don’t need to
    assume the same level of danger as completely external input, but you should still
    be a bit suspicious of it. After all, it’s just good practice for the developer to perform
    some internal consistency checking, especially in a general purpose library.

Constraint Establishment
Sometimes you have a large number of test cases that verify code for all sorts of
boundary conditions, but a lot of these test cases might be useless to you. Why?
Because the code module you’re testing can’t be reached with variables in certain
states, so even if the test cases aren’t handled correctly, it doesn’t matter because
they can never happen.
    If you can verify that it’s impossible for variables to exist in certain states, a
number of the test cases become irrelevant, and you can discard them (noting
down why you discarded them). This process is called constraint establishment.
When you do this, you should ensure that sanitation checks on the input work as
expected by doing separate test cases for the part of the code where the sanity
checks occur. To see an example of where to discard test cases, go back to the
ConnectionRead() function. Imagine that it’s called from only a single place in
the application, a function called ConnectionReadBuffer() that looks like this:
int Connection::ConnectionReadBuffer(int len)
{
        return ((len > 0) ? ConnectionRead(len) : 0);
}

                                  Code-Auditing Tactics

    This function is basically a wrapper to ConnectionRead(), except it ensures that
len is a value greater than 0. That single check cuts out quite a few test cases; now
you need to test only situations in which len is positive because ConnectionRead()
can never be reached with len being 0 or negative.

Extraneous Input Thinning
Extraneous input thinning means getting rid of inputs that aren’t a concern. For
example, consider the following function prototype:
int read_data(int sock, unsigned char *buffer,
                   size_t length, int flags);

    This function is mostly a wrapper to recv(). The initial set of states for each
variable when this function is called are shown in Table 4-20.

Table 4-20
Input Data States
Variable                                 States
sock                                     Valid socket descriptor
                                         Invalid socket descriptor
buffer                                   NULL
                                         Non-NULL (size equal to length)
                                         Non-NULL (size not equal to length)
length                                   0
                                         Small positive number
                                         Huge positive number
flags                                    0
                                         Valid flags
                                         Invalid flags

     Now you have a set of possible states you want to test for. (You should normally
be more specific about what values the flags variable can take, but that isn’t neces-
sary for this example.) You can probably eliminate a couple of these states when
you examine the constraints for this function. For example, it’s highly unlikely the
program will call this function with an invalid socket descriptor. Beyond this con-
straint, however, certain values are outside an attacker’s control both directly and
indirectly. For example, say the flags variable can be any valid flag or combination
of flags that the recv() function accepts (and this rule is enforced in the code else-
where), but the program sets that value based on input from a configuration file
that only the administrator can access. In this case, you don’t need to test every
combination of possible values flags can take; the default configuration from the
file is probably sufficient.

   When eliminating test cases, be careful that you don’t eliminate too many. Just
because you can’t control the value of a variable doesn’t mean you can ignore it
because the values that variable takes might influence how the function or module
works, and you need to see how your input is dealt with in each circumstance. To
summarize, you can ignore only input values that meet the following conditions:
      ■ You can’t control them directly or indirectly.

      ■ The value of this variable doesn’t significantly affect how data you do control
       is dealt with or how the module operates.
    In addition, sometimes you see arguments with the sole purpose of being filled
in by the function, so when the function is called, the values in these variables are
irrelevant.

Unconstrained Data Types
This discussion of test cases hasn’t addressed dealing with data inputs of types
that aren’t constrained to a strict subset or range of values. The examples so far
have dealt primarily with integer types that can be in one of three states: nega-
tive value, positive value, or 0. What about character strings, however? String
data can be an arbitrary length and contain arbitrary characters supplied by
users. This makes it hard to write a strict set of test cases and ensure that you’re
covering all possible results when the application is running in a real-world envi-
ronment. String data complicates your test case procedures. Furthermore, this
type of data isn’t rare; you’ll need to make test cases for it frequently, so you
must be able to deal with this input in a consistent and accurate fashion. To do
this, you need to do be aware of some context surrounding the input. In other
words, you must determine what the unconstrained data represents and how the
program interprets it. A number of things happen to string data over the course
of a program:
      ■ Transformations—The data is converted from one representation to another.

      ■ Validations—Checks are performed to verify whether certain data elements are
        present at certain locations, to do length checks on the data, and to perform
        other related validation procedures.
      ■ Parsing and extraction—Data is parsed into constituent elements. For strings,
        parsing usually means locating element boundaries by searching for a
        delimiter (such as whitespace), and then copying elements as needed by the
        application.
      ■ System usage—The data is actually used for retrieving some sort of system
        resource, such as supplied filenames being opened or passed to another
        program to send e-mail.

    To provide effective string test cases, you should choose boundary cases for
each transformation, validation, or parsing block that takes place. The best way to
do this is by examining each operation performed on the data and classifying it
into one of the three categories: transformation, validation, or parsing. Depending
on the category, you decide what your goal is so that you can craft test cases
accordingly.
    If an operation is a transformation, your goals are to see whether there’s a case
where the transformation occurs incorrectly, see whether corruption of some kind
can occur, and see whether the order of transformations versus data validation
results in a logical security vulnerability (that is, a validation procedure checks for
the absence or presence of some data, but the data is subsequently transformed
before it’s used). These issues are explained in more detail in Chapter 8, “Strings
and Metacharacters.”
    If the operation is a validation procedure, your main goal is to determine
whether this validation can be subverted in any cases or whether the validation is
inadequate given the actions that follow. (This determination can include cases with
no validation.) Again, these issues are discussed in Chapter 8.
    When parsing and extraction is performed, you’re concerned with issues
related to parsing data incorrectly, usually resulting in some sort of memory corrup-
tion (covered extensively in several later chapters). After completing these steps,
often you find cases in which the data is used to access a system resource. This is
usually the final step of the data’s handling because it should have been validated
and parsed by this point. So a vulnerability exists if using this string to access a
resource allows an attacker to circumvent the application’s security policy or cor-
rupt its internal state.

Code Auditor’s Toolbox
Before you can analyze large chunks of code effectively, you need some tools that
enable you to navigate code comfortably and perform related tasks such as
fuzz-testing. This section introduces some major software tools for navigation of
both source and binary code, debugging, fuzz-testing, and automated code auditing.
     Coverage of each tool includes an overview of its feature set and an assessment
of its strengths and weaknesses. Code auditors vary in what type of tools they’re
comfortable with, so spend some time testing each product, and find the ones that
suit you best. The overview tables also indicate which tools have a free version
available.
     Code auditors tend to be creatures of habit. Most get familiar with certain
tools and then never try competing tools because of the effort required to change
their workflow. However, the state of the art changes rapidly, and new tools can

introduce new capabilities that make code review much easier. If possible, take time
to explore different products; you might find some features in competing tools that
aren’t available in your current tools.

Source Code Navigators
Source code navigators enable you to manage both small and large source-code
projects easily and efficiently. Although most programming suites come with IDE
software, source code navigators vary slightly by focusing on reading and following
the code instead of building it (although many IDEs have similar functions and
might be adequate for analyzing code). Some features of good source code naviga-
tors include the following:
      ■ Cross-referencing functionality—The capability to cross-reference a function or
        variable use is one of the most important features of a source code navigator.
        A good tool should enable you to look up definitions as well as uses of an
        object so that you can see the specifics of an object quickly and easily.
      ■ Text searching—Text searching is useful for locating code that might be per-
        forming a particular kind of task (based on what strings it’s looking for in
        input data). Additionally, text searching comes in handy for locating objects
        when the tool is unable to find a definition or the object definition comes from
        outside the project source. For example, an RPC server might have definitions
        for a variable declared in an rpcgen.x file, and the tool can’t find the defini-
        tions because it’s analyzing only.c files.
      ■ Multiple language support—Multiple language support is useful for code audi-
        tors who examine projects written in a variety of languages. Most source code
        navigators support a few major languages (such as C/C++ and Java).
      ■ Syntax highlighting—Every programmer should be familiar with the value of
        syntax highlighting. It is simply color coding that an IDE or source navigator
        applies to different programmatic constructs. Most tools have some form of
        syntax highlighting because it is considered essential for any modern software
        development.
      ■ Graphing capabilities—A pictorial representation of an object’s use or the con-
        trol flow in a function or function group can be very useful. With graphing
        capabilities, you can get a clear representation of call trees or control-flow con-
        structs without getting mired in the code.
      ■ Scripting capabilities—Scripting capabilities can be useful for advanced auto-
        mated analysis or manipulation of source code trees. With a powerful script-
        ing language, automating some basic (and even not so basic) aspects of code
        auditing might be possible.

Cscope
Cscope, summarized in Table 4-21, is a useful utility with cross-referencing features
in an easy-to-use text interface and search-and-replace features for making text sub-
stitutions over multiple source files. This utility doesn’t offer a satisfactory code
navigation environment because of the limited features it supports, but it’s not
designed to be an auditing environment. However, it can be a useful complement
to other products, particularly Ctags, as both products make up for each other’s
drawbacks.

Table 4-21
Cscope
Operating system         Most UNIX-based operating systems (Linux, BSD, Solaris)
Product requirements     None
Free version available   Yes
URL                      http://cscope.sourceforge.net/
Key features             Cross-referencing
                         Text searching and replacing

Ctags
Ctags is an extension of the VIM editor designed for navigating source code. It
offers a number of interesting features, although many features listed in Table
4-22 are actually part of VIM, not Ctags. It works by generating a file containing
locations of data elements (structures, functions, variables, type definitions, pre-
processor macros, and so on), and then referring to that file when users look up
definitions. It’s easy to use (for those familiar with VIM), and when combined
with features already in VIM, it creates a functional code-navigating
environment.

Table 4-22
Ctags
Operating system         Most UNIX-based operating systems (Linux, BSD, Solaris)
Product requirements     VIM editor
Free version available   Yes
URL                      http://ctags.sourceforge.net/
Key features             Multiple language support
                         Definition lookups
                         Syntax highlighting
                         Navigational shortcuts

     One of the main drawbacks of Ctags is that occasionally it jumps to the wrong
place during a definition lookup. It might jump to a prototype instead of the actual
function, for example. It can be particularly problem prone when a lot of indirection
is involved in the code being examined. The second main drawback is that it doesn’t
have cross-referencing features; however, using this tool with Cscope can work
around that limitation.

Source Navigator
Source Navigator (see Table 4-23) is a GUI IDE developed primarily for use on Linux
(and other UNIX-based OSs), but it also runs on Windows. It offers a rich feature
set, including support for multiple languages, cross-referencing (text as well as
pictorial), text searching, and definition lookups. It’s an excellent product because
the interface is simple and fast, and the engine works well. (It doesn’t get definition
lookups wrong, as other products sometimes do.)
Table 4-23
Source Navigator
Operating system         UNIX and Windows
Product requirements     None
Free version available   Yes
URL                      http://sourcenav.sourceforge.net/
Key features             Multiple language support
                         Cross-referencing
                         Graphing capabilities
                         Text searching and replacing
                         Definition lookups

     Many auditors tend to prefer console environments for code auditing, but
some of the features Source Navigator offers make code auditing in a GUI envi-
ronment reasonably efficient. It does have a couple of drawbacks, however. First,
it seems to have problems occasionally when dealing with large source trees
(which can cause the application to crash). This problem isn’t common, but it
does happen. Second, it lacks syntax highlighting, which can make following
code a little more difficult.

Code Surfer
Code Surfer (summarized in Table 4-24), a product by Grammatech, is specifically
designed for code-auditing tasks. It extends the basic function of code navigators
with additional features such as slicing. Slicing is a mechanism for syntax highlight-
ing based on variables the user wants to track and what code paths are affected by
that variable. This feature can be useful for enforcing the control-flow and data-flow
sensitivities of your analysis.

Table 4-24
Code Surfer
Operating system         UNIX and Windows
Product requirements     Cygwin if installed on Windows
Free version available   No
URL                      www.grammatech.com/products/codesurfer/
Key features             Multiple language support
                         Cross-referencing
                         Graphing capabilities
                         Text searching and replacing
                         Definition lookups

Understand
Understand by SciTools (summarized in Table 4-25) is designed for analyzing large
codebases and supports a number of different languages. It’s available as a GUI for
both Windows and UNIX OSs. Understand is one of the most full-featured source
code reading environment available today (with an especially easy-to-use and con-
figurable interface). Understand also has a scripting interface for automating
source-code analysis tasks.

Table 4-25
Understand
Operating system         UNIX and Windows
Product requirements     None
Free version available   Time-limited trial
URL                      www.scitools.com/
Key features             Multiple language support
                         Cross-referencing
                         Graphing capabilities
                         Text searching and replacing
                         Definition lookups
                         Scripting and plug-in capabilities

Debuggers
Debugging is an integral part of a code auditor’s job. It might be helpful when
tracking down what code paths are used under a given set of circumstances, track-
ing down a fault that occurred as a result of black box testing, or verifying a vulner-
ability that has been located in the code. Quite a selection of debuggers are
available for both Windows and UNIX-based OSs, and many have support for any
architecture the OS is available on (to varying degrees). The level of sophistication

in debuggers varies widely, as do their feature sets, so familiarize yourself with a
number of debuggers to see which one suits you best. The following features are
some good things to look for when selecting a debugger:
      ■ Kernel debugging—Most debuggers are designed for debugging user land
        processes. You might be required to debug a kernel or kernel drivers, however.
        If so, you need a debugger with the capability of stepping through code that’s
        running in kernel mode. Kernel debuggers are few and far between compared
        to regular debuggers, so if you anticipate doing any kernel-related work, famil-
        iarizing yourself with the popular ones is well worth your time.
      ■ Memory searching—This is simply the ability to search for strings and values
        through arbitrary memory ranges. It might seem like a basic requirement for
        debuggers, but surprisingly, a few lack this feature.
      ■ Scripting capabilities—Defining custom commands or macros for use when
        debugging an application can be useful. Scripting capabilities can be a power-
        ful feature, and they’re convenient for automating repetitive tasks.
      ■ Debugging support—Certain binary file formats (such as ELF) have the capabil-
        ity to contain extensive debugging information, including source code, line
        numbering, source filenames, and so on. Other file formats are created when
        a program is compiled specifically to store debugging information (such as
        DBG files). This information is often useful, and a good debugger should be
        able to interpret this data to make debugging more manageable.
      ■ Conditional breakpoints—You might need the ability to provide a set of require-
        ments to be met for a breakpoint to trigger. This way, you don’t need to manu-
        ally check process state every time a breakpoint is triggered to determine
        whether it’s relevant to what you’re examining.
      ■ Thread support—Debugging multithreaded applications can be quite difficult.
        Although nearly all debuggers support debugging multithreaded applications,
        some are better than others.
      ■ On-the-fly assembling—It can be useful to write assembly code that the debug-
        ger interprets into bytecode, especially when you’re injecting code manually
        in a process or modifying code to test some condition.
      ■ Remote debugging support—Depending on the task at hand, being able to debug
        a machine over the network can be convenient.
      The following sections describe some popular debuggers available for different OSs.

GNU Debugger (GDB)
GDB, summarized in Table 4-26, is probably the most widely used debugger for
UNIX-based systems. It’s a console debugger (although GUI front ends are
available) that offers a fairly rich feature set and is quite easy to use (if you’re

familiar with assembly code and general debugger use—a requirement if you plan
to be effective with a debugger). Most of the commands use a similar syntax, so
after you familiarize yourself with the basics, the rest comes easily. GDB is useful
when you have source code access to the code you’re debugging, as you can com-
pile it with debugging information. (This level of information is specific to ELF
binaries, a common binary file format on contemporary UNIX variants.) You can
step through assembly code, and GDB shows the line of source code relating to
the instruction being carried out. This feature makes it easy to do fault tracing or
see what’s going wrong when attempting to exercise code paths to test potential
vulnerabilities in the code.

Table 4-26
GDB
Operating system         UNIX and Windows
Product requirements     None
Free version available   Yes
URL                      www.gnu.org/
Key features             Kernel debugging (in some limited circumstances)
                         Scripting capabilities
                         File format debugging support
                         Conditional breakpoints
                         Thread support (limited)
                         Remote debugging support

    GDB also has a scripting interface, which is useful for creating customized
commands that can speed up debugging. The scripting interface is quite limited
in many ways; for example, it can’t keep state information between command
calls. It’s primarily meant for defining macros for a series of commands instead
of building fully featured plug-ins, which is a shame.
    GDB also lacks a couple of features. On-the-fly assembly would be useful, as
would memory searching. (There’s no command to search through memory,
although it’s fairly easy to make a script to do so.) The interface can be a bit awk-
ward for tasks such as editing data in memory (compared with a debugger such as
SoftICE, covered later in this section). Further, GDB has a limitation when a process
spawns several child processes: tracing into children can be difficult. Having said
that, other UNIX debuggers have similar limitations, so it’s not a GDB-specific
issue. GDB supports non-Intel architectures, but sometimes it doesn’t work quite as
well on others; specifically, debugging sparc binaries is known to cause problems.

OllyDbg
OllyDbg is a free user land Windows debugger with an easy-to-use GUI for analyz-
ing programs at runtime (see Table 4-27).

Table 4-27
OllyDbg
Operating system         Windows
Product requirements     None
Free version available   Yes
URL                      www.ollydbg.de/
Key features             Conditional breakpoints
                         Thread support
                         Remote debugging support
                         Plug-in capabilities
                         On-the-fly assembly

   OllyDbg is feature rich and simplifies some time-consuming debugging tasks.
Some of OllyDbg’s features include the following:
      ■ The ability to record execution paths (useful in analyzing crashes, as you can
        step backward in the program to see what went wrong, which branches were
        taken, and so forth)
      ■ Exception handler chain view (saves you from manually walking the stack)

      ■ Setting marks you can return to (such as IDA has)

      ■ On-the-fly assembly

      ■ Exception blocking (you can choose to pass certain exceptions on to the
        debugged process, but not others)
    In addition to basic debugging capabilities, Ollydbg has a sophisticated engine that
enables developing plug-ins for extending the debugger’s functionality. Some plug-ins
include OllyDump (available at www.openrce.org/downloads/details/108/OllyDump),
which allows the in-memory image of a process to be dumped to disk, and HeapVis
(available at http://labs.idefense.com/labs.php?show=8#a8), a tool for visualizing the
program heap’s current state.

SoftICE
SoftICE from Compuware, summarized in Table 4-28, is a popular kernel-level debug-
ger for Windows OSs. Because SoftICE runs in kernel mode, it can be used to debug
user land applications and kernel drivers (or the kernel itself). SoftICE has a number of
helpful features, including remote debugging, on-the-fly assembly, an efficient com-
mand language, and powerful search, replace, and edit features. Compuware recently
discontinued SoftICE; however, it remains a popular Windows kernal debugger.

Table 4-28
SoftICE
Operating system          Windows
Product requirements      None
Free version available    Trial version only
URL                       www.compuware.com
Key features              Kernel debugging
                          Conditional breakpoints
                          Thread support
                          Remote debugging support
                          On-the-fly assembly

Binary Navigation Tools
Not all the applications you audit are available as source code. In fact, source code
often isn’t provided, so you must audit the program binaries by reading the applica-
tion’s assembly code and figuring out how it works from there. You need some tools
that aid in binary navigation so that examining executables is less cumbersome.
Some good features for binary navigation tools include the following:
    ■ Annotation options—Auditing assembly code can be tedious and difficult. It’s
      useful for code reviewers to be able to annotate code with remarks about what
      the code does or potential errors that need to be followed up.
    ■ Markers—As an addition to annotation, markers enable you to return to previ-
      ous suspect code locations automatically. These markers are useful, especially
      when you’re returning to an application you worked on all last night.
    ■ Graphing capabilities—As with source code navigators, graphing capabilities
      enable you to see the structure of a function or function call tree. This feature
      is useful when you need to establish a call path to a suspect function or exam-
      ine the logical layout of how a function operates internally.
    ■ Structure definition capabilities—Because assembly code can be difficult to
      follow, it’s useful to be able to define structures with discernible members
      discovered during the reverse-engineering process. Applying these struc-
      tures is essential when performing data-flow sensitive analysis, especially
      in object-oriented code.
    ■ Scripting capabilities—The ability to write scripts or plug-ins is particularly useful
      for binary analysis. They can be useful for unpacking an executable automati-
      cally as well as writing tools to automatically analyze certain constructs in the
      code. For instance, scripts can aid static analysis for automatic vulnerability
      detection or provide useful information, such as object recognition, structure
      definitions, or variable tracking.

IDA Pro
IDA Pro, summarized in Table 4-29, is the tool for binary navigation and a manda-
tory part of code reviewers’ toolkit. Get this product if you don’t have it—that’s an
order! IDA Pro can be used to interpret many binary file formats targeted for a range
of processors, so it’s useful for nearly any sort of binary you encounter.
Table 4-29
IDA Pro
Operating system         Linux and Windows
Product requirements     None
Free version available   No
URL                      www.datarescue.com
Key features             Multiple language support
                         Cross-referencing
                         Graphing capabilities
                         Text searching and replacing
                         Definition lookups
                         Scripting and plug-in capabilities

          Note
          Even if IDA doesn’t recognize the file format you’re trying to ana-
          lyze, it’s possible to construct a loader module for specific binary
          types by using the IDA plug-in interface.

      IDA Pro has a rich (and unparalleled) feature set, which includes the following:
      ■ Automatic recognition of functions and data elements in a binary

      ■ Propagation of type information across function calls

      ■ Recognition of common compiler constructs

      ■ Recognition of fragmented function blocks

      ■ The ability to navigate a binary graphically (new to version 5)

      ■ Cross-referencing capabilities

      ■ Flowchart and graphing capabilities

      ■ A flexible scripting language for automating analysis tasks

      ■ An extensible plug-in framework that allows developers to write sophisticated
       analysis modules (or binary loaders)
    IDA also integrates debugging into its disassembler product. This product can
be used instead of a standalone debugger and has the advantage of combining static
analysis features with live debugging for a more comprehensive reverse-engineering

environment. The debugger in IDA also has a lot of the features that other popular
debuggers have.

BinNavi
BinNavi is an exciting new product by Sabre (see Table 4-30). Developed as an IDA
plug-in targeted at code auditors who want to understand a program’s inner work-
ings more clearly, BinNavi provides a graphical representation of a binary that users
can navigate easily. Call trees or internal function workings can be expressed in a
variety of graphical formats, from circular graphs to tree flowcharts. BinNavi
enables users to pinpoint interesting code paths quickly by eliminating extraneous
code paths and saving different views of the same binary that highlight the paths
being analyzed. Graph nodes can be colored separately to help highlight certain
components in a function or call tree.

Table 4-30
BinNavi
Operating system         Windows and Linux
Product requirements     IDA Pro
Free version available   No
URL                      www.sabre-security.com/
Key features             Graphing capabilities
                         Annotation
                         Debugging
                         Scriptable interface

    Graphing is just one of the tools that BinNavi provides for annotation. Users
can also maintain detailed notes on each node on a graph, and these notes can be
found quickly by using saved views and BinNavi’s built-in search capabilities.
    Of course, the features described so far are useful for static analysis, but users
need to be able to correlate their notes with runtime instances of the application.
Therefore, BinNavi also gives users basic debugging capabilities, so they can select
nodes to break on for further analysis while the process is running. The latest
version of BinNavi offers some Python scripting capabilities to perform some of the
features mentioned in the previous section on debuggers.

Fuzz-Testing Tools
At times, fuzz-testing is required as part of an audit in addition to code review.
Fuzz-testing can be useful for finding bugs missed during the code audit because
of complex code constructs and time constraints. This testing can be invaluable in
ensuring that you have caught the most readily detected vulnerabilities.

     A good fuzz-testing tool should be protocol aware or capable of scripting so that
it can provide a thorough test of known problems with the protocol in question.
In addition, some new fuzz-testing tools might attempt intelligent attack vectors,
which means they receive results of a request and use that information to build
further requests to target potential problem areas.

SPIKE
SPIKE, summarized in Table 4-31, is a protocol-independent fuzz-testing tool. It
gives users a number of preformulated scripts for testing products that use known
protocols as well as a powerful scripting language for creating scripts to test
arbitrary protocols.

Table 4-31
SPIKE
Operating system         UNIX and Windows
Product requirements     None
Free version available   Yes
URL                      www.immunitysec.com/
Key features             Scriptable interface

    Dave Aitel (author of SPIKE) has written an interesting paper on the merits of
block-based protocol analysis (decomposing protocol data into blocks for the pur-
poses of size management and information discovery), the model on which SPIKE
is built. You can find this paper at www.immunitysec.com/downloads/
advantages_of_block_based_analysis.html. In addition, a proxy component is
available for SPIKE for dealing with Web application testing environments.

Case Study: OpenSSH
In this chapter, you have learned about the four-phase application review process
that functions at a high level. To see how these steps could be applied in a real-world
setting, you walk through a practical example using the OpenSSH server. The source
code is available from www.openssh.com/, and the version is OpenSSH 4.3.

        Note
        For those unfamiliar with OpenSSH, it’s the premier Secure Shell
        (SSH) server on the Internet. It provides an encrypted interactive
        shell service to authenticated users for a particular machine. More
        details are available on the OpenSSH Web site (www.openssh.com).

                                   Case Study: OpenSSH

Preassessment
Referring back to the application review process, first you need to establish
essential application information. You don’t have a design specification or SDLC
documentation; instead, you need to examine the code briefly to identify the key
components you need to look at. The first thing you do is determine attack vec-
tors you need to cover. To do this, you need a good idea of how the application is
exposed and to whom. As mentioned earlier, you apply your knowledge of threat
modeling to identify the major attack vectors. In the OpenSSH server example,
the application is exposed to three main classes of users:
    ■ Administrator—This user has permissions to start and stop the SSH server and
      modify the configuration file.
    ■ Authenticated users—This class of users can log in remotely and start a shell
      interactively.
    ■ Unauthenticated users—This class of users doesn’t have valid credentials and
      shouldn’t be able to do anything.
    In this audit, you’re largely uninterested in the administrator and authenticated
user classes; you want to focus on remote unauthenticated users. You need to begin
collecting SSH documentation to get an idea of how an SSH server works, the pro-
tocol constraints it has to work within and the exposure level available to each user
class. In this case, the SSH RFCs are particularly useful. After a brief search on
www.ietf.org, you can find the following RFCs:
    ■ RFC 4250—The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Assigned Numbers
      (www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4250.txt)
    ■ RFC 4251—The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Architecture
      (www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc/4251.txt)
    ■ RFC 4252—The Secure Shell (SSH) Authentication Protocol
      (www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4252.txt)
    ■ RFC 4253—The Secure Shell (SSH) Transport Layer Protocol
      (www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4253.txt)
    ■ RFC 4254—The Secure Shell (SSH) Connection Protocol
      (www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4254.txt)
    Looks like a lot of reading! Fortunately, you can skim over a lot of the details, as
long as you make sure you grasp the basic architecture of an SSH server and how
SSH clients and servers communicate.
    Before you go any further, you need some insight into the architecture of the
OpenSSH server code. When you unpack the source, you’ll notice that all the
source files unpack into one directory. Because there’s no neat directory structure
hinting at how the application is designed, you need to start from the main()

function in the SSH server and examine the code briefly. This cursory look indicates
several subsystems you need to be familiar with to analyze the code in more depth:
      ■ Buffer subsystem—Manages binary data streams for both input and output. All
        code for managing these buffers is in buffer.c and bufaux.c.
      ■ Packet subsystem—Deals with transmitting and receiving packets. Most of the
        packet subsystem is a wrapper for buffer functions, with the exception of I/O
        functions. The code for dealing with packets is in packet.c.
      ■ Crypto subsystem—Each supported cryptography algorithm is represented by a
        structure defining key elements of the algorithm, such as encryption/
        decryption routines, key sizes, and so on. This code is in cipher.c.
      ■ Privilege separation—When you read any code and documentation about
        OpenSSH, you’ll discover a mechanism known as “privilege separation” that
        attempts to minimize the chances of exploitable vulnerabilities gaining much
        access to the target system. It works by forking two processes to handle each
        connection: an unprivileged child dealing with network data and a privileged
        parent that can authenticate users based on requests from the child. Most of
        the code for privilege separation is in monitor.c and monitor_wrap.c.
    You should also figure out what functionality you’re going to focus the audit
on, which should be clear after doing the brief code inspection. You want to focus
on code that can be triggered by remote unauthenticated users, which means you
probably want to cover the following code portions:
      ■ Low-level packet handling routines (a more in-depth vulnerability analysis of
        the buffer and packet reception routines)
      ■ Identification exchange (initial identification exchange as defined by the SSH
        protocol—in sshd.c)
      ■ Session setup (proposal and key exchange—spans multiple files)

      ■ Compression handling (SSH supports compression by default, located in
        compress.c)
      ■ Authentication (spans multiple files, all beginning with auth- or auth2-). Note
        that authentication data is extracted in the child and handled in the server, so
        you need to examine both sides.
    Finally, make note of any objects that are used. Given that you’re concerned
only with preauthentication routines, you need to examine very few objects. The
relevant ones are listed here:
      ■ Configuration file—Obviously, remote unauthenticated users can’t read or write
       to this file or affect it in any way. You should familiarize yourself with what
       options are available and what default options are set, however.

                                   Case Study: OpenSSH

    ■ Local privilege separation socket—The parent and child processes in a privilege
      separation relationship communicate via a local socket. You don’t need to
      worry much about this object because you can’t influence how it is accessed.
    ■ Remote client socket—This object addresses how you can communicate with the
      server.
    ■ Various authentication files—Various forms of authentication examine local files
      for authentication data—host entries, keys, and so on. Some files you examine
      could be system files, and others are files in a user’s home directory. If you
      already had an account on the system and were using SSH to leverage elevated
      privileges, parsing and interpreting these files would be significant. However,
      you’re not considering that case for this example.
    ■ External application invocation—OpenSSH can be made to invoke external appli-
      cations, even before authentication has been established. For example, on
      BSD systems, the BSD authentication mechanism can be used, which calls a
      user-defined login program that is responsible for deciding whether a user is
      authenticated. For this example, you can ignore these invocations, although a
      thorough audit would involve some examination of them.

Implementation Analysis
Now that you have spent time doing information gathering, it’s time to move on to the
code audit. To begin, you look through the exposed functionality you identified in the
preassessment phase. You now have enough context to start with the lowest-level
routines and work upward, so you would start with the packet and buffer-handling
routines. You attempt to identify bugs that fall into your known vulnerability classes,
such as integer-related vulnerabilities, memory management problems, and so forth.
It’s also helpful to note quirky behavior that certain parts of the application exhibit
and see whether that behavior creates a vulnerability at any point. After going over
the OpenSSH code, you might note some of the following behaviors:
    ■ The fatal() function could provide a useful application-specific candidate
      point (CP6). It doesn’t exit the application directly; it does a series of cleanups
      to prevent memory leaks and so forth when it calls cleanup_exit(). Could
      this function be a problem if something it cleaned up were in an inconsistent
      state? (It has been in the past.)
    ■ A simple lexical candidate point search (CP3) determines that nearly every
      length parameter is unsigned; it’s unlikely that signed integer vulnerabilities
      will be found.
    ■ Code comprehension strategies identify the consistent use of a buffer struc-
      ture. Buffer overflows seem unlikely due to the consistent use of these buffer
      mechanisms.

      ■ You might want to do a candidate point search to identify double free() vul-
        nerabilities. They seem possible, as many routines allocate a large number of
        data structures and have cleanup parts at the end. Maybe there’s a place
        where one buffer is freed that’s never allocated?
      ■ Code comprehension strategies identify that authentication success or failure
        is often indicated by a return value of 1 or 0. Is another value ever returned
        from an authentication function accidentally?
      ■ Code comprehension and design generalization strategies reveal that multi-
        stage authentication algorithms could have state problems. What if you repeat
        stages or skip stages? Is it possible? Doing so could lead to double free()
        vulnerabilities, memory leaks, and inconsistent variable states.
    You should note several other behaviors when walking through the code. If
you’re unsure about some vulnerability classes mentioned in the preceding list,
don’t worry. They are covered in later chapters throughout the book. With your
series of informal mental notes combined with formal techniques introduced
throughout the book, you can analyze the code in depth for each vulnerability class,
making sure to consider each code path carefully.

High-Level Attack Vectors
A higher-level analysis of the code can help you discover potential flaws in the
application’s logic and design. The OpenSSH specification seems to leave the possi-
bility open for a number of higher-level logic and design vulnerabilities. You don’t
have a threat model; however, you can identify some basic attack vectors from the
RFCs you’ve read and your current knowledge of the implementation.

SSH Protocol Attack Vectors
Before authentication, the identification exchange, proposal, and session setup
phases take place. During this period, the SSH server and client agree on a number of
supported parameters for the session and establish a secure channel. When attempt-
ing to attack this code, you would need to consider some of the following points:
      ■ Sniffing—SSH communications are encrypted mainly to prevent third parties
        from snooping on a session. Therefore, you need to see whether there’s any
        way to break that encryption. In performing an audit, often you assume the
        effectiveness of a publicly validated encryption protocol. However, that
        doesn’t necessarily mean the protocol is being used safely. You might want to
        look at session establishment and see whether an observer can learn secret
        keys from watching a proposal and session setup.
      ■ Man in the middle—Can an observer masquerade as a server and glean login
        credentials from clients without their knowledge?

                                  Case Study: OpenSSH

    ■ Protocol quirks—What interesting quirks does the protocol allow? For example,
      does it provide backward compatibility with previous, less secure versions of
      the protocol? If so, undermining security by forcing the use of old protocol
      features or authentication mechanisms might be possible.
    ■ Protocol state—Examine how OpenSSH deals with the state of messages. Does
      the server ever attempt to handle messages sent at inappropriate stages? Also,
      at various points throughout SSH negotiation, it’s legal to receive any of a
      number of different messages, which can lead to complicated and unpre-
      dictable code paths.

Login Attack Vectors
Logging in is the most crucial element of the SSH server. If any login mechanisms
don’t work correctly, remote attackers could gain local access to the machine the
server resides on. Some things to consider when evaluating the authentication
components of OpenSSH include the following:
    ■ Brute-forcing—Can accounts be brute-forced? Are mechanisms in place to
      prevent remote attackers from trying millions of different passwords on a
      username (dictionary attacks)?
    ■ Multistage authentication—Can any multistage authentication modules be
      tricked into giving access by sending out state requests? This consideration
      ties in with your work in assessing the protocol state attack vectors.
    ■ Disabled accounts—Does the OpenSSH server recognize that certain system
      accounts are intended to be disabled? For example, can users who have the
      shell /bin/false log in?
    ■ File-based authentication—A lot of authentication mechanisms require checking
      files on the local file system. For example, key-based authentication verifies
      users by checking key files in their home directories, and rhosts authentica-
      tion checks a local file to see whether users can log in without a password if
      they’re coming from a valid host. Is there any way to fool these authentication
      protocols into reading the wrong files, such as privileged files or authentica-
      tion files for other users?
    ■ Incorrectly set up authentication—Many authentication mechanisms (such as
      Kerberos) require administrators to configure the machine correctly before
      authentication can be established successfully. Can an enabled authentication
      mechanism that isn’t set up correctly (or at all) yield access to the machine?
    ■ Incorrectly functioning authentication—Most authentication mechanisms
      OpenSSH uses are industry-accepted and standardized mechanisms, such as
      BSD authentication, password authentication, Kerberos, and public key
      authentication. That doesn’t necessarily mean the modules function correctly,

      however. Can the program allow an unauthorized authentication bypass? The
      most likely cause of this problem is incorrectly interpreting global structures
      that are in an inconsistent state or misinterpreting return values. This consid-
      eration ties in with your work in assessing the protocol state attack vectors.

Documentation of Findings
After the analysis is finished, you can write up your findings in the manner dis-
cussed in the “Documentation and Analysis” section of this chapter. This documen-
tation includes locations of any vulnerabilities you identified, such as the pertinent
details identified in this case study.

Summary
Taking a given application and performing a detailed security assessment is a complex
task. To know how to address this complexity, you learned an iterative process for
isolating application components and identifying security issues. You also learned a
range of strategies and techniques for performing and managing your assessment
efforts. This review process assists you in examining each application in a thorough
and systematic manner and directing your review efforts to where they make the
most impact.

     PART II
SOFTWARE VULNERABILITIES
This page intentionally left blank
