                       Chapter 5
                Memory Corruption

“Nearly all men can stand adversity, but if you want to test a man’s character, give him power.”
   Abraham Lincoln

Introduction
In this book, you’re asked to accept one basic assumption—that all memory corruption
vulnerabilities should be treated as exploitable until you can prove otherwise. This
assumption might seem a bit extreme, but it’s a useful perspective for a code auditor.
Attackers can often leverage an out-of-bounds memory write to modify a program’s
runtime state in an arbitrary manner, thus violating any security policy an application
should be enforcing. However, it’s hard to accept the severity of memory corruption
vulnerabilities or even understand them until you have some knowledge of how memory
corruption is exploited.
    Exploit creation and software auditing are two different—but highly complementary—skill
sets. An auditor with a good understanding of exploit development is more effective, as this
knowledge is useful for determining the difference between an innocuous bug and a genuine
vulnerability. There are many well-documented techniques for exploiting memory corruption
vulnerabilities, and this chapter provides a brief introduction to some basic approaches for

the Intel x86 architecture (although the concepts are applicable to all architectures).
Along with exploit techniques, you learn more details about anti-exploit technologies
and strategies for determining exploitability. The coverage is not intended as a
definitive guide to exploiting memory corruption vulnerabilities, but it does provide
the background you need to understand and appreciate many of the vulnerabilities
covered throughout this book.

        Note
        Readers interested in learning more about exploiting memory
        corruption vulnerabilities should pick up The Shellcoder’s
        Handbook (Wiley, 2004) by Jack Koziol et al. or Exploiting Software
        (Addison-Wesley, 2004) by Greg Hoglund and Gary McGraw. You
        can also find numerous online resources about exploitation
        techniques, such as phrack magazine (www.phrack.org) and
        Uninformed magazine (www.uninformed.org).

Buffer Overflows
You’re probably familiar with the term “buffer overflow,” but if not, a buffer
overflow is a software bug in which data copied to a location in memory exceeds
the size of the reserved destination area. When an overflow is triggered, the excess
data corrupts program information adjacent to the target buffer, often with disas-
trous consequences.
    Buffer overflows are the most common type of memory corruption. If you’re not
familiar with how these bugs are exploited, they almost seem to defy logic and
somehow grant an attacker complete access to a vulnerable system. But how do
they work? Why are they such a threat to system integrity? And why don’t operat-
ing systems just protect memory from being corrupted altogether? To answer these
questions, you need to be familiar with program internals and how the CPU and OS
manage processes.

        Note
        Some of the vulnerabilities in this book are more complex
        memory corruption vulnerabilities that aren’t technically buffer
        overflows, but share many of the same characteristics. This
        discussion of exploitability is largely applicable to these types of
        issues, especially the “Assessing Memory Corruption Impact”
        section later in this chapter.

Process Memory Layout
A process can be laid out in memory in any way the host OS chooses, but nearly all
contemporary systems observe a few common conventions. In general, a process is
organized into the following major areas:
    ■ Program code—This section contains executable program instructions that can
      be interpreted by the processor and acted on. Program code includes
      compiled code for the running program and additional code located in shared
      libraries the program uses. Shared libraries aren’t usually mapped
      contiguously with the main program code.
    ■ Program data—This section is used to store program variables that aren’t local
      to functions. It includes both global and static variables. The data section
      usually contains a dynamic memory region, called the “program heap,” for
      storing dynamically allocated variables.
    ■ Program stack—The stack is used for dynamic storage for currently executing
      functions, and it keeps track of the call chain of functions as they execute.
     Although this is a high-level view of how process memory is organized, it shows
how the impact of a buffer overflow vulnerability varies based on where the buffer
is located. The following sections address common and unique attack patterns
associated with each location.

Stack Overflows
Stack overflows are buffer overflows in which the target buffer is located on the
runtime program stack. They are the most well understood and, historically, the
most straightforward type of buffer overflow to exploit. This section covers the
basics of the runtime program stack and then shows how attackers exploit
stack-based buffer overflows.

 The Stack ADT
 From a general computer science perspective, a stack is an abstract data type (ADT)
 used for the ordered storage and retrieval of a series of data elements. Users of a stack
 data structure typically have two operations available for manipulating the stack:
    ■ push()—The push operation adds an element to the top of the stack.

    ■ pop()—A pop operation removes and returns the top element from the stack.

 A stack is a last-in, first-out (LIFO) data structure. You can think of it like a physical
 stack of dishes. You can place a dish on top of the stack—a push() operation—and
 you can take a dish off the top of the stack—a pop() operation. You cannot,
 however, directly remove a dish from the middle of the stack without first
 removing the dishes on top of it.

The Runtime Stack
Each process has a runtime stack, which is also referred to as “the program stack,”
“the call stack,” or just “the stack.” The runtime stack provides the underpinning
necessary for the functions used in every structured programming language.
Functions can be called in arbitrary order, and they can be recursive and mutually
recursive. The runtime stack supports this functionality with activation records,
which record the chain of calls from function to function so that they can be
followed back when functions return. An activation record also includes data that
needs to be allocated each time a function is called, such as local variables, saved
machine state, and function parameters.
     Because runtime stacks are an integral part of how programs function, they are
implemented with CPU assistance instead of as a pure software abstraction. The
processor usually has a special register that points to the top of the stack, which is
modified by using push() and pop() machine instructions. On Intel x86 CPUs, this
register is called ESP (ESP stands for “extended stack pointer”).
     On most modern CPUs, the stack grows downward. This means the stack starts
at a high address in virtual memory and grows toward a lower address. A push
operation subtracts from the stack pointer so that the stack pointer moves toward
the lower end of process memory. Correspondingly, the pop operation adds to the
stack pointer, moving it back toward the top of memory.
     Every time a function is called, the program creates a new stack frame, which is
simply a reserved block of contiguous memory that a function uses for storing local
variables and internal state information. This block of memory is reserved for
exclusive use by the function until it returns, at which time it’s removed from the
stack. To understand this process, consider the following program snippet:
int function_B(int a, int b)
{
      int x, y;

      x = a * a;
      y = b * b;

      return (x+y);
}

int function_A(int p, int q)
{
      int c;

     c = p * q * function_B(p, p);

     return c;
}

int main(int argc, char **argv, char **envp)
{
     int ret;

     ret = function_A(1, 2);

     return ret;
}

    When function_A() is entered, a stack frame is allocated and placed on the top
of the stack, as shown in Figure 5-1.

0xBFFFFC00

                        function_A()’s stack
                                frame

                                                   Stack grows toward
                                                      lower memory
                        main()’s stack frame
                                                        addresses

0xBFFFFF00

                              Stack base
Figure 5-1   Stack while in function_A()

    This diagram is a simplified view of the program stack, but you can see the
basic stack frame layout when the main() function has called function_A().

         Note
         Figures 5-1 and 5-2 might seem confusing at first because the
         stack appears to be growing upward rather than downward; how-
         ever, it’s not a mistake. If you imagine a memory address space
         beginning at 0 and extending downward to 0xFFFFFFFF, a lower
         memory address is closer to 0 and, therefore, appears higher on
         the diagram.

      Figure 5-2 shows what the stack would look like after function_A() calls
function_B().

0xBFFFFC00

                            function_B()’s stack
                                    frame

                            function_A()’s stack
                                    frame

                                                   Stack grows toward
                                                      lower memory
                            main()’s stack frame        addresses

0xBFFFFF00

                               Stack base
Figure 5-2   Stack while in function_B()

    When function_B() is finished, it returns back into function_A(). The
function_B() stack frame is popped off the top of the stack, and the stack again
looks like it does in Figure 5-1. This simply means the value of ESP is restored to the
value it had when function_B() was called.

        Note
        The stack diagrams in Figures 5-1 and 5-2 are simplified representa-
        tions. In fact, main() is not the first function on the call stack.
        Usually, functions are called before main() to set up the environ-
        ment for the process. For example, glibc Linux systems usually
        begin with a function named _start(), which calls
        _libc_start_main(), which in turn calls main().

    Each function manages its own stack frame, which is sized depending on how
many local variables are present and the size of each variable. Local variables need
to be accessed directly as the function requires them, which would be inefficient
just using push and pop instructions. Therefore, many programs make use of
another register, called the “frame pointer” or “base pointer.” On Intel x86 CPUs,
this register is called EBP (EBP stands for “extended base pointer”). This register
points to the beginning of the function’s stack frame. Each variable in the given
frame can be accessed by referencing a memory location that is a fixed offset from
the base pointer. The use of the base pointer is optional, and it is sometimes
omitted, but you can assume that it’s present for the purposes of this discussion.
    A crucial detail that was glossed over earlier is the internal state information
recorded in each stack frame. The state information stored on the stack varies among
processor architectures, but usually it includes the previous function’s frame pointer
and a return address. This return address value is saved so that when the currently
running function returns, the CPU knows where execution should continue. Of
course, the frame pointer must also be restored so that local variable accesses remain
consistent after a function has called a subfunction that allocates its own stack frame.

 Function-Calling Conventions
 A calling convention describes how function parameters are passed to a function
 and what stack maintenance must be performed by the calling and called
 functions. The section “The Runtime Stack” earlier in this chapter addresses the
 most popular type of calling convention; however, calling conventions vary with
 processor architectures, OSs, and compilers.
 Compilers can switch between calling conventions for optimization purposes; for
 example, one popular optimized x86 calling convention is the fastcall. The
 fastcall passes function parameters in registers when possible, which can speed
 up variable access and reduce stack maintenance overhead. Each compiler has a
 slightly different version of the fastcall.
                                                                         continues...

 Function-Calling Conventions Continued
 Language features can also introduce different calling conventions. A typical C++
 class member function requires access to the class instance’s this pointer. On
 Windows x86 systems, the this pointer is passed in the ECX register for func-
 tions with a fixed number of parameters. In contrast, the GCC C++ compiler
 passes the this pointer as the last parameter pushed onto the stack.

    The stack pointer must also be restored to its previous state, but this task isn’t per-
formed implicitly; the called function must reset the stack pointer to the appropriate
location before it returns. This is necessary because the saved frame pointer and return
address are restored from the top of the stack. The frame pointer is restored by using a
pop instruction, which uses the stack pointer implicitly; the ret instruction used to
return from a function also uses ESP implicitly to retrieve the return address.
    Each function that allocates its own stack frame, therefore, needs to save its
own frame pointer. Listing 5-1 shows a typical function prologue on Intel machines
for saving the frame pointer.

Listing 5-1
Function Prologue
text:5B891A50                    mov      edi, edi
text:5B891A52                    push     ebp
text:5B891A53                    mov      ebp, esp

The prologue doesn’t require that the caller specifically push the return address
onto the stack; this task is done by the call instruction. So the stack layout when
function_B() is called looks like Figure 5-3.

         Note
         You might notice that the prologue in Listing 5-1 includes a seem-
         ingly useless instruction (mov edi, edi). This instruction is actually
         a placeholder added to ease runtime patching for system monitoring
         and debugging.

Exploiting Stack Overflows
As you can see, local variables are in close proximity to each other—in fact, they are
arranged contiguously in memory. Therefore, if a program has a vulnerability allowing
data to be written past the end of a local stack buffer, the data overwrites adjacent
variables. These adjacent variables can include other local variables, program state

information, and even function arguments. Depending on how many bytes can be
written, attackers might also be able to corrupt variables and state information in
previous stack frames.
                                                                                0xBFFFFDBC
                             int y

                             int x
                                                               function_B’s stack frame
                         Saved EBP

        Saved EIP (points to a location in function_A)

                function_B argument 1 (int a)

                function_B argument 2 (int b)

                             int c                             Function_A’s stack frame

                         Saved EBP

          Saved EIP (points to a location in main)

                function_A argument 1 (int p)

                 funcion_A argument 2 (int q)
                                                                 main’s stack frame
                            int ret

                         Saved EBP

      Saved EIP (points to a location in_libc_start_main)

                           int argc

                          char **argv

                         char **envp                                           0xBFFFFE00

                   _libc_start_main() stuff..

                        Stack base
Figure 5-3    Detailed stack layout

          Note
          Compilers sometimes add padding between one variable and the
          next, depending on several factors such as optimization levels and
          variable sizes. For the purposes of this discussion, you can consider
          variables to be contiguous.

    To begin, consider the simple case of writing over a local variable. The danger
with writing over a local variable is that you can arbitrarily change the variable’s
value in a manner the application didn’t intend. This state change can often have
undesirable consequences. Consider the example in Listing 5-2.
Listing 5-2
Off-by-One Length Miscalculation
int authenticate(char *username, char *password)

{
       int authenticated;
       char buffer[1024];

       authenticated = verify_password(username,              password);

       if(authenticated == 0)
       {
           sprintf(buffer,
                   “password is incorrect for user %s\n”,
                   username);
           log(“%s”, buffer);
       }

      return authenticated;
}

    Assume that the authenticated variable is located at the top of the stack frame,
placing it at a higher memory location than the buffer variable. The function’s stack
looks like Figure 5-4.
          Stack frame for
           authenticate()
          (undefined contents)

                                       buffer

        authenticated: 0x00000000
        Saved EBP: 0xBFFFFC00
         Saved EIP: 0x00123456
         username: 0x080B4444                               AAAAAAAAAAAAA
                                                            AAAAAAAAAAAAA
          password: 0x080B8888                               AAAAAAAAA ...
                                                   12345
                                                             username
      Calling function                           password
Figure 5-4   Stack frame of authenticate() before exploit

          Note
          Figure 5-4 demonstrates one possible layout for Listing 5-2; however,
          you can’t conclusively determine from source code how variables
          are ordered internally in a stack frame. The compiler can (and often
          does) reorder variables for optimization purposes.

     The authenticate() function has a buffer overflow. Specifically, the sprintf()
function doesn’t limit the amount of data it writes to the output buffer. Therefore, if
the username string is around 1024 bytes, data is written past the end of the buffer
variable and into the authenticated variable. (Remember that authenticated() is
at the top of the stack frame.) Figure 5-5 shows what happens when the overflow
is triggered.

             Stack frame for
              authenticate()
                  AAAA
                  AAAA
                  AAAA
                  AAAA
                                         buffer
                  AAAA
                 AAAA
  authenticated: 000\n (0x0000000A)
      Saved EBP: 0xBFFFFC00
        Saved EIP: 0x00123456
        username: 0x080B4444                                    AAAAAAAAAAAAA
                                                                AAAAAAAAAAAAA
        password: 0x080B8888                                     AAAAAAAAA...
                                                       12345

                                                                 username
    Calling function
                                                    password
Figure 5-5    Stack frame of authenticate() after exploit

    The authenticated variable is a simple state variable, indicating whether
the user was able to successfully log on. A value of zero indicates that authenti-
cation failed; a nonzero value indicates success. By overflowing the buffer
variable, an attacker can overwrite the authenticated variable, thus making it
nonzero. Therefore, the caller incorrectly treats the attacker as successfully
authenticated!
    Overwriting adjacent local variables is a useful technique, but it’s not generally
applicable. The technique depends on what variables are available to overwrite,
how the compiler orders the variables in memory, and what the program does with
them after the overflow happens. A more general technique is to target the saved
state information in every stack frame—namely, the saved frame pointer and return
address. Of these two variables, the return address is most immediately useful to
attackers. If a buffer overflow can overwrite the saved return address, the applica-
tion can be redirected to an arbitrary point after the currently executing function
returns. This process is shown in Figure 5-6.

          Stack frame for
           authenticate()
                  AAAA
                  AAAA
                  AAAA
                  AAAA
                                           buffer
                  AAAA
                  AAAA                              User-controlled data
 authenticated: AAAA (0x41414141)                      seeded with
  Saved EBP: AAAA (0x41414141)                       executable code
     Saved EIP: 0x0BADC0DE
        username: 0x080B000A
        password: 0x080B8888
Figure 5-6    Overwriting the return address

    Essentially, the attacker chooses an address in the program where some useful
code resides and overwrites the return address with this new address. The exact
location depends on what the attacker wants to achieve, but there are two basic
options:
      ■ Execution can be redirected to the code section of the application being
        run or to some code in a shared library that does something useful—for
        example, the system() function in UNIX libc, which runs commands via
        the shell.
      ■ Execution can be redirected to an area of memory containing data the attacker
        controls, such as a global variable, a stack location, or a static buffer. In this
        situation, the attacker fills the targeted return location with a small stub of
        position-independent code to do something useful, such as connecting back to
        the attacker and spawning a shell on the connected socket. These small code
        stubs are commonly referred to as shellcode.

SEH Attacks
Windows systems can be vulnerable to a slight variation on the traditional stack
overflow attacks; this variation is known as “smashing the structured exception
handlers.” Windows provides structured exception handling (SEH) so that pro-
grams can register a handler to act on errors in a consistent manner. When a thread
causes an exception to be thrown, the thread has a chance to catch that exception
and recover. Each time a function registers an exception handler, it’s placed at the
top of a chain of currently registered exception handlers. When an exception is
thrown, this chain is traversed from the top until the correct handler type is found

for the thrown exception. If no appropriate exception handler is found, the
exception is passed to an “unhandled exception filter,” which generally terminates
the process.

         Note
         Exception handling is a feature of a number of languages and was
         popularized by the C++ programming language. Although C++
         exception handling (EH) is significantly more complex than the
         basic Windows SEH mechanism, C++ exceptions in Windows are
         implemented on top of SEH. If you would like to learn more about
         Windows C++ exception handling, you should check out the write-up
         at www.openrce.org/articles/full_view/21.

    SEH provides a convenient method for exploiting stack overflows on a Win-
dows system because the exception handler registration structures are located on
the stack. Each structure has the address of a handler routine and a pointer to its
parent handlers. These structures are shown in Figure 5-7.

         Pointer to previous _EXCEPTION_REGISTRATION

                         SEH handler #3

                                                            Current stack frame

         Pointer to previous _EXCEPTION_REGISTRATION

                         SEH handler #2

             Pointer to _EXCEPTION_REGISTRATION (-1)

                         SEH handler #1

                          Stack base

Figure 5-7    Windows SEH layout

    When an exception occurs, these records are traversed from the most recently
installed handler back to the first one. At each stage, the handler is executed to

determine whether it’s appropriate for the currently thrown exception. (This
explanation is a bit oversimplified, but there’s an excellent paper describing the
process at www.microsoft.com/msj/0197/exception/exception.aspx.)
     Therefore, if an attacker can trigger a stack overflow followed by any sort of
exception, these exception registration structures are examined, and the exception
handler address in each structure is called until an appropriate one is found.
Because they are structures on the attacker-corrupted stack, the application jumps
to an address of the attacker’s choosing. When it’s possible to overflow a buffer by a
fairly large amount, the attacker can copy over the entire stack, resulting in an
exception when the stack base is overwritten. The application then uses the
corrupted SEH information on the stack and jumps to an arbitrary address. This
process is depicted in Figure 5-8.

                                    0x41414141
   Corrupted
 _EXCEPTION _
                    Pointer to previous _EXCEPTION _REGISTRATION
                                     (now 0x41414141)
REGISTRATION
    Record                    SEH handler (now : 0xBADC 0DE)
                                    0x41414141
                                                                   User-controlled
                                    0x41414141
                                                                       code
                                    0x41414141

Figure 5-8      SEH exploit

Off-by-One Errors
Memory corruption is often caused by calculating the length of an array incorrectly.
Among the most common mistakes are off-by-one errors, in which a length calcula-
tion is incorrect by one array element. This error is typically caused by failing to
account for a terminator element or misunderstanding the way array indexing
works. Consider the following example:
...
void process_string(char *src)
{
       char dest[32];

      for (i = 0; src[i] && (i <= sizeof(dest)); i++)
            dest[i] = src[i];
...

    The process_string() function starts by reading a small number of characters
from its argument src and storing them to the stack-based buffer dest. This code
attempts to prevent a buffer overflow if src has more than 32 characters, but it has a
simple problem: It can write one element out of bounds into dest. Array indexes
begin with 0 and extend to sizeof(array) - 1, so an array with 32 members has
valid array indexes from 0 through 31. The preceding code indexes one element past
the end of dest, as the condition controlling the loop is (i <= sizeof(dest)) when it
should be (i < sizeof(dest)). If i is incremented to a value of 32 in the vulnerable
code, it passes the length check, and the program sets dest[32] equal to src[32].
    This type of issue surfaces repeatedly in code dealing with C strings. C strings
require storage space for each byte of the string as well as one additional byte for
the NUL character used to terminate the string. Often this NUL byte isn’t
accounted for correctly, which can lead to subtle off-by-one errors, such as the one
in Listing 5-3.
Listing 5-3
Off-by-One Length Miscalculation
int get_user(char *user)
{
    char buf[1024];

      if(strlen(user) > sizeof(buf))
          die(“error: user string too long\n”);

      strcpy(buf, user);

      ...
}

     This code uses the strlen() function to check that there’s enough room to copy
the username into the buffer. The strlen() function returns the number of charac-
ters in a C string, but it doesn’t count the NUL terminating character. So if a string
is 1024 characters according to strlen(), it actually takes up 1025 bytes of space in
memory. In the get_user() function, if the supplied user string is exactly 1024
characters, strlen() returns 1024, sizeof() returns 1024, and the length check
passes. Therefore, the strcpy() function writes 1024 bytes of string data plus the
trailing NUL character, causing one byte too many to be written into buf.
     You might expect that off-by-one miscalculations are rarely, if ever, exploitable.
However, on OSs running on Intel x86 machines, these errors are often exploitable

because you can overwrite the least significant byte of the saved frame pointer. As
you already know, during the course of program execution, each function allocates
a stack frame for local variable storage. The address of this stack frame, known as
the base pointer or frame pointer, is kept in the register EBP. As part of the function
prologue, the program saves the old base pointer to the stack, right next to the
return address. If an off-by-one buffer overflow is triggered on a buffer located
directly below the saved base pointer, the NUL byte is written one byte past the end
of the buffer, which corresponds to the least significant byte of the saved base
pointer. This means when the function returns, the restored base pointer is incor-
rect by up to 255 bytes, as shown in Figure 5-9.

               (Stack buffer data)                         (Stack buffer data)

         Saved EBP: 0xBFFFFC30                          Saved EBP: 0xBFFFFC00
          Saved EIP: 0x00123456                          Saved EIP: 0x00123456
           (Previous frame data)                          (Previous frame data)

         Saved EBP: 0xBFFFFC80                          Saved EBP: 0xBFFFFC80
             Saved EIP: 0x00ABCDEF                      Saved EIP: 0x00ABCDEF

         Ordinary stack layout                        Frame pointer off-by-one
                                                            corruption
Figure 5-9     Off-by-one stack frame

     If the new base pointer points to some user-controllable data (such as a charac-
ter buffer), users can then specify local variable values from the previous stack
frame as well as the saved base pointer and return address. Therefore, when the
calling function returns, an arbitrary return address might be specified, and total
control over the program can be seized.
     Off-by-one errors can also be exploitable when the element is written out of
bounds into another variable used by that function. The security implications of
the off-by-one error in this situation depend on how the adjacent variable is used
subsequent to the overflow. If the variable is an integer indicating size, it’s trun-
cated, and the program could make incorrect calculations based on its value. The

adjacent variable might also affect the security model directly. For example, it
might be a user ID, allowing users to receive permissions they aren’t entitled to.
Although these types of exploits are implementation specific, their impact can be
just as severe as generalized attacks.

Heap Overflows
Heap overflows are a more recent advance in exploitation. Although common now,
general heap exploitation techniques didn’t surface until July 2000. These
techniques were originally presented by an accomplished security researcher
known as Solar Designer. (His original advisory is available at www.openwall.com
/advisories/OW-002-netscape-jpeg/.) To understand how heap exploitation works,
you need to be familiar with how the heap is managed. The following sections
cover the basics of heap management and show how heap-based buffer overflows
are exploited.

Heap Management
Although heap implementations vary widely, some common elements are present
in most algorithms. Essentially, when a call to malloc() or a similar allocation
routine is made, some memory is fetched from the heap and returned to the user.
When this memory is deallocated by using free(), the system must mark it as free
so that it can be used again later. Consequently, state must be kept for regions of
memory that are returned to the callers so that memory can be handed out
and reclaimed efficiently. In many cases, this state information is stored inline.
Specifically, most implementations return a block of memory to the user, which is
preceded by a header describing some basic characteristics of the block as well
as some additional information about neighboring memory blocks. The type of
information in the block header usually includes the following:
   ■ Size of the current block

   ■ Size of the previous block

   ■ Whether the block is free or in use

   ■ Possibly some additional flags

       Note
       BSD systems manage heap memory differently from most other
       OSs. They store most block information out of band.

    Free blocks are often chained together using a standard data structure, such as
a singly or doubly linked list. Most heap implementations define a minimum size of

a block big enough to hold pointers to previous and next elements in a list and use
this space to hold pointers when the block isn’t in use. Figure 5-10 is an example of
the two basic block structures specific to glibc malloc() implementations.

              Previous size                                Previous size
              Currrent size    Flags                       Currrent size       Flags
              (User data)                               List forward pointer
                                                       List backward pointer
                                                            (Free space)

       GLIBC in-use chunk                             GLIBC free chunk
Figure 5-10   Glibc heap structure

    Note that the organization of blocks in this way means that triggering an
overflow results in corrupting header information for allocated memory chunks as
well as list management data.

Exploiting Heap Overflows
As you might have guessed, the ability to modify header data and list pointers
arbitrarily (as when a buffer overflow occurs) gives attackers the opportunity to disrupt
the management of heap blocks. These disruptions can be used to manipulate block
headers to gain reliable arbitrary execution by leveraging the heap maintenance
algorithms, especially list maintenance of free blocks. After its initial discovery by
Solar Designer, this process was described in depth in Phrack 57 (www.phrack.org/
phrack/57/p57-0x09). The following list summarizes the standard technique:
      1. Blocks marked as free are assumed to contain list pointers to next and
         previous blocks in the free chunks list.
      2. When a block is freed, it’s often coalesced with adjacent blocks if they are
         also free.
      3. Because two blocks are being merged into one, the heap algorithm removes
         the next chunk that was originally on the free list, adjusts the size of the
         chunk being freed to reflect that it’s now bigger, and then adds the new
         larger chunk onto the free list.
      4. An overflow on the heap is used to mark the next chunk as free so that it’s
         later unlinked from the free list.
      5. The overflow buffer sets the list pointers in the corrupted chunk to locations
         useful to an attacker.
      6. When the unlink operation is performed, an attacker-supplied, fixed-size
         value is written to an attacker-determined memory location.

    To understand why unlinking a chunk leads to an arbitrary overwrite, consider
the following code for unlinking an element from a doubly linked list:
int unlink(ListElement *element)
{
           ListElement *next = element->next;
           ListElement *prev = element->prev;

           next->prev = prev;
           prev->next = next;

           return 0;
}

    This code removes a ListElement by updating pointers in adjacent elements of
the list to remove references to the current element, element. If you could specify the
element->next and element->prev values, you would see that this code unwittingly
updates arbitrary memory locations with values you can control. This process is
shown before unlinking in Figure 5-11 and after unlinking in Figure 5-12.

    prev    Node 1   next   prev   Node 2   next   prev   Node 3   next   prev   Node 4   next

Figure 5-11            Linked list before unlink operation

prev       Node 1    next   prev   Node 2   next   prev   Node 3   next   prev   Node 4   next

Figure 5-12            Linked list after unlink operation

     Being able to overwrite a memory location with a controllable value is usually
all that attackers need to gain control of a process. Many useful values can be
overwritten to enable attackers to compromise the application. A few popular targets
include the following:
           ■ Global offset table (GOT)/process linkage table (PLT)—UNIX ELF binaries use
            several loader structures to resolve called functions from libraries into
            addresses. These structures enable shared libraries to be located anywhere
            in memory so that the application doesn’t need static addresses for API

        functions at compile time. By targeting these structures, attackers can
        redirect execution to an arbitrary location when a certain API function is
        called (for example, free()).
      ■ Exit handlers—Exit handlers are a table of function pointers that are called
        when the process exits in a UNIX OS. By overwriting one of these values, it’s
        possible to gain arbitrary execution when the process calls the exit()
        function or returns from the main() function.
      ■ Lock pointers—Windows uses a set of function pointers in the process
        environment block (PEB) to prevent unsynchronized modification of process
        information by competing threads. These lock pointers can be overwritten
        and then triggered by certain types of exceptional conditions.
      ■ Exception handler routines—The Windows PEB maintains an address for the
        unhandled exception filter routine. This routine is called when an
        exception isn’t handled successfully by any other exception handler. A
        common technique is to use the list maintenance code to overwrite the
        unhandled exception routine when updating one part of the list (such as
        the previous element) and then cause a memory access violation when
        updating the other part of the list (the next element). This technique
        ensures that the unhandled exception filter is called immediately, assuming
        that another exception handler doesn’t successfully catch the resulting
        access violation exception.
      ■ Function pointers—Applications use function pointers for various reasons, such
        as calling functions from dynamically loaded libraries, for C++ virtual member
        functions, or for abstracting low-level worker functions in opaque structures.
        Overwriting application-specific function pointers can provide a reliable
        exploit against an application.

Global and Static Data Overflows
Global and static variables are used to store data that persists between different
function calls, so they are generally stored in a different memory segment than
stack and heap variables are. Normally, these locations don’t contain general
program runtime data structures, such as stack activation records and heap chunk
data, so exploiting an overflow in this segment requires application-specific
attacks similar to the vulnerability in Listing 5-2. Exploitability depends on what
variables can be corrupted when the buffer overflow occurs and how the variables
are used. For example, if pointer variables can be corrupted, the likelihood of
exploitation increases, as this corruption introduces the possibility for arbitrary
memory overwrites.

                                         Shellcode

Shellcode
Buffer overflows are usually exploited by directing execution to a known location in
memory where attacker-controlled data is stored. For an exploit to be successful,
this location must contain executable machine code that allows attackers to perform
malicious activities. This is achieved by constructing small snippets of machine
code designed to launch a shell, connect back to the originating user, or do what-
ever the attacker chooses. At the time of this writing, the most common trend in
shellcode construction uses stubs capable of loading additional components on
demand over a connected socket, as needed by an attacker on the other end.

Writing the Code
At the most basic level, shellcode is a small chunk of position-independent code
that uses system APIs to achieve your objectives. To see how this is done, consider
the simple case of spawning a shell in UNIX. In this case, the code you want to run
is roughly the following:
char *args[] = { “/bin/sh”, NULL };

execve(“/bin/sh”, args, NULL);

      This simple code spawns a command shell when it runs. If this code were run in
a network service, the socket descriptor the user is connected with would need to
be duplicated over stdin, stdout, and optionally stderr as well.
      To construct the machine code required to spawn the shell, you need to under-
stand how this code works at a lower level. The execve() function is exported by
the standard C library, so a normal program would first locate the libc execve()
implementation with a little help from the loader, and then call it. Because this
functionality could be difficult to duplicate in reasonably sized shellcode, generally
you want to look for a simpler solution. As it turns out, execve() is also a system
call on UNIX systems, and all the libc function does is perform the system call.
      Invoking system calls on an Intel-based OS usually involves building an argument
list (in registers or on the stack, depending on the OS), and then asking the kernel to
perform a system call on behalf of the process. This can be done with a variety of
methods. For Intel systems, the system call functionality can rely on a software
interrupt, initiated by the int instruction; a call gate, invoked with an lcall; or special-
purpose machine support, such as sysenter. For Linux and many BSD variants, the
int 128 interrupt is reserved for system calls. When this interrupt is generated, the
kernel handles it, determines that the process needs some system function performed,
and carries out the requested task. The procedure for Linux systems is as follows:

       1. Put the system call parameters in general-purpose registers starting at EBX.
          If a system call requires more than five parameters, additional parameters
          are placed on the stack.
       2. Put the system call number of the desired system call in EAX.
       3. Use the int 128 instruction to perform the system call.
      So the assembly code would look something like this initially:
xorl %eax, %eax         ; zero out EAX
movl %eax, %edx         ; EDX = envp = NULL
movl $address_of_shell_string, %ebx; EBX = path parameter
movl $address_of_argv, %ecx; ECX = argv
movb $0x0b              ; syscall number for execve()
int $0x80               ; invoke the system call

    Nearly all functionality you need when you create shellcode consists of a series
of system calls and follows the same basic principles presented here. In Windows,
the system call numbers aren’t consistent in OS versions, so most Windows
shellcode loads system libraries and calls functions in those libraries. A hacker
group known as Last Stage of Delirium (LSD) documented the basis for what’s used
to write most modern Windows shellcode at www.lsd-pl.net/projects/winasm.zip.

Finding Your Code in Memory
The constructed machine code snippets must be position independent—that is, they
must be able to run successfully regardless of their location in memory. To understand
why this is important, consider the example in the previous section; you need to pro-
vide the address of the argument array vector and the address of the string “/bin/sh”
for the pathname parameter. By using absolute addresses, you limit your shellcode’s
reliability to a large degree and would need to modify it for every exploit you write.
Therefore, you should have a method of determining these addresses dynamically,
regardless of the process environment in which the code is running.
     Usually, on Intel x86 CPUs, the strings or data required by shellcode is supplied
alongside the code and their address is calculated independently. To understand how
this works, consider the semantics of the call instruction. This function implicitly
saves a return address on the stack; which is the address of the first byte after the call
instruction. Therefore, shellcode is often constructed with the following format:
jmp end
code:
... shellcode ...

end:
call code
.string “/bin/sh”

    This example jumps to the end of the code and then uses call to run code
located directly after the jmp instruction. What is the point of this indirection?
Basically, you have the relative address of the string “/bin/sh” located on the stack
because of the call instruction implicitly pushing a return address on the
stack. Hence, the address of “/bin/sh” can be calculated automatically, regardless
of where the shellcode is located in the target application. Combining this with
the information in the previous section, execve() shellcode would look something
like this:

jmp end
code:
popl %ebx           ; EBX = pathname argument
xorl %eax, %eax     ; zero out EAX
movl %eax, %edx     ; EDX = envp
pushl %eax          ; put NULL in argv array
pushl %ebx          ; put “/bin/sh” in argv array
movl %esp, %ecx     ; ECX = argv
movb $0x0b, %al     ; 0x0b = execve() system call
int $0x80           ; system call
call code
.string “/bin/sh”

   As you can see, the code to start a shell is fairly straightforward; you simply
need to fill EBX, ECX, and EDX with pathname, argv, and envp respectively, and
then invoke a system call. This example is a simple shellcode snippet, but more
complex shellcode is based on the same principles.

Protection Mechanisms
The basics covered so far represent viable exploitation techniques for some
contemporary systems, but the security landscape is changing rapidly. Modern OSs
often include preventive technologies to make it difficult to exploit buffer overflows.
These technologies typically reduce the attacker’s chance of exploiting a bug or at
least reduce the chance that a program can be constructed to reliably exploit a bug
on a target host.

    Chapter 3, “Operational Review,” discussed several of these technologies from a
high-level operations perspective. This section builds on Chapter 3’s coverage by
focusing on technical details of common anticorruption protections and addressing
potential and real weaknesses in these mechanisms. This discussion isn’t a compre-
hensive study of protection mechanisms, but it does touch on the most commonly
deployed ones.

Stack Cookies
Stack cookies (also known as “canary values”) are a method devised to detect and
prevent exploitation of a buffer overflow on the stack. Stack cookies are a compile-
time solution present in most default applications and libraries shipped with
Windows XP SP2 and later. There are also several UNIX implementations of stack
cookie protections, most notably ProPolice and Stackguard.
    Stack cookies work by inserting a random 32-bit value (usually generated at run-
time) on the stack immediately after the saved return address and saved frame
pointer but before the local variables in each stack frame, as shown in Figure 5-13.
This cookie is inserted when the function is entered and is checked immediately
before the function returns. If the cookie value has been altered, the program can
infer that the stack has been corrupted and take appropriate action. This response
usually involves logging the problem and terminating immediately. The stack cookie
prevents traditional stack overflows from being exploitable, as the corrupted return
address is never used.

                                                               Buffer
                Buffer

                                                      Random value stack cookie
              Saved EBP                                     Saved EBP
              Saved EIP                                     Saved EIP
              Argument 1                                    Argument 1
              Argument 2                                    Argument 2

       Ordinary function                               Protected function
          stack frame                                     stack frame
Figure 5-13    Stack frame with and without cookies

Limitations
This technology is effective but not foolproof. Although it prevents overwriting the
saved frame pointer and saved return address, it doesn’t protect against overwriting
adjacent local variables. Figure 5-5 showed how overwriting local variables can
subvert system security, especially when you corrupt pointer values the function
uses to modify data. Modification of these pointer values usually results in the
attacker seizing control of the application by overwriting a function pointer or other
useful value. However, many stack protection systems reorder local variables, which
can minimize the risk of adjacent variable overwriting.
    Another attack is to write past the stack cookie and overwrite the parameters to
the current function. The attacker corrupts the stack cookie by overwriting function
parameters, but the goal of the attack is to not let the function return. In certain cases,
overwriting function parameters allows the attacker to gain control of the application
before the function returns, thus rendering the stack cookie protection ineffective.
    Although this technique seems as though it would be useful to attackers,
optimization can sometimes inadvertently eliminate the chance of a bug being
exploited. When a variable value is used frequently, the compiler usually generates
code that reads it off the stack once and then keeps it in a register for the duration
of the function or the part of the function in which the value is used repeatedly. So
even though an argument or local variable might be accessed frequently after an
overflow is triggered, attackers might not be able to use that argument to perform
arbitrary overwrites.
    Another similar technique on Windows is to not worry about the saved return
address and instead shoot for an SEH overwrite. This way, the attacker can corrupt
SEH records and trigger an access violation before the currently running function
returns; therefore, attacker-controlled code runs and the overflow is never detected.
    Finally, note that stack cookies are a compile-time solution and might not be a
realistic option if developers can’t recompile the whole application. The developers
might not have access to all the source code, such as code in commercial libraries.
There might also be issues with making changes to the build environment for a
large application, especially with hand-optimized components.

Heap Implementation Hardening
Heap overflows are typically exploited through the unlinking operations performed
by the system’s memory allocation and deallocation routines. The list operations in
memory management routines can be leveraged to write to arbitrary locations in
memory and seize complete control of the application. In response to this threat, a
number of systems have hardened their heap implementations to make them more
resistant to exploitation.

   Windows XP SP2 and later have implemented various protections to ensure that
heap operations don’t inadvertently allow attackers to manipulate the process in a
harmful manner. These mechanisms include the following:
      ■ An 8-bit cookie is stored in each heap header structure. An XOR operation
        combines this cookie with a global heap cookie, and the heap chunk’s address
        divided by 8. If the resulting value is not 0, heap corruption has occurred.
        Because the address of the heap chunk is used in this operation, cookies
        shouldn’t be vulnerable to brute-force attacks.
      ■ Checks are done whenever an unlink operation occurs to ensure that the
        previous and next elements are indeed valid. Specifically, both the next and
        previous elements must point back to the current element about to be unlinked.
        If they don’t, the heap is assumed to be corrupt and the operation is aborted.
   The UNIX glibc heap implementation has also been hardened to prevent easy
heap exploitation. The glibc developers have added unlink checks to their heap
management code, similar to the Windows XP SP2 defenses.

Limitations
Heap protection technologies aren’t perfect. Most have weaknesses that still allow
attackers to leverage heap data structures for reliable (or relatively reliable)
exploitation. Some of the published works on defeating Windows heap protection
include the following:
      ■ “Defeating Microsoft Windows XP SP2 Heap Protection and DEP Bypass” by
        Alexander Anisimov (www.maxpatrol.com/defeating-xpsp2-heap-
        protection.htm)
      ■ “A New Way to Bypass Windows Heap Protections” by Nicolas Falliere
        (www.securityfocus.com/infocus/1846)
      ■ “Windows Heap Exploitation” by Oded Horovitz and Matt Connover
        (www.cybertech.net/~sh0ksh0k/heap/XPSP2%20Heap%20Exploitation.ppt)
    UNIX glibc implementations have undergone similar scrutiny. One useful
resource is “The Malloc Maleficarum” by Phantasmal Phantasmagoria
(www.securityfocus.com/archive/1/413007/30/0/threaded).
    The most important limitation of these heap protection mechanisms is that they
protect only the internal heap management structures. They don’t prevent attackers
from modifying application data on the heap. If you are able to modify other
meaningful data, exploitation is usually just a matter of time and effort. Modifying
program variables is difficult, however, as it requires specific variable layouts. An
attacker can create these layouts in many applications, but it isn’t always a reliable
form of exploitation—especially in multithreaded applications.

    Another point to keep in mind is that it’s not uncommon for applications to
implement their own memory management strategies on top of the system
allocation routines. In this situation, the application in question usually requests a
page or series of pages from the system at once and then manages them internally
with its own algorithm. This can be advantageous for attackers because custom
memory-management algorithms are often unprotected, leaving them vulnerable to
variations on classic heap overwrite attacks.

Nonexecutable Stack and Heap Protection
Many CPUs provide fine-grained protection for memory pages, allowing the CPU to
mark a page in memory as readable, writable, or executable. If the program keeps its
code and data completely separate, it’s possible to prevent shellcode from running
by marking data pages as nonexecutable. By enforcing nonexecutable protections,
the CPU prevents the most popular exploitation method, which is to transfer control
flow to a location in memory where attacker-created data already resides.

         Note
         Intel CPUs didn’t enforce nonexecutable memory pages until
         recently (2004). Some interesting workarounds were developed to
         overcome this limitation, most notably by the PaX development
         team (now part of the GR-Security team). Documentation on the
         inner workings of PaX is available at http://pax.grsecurity.net/.

Limitations
Because nonexecutable memory is enforced by the CPU, bypassing this protection
directly isn’t feasible—generally, the attacker is completely incapacitated from
directing execution to a location on the stack or the heap. However, this does not
prevent attackers from returning to useful code in the executable code sections,
whether it’s in the application being exploited or a shared library. One popular
technique to circumvent these protections is to have a series of return addresses
constructed on the stack so that the attacker can make multiple calls to useful API
functions. Often, attackers can return to an API function for unprotecting a region
of memory with data they control. This marks the target page as executable and
disables the protection, allowing the exploit to run its own shellcode.
    In general, this protection mechanism makes exploiting protected systems more
difficult, but sophisticated attackers can usually find a way around it. With a little
creativity, the existing code can be spliced, diced, and coerced into serving the
attacker’s purpose.

Address Space Layout Randomization
Address space layout randomization (ASLR) is a technology that attempts to
mitigate the threat of buffer overflows by randomizing where application data and
code is mapped at runtime. Essentially, data and code sections are mapped at a
(somewhat) random memory location when they are loaded. Because a crucial part
of buffer overflow exploitation involves overwriting key data structures or returning
to specific places in memory, ASLR should, in theory, prevent reliable exploitation
because attackers can no longer rely on static addresses. Although ASLR is a
form of security by obscurity, it’s a highly effective technique for preventing
exploitation, especially when used with some of the other preventative technologies
already discussed.

Limitations
Defeating ASLR essentially relies on finding a weak point in the ASLR
implementation. Attackers usually attempt to adopt one of the following
approaches:
      ■ Find something in memory that’s in a static location despite the ASLR. No
        matter what the static element is, it’s probably useful in one way or another.
        Examples of statically located elements might include base executables that
        don’t contain relocation information (so the loader might not be able to
        relocate it), specialized data structures present in all mapped processes (such
        as the Windows PEB and the Linux vsyscall page), the loader itself, and
        nonrelocatable shared libraries. If ASLR fails to randomize any specific part of
        the process, it can be relied on and potentially used to undermine the ASLR
        protection.
      ■ Brute force where possible. In a lot of cases, data elements are shifted around
        in memory but not by a large amount. For example, the current Linux exec-
        shield ASLR maps the stack at a random location; however, closer inspection
        of the code shows these mappings include only 256 possible locations. This
        small set of possible locations doesn’t provide for a large randomness factor,
        and most ASLR implementations don’t randomize a child process’s memory
        layout. This lack of randomness creates the potential for a brute force attack
        when a vulnerable service creates child processes to service requests. An
        attacker can send requests for each possible offset and eventually achieve suc-
        cessful exploitation when the correct offset is found.

SafeSEH
Modern Windows systems (XP SP2+, Windows 2003, Vista) implement protection
mechanisms for the SEH structures located on the stack. When an exception is

triggered, the exception handler target addresses are examined before they are
called to ensure that every one is a valid exception handler routine. At the time of
this writing, the following procedure determines an exception handler’s validity:
      1. Get the exception handler address, and determine which module (DLL or
         executable) the handler address is pointing into.
      2. Check whether the module has an exception table registered. An exception
         table is a table of valid exception handlers that can legitimately be entered
         in an _EXCEPTION_REGISTRATION structure. This table is optional and
         modules might omit it. In this case, the handler is assumed to be valid and
         can be called.
      3. If the exception table exists and the handler address in the
         _EXCEPTION_REGISTRATION structure doesn’t match a valid handler entry,
         the structure is deemed corrupt and the handler isn’t called.

Limitations
SafeSEH protection is a good complement to the stack cookies used in recent
Windows releases, in that it prevents attackers from using SEH overwrites as a
method for bypassing the stack cookie protection. However, as with other
protection mechanisms, it has had weaknesses in the past. David Litchfield of Next
Generation Security Software (NGSSoftware) wrote a paper detailing some
problems with early implementations of SafeSEH that have since been addressed
(available at www.ngssoftware.com/papers/defeating-w2k3-stack-protection.pdf).
Primary methods for bypassing SafeSEH included returning to a location in
memory that doesn’t belong to any module (such as the PEB), returning into
modules without an exception table registered, or abusing defined exception
handlers that might allow indirect running of arbitrary code.

Function Pointer Obfuscation
Long-lived function pointers are often the target of memory corruption exploits
because they provide a direct method for seizing control of program execution.
One method of preventing this attack is to obfuscate any sensitive pointers
stored in globally visible data structures. This protection mechanism doesn’t
prevent memory corruption, but it does reduce the probability of a successful
exploit for any attack other than a denial of service. For example, you saw earlier
that an attacker might be able to leverage function pointers in the PEB of a
running Windows process. To help mitigate this attack, Microsoft is now using
the EncodePointer(), DecodePointer(), EncodeSystemPointer(), and
DecodeSystemPointer() functions to obfuscate many of these values. These
functions obfuscate a pointer by combining its pointer value with a secret cookie

value using an XOR operation. Recent versions of Windows also use this
anti-exploitation technique in parts of the heap implementation.

Limitations
This technology certainly raises the bar for exploit developers, especially when
combined with other technologies, such as ASLR and nonexecutable memory
pages. However, it’s not a complete solution in itself and has only limited use.
Attackers can still overwrite application-specific function pointers, as compilers
currently don’t encode function pointers the application uses. An attacker might
also be able to overwrite normal unencoded variables that eventually provide
execution control through a less direct vector. Finally, attackers might identify
circumstances that redirect execution control in a limited but useful way. For
example, when user-controlled data is in close proximity to a function pointer, just
corrupting the low byte of an encoded function pointer might give attackers a
reasonable chance of running arbitrary code, especially when they can make
repeated exploit attempts until a successful value is identified.

Assessing Memory Corruption Impact
Now that you’re familiar with the landscape of memory corruption, you need to
know how to accurately assess the risk these vulnerabilities represent. A number of
factors affect how exploitable a vulnerability is. By being aware of these factors,
code auditors can estimate how serious a vulnerability is and the extent to which it
can be exploited. Can it be used just to crash the application? Can arbitrary code be
run? The only way to know for certain is to write a proof-of-concept exploit, but that
approach can be far too time consuming for even a moderate-sized application
assessment. Instead, you can reasonably estimate exploitability by answering a few
questions about the resulting memory corruption. This approach is not as definitive
as a proof-of-concept exploit, but it’s far less time consuming, making it adequate
for most assessments.

 The Real Cost of Fixing Vulnerabilities
 You might be surprised at the amount of resistance you can encounter when
 disclosing vulnerabilities to vendors—even vendors who specifically hired you to
 perform an assessment. Vendors often say that potential memory corruption
 bugs aren’t exploitable or aren’t problems for some reason or another. However,
 memory corruption affects an application at its most basic level, so all instances
 need to be given serious consideration. Indeed, history has shown that attackers
 and security researchers alike have come up with ingenious ways to exploit the
 seemingly unexploitable. The old adage “where there’s a will, there’s a way”

                            Assessing Memory Corruption Impact

 comes to mind, and when it comes to compromising computer systems, there’s
 definitely a lot of will.
 Therefore, most auditors think that software vendors should treat all issues as
 high priority; after all, why wouldn’t vendors want their code to be as secure as
 possible and not fix problems as quickly as they can? The truth is that there’s
 always a price attached to fixing software bugs, including developer time, patch
 deployment cost, and possible product recalls or reissues. Consider, for example,
 the cost of distributing a vulnerability update to a widely deployed embedded
 system, like a smart card or cell phone. Updating these embedded systems often
 requires hardware modifications or some other intervention by a qualified techni-
 cian. A company would be irresponsible to incur the costs associated with an
 update if it doesn’t have a reasonable expectation that the bug is exploitable.

Where Is the Buffer Located in Memory?
The location of the buffer in memory is important; it affects what choices an attacker
has when trying to seize control of the process. Variables are stored mainly in three
memory areas: stack, heap, and persistent data (including static and global variables).
However, different OSs often further segment these three regions or add new regions.
There might be distinctions between initialized and uninitialized global data, or the
system might place thread local storage (TLS) at a special location. Also, shared
libraries typically have their own uninitialized and initialized data mapped into the
process memory immediately after their program code. When determining
exploitability, you need to keep track of where the memory corruption occurs and
what special considerations apply. This task might include conducting some
additional research to understand the process memory layout for a particular OS.

What Other Data Is Overwritten?
Memory corruption might not be isolated to just the variables an attacker is targeting.
It can also overwrite other variables that might complicate the exploitation process.
This happens commonly when trying to exploit corruption on the process stack. You
already know that vulnerabilities in the stack segment are most often exploited by
overwriting the saved program counter. It’s not always that straightforward, however;
often attackers overwrite local variables before overwriting the saved program
counter, which can complicate exploitation, as shown in Listing 5-4.
Listing 5-4
Overflowing into Local Variables
int dostuff(char *login)

{
      char *ptr = (char *)malloc(1024);
      char buf[1024];

      ...
      strcpy(buf, login);
      ...

      free(ptr);

      return 0;
}

    This example has a small issue: Although attackers can overwrite the saved pro-
gram counter, they also overwrite the ptr variable, which gets freed right before the
function returns. This means attackers must overwrite ptr with a location in mem-
ory that’s valid and doesn’t result in a crash in the call to free(). Although this
method makes it possible for attackers to exploit the call to free(), the attack
method is more complicated than a simple program counter overwrite (especially if
there’s no user-controlled data at a static location in memory).
    When evaluating the risk of buffer overflow vulnerabilities, pay special atten-
tion to any variables in the overflow path that mitigate exploit attempts. Also,
remember that the compiler might reorder the variable layout during compilation,
so you might need to check the binary to confirm exploitability.

        Note
        Sometimes more than one function return is required for a bug to be
        exploitable. For example, OSs running on Sun SPARC CPUs often
        require two function returns because of the way SPARC register
        windows work.

How Many Bytes Can Be Overwritten?
You need to take into account how many bytes the buffer overflows and how much
control users have over the size of the overflow. Overflows of too few or too many
bytes can make the exploit a lot harder. Obviously, the ideal situation for an
attacker is to choose an arbitrary length of data to overflow.
    Sometimes an attacker can overflow a buffer by a fixed amount, which provides
fewer options, but successful exploitation is still likely. If only a small number of
bytes can be overflowed, exploitability depends on what data is corrupted. If the
attacker is able to corrupt only an adjacent variable in memory that’s never used

                             Assessing Memory Corruption Impact

again, the bug is probably unexploitable. Obviously, the less memory the attacker
can corrupt, the less likely it is that the bug is exploitable.
     Conversely, if attackers can overflow by a fixed amount that happens to be very
large, the bug invariably results in corrupting a huge part of the program’s memory
and will almost certainly crash the process. In some cases, when a signal handler or
exception handler can be corrupted, attackers can exploit this situation and gain
control of the process after an exception has occurred. The most prevalent example
is large stack-based overflows in Windows, as attackers can overwrite SEH
structures containing function pointers that are accessed when an exception occurs.
     Additionally, some bugs can result in multiple writes to arbitrary locations in
memory. Although often only one overwrite is possible, if multiple overwrites can
be performed, an attacker has more leverage in choosing how to exploit the
vulnerable program. For example, with format string vulnerabilities, attackers can
often write to as many arbitrary locations as they choose, increasing the likelihood
of successful exploitation.

       Note
       Sometimes a 1- or 2-byte overwrite is easier to exploit than a 4-byte
       overwrite. For example, say you overwrite a pointer to an object
       composed of several pointers followed by a buffer with data you con-
       trol. In this case, the least significant byte of the pointer value could
       be overwritten so that the data buffer in the object is pointed to
       rather than the object itself. You could arbitrarily change the state of
       any object property and probably exploit the bug quite reliably.

What Data Can Be Used to Corrupt Memory?
Some memory corruption vulnerabilities don’t allow direct control of the data used
to overwrite memory. The data might be restricted based on how it’s used, as with
character restrictions, single-byte overwrites, or attacker-malleable calls to
memset(). Listing 5-5 shows an example of a vulnerability in which memory is over-
written with data the attacker doesn’t control.
Listing 5-5
Indirect Memory Corruption
int process_string(char *string)
{
    char **tokens, *ptr;
    int tokencount;

      tokens = (char **)calloc(64, sizeof(char *));

      if(!tokens)
          return -1;

      for(ptr = string; *ptr;){
          int c;

            for(end = ptr; *end && !isspace(end); end++);

            c = *end;
            *end = ‘\0’;

            tokens[tokencount++] = ptr;

            ptr = (c == 0 ? end : end + 1);
      }

      ...

    This code has a buffer overflow in the bolded line manipulating the tokens
array. The data used to overwrite memory can’t be controlled directly by attackers,
but the overwritten memory includes pointers to attacker-controllable data. This
could make exploitation even easier than using a standard technique. If a function
pointer is overwritten, for example, attackers require no memory layout information
because the function pointer can be replaced with a pointer to attacker-controlled
data. However, exploitation could be more complicated if, for example, a heap block
header or other complex structure is overwritten.
    Off-by-one vulnerabilities are one of the most common vulnerabilities involving
overwritten data that an attacker doesn’t control. Listing 5-6 shows an example of
an off-by-one vulnerability.
Listing 5-6
Off-by-One Overwrite
struct session {
    int sequence;
    int mac[MAX_MAC];
    char *key;
};

int delete_session(struct session *session)
{
    memset(session->key, 0, KEY_SIZE);
    free(session->key);
    free(session);
}

                            Assessing Memory Corruption Impact

int get_mac(int fd, struct session *session)
{
    unsigned int i, n;

    n = read_network_integer(fd);

    if(n > MAX_MAC)
        return –1;

    for(i = 0; i <= n; i++)
        session->mac[i] = read_network_integer(fd);

    return 0;
}

    If attackers specify the length of mac to be exactly MAX_MAC, the get_mac()
function reads one more element than it has allocated space for (as shown in the
bolded line). In this case, the last integer read in overwrites the key variable.
During the delete_session() function, the key variable is passed to memset
before it’s deleted, which allows attackers to overwrite an arbitrary location in
memory, but only with NUL bytes. Exploiting this vulnerability is complicated
because attackers can’t choose what data the memory is overwritten with. In
addition, the attacker-supplied memory location is subsequently freed, which
means that attack would most likely be directed at the memory-management
routines. Performing this attack successfully could be extremely difficult,
especially in multithreaded applications.
    Listings 5-5 and 5-6 show how attackers might have difficulty exploiting a
vulnerability when the overwritten data can’t be controlled. When examining
similar issues, you need to determine what’s included in the overwritten data
and whether it can be controlled by attackers. Usually, attackers have fairly
direct control over the data being written or can manipulate the resulting
corruption to access attacker-controlled data.

Are Memory Blocks Shared?
Occasionally, bugs surface in applications in which a memory manager erroneously
hands out the same block of memory more than once, even though it’s still in use.
When this happens, two or more independent parts of the application use the
memory block with the expectation that they have exclusive access to it, when in
fact they don’t. These vulnerabilities are usually caused by one of two errors:
    ■ A bug in the memory-management code

    ■ The memory-management API being used incorrectly

    These types of vulnerabilities can also lead to remote execution; however,
determining whether memory-block-sharing vulnerabilities are exploitable is usually
complicated and application specific. One reason is that attackers might not be able
to accurately predict what other part of the application gets the same memory block
and won’t know what data to supply to perform an attack. In addition, there might
be timing issues with the application, particularly multithreaded software servicing
a large number of clients whenever they happen to connect. Accepting the
difficulties, there are procedures for exploiting these vulnerabilities, so they
shouldn’t be regarded as low priority without justification.
    A similar memory corruption can occur in which a memory block is allocated
only once (the correct behavior), but then that memory block is handed off to two
concurrently running threads with the assumption of mutually exclusive access.
This type of vulnerability is largely caused by synchronization issues and is covered
extensively in Chapter 13, “Synchronization and State.”

What Protections Are in Place?
After you know the details of a potentially exploitable memory corruption
vulnerability, you need to consider any mitigating factors that might prevent
exploitation. For example, if a piece of software is going to run only on Windows XP
SP2+, you know that stack cookies and SafeSEH are present, so a typical stack
overflow might not be exploitable. Of course, you can’t discount memory
corruption just because protective measures are in place. It’s quite possible that an
attacker could find a way to subvert SafeSEH by using an unsafe loaded module or
overwriting a function parameter to subvert stack cookies. However, you need to
account for these protective measures and try to gauge the likelihood of an attacker
circumventing them and reliably exploiting the system.

Summary
This chapter has explained how memory corruption occurs and how it can affect the
state of an application. In particular, you’ve seen how attackers can leverage memory
corruption bugs to seize control of applications and perform malicious activities.
This knowledge is essential as you assess application security vulnerabilities because
it allows you to accurately determine the likelihood of an attacker exploiting a
particular memory corruption issue. However, memory corruption exploits are an
entire field of study on their own, and the state of the art is constantly changing to
find new ways to exploit the previously unexploitable. As a reviewer, you should
regard all memory corruption issues as potentially serious vulnerabilities until you
can prove otherwise.

