                      Chapter 9
   UNIX I: Privileges and Files

“There are two major products that came from Berkeley: LSD and UNIX. We don’t believe this
to be a coincidence.”
    J. S. Anderson
“First, LSD did not come from Berkeley. LSD was developed in Sandoz labs in Basel, Switzer-
land. Second, BSD did come from Berkeley, but it is not ‘UNIX.’”
    Nick Johnson

Introduction
UNIX is more than just a single operating system; it’s a phenomenon. What started as a
hacker’s project to create a functional multi-user operating system has evolved into an
array of OSs that all share some basic characteristics and a common ancestor. Writing
about UNIX from a technical perspective can be rather intimidating, simply because it’s
hard to know what to call this phenomenon. Does UNIX refer only to vendors who paid for
the use of the trademark? What do you call UNIX-like systems, such as Linux and BSD?
UNIX-like operating systems? UN*X? UNIX derivatives? Should you preface everything
with GNU?

    In this book, the term “UNIX” is used to refer to all of the UNIX derivatives that
exist today: Linux, GNU/Linux, OpenBSD, FreeBSD, NetBSD, Solaris, HPUX, IRIX,
AIX, SCO, Unicos, TiVo, Mr. Coffee, and every other OS resembling UNIX that
(roughly) conforms to POSIX standards. Some might consider this usage uncon-
scionable, but as long as you understand what’s meant by the term in this book, it’s
good enough for the purposes of this discussion.
    Welcome to the first of two chapters on auditing UNIX applications. You start
with a brief overview of UNIX technology, and then dive right in to study the UNIX
access control model. As part of this exploration, you look at several ways in which
application developers can mismanage process privileges and expose their pro-
grams to attackers. The second half of this chapter focuses on vulnerabilities
related to interaction with the file system. You learn about file permissions and
ownership, file system internals, linking attacks, race conditions, and issues with
temporary files and public directories. Chapter 10, “UNIX II: Processes,” continues
the study of UNIX-centric application security by looking at the life and runtime
environment of a typical process. You examine security issues related to various
system services, including program invocation, program attribute retention, and
interprocess communication (IPC) mechanisms.

UNIX 101
The UNIX family of operating systems has been around for a long time (in comput-
ing terms) and undergone many variations and changes. Ken Thompson developed
the first incarnation of UNIX in 1969. His employer, Bell Labs, had just withdrawn
from a joint venture to develop the Multiplexed Information and Computing Service
(Multics) system: a large-scale, ambitious project to create a time-sharing system.
The design turned out to be unwieldy and mired in complexity, however. Bell Labs
worked on the project for four years but then withdrew, as it was still far from
completion with no end in sight.
    Ken Thompson then decided to write his own operating system, and he took a
completely different approach. He focused on simplicity and pragmatic compro-
mise, and he designed and implemented the system in an incremental fashion, one
piece at a time. Over time, he would periodically implement a new tool or new sub-
system and synthesize it into the existing code. Eventually, it shaped up to form a
real operating system, and UNIX was born.

       Note
       The name UNIX is actually a play on the name Multics. There are a
       few funny explanations of the genesis of the name. One amusing
       quote is “UNIX is just one of whatever it was that Multics had lots

                                        UNIX 101

        of.” There’s the obligatory “UNIX is Multics without balls.” There’s
        also a commonly repeated anecdote that UNIX was originally
        spelled Unics, which stood for the slightly non sequitur Uniplexed
        Information and Computing Service. Comedy gold.

    UNIX systems generally feature simple and straightforward interfaces between
small, concise modules. As you’ll see, the file abstraction is used heavily throughout
the system to access just about everything. At the core of a UNIX system is the kernel,
which manages system devices, performs process maintenance and scheduling, and
shares system resources among multiple processes. The userland portion of a UNIX
system is typically composed of hundreds of programs that work in concert to provide
a robust user interface. UNIX programs are typically small and designed around
simple, easily accessible text-based interfaces. This tool-oriented approach to system
design is often referred to as the “UNIX design philosophy,” which can be summed up
as “Write simple tools that do only one thing and do that one thing well, and make
them easily interoperable with other tools.”
    The following sections explain the basics of a typical UNIX system, and then
you jump into the details of privilege management.

Users and Groups
Every user in a UNIX system has a unique numeric user ID (UID). UNIX
configurations typically have a user account for each real-life person who uses the
machine as well as several auxiliary UIDs that facilitate the system’s supporting
functionality. These UIDs are used by the kernel to decide what privileges a given
user has on the system, and what resources they may access. UID 0 is reserved for
the superuser, which is a special user who, in essence, has total control of the
system. The superuser account is typically given the name “root.”
    UNIX also has the concept of groups, which are used for defining a set of
related users that need to share resources such as files, devices, and programs.
Groups are also identified with a unique numeric ID, known as a group ID (GID).
GIDs assist the kernel in access control decisions, as you will see throughout this
chapter. Each user can belong to multiple groups. One is the user’s primary group,
or login group, and the remaining groups are the user’s supplemental groups, or
secondary groups.
    The users of a system are typically defined in the password file, /etc/passwd,
which can be read by every local user on the system. There’s usually also a
corresponding shadow password file that can be read only by the superuser; it
contains hashes of user passwords for authentication. Different UNIX
implementations store this information in different files and directories, but there’s a
common programmatic interface to access it.

   The password file is a line-based database file that records some basic details
about each user on the system, delimited by the colon character. An entry in the
password file has the following format:
bob:x:301:301:Bobward James Smithington:/home/bob:/bin/bash

     The first field contains a username that identifies the user on the system. The next
field traditionally contained a one-way hash of the user’s password. However, on
contemporary systems, this field usually just has a placeholder and the real password
hash is stored in the shadow password database. The next two fields indicate the user’s
UID and primary GID, respectively. Supplemental groups for users are typically defined
in the group file, /etc/group. The next field, known as the GECOS field, is a textual
representation of the user’s full name. It can also contain additional information about
the user such as their address or phone number.

        Note
        GECOS actually stands for “General Electric Comprehensive
        Operating System,” which was an old OS originally implemented by
        General Electric, and shortly renamed thereafter to GCOS. The
        GECOS field in the password file was added in early UNIX systems
        to contain ID information needed to use services exposed by GCOS
        systems. For a more detailed history of GECOS, consult the
        wikipedia entry at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GECOS.

    Each user also has a home directory defined in the password file (/home/bob in
this case), which is usually a directory that’s totally under the user’s control. Finally,
each user also has a default shell, which is the command-line interface program that
runs when the user logs in.

Files and Directories
Files are an important part of any computer system, and UNIX-based ones are no
exception. The kernel provides a simple interface for interacting with a file, which
allows a program to read, write, and move around to different locations in the file.
UNIX uses this file abstraction to represent other objects on the system as well, so
the same interface can be used to access other system resources. For example, a
pipe between programs, a device driver, and a network connection all can be
accessed through the file-based interface exposed by the kernel.
    On a UNIX system, files are organized into a unified hierarchical structure. At
the top of the hierarchy is the root directory (named /). Files are uniquely identi-
fied by their name and location in the file system. A location, or pathname, is

                                         UNIX 101

composed of a series of directory names separated by the slash (/) character. For
example, if you have an internetd.c file stored in the str directory, and the str
directory is a subdirectory of /home, the full pathname for the file is
/home/str/internetd.c.
    A typical UNIX system has a number of directories that are set up by default
according to certain historical conventions. The exact directory structure can vary
slightly from system to system, but most directory structures approximate the
Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (available, along with bonus Enya lyrics, at
www.pathname.com/). A standard UNIX system includes the following directories:
    ■ /etc—This directory usually contains configuration files used by various
      subsystems. Among other things, the system password database is located
      in this directory. If it’s not there, it’s somewhere strange, such as /tcb.
    ■ /home—Home directories for users on the system to store their personal files
      and applications are typically located here. Sometimes home directories are
      stored at a different location, such as /usr/home.
    ■ /bin—This directory contains executables (“binaries,” hence the directory
      name) that are part of the OS. They are usually the files needed to operate the
      system in single-user mode before mounting the /usr file system. The rest of
      the OS binaries are usually in /usr/bin.
    ■ /sbin—This directory contains executables intended for use by superusers.
      Again, /sbin contains the core utilities useful for managing a system in single-
      user mode, and /usr/sbin contains the rest of the administrative programs.
    ■ /var—This directory is used primarily to keep files that change as programs
      are running. Log files, data stores, and temporary files are often stored under
      this directory.
     Although the visible hierarchy appears to users to be a single file system, it might
in fact be composed of several file systems, which are grafted together through the use
of mount points. Mount points are simply empty directories in the file system that a
new file system can be attached to. For example, the /mnt/cdrom directory could be
reserved for use when mounting a CD. If no CD is mounted, it’s a normal directory.
After the CD is mounted, you can access the file system on the CD through that
directory. So you could view the test.txt file in the CD’s root directory by accessing
the /mnt/cdrom/test.txt file. Each file system that’s mounted has a corresponding
kernel driver responsible for managing file properties and data on the storage media,
and providing access to files located on the file system. Typically, a file system module
handles access to files on a partition of a physical disk, but plenty of virtual file sys-
tems also exist, which do things such as encapsulate network resources or RAM disks.
     Every file on the system belongs to a single user and a single group; it has a
numeric user ID (UID) indicating its owner and a numeric group ID (GID) indicating

its owning group. Each file also has a simple set of permissions, a fixed-size bit
mask that indicates which actions are permissible for various classes of users. File
permissions are covered in “File Security” later in this chapter.

Processes
A program is an executable file residing on the file system. A process is an instance
of a program running on a system. A process has its own virtual memory environ-
ment that is isolated from all other processes on the system. Most modern UNIX
systems also provide mechanisms for multiple execution flows to share the same
address space to support threaded programming models.
    Each process on a UNIX system has a unique process ID (PID), and runs with
the privileges of a particular user, known as its effective user. The privileges associ-
ated with that user determines which resources and files the process has access to.
Usually, the effective user is simply the user that runs the application. In certain sit-
uations, however, processes can change who they’re running as by switching to an
effective user with different privileges, thus expanding or reducing their current
access capabilities to system resources.
    When the UNIX kernel checks to see whether a process has permission to
perform a requested action, it usually does a simple test before examining the
relevant user and group permissions: If the process is running as the superuser,
the action is categorically allowed. This makes the superuser a special entity in
UNIX; it’s the one account that has unfettered access to the system. Several
actions can be performed only by the superuser, such as mounting and
unmounting disks or rebooting the system (although systems can be configured
to allow normal users to perform these tasks as well).
    In some situations, a normal user needs to perform actions that require special
privileges. UNIX allows certain programs to be marked as set-user-id (setuid),
which means they run with the privileges of the user who actually owns the
program file, as opposed to running with the privileges of the user who starts the
application. So, if a program is owned by root, and the permissions indicate that it’s
a setuid file, the program runs as the superuser regardless of who invokes it.
There’s a similar mechanism for groups called set-group-id (setgid), which allows a
program to run as a member of a specific group.

Privilege Model
In the UNIX access control model, each process has three associated user IDs:
      ■ Real user ID—The ID of the user who started the process (that is, the user ID of
       the user who initially ran the program).

    ■ Saved set-user-ID—If a program is configured as setuid, it runs as the user that
      owns the file when it’s called, regardless of who called it. The ID of this user,
      the set-user-ID, is saved here.
    ■ Effective user ID—The actual ID used when permission checks are done in the
      kernel. The effective user ID tells you the current privileges of the process. If a
      program wants to change its privileges, it changes its effective user ID to the
      ID of the user with the desired privileges. If a program has an effective user ID
      of 0, it has full superuser privileges to the system.
    In general, a process is allowed to change its effective user ID to its real user ID or
saved set-user-ID. In this way, processes can toggle their effective permissions
between the user who started the program and the more privileged set-user-ID. Note
that a program with the superuser’s effective user ID doesn’t have to obey many
rules, so the semantics of how those programs manage their IDs are more subtle.
    Each UNIX process also has multiple group IDs:
    ■ Real group ID—The primary group ID of the user who called the process.

    ■ Saved set-group-ID—If a program is configured as setgid, it runs as a member of
      a particular group. That group, the set-group-ID, is saved here.
    ■ Effective group ID—One of the group IDs used when permission checks are
      done in the kernel. It’s used with the supplemental group IDs when the kernel
      performs access control checks.
    ■ Supplemental group IDs—Each process also maintains a list of groups the
      process has membership in. This list is used with the effective group ID when
      the kernel does permission checks of group permissions.

    The group IDs mirror the user IDs as far as functionality, except supplemental
groups are also considered in access control decisions. Note that having an effective
group ID of 0—usually the wheel group—does not grant any special privileges in the
system. It gives you access commensurate with the privileges members of the wheel
group have, but it doesn’t give you any special consideration at the kernel level.
(Caveat: There have been vague references to older UNIX systems where the kernel
does give special consideration to group 0, but the authors never encountered such
a system.)
    When a process runs another program, the real user ID stays the same. The
effective user ID also stays the same, unless the new program is setuid. The saved
set-user-ID is replaced with the effective user ID of the new process when it starts.
So if you temporarily drop privileges by setting your effective user ID equal to your
real user ID and then run a new program with exec(), the elevated privileges
stored in your saved set-user-ID aren’t passed on to the new program.

Privileged Programs
There are basically three categories of programs in UNIX, described in the following
sections, that manage privileges by manipulating their effective user and group IDs.
We will explore each of them in this section.

Nonroot Setuid and Setgid Programs
The setuid and setgid programs allow normal users to perform actions that require
privileges they don’t have. For example, the wall program is used to broadcast a mes-
sage to all users on a system. This program works by writing a message to each user’s
terminal device. Normally, a regular (non-root) user can’t write directly to another
user’s terminal device, as this would allow users to spy on each other and interfere
with one another’s terminal sessions. So the wall program is usually installed as set-
gid tty, which means wall runs as a member of the group tty. All the terminal devices
on a system belong to this tty group, and permissions are set up so that the terminal
devices are group writeable. Therefore, the wall program can provide users with the
ability to write to other user’s terminal devices in a controlled, safe fashion.
     Another example is the minicom program—a text-based interface for interacting
with a serial device, such as a modem. The administrator typically doesn’t want to
allow users to talk directly with serial device drivers, as this could lead to various
attacks and reliability issues. One way some UNIX systems work around this
requirement is by making the serial devices owned by the user uucp and configur-
ing the minicom program to run setuid uucp. This way, when a normal user runs
minicom, the program runs as the uucp user and has the privileges necessary to
make use of serial devices.
     So a process’s effective permissions are determined by its effective user ID,
its effective group ID, and its supplemental group IDs. Setuid programs start off
running with their elevated privileges, so their effective user ID is equal to their
saved set-user-ID. Setgid programs behave in the same fashion. At any point,
these programs are allowed to switch their effective IDs to their real IDs to drop
their privileges. If they want to regain their privileges, they can toggle their
effective IDs back to their saved set-user-IDs.
     These programs can permanently drop their privileges by changing their saved
setIDs and effective IDs to be equal to their real IDs, so they can’t toggle to the user
ID with higher privileges .

Setuid Root Programs
Most setuid programs in UNIX environments are setuid root, meaning they run as
the superuser when they are started. The rules for setuid root programs are a little
different; when a process has an effective user ID of 0, it doesn’t have to obey
conventions for how it manipulates its associated user and group IDs. Also, the

semantics of the ID management API functions change slightly, as explained
shortly in “User ID Functions” and “Group ID Functions.”
    A good example of a setuid root program is the ping program. Ping needs the
capability to use a raw socket, which requires root privileges. A raw socket can be
used to spoof arbitrary network packets and retrieve certain types of raw network
packets, so allowing nonprivileged users to create one would allow them to sniff
traffic and forge data packets (generally considered rude in polite society). There-
fore, this capability is limited to root users, and the ping program is configured as
setuid root so that it can create a raw socket.
    A setuid root program starts off with an effective user ID of 0, a saved set-user-ID
of 0, and a real user ID corresponding to the user who started the program. Setuid root
programs typically behave like other setuid and setgid programs, in that they manage
privileges by toggling their effective user ID between their real user ID and saved set-
user-ID. They permanently drop their privileges by setting all three IDs to the real user
ID. However, they aren’t required to obey these conventions when they’re running as
the superuser, so they could conceivably change their IDs in arbitrary ways.

Daemons and Their Children
In UNIX, daemons are long-running processes that provide system services (not
unlike Windows service processes). They are usually started automatically by the
system at boot time, or they are started by an administrator or a job-scheduling pro-
gram. Daemons often run as the superuser so that they can perform privileged
operations. A daemon running as root starts with an effective user ID of 0, a real
user ID of 0, and a saved set-user-ID of 0. Its group membership corresponds to the
root account’s group membership, which equates to an effective group ID of 0, a real
group ID of 0, a saved set-group-ID of 0, and membership in several administration-
related supplementary groups.
     Daemon programs often run other programs to handle required tasks, and
these child programs are usually also started with root privileges. These daemons
and their child processes might temporarily assume a normal user’s identity to
perform certain actions in a safe manner or to minimize the amount of time
they’re running with root privileges. To pull this off, the program typically
changes its effective user ID to the user ID it’s interested in assuming. However,
first the program needs to change its effective group ID to an appropriate group
ID and alter its supplemental group list to contain appropriate groups. As long as
the program leaves its saved set-user-ID or real user ID set to 0, it can regain its
superuser privileges later.
     A program running as root might also want to fully drop its root privileges and
assume the role of a normal user permanently. To fully drop root privileges, the pro-
gram must set all three of its user IDs and group IDs to the correct IDs for the user
that it wants to become.

    A good example of a program like this is the login program, which authenti-
cates users on a local terminal or remotely via the telnet service. This login program
displays the login prompt and waits for the user to try to log in to the machine. At
this point in time, the login program is running as root, because it needs access to
system authentication databases. If the user authenticates successfully, login
assumes the identity of that user before it opens a command shell, such as /bin/sh
It does this by initializing its group IDs based on the user’s group membership and
then setting all three of its user IDs to the user’s ID.

User ID Functions
The setuid(), seteuid(), setreuid(), and setresuid() functions are used to
manipulate the three user IDs associated with a process. These functions have
slightly different semantics on different UNIX OSs, and these differences can lead
to security problems in applications that are intended to be portable across UNIX
variants. This section introduces the user ID functions exposed by the standard C
library and notes system-specific idiosyncrasies when relevant.

         Note
         You can find an excellent paper on the nuances of the setuid() family
         of functions at www.csl.sri.com/users/ddean/papers/usenix02.pdf.

The seteuid() Function
The effective user ID associated with a process is changed with the seteuid()
function:
int seteuid(uid_t euid);

    This function, summarized in Table 9-1, has a single parameter, euid, which
indicates the desired UID that the effective user ID should be set to. If a process is
running with superuser privileges (effective user ID of 0), it can set the effective
user ID to any arbitrary ID. Otherwise, for non-root processes, it can toggle the
effective user ID between the saved set-user-ID and the real user ID. Programs use
seteuid() to temporarily change their privileges.

Table 9-1
Seteuid() Behavior
Privileged    OS                    Notes
Yes           General               Changes the effective user ID to any arbitrary value.
Yes           Linux libc            If the new ID isn’t the real user ID or the saved set-user-ID, the
              glibc 2.1 and earlier saved set-user-ID is updated along with the effective user
                                    ID. seteuid() is equivalent to setreuid(-1, euid).

No          General           Toggles the effective user ID between the real user ID, the effective
                              user ID, and the saved set-user-ID.
No          NetBSD FreeBSD    Toggles the effective user ID between the real user ID and the
                              saved set-user-ID.

    Take a closer look at this nonprivileged case: Say a user named admin has a user
ID of 1000. The admin user runs a file owned by the bin user (typically user ID 1)
and the saved set-user-ID bit is set on the file. When the program runs, the process
has the following IDs:
real user ID - 1000 - admin
saved set-user-ID - 1 - bin
effective user ID - 1 - bin

    The program can do anything the bin user is allowed to do. If the program
wants to temporarily relinquish these privileges, it can use seteuid(1000). It then
has the following privileges:
real user ID - 1000 - admin
saved set-user-ID - 1 - bin
effective user ID - 1000 - admin

    If the program wants to regain its privileges, it uses seteuid(1). It then has
these associated IDs:
real user ID - 1000 - admin
saved set-user-ID - 1 - bin
effective user ID - 1 - bin

     For the sake of completeness, say you have a program running as root with the
following IDs:
real user ID - 0 - root
saved set-user-ID - 0 - root
effective user ID - 0 - root

   This program can call a seteuid() with any value it likes, including values for
user IDs that don’t exist in the system, and the kernel allows it. Using a
seteuid(4242) would result in the following IDs:

real user ID - 0 - root
saved set-user-ID - 0 - root
effective user ID - 4242 - arbitrary

         Warning
         There’s one caveat with seteuid() that should never be an issue in
         production code, but it’s worth mentioning. On Linux systems with
         libc or glibc versions before 2.1, if you are the superuser and change
         the effective user ID to an ID that isn’t the real user ID or the saved
         set-user-ID, the saved set-user-ID is changed along with the effective
         user ID. So if you’re root and all three of your IDs are 0, and you use
         a seteuid(4242) on a Linux glibc 2.0 system, the process would have
         the following IDs:

         real user ID - 0 - root
         saved set-user-ID - 4242 - arbitrary
         effective user ID - 4242 - arbitrary

The setuid() Function
The behavior exhibited by the setuid() function has evolved and mutated over
time, with subtle variances surfacing in different implementations across divergent
UNIX systems. It has the following prototype:
int setuid(uid_t uid);

    The uid parameter is used to specify a new effective user ID to be associated
with the calling process. This function will also change both the real user ID and
saved set-user-ID, contingent upon the privileges the calling process is running
with and the UNIX variant that the process is running on (see Table 9-2). For
processes running with superuser privileges, setuid() sets all three of a process’s
user IDs to the specified argument. For example, if a process’s effective user ID is 0,
a setuid(12345) sets the real user ID, saved set-user-ID, and effective user ID to
12345. setuid() is mainly used for permanently assuming the role of a user, usually for
the purposes of dropping privileges.

Table 9-2
Setuid() Behavior
Privileged    OS        Notes
Yes           General   Real user ID, effective user ID, and saved set-user-ID are all set to the
                        new value.
No            Linux     You can specify the real user ID or the saved set-user-ID. The effective user
              Solaris   ID is updated; works much like seteuid().
No            OpenBSD   You can specify the real user ID, the saved set-user-ID, or the effective user
                        ID. If the specified value is equal to the the current effective user ID, the

                       real user ID and saved set-user-ID are also updated. Otherwise, it works like
                       seteuid(), just updating the effective user ID.
No          NetBSD     You can specify only the real user ID. The real user ID, effective user ID, and
                       saved set-user-ID are all set to the specified value.
No          FreeBSD    You can specify the real user ID or the effective user ID. The real user ID,
                       effective user ID, and saved set-user-ID are set to the specified value.

     If the process isn’t running as the superuser, setuid() has a behavior that
varies across different flavors of UNIX. UNIX variants fall into two basic camps. The
first camp believes that setuid() should work just like seteuid() when dealing
with nonsuperuser processes. Linux, Solaris, and OpenBSD fall roughly into this
camp. The second camp says that setuid() should work in a fashion consistent
with how it works for superuser programs, so it should drop all privileges if the user
requests a setuid() to the real user ID. FreeBSD and NetBSD belong in this camp.
     Say the admin user runs a set-user-ID bin file:
real user ID - 1000 - admin
saved set-user-ID - 1 - bin
effective user ID - 1 - bin

    In Linux and Solaris, setuid() behaves exactly like seteuid() when the
effective user ID isn’t the superuser’s. You can specify the real user ID or saved set-
user-ID as the argument, and setuid() updates the process’s effective user ID. So
in the preceding case, the two potentially valid calls are setuid(1000) and
setuid(1), both of which would change only the effective user ID. So if you use
setuid(1000), the IDs would change as follows:

real user ID - 1000 - admin
saved set-user-ID - 1 - bin
effective user ID - 1000 - admin

     If you then use setuid(1), you have this result:
real user ID - 1000 - admin
saved set-user-ID - 1 - bin
effective user ID - 1 - bin

    OpenBSD allows you to use setuid() on the real user ID, the saved set-user-ID,
or the effective user ID. Its behavior is a little different; if you use the current effec-
tive user ID as the argument, setuid() in OpenBSD sets all three IDs to that user
ID. However, if you use setuid() to toggle between the saved set-user-ID and effec-
tive user ID, as you would in Linux or Solaris, the function behaves like seteuid().

The basic idea is that if you repeat the setuid() call, you can make the permission
change permanent. For example, say you have this set of IDs :
real user ID - 1000 - admin
saved set-user-ID - 1 - bin
effective user ID - 1 - bin

    If you use setuid(1), you effectively assume the bin user’s identity, and all
three IDs are changed to 1. If you use setuid(1000), however, you toggle your
effective user ID, and the result is as follows:
real user ID - 1000 - admin
saved set-user-ID - 1 - bin
effective user ID - 1000 - admin

    From here, you could use another setuid(1000) and cause the program to fully
assume the admin user’s identity, or you could toggle back to bin by using setuid(1).
    FreeBSD allows you to use setuid() on the real user ID or effective user ID, and
the result causes all three user IDs to be set. So in the preceding example, you could
use setuid(1000) to set all three IDs to 1000, or you could use setuid(1) to set all
three IDs to 1. FreeBSD always lets you fully drop privileges back to the real user ID.
However, it also lets you use setuid() to confirm your current effective user ID and
have it become your new user ID across all three IDs.
    NetBSD allows you to use setuid() only with the real user ID, and the result
causes all three user IDs to be set. In essence, the NetBSD version of setuid()
allows only a nonsuperuser process to fully drop privileges back to the real user ID.
So in the preceding example, if you use a setuid(1000), you would end up with all
three IDs being 1000.
    All these details are great, but what’s the bottom line for auditing code that uses
setuid()? Basically, if the program has an effective user ID of 0, and the developer
is using it to fully drop user privileges, everything is probably fine. If the program
doesn’t have an effective user ID of 0, setuid() is probably the wrong function for
trying to manipulate privileges. If developers try to rely on it to fully drop privileges,
they are burned by the saved set-user-IDs persisting in Linux, OpenBSD, and
Solaris. If they try to rely on it just to change the effective user ID, they inadver-
tently throw away credentials in FreeBSD and NetBSD.

The setresuid() Function
The setresuid() function is used to explicitly set the real, effective, and saver
set-user-IDs. This function has the following prototype:
int setresuid(uid_t ruid, uid_t euid, uid_t suid);

    The ruid, euid, and suid parameters indicate new values for the real user ID,
effective user ID, and saved set-user-ID attributes respectively. The caller can
place a -1 in any of the arguments, and the kernel fills in the current value of the
corresponding UID. Superusers can set the IDs to any value they want. A non-
superuser process can set any of the IDs to the value of any of the three current
IDs. This function has clear semantics and is implemented the same way across
the UNIX variants that provide it. It’s currently available on Linux, FreeBSD,
HPUX, and newer versions of OpenBSD. This is summarized in Table 9-3.

Table 9-3
Setresuid() Behavior
Privileged   OS                       Notes
Yes          Linux                    Real user ID, effective user ID, and saved set-user-ID are set to
             FreeBSD                  the specified values or filled in from current values
             HPUX
             OpenBSD 3.3 and later.
No           Linux                    Any of the three values can be set to any of the current real
             FreeBSD                  user ID, effective user ID, or saved set-user-ID. Other values
             HPUX                     can be filled in by the kernel.
             OpenBSD3.3 and later

The setreuid() Function
The setreuid() function sets both the real user ID and effective user ID of a
process. It works as shown:
int setreuid(uid_t ruid, uid_t euid);

     The setreuid() takes a ruid parameter to indicate what the real userID
should be set to, and an euid function to indicate what the effective user ID
should be set to. If you provide an argument of -1 for ruid or euid, the function
fills in the current value from the process. The semantics of this function are
explored in Table 9-4.

Table 9-4
Setreuid() Behavior
Privileged   OS            Notes
Yes          NetBSD        Real user ID and effective user ID can be set to arbitrary values. Saved set-
                           user-ID is set to the effective user ID if the real user ID value is specified,
                           even if it isn’t changed.

                                                                                           continues ...

Table 9-4   continued
Setreuid() Behavior
Yes         FreeBSD        Real user ID and effective user ID can be set to arbitrary values. Saved
            Solaris        set-user-ID is set to the effective user ID if the real user ID is specified or
                           the effective user ID doesn’t equal the real user ID.
Yes         Linux          Real user ID and effective user ID can be set to arbitrary values. Saved
                           set-user-ID is set to the effective user ID if the real user ID is specified or the
                           effective user ID is specified and its new value doesn’t equal the real user ID.
Yes         OpenBSD 3.3 Real user ID and effective user ID can be set to arbitrary values. Saved
            and later   set-user-ID is set to the effective user ID if the real user ID is specified and
                        the real user ID is actually changed or the effective user ID doesn’t equal
                        the saved user ID.
Yes         OpenBSD        Effectively unsupported. Behavior is provided through compatibility lib
            before 3.3     with rather complex, nonconfirming behavior.
No          NetBSD         Real user ID can be set to real user ID or effective user ID. Effective user ID
                           can be set to real user ID, effective user ID, or saved set-user-ID. Saved
                           set-user-ID is set to the effective user ID if the real user ID value is speci-
                           fied, even if it isn’t changed.
No          FreeBSD        Real user ID can be set to real user ID or saved user ID. Effective user ID
                           can be set to real user ID, effective user ID, or saved set-user-ID. Saved
                           set-user-ID is set to the effective user ID if the real user ID is specified or
                           the effective user ID doesn’t equal the real user ID.
No          Solaris        Real user ID can be set to real user ID or effective user ID. Effective user
                           ID can be set to real user ID, effective user ID, or saved set-user-ID. Saved
                           set-user-ID is set to the effective user ID if the real user ID is specified or
                           the effective user ID doesn’t equal the real user ID.
No          Linux          Real user ID can be set to real user ID or effective user ID. Effective user ID
                           can be set to real user ID, effective user ID, or saved set-user-ID. Saved
                           set-user-ID is set to the effective user ID if the real user ID is specified or the
                           effective user ID is specified and its new value doesn’t equal the real user ID.
No          OpenBSD 3.3 Real user ID can be set to real user ID, saved set-user-ID or effective
            and later   user ID. Effective user ID can be set to real user ID, effective user ID, or
                        saved set-user-ID. Saved set-user-ID is set to the effective user ID if the
                        real user ID is specified and the real user ID is actually changed or the
                        effective user ID doesn’t equal the saved user ID.
No          OpenBSD        Effectively unsupported. Behavior is provided through compatibility
            before 3.3     lib with rather complex, nonconfirming behavior.

    If you’re the superuser, you can set the user ID and effective user ID to any value
you like. If you aren’t the superuser, allowed behaviors vary among OSs, but you can
typically change the real user ID to the effective user ID. You can change the effective
user ID to the real user ID, the effective user ID, or the saved set-user-ID.
    After it modifies the real user ID and the effective user ID, the setreuid()
function attempts to determine whether it should update the saved set-user-ID to

reflect the value of the new effective user ID. It varies a bit among OSs, but generally,
if the real user ID is changed or the effective user ID is changed to something other
than the real user ID, the saved set-user-ID is set to be equal to the effective user ID.
     This API is quite cumbersome and there are issues with it having variances
across multiple platforms, which you can definitely see in Table 9-4. Linux,
NetBSD, and Solaris implement similar algorithms, but FreeBSD lets a
nonsuperuser process change the real user ID to the saved set-user-ID as
opposed to the effective user ID, which is slightly different. Versions of
OpenBSD before 3.3 effectively didn’t support this function; it was provded
through a compatibility mode that was incompatible with other UNIX
implementations. Versions after 3.3 implement it, but it has slightly different
semantics than the other UNIX implementations.
     setreuid() isn’t pretty, but it’s important for one notable situation. If a
program is managing two user IDs as its real user ID and saved set-user-ID, but
neither is the superuser, it can prove difficult for that program to fully drop one
set of privileges. Linux, FreeBSD, HPUX, and more recent OpenBSD builds can
make use of the setresuid() function, which has a clean and simple interface.
Solaris and certain versions of the BSDs, however, don’t have access to this
function. For a more cross-platform solution, developers can use the
setreuid(getuid(),getuid()) idiom, which should work on all modern UNIX
implementations, with the notable exception of older versions of OpenBSD.
Before OpenBSD imported the setresuid() function and rewrote the
setreuid() function, the only straightforward way for a nonprivileged program
to clear the saved set-user-ID was to call the setuid() function when the effec-
tive user ID is set to the real user ID. This can be accomplished by calling
setuid(getuid()) twice in a row.

Group ID Functions
The setgid(), setegid(), setregid(), setresgid(), setgroups(), and
initgroups() functions are used to manipulate the group IDs associated with a
process. Like the user ID functions, these functions have slightly different semantics
on the different UNIX OSs. The following sections introduce the group ID functions.

        Warning
        The group ID functions, like the user ID functions, have different
        behaviors if the process is running as the superuser, which means
        an effective user ID of 0. An effective group ID of 0, however,
        doesn’t give a process any special kernel-level privileges.

The setegid() Function
The setegid() function is used to change the effective group ID associated with the
current process. It’s prototype is
int setegid(gid_t egid);

     It behaves like its user ID counterpart, the seteuid() function, in that it’s used
to toggle the effective group ID between the saved set-group-ID and the real group
ID. Similar to seteuid(), if the process is running with superuser privileges, it can
set the effective group ID to any arbitrary value.

The setgid() Function
The setgid() function changes group IDs associated with a process, and is equally
nuanced as its counterpart setuid(). It works like this:
int setgid(gid_t gid);

    setgid()takes a single parameter, gid, which it uses to set the effective group
ID, and possibly also the saved set-group-ID and real group ID. If it’s run from a
process running with superuser privileges, it sets the effective group ID, the saved
set-group-ID, and the real group ID to the same value. When the process isn’t
running as the superuser, setgid() has varying behavior that closely tracks the
different behaviors discussed for setuid().

The setresgid() Function
The setresgid() function is used to change the real group ID, effective group ID,
and saved set-group-ID of a process. It has the following prototype:
int setresgid(gid_t rgid, gid_t egid, gid_t sgid);

    setresgid() behaves in much the same way that setresuid() does, except that
it manipulates group IDs for a process rather than user IDs. The caller can provide
-1 for any of the arguments, and the kernel fills in the current value. Superusers
can set any of the group IDs to any value they want. A nonsuperuser process can set
any of the IDs to the value of any of the three current IDs. This function has clear
semantics and is implemented the same across UNIX variants that provide it.

The setregid() Function
The setregid() function can be used to modify the real group ID and effective
group ID associated with a process. It works as shown:
int setregid(gid_t rgid, gid_t egid);

    setregid() lets you specify the values you want for your real group ID and
effective group ID through the use of the rgid and egid parameters respectively. If

you provide an argument of -1 for rgid or egid, it fills in the current value from the
process. This function behaves like its counterpart, setreuid().

The setgroups() Function
A process can set its supplementary groups using the setgroups() function, as
shown:
int setgroups(int ngroups, const gid_t *gidset);

    The setgroups() function takes two parameters; the ngroups parameter indi-
cates how many supplemental groups the process will have and the gidset para-
maeter points to an array of group IDs that has ngroup members. This function can
be called only by a process with an effective user ID of 0.

The initgroups() Function
As an alternative to setgroups(), processes can set their supplementary groups
using initgroups(), which has the following prototype:
int initgroups(const char *name, gid_t basegid);

     initgroups() is a convenient alternative to setgroups() because it saves the
calling application from having to find out the groups that a particular user is a
member of in order to correctly establish the process’s supplementary group list.
The name parameter indicates a user account whose group memberships are to be
enumerated and set as the calling process’s supplementary group list. The basegid
GID is also added to the supplementary group list, and is typically the primary GID
of the user specified by the name parameter. Like setgroups(), it can be performed
only by a process with an effective user ID of 0.

Privilege Vulnerabilities
Now that you are familiar with the basic privilege management API, you can
explore the types of mistakes developers are likely to make when attempting to per-
form privilege management.

Reckless Use of Privileges
The most straightforward type of privilege vulnerability happens when a program
running with elevated privileges performs a potentially dangerous action on behalf
of an unprivileged user without first imposing any limitations on itself with privilege
management functions. Although it is possible for programs to safely access
resources without needing to temporarily or permanently drop privileges, it is very
easy to make mistakes when doing so.

    Here is a simple real-world example of a setuid root program named XF86_SVGA
that used to ship with the XFree86 windowing package. Nicolas Dubee, a notorious
and gifted researcher, discovered this vulnerability in 1997. Listing 9-1 is an excerpt
from his advisory (available at http://packetstormsecurity.org/advisories/plaguez/
plaguez.advisory.010.xfree86).
Listing 9-1
Privilege Misuse in XFree86 SVGA Server
[plaguez@plaguez plaguez]$ ls -al /etc/shadow
-rw----   1 root     bin
➥ 1039 Aug 21 20:12 /etc/shadow
 [plaguez@plaguez bin]$ ID
uid=502(plaguez) gid=500(users) groups=500(users)
[plaguez@plaguez plaguez]$ cd /usr/X11R6/bin
[plaguez@plaguez bin]$ ./XF86_SVGA -config /etc/shadow
Unrecognized option: root:qEXaUxSeQ45ls:10171:-1:-1:-1:-1:-1:-1
use: X [:<display>] [option]
-a #                   mouse acceleration (pixels)
-ac                    disable access control restrictions
-audit int            set audit trail level
-auth file            select authorization file
bc                     enable bug compatibility
-bs                    disable any backing store support
-c                     turns off key-click

     The XF86_SVGA server, which was a setuid root program, happily read the
configuration file /etc/shadow, and then proceeded to complain about the unrecog-
nized option of root’s password hash! The problem is that the X server would read
in any configuration file the user requested as root, without regard for the actual
user’s permissions. Its configuration file parser happened to display a verbose error
message, which printed the first line of the suspect configuration file.
     Considering the effects of any elevated group privileges is important, too. Many
programs are installed as setgid so that they run as a member of a particular group.
If the program performs a privileged action without relinquishing group privileges,
it can still be vulnerable to a privilege escalation attack by allowing the user to
access resources designated to the group in question.
     For example, the /sbin/dump program in NetBSD was installed as setgid tty so
that it could notify system administrators if backup media needed to be changed.
The dump program never dropped this group privilege, and local users could have
the dump program start a program of their choice by setting the libc environment
variable RCMD_CMD. This program would then run with an effective group ID of tty.
Attackers could seize group tty privileges, which could allow them to interact with
other user’s terminals.

Dropping Privileges Permanently
Occasionally, application developers will make mistakes when writing the code for
a program that permanently relinquishes its privileges. The following sample code
represents part of a setuid root program:
     /* set up special socket */
     setup_socket();

     /* drop root privs */
     setuid(getuid());

     /* main processing loop */
     start_procloop();

     This code is similar in spirit to what you find in several common network
programs. The program needs to be root to obtain a socket bound to a port below
1024 or to obtain a special socket for sniffing. The author wants the program to
be safe and follow a least-privilege design, so after obtaining this socket, the
program drops its root privileges by performing a setuid(getuid()), which sets
the saved set-user-ID, the real user ID, and the effective user ID to the value of
the real user ID.
     setuid(getuid()) is a common idiom for permanently relinquishing privileges,
and it usually works without too many complications. However, in some situations,
it’s not enough, as explained in the following sections.

Dropping Group Privileges
Some programs are installed as both setuid and setgid, meaning they run with an ele-
vated user ID and elevated group ID. The code in the previous section would be fine if
the program is only setuid root, but if the program is setuid root and setgid wheel, the
elevated group privileges aren’t relinquished correctly. In the processing loop, the
effective group ID of the process is still set to the privileged wheel group, so if attack-
ers found a way to exploit the program in the main processing loop, they could gain
access to resources available to that privileged group. The correct way to address this
problem is to relinquish group privileges like this:
     /* set up special socket */
     setup_socket();

     /* drop root privs - correct order */
     setgid(getgid());
     setuid(getuid());

      /* main processing loop */
      start_procloop();

     This code drops the group permissions and then the user permissions. It seems
fairly straightforward, but it can actually be done incorrectly, as shown in the fol-
lowing example:
      /* set up special socket */
      setup_socket();

      /* drop root privs – incorrect order */
      setuid(getuid());
      setgid(getgid());

      /* main processing loop */
      start_procloop();

    This code doesn’t fully work because the function calls are ordered incorrectly.
The setuid(getuid()) function relinquishes root privileges. Remember that having
an effective group ID of 0 doesn’t mean you are a superuser, as superuser status is
based solely on your effective user ID. The setgid(getgid()) call is performed with
privileges of the nonprivileged user, so the result of the setgid(getgid()) call
depends on the OS. In Linux, Solaris, and OpenBSD, only the effective group ID is
modified, and the saved set-group-ID still contains the group ID of the privileged
group. If attackers find a flaw in the program they could leverage to run arbitrary
code, they could perform a setegid(0) or setregid(-1, 0) and recover the
elevated group privileges.

Dropping Supplemental Group Privileges
Programs running as daemons can run into security issues related to dropping
privileges that are a little different from setuid programs. This is because they are
typically started as a privileged user and then assume the role of an unprivileged
user based on user input. In this situation, you have to be cognizant of supplemen-
tal group IDs because if they aren’t updated when privileges are dropped, they
could leave the process with access to privileged resources.
     Certain implementations of the rsync application contained a vulnerability of this
nature, which is detailed at http://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-
2002-0080. If rsync runs as a daemon, it starts off with the user ID and groups of the
user running the daemon (typically root). If the rsync daemon needs to operate as an
unprivileged user, it runs the following code:

      if (am_root) {
          if (setgid(gid)) {
               rsyserr(FERROR, errno, “setgid %d failed”,
                    (int) gid);
               io_printf(fd,”@ERROR: setgid failed\n”);
               return -1;
          }

          if (setuid(uid)) {
               rsyserr(FERROR, errno, “setuid %d failed”,
                    (int) uid);
               io_printf(fd,”@ERROR: setuid failed\n”);
               return -1;
          }

          am_root = (getuid() == 0);
      }

    This code releases the effective group ID before the effective user ID, so it
should drop those privileges in the correct order. However, this code doesn’t drop
the supplementary group privileges! The developers solved this problem by insert-
ing the following code:
#ifdef HAVE_SETGROUPS
          /* Get rid of any supplementary groups this process
           * might have inherited. */
          if (setgroups(0, NULL)) {
               rsyserr(FERROR, errno, “setgroups failed”);
               io_printf(fd, “@ERROR: setgroups failed\n”);
               return -1;
          }
#endif
...
          if (setgid(gid)) {

    Note that setgroups() works only if you are the superuser and have an effective
user ID of 0. This is another reason it’s important to relinquish privileges in the correct
order.

Dropping Nonsuperuser Elevated Privileges
As discussed earlier, the behavior of the setuid() and setgid() functions are different
if the program isn’t running as the superuser. setuid(getuid()) is a reasonable idiom
for a program running as root that wants to drop privileges permanently, but if the
effective user ID isn’t 0, the same tactic yields system-dependant, and sometimes inad-
equate results.
     Say that the simple network program was changed so that instead of being setuid
root and setgid wheel, it’s setuid to another nonprivileged user, such as daemon.
This might happen if you installed a kernel-hardening patch that let programs with a
particular user ID or group ID allocate special sockets to avoid the root privilege
requirement. The code would look the same:
      /* set up special socket */
      setup_socket();

      /* drop root privs */
      setgid(getgid());
      setuid(getuid());

      /* main processing loop */
      start_procloop();

    However, the semantics of this code would be quite different when not running
with an effective user ID of 0. Both setgid() and setuid() would be called as non-
privileged users, and they would change only the effective IDs, not the saved IDs.
(In FreeBSD and NetBSD, this code would change all three IDs, so it wouldn’t be
vulnerable.) Attackers who exploited a problem in the program could therefore
regain any relinquished privileges. The solution for nonsetuid root applications that
need to fully drop their privileges is to use the setresgid() and setresuid() func-
tions or the setregid() and setreuid() functions if necessary. OpenBSD versions
before 2.3 require two calls to setuid().
    A noted researcher named Michael Zalewski found a bug in Sendmail 8.12.0
(documented at www.sendmail.org/releases/8.12.1.html) that’s a good real-world
example of this situation. Sendmail used to install a set-user-ID root binary, but in
version 8.12.0, it moved to a new configuration, with a set-group-ID smssp binary.
Here’s the code that is intended to drop the elevated group privileges:
int
drop_privileges(to_real_uid)
      bool to_real_uid;
{

      int rval = EX_OK;
      GIDSET_T emptygidset[1];
...
      if (to_real_uid)
      {
          RunAsUserName = RealUserName;
          RunAsUid = RealUid;
          RunAsGid = RealGid;
      }

      /* make sure no one can grab open descriptors
          for secret files */
      endpwent();
      sm_mbdb_terminate();

      /* reset group permissions; these can be set later */
      emptygidset[0] = (to_real_uid || RunAsGid != 0)
          ? RunAsGid : getegid();

      if (setgroups(1, emptygidset) == -1 && geteuid() == 0)
      {
          syserr(“drop_privileges: setgroups(1, %d) failed”,
                 (int) emptygidset[0]);
          rval = EX_OSERR;
      }
      /* reset primary group and user ID */
      if ((to_real_uid || RunAsGid != 0) &&
          EffGid != RunAsGid &&
          setgid(RunAsGid) < 0)
      {
          syserr(“drop_privileges: setgid(%d) failed”,
              (int) RunAsGid);
          rval = EX_OSERR;
      }
}

   First, setgroups() fails, but that’s fine because the supplemental groups are
ones for the real user, which is a nonprivileged account. setgid() successfully
changes the effective group ID from the saved set-group-ID to the real group ID but

doesn’t fully drop the privileges (except in FreeBSD and NetBSD). The saved
set-group-ID still has the privileged smssp group ID. The Sendmail developers fixed
the issue by replacing the call to setgid() with conditionally compiled calls to
setresgid() or setregid(), depending on which function is available.

Mixing Temporary and Permanent Privilege Relinquishment
Many applications designed to run in an elevated context are programmed by security-
conscious developers who adopt a model of least privileges—running an application
with the minimal set of privileges it requires at a certain time to achieve its objectives.
This model often means running as the invoking user for the bulk of the program and
temporarily switching to a more powerful user when a privileged operation is required.
If no more privileged operations are required, often the application permanently relin-
quishes its elevated user-ID by using setuid(). Although this model is preferred for
developing a privileged application, subtle errors can result in using setuid() when
the effective user-ID has been changed previously, as shown in this example:
#define STARTPRIV seteuid(0);
#define ENDPRIV seteuid(realuid);

void main_loop(void)
{
      uid_t realuid=getuid();

      /* don’t need privileges */
      seteuid(realuid);
      /* process data */
...
      STARTPRIV
      do_privileged_action();
      ENDPRIV
      /* process more data */
...
      /* done with root privs - drop permanently */
      setuid(realuid);
      /* process yet more data */
...
}

      This code starts out by relinquishing its privileges temporarily with
seteuid(realuid). When the program needs its root privileges, it uses the STARTPRIV

macro to obtain them and the ENDPRIV macro to release them. Those macros work by
calling seteuid(0) and seteuid(realuid), respectively. After a bit of processing, the
program decides it wants to fully drop its privileges, and it does that with the com-
mon idiom setuid(realuid). The problem is that at this point, the effective user ID is
the real user ID of the program, not 0. Therefore, setuid(realuid) doesn’t affect the
saved set-user-ID in most UNIX implementations, with FreeBSD and NetBSD being
the major exceptions. If attackers find a way to co-opt the program after the final
privilege drop and run a seteuid(0), they could recover root privileges from the
saved set-user-ID.
     Here’s another example:
void temp_drop(void)
{
      seteuid(getuid());
}

void temp_gain(void)
{
      seteuid(0);
}

void main_loop(void)
{
...
      while (options)
      {
          ...
          if (unsafe_option)
          {
                temp_drop();

                if (process_option()==END_OF_OPTIONS)
                    goto step2;

                temp_gain();
          }
          ...
      }
...

step2:
      /* drop root privs */
      setuid(getuid());
...
}

     This code represents a simple set-user-ID root application. The main loop con-
tains two steps: option processing and main processing. The option-processing
code needs root privileges, but it temporarily drops them to process a potentially
unsafe option. After the option-processing code is completed, the program enters
step2, the main processing section. The rest of the code is complex and poten-
tially prone to security issues, so it fully drops privileges with a setuid(getuid())
before continuing.
     The problem is that if an unsafe option signals that the option processing is
prematurely complete, the jump to step2 happens while privileges are temporarily
dropped. The setuid(getuid()) call succeeds, but it doesn’t correctly clear the
saved set-user-ID in the process, except in FreeBSD and NetBSD. Therefore, if
there’s an exploitable problem in the main processing code, users can reclaim root
privileges by performing a seteuid(0), which succeeds because the saved set-user-
ID is still 0.

Dropping Privileges Temporarily
Temporary dropping of privileges can also be difficult to implement correctly. Many
of the pitfalls in permanent privilege relinquishment can be applied to temporary
privilege changes as well. Furthermore, dropping group privileges (and supplemental
group privileges) is an easy step to overlook. Finally, the order in which privileges are
relinquished can cause some privileges to be retained mistakenly.

Using the Wrong Idiom
If you drop privileges temporarily, your program is still vulnerable to a low-level
attack, such as a buffer overflow. If attackers can run arbitrary code within the
context of your process, they can issue the necessary system calls to propagate a
saved set-user-ID to the effective and real user ID fields and regain privileges. To
avoid this possibility, dropping privileges permanently as soon as possible is the
safest option for a setuid application.
    Tcptraceroute had a simple permission-related problem that a security specialist
from Debian Linux named Matt Zimmerman discovered. The program intended to
drop privileges permanently, but the author used the idiom for dropping privileges
temporarily. Here’s the vulnerable code:

     defaults();
      initcapture();
     seteuid(getuid());
     return trace();
 }

    This mistake was a simple one: The authors used the wrong function. They
should have used setuid() rather than seteuid() to prevent privileges from
being reclaimed later. Any memory corruption vulnerability that occurred in the
application’s trace() function could allow privileges to be regained simply by
using seteuid(0). The full advisory is archived at http://freshmeat.net/
articles/view/893/.

Dropping Group Privileges
Now take a look at a real-world example of a vulnerability related to dropping
group privileges in the wrong order. (This vulnerability is documented in the
FreeBSD security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:11.inetd, which can be found at
http://security.freebsd.org/advisories/FreeBSD-SA-01:11.inetd.asc.) The inetd
server in FreeBSD contains code to handle the IDENT service, which remote
users query to learn the user associated with any TCP connection on the
machine. The service has an option thatallows users to place a .fakeid file in
their home directory, which can contain a name the ident server provides instead
of the real username. Because the ident server runs as root, the code in
Listing 9-2 was used to drop privileges temporarily.
Listing 9-2
Incorrect Temporary Privilege Relinquishment in FreeBSD Inetd
     /*
      * Here, if enabled, we read a user’s “.fakeid” file in
      * their home directory. It consists of a line
      * containing the name they want.
      */
     if (fflag) {
         FILE *fakeid = NULL;
         int fakeid_fd;

           if (asprintf(&p, “%s/.fakeid”, pw->pw_dir) == -1)
               iderror(lport, fport, s, errno);
           /*
            * Here we set ourself to effectively be the user,
            * so we don’t open any files we have no permission
            * to open, especially symbolic links to sensitive
            * root-owned files or devices.
            */

          seteuid(pw->pw_uid);
          setegid(pw->pw_gid);
...

   This code first calls seteuid() to take on the user’s privileges. It then calls
setegid() to take on the caller’s effective group ID, but this call fails because the
program has relinquished its superuser privileges.

Using More Than One Account
To understand this problem, consider a daemon that needs to use more than one
user account. (This example is based on one provided by Jan Wolter, a software
designer that wrote an interesting paper entitled “Unix Incompatibility Notes: UID
Function Setting,” available at www.unixpapa.com/incnote/setuid.html.) Here’s an
example of how it might be implemented:
      /* become user1 */
      seteuid(user1);
      process_log1();

      /* become user2 */
      seteuid(user2);
      process_log2();

      /* become root again */
      seteuid(0);

    The intent of this code is to do some processing as user1, and then assume the
identity of user2 and do further processing. This implementation is flawed, how-
ever, because the call to seteuid(user2) fails because the program’s effective user
ID is no longer 0; it’s user1. Correct code would have a seteuid(0) before the
seteuid(user2) call.

Auditing Privilege-Management Code
Now that you have seen a variety of vulnerabilities in code running with special
privileges, you can focus on a method for auditing how those privileges are man-
aged throughout the application’s lifespan. You can use the steps in the following
sections to help you decide whether privilege management has been implemented
correctly and adequately inhibits users’ ability to exploit the application. You con-
sider two main cases: an application that intends to drop privileges permanently
and an application that intends to drop privileges temporarily.

Permanent Dropping of Privileges
Some programs run with root privileges and want to discard these root privileges
permanently. When auditing an application that runs in a privileged context and
you encounter this scenario, you need to address the following points:
    ■ Make sure the code that’s going to drop privileges permanently is running
      with an effective user ID of 0. If it’s not, it probably won’t be able to drop
      privileges effectively. Look for possible unexpected code paths where the
      program might temporarily drop privileges and then permanently drop
      privileges without restoring temporary privileges first.
    ■ If supplemental groups are potentially unsafe, make sure they are cleared with
      setgroups(). Again, setgroups() works only when running with an effective
      user ID of 0.
    ■ Make sure the real group ID, the saved set-group-ID, and the effective group
      ID are set to an unprivileged group, usually done with setgid(getgid()).
      Look for code that mistakenly uses setegid() to try to drop privileges.
    ■ Make sure the real user ID, the saved set-user-ID, and the effective user ID are
      set to an unprivileged user, usually done with setuid(getuid()). Keep an eye
      outfor code that mistakenly uses seteuid() to try to drop privileges.
    ■ Make sure the privileged groups and supplemental groups are dropped before
      the process gives up its effective user ID of root. Otherwise, the program is
      likely to expose privileged group credentials.
    There are also programs that run without root privileges but want to discard one
set of privileges permanently; for those programs, check the following points:
    ■ The programmer can’t modify groups with setgroups(), as this function
      works only for superusers. If the program requires this functionality but
      doesn’t have root privileges, it has a design flaw.
    ■ Programmers run into difficulty when using the setgid(getgid()) idiom
      because it probably leaves the saved set-group-ID set to a privileged group. You
      can suggest the use of setregid(getgid(), getgid()) or setresgid(getgid(),
      getgid(), getgid()), which sets all three group IDs to the real group ID. This
      method doesn’t work in older versions of OpenBSD, however. You can instead
      suggest using setgid(getgid()) twice in a row to clear the saved set-group-ID.
    ■ Similarly, developers run into difficulty using the setuid(getuid()) idiom
      because it probably leaves the saved set-user-ID set to a privileged user.
      setreuid(getuid(), getuid()) or setresuid(getuid(), getuid(),
      getuid()) should work to set all three user IDs to the real user ID. This
      method doesn’t work in older versions of OpenBSD, but you can instead
      suggest using setuid(getuid()) twice in a row.

Temporary Dropping of Privileges
If programs need to drop their privileges temporarily, check for the following:
      ■ Make sure the code drops any relevant group permissions as well as
       supplemental group permissions.
      ■ Make sure the code drops group permissions before user permissions.

      ■ Make sure the code restores privileges before attempting to drop privileges
       again, either temporarily or permanently.
      ■ Think about the consequences of changing the effective user ID for signals,
       debugging APIs, and special device files. These issues are discussed in more
       depth in this chapter and Chapter 10, “UNIX II: Processes.” Signals are dealt
       with separately in Chapter 13, “Synchronization and State.”

Function Audit Logs for Privileged Applications
As a useful auditing aid, you might find it advantageous to note in your function
audit logs (described in Chapter 7, “Program Building Blocks”) the privileges that
each function runs with when auditing applications that switch privilege contexts.
This is as simple as adding in an additional two entries for a function (See Table 9-5).

Table 9-5
Function Audit Log Addition
User Privileges               RUID=user, EUID=root, SUID=root
Group Privileges              RGID=users, EGID=users, SGID=users, SUPP=users

    The example indicates both the user and group privileges in effect when the
program is run. RUID, EUID, and SUID stand for “Real UID”, “Effective UID”, and
“Saved set UID” respectively. The next row uses RGID, EGID, SGID, and SUPP to
stand for “Real GID”, “Effective GID”, “Saved set GID”, and “Supplemental
Groups” respectively. You also need to add to your notes for the function if it
changes privileges throughout the course of the function, and in which cases it
will change privileges. This little addition to a standard audit log allows you to
quickly and accurately assess whether resource accesses within the function are
potentially dangerous or not.

         Note
         You saw that the privilege management API can behave differently
         on different UNIX systems, and, as such, you might not be able to
         correctly assess what the user and group privileges will be for a

         particular function. In this case, you also should make a note in the
         function audit log if non-portable privilege API usage might cause
         the application to behave differently on other OSs.

Privilege Extensions
The UNIX privilege model often comes under criticism because of its all-or-nothing
design. If you’re the root user, you have the unrestricted ability to wreak havoc on
the system because you’re granted access to any resource you want. To understand
why this is a problem, return to one of the examples used in the discussion of user
IDs. The ping program requires root privileges to run because it needs to create a
raw socket. If a vulnerability is discovered in ping that is exploitable before it drops
privileges, not only can users create a raw socket, but they can also modify any file
on the system, potentially load kernel modules to hijack system functionality, delete
log files, and steal sensitive data. So any program that needs to perform an
operation requiring special privileges essentially puts the entire system’s security at
stake. Several technologies, discussed in the following sections, have been
developed to combat this age-old problem.

Linux File System IDs
One set of IDs not mentioned previously is relevant to code running on a Linux
system. In Linux, each process also maintains a file system user ID (fsuid) and a
file system group ID (fsgid). These IDs were created to address a potential security
problem with signals. If you recall, when a daemon running as root temporarily
drops privileges to assume a user’s role, it sets its effective user ID to the ID of the
less privileged user.
     This behavior can lead to security issues because a process’s effective user ID is
used in security checks throughout the kernel. Specifically, it’s used to determine
whether certain signals can be sent to a process from another process. Because of
this checking, when the daemon assumes the effective user ID of a local user on the
machine, that user might be able to send signals and perhaps even attach a
debugger to the daemon.
     To address this issue, the Linux kernel programmers created the fsuid and fsgid
to be used for all file system accesses. These IDs are usually kept 100% synced with
the effective user ID, so their presence doesn’t affect use of the normal
privilege-management APIs. However, a program that wants to temporarily use a
normal user’s file system privileges without exposure to attacks caused by security
checks based on effective IDs can simply change its file system user and group IDs
with the API calls setfsuid() and setfsgid().

BSD securelevels
The BSD securelevels kernel protection (now supported by Linux to some extent) is
intended to protect the system kernel from the root user. The primary focus of
securelevels is to enforce some restrictions on every user on the system, including
the superuser, so that a root compromise doesn’t render a machine completely vul-
nerable. It uses a systemwide kernel value, the “securelevel,” to help decide what
actions system users are allowed to perform. The different branches and versions of
BSD vary in the number of levels they provide and the protection each level offers,
but the idea is essentially the same in each version. The following excerpt from the
init(8) man page describes the available levels:

      The kernel runs with four different levels of security. Any superuser process
      can raise the security level, but only init can lower it. The security levels are:
      -1 Permanently insecure mode—always run the system in level 0 mode.
      0 Insecure mode—immutable and append-only flags may be turned off.
      All devices may be read or written subject to their permissions.
      1 Secure mode—the system immutable and system append-only flags may
      not be turned off; disks for mounted filesystems, /dev/mem, and
      /dev/kmem may not be opened for writing.
      2 Highly secure mode—same as secure mode, plus disks may not be opened
      for writing (except by mount(2)) whether mounted or not. This level precludes
      tampering with filesystems by unmounting them, but also inhibits running
      newfs(8) while the system is multi-user.
      If the security level is initially -1, then init leaves it unchanged. Otherwise,
      init arranges to run the system in level 0 mode while single user and in level
      1 mode while multiuser. If level 2 mode is desired while running multiuser,
      it can be set while single user, e.g., in the startup script /etc/rc, using
      sysctl(8).
    As you can see, this systemwide setting can inhibit actions for even superusers.
Although it offers a level of protection, it doesn’t allow fine-tuning for specific
processes and can be susceptible to bypasses by users modifying certain files and
restarting the machine if they gain root access.

Capabilities
Linux has also undertaken the challenge of addressing the basic UNIX privilege
shortcomings by implementing a technology known as capabilities. This model
defines a set of administrative tasks (capabilities) that can be granted to or
restricted from a process running with elevated privileges. Some of the defined
capabilities include the following:

    ■ CAP_CHOWN—Provides the capability to change the ownership of a file.

    ■ CAP_SETUID/CAP_SETGID—Provides the capability to manipulate a user and group
     privileges of a process by using the set*id() functions discussed previously.
    ■ CAP_NET_RAW—Provides the capability to use raw sockets.

    ■ CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE—Provides the capability to bind to a “privileged” UDP
     or TCP port (that is, one lower than 1024).
    ■ CAP_SYS_MODULE—Provides the capability to load and unload kernel modules.

    Being able to grant and omit certain capabilities from applications makes it pos-
sible to create processes that have one special system capability without putting the
entire system at risk if it’s compromised. The ping program is a perfect example.
Instead of having it run with full permissions to create a raw socket, it could be
granted the CAP_NET_RAW privilege. If the program is compromised, attackers can
create raw sockets (which is still a breach), but can’t automatically load kernel mod-
ules or mount new file systems, for example.
    Capabilities are applied to running processes but can also be applied to files on
disk to enforce restrictions or grant special privileges when a certain binary is run
(much like the setuid/setgid bits associated with a file).
    A process has three bitmasks of capabilities:
    ■ Permitted set—The set of capabilities the process can enable.

    ■ Effective set—The set of capabilities that has been enabled already (the set
     that’s consulted when performing a privileged operation).
    ■ Inheritable set—The set of capabilities that a new process can inherit when the
     current process creates one.
    Although the effective set ultimately governs what a process can do, the other
two sets are equally important. To see why, imagine that the ping program has only
the CAP_NET_RAW capability in its effective set, but its permitted set includes a series
of other random capabilities, such as CAP_SYS_MODULE. In this case, if users did com-
promise the ping program, they could enable the CAP_SYS_MODULE capability (thus
adding it to the effective set) by using the sys_capset() system call and load kernel
modules as a result.
    File capabilities are similar, except they’re associated with a file. A file has three
capability sets also, but these sets differ slightly:
    ■ Allowed set—The set of capabilities that are allowed to be added to the process
     capability sets when the executable runs. (Capabilities apply only to executables.)
    ■ Forced set—A set of capabilities that are granted in addition to those users
     might already have. This set allows a certain application to be given special
     privileges whenever it runs (like setuid/setgid bits on a file, but more refined).

      ■ Effective set—This set isn’t really a set, but a bit indicating whether capabilities
       in the permitted set should automatically be transferred to the effective set
       when a new process image is loaded.

 Capabilities Implementation Vulnerability
 In early incarnations of the Linux capabilities solution (Linux kernel 2.2.15), Wojciech
 Purczynski discovered an interesting logic error. Specifically, users were able to
 restrict their privileges to their eventual advantage. By removing the CAP_SETUID
 privilege from the inheritable and permitted privilege sets and then running a
 setuid root application, the application would run with root privileges but wasn’t
 permitted to drop privileges if necessary. Therefore, a call to setuid(getuid())
 would fail, and the application would continue to run in an elevated privilege con-
 text. An exploit was constructed that targeted Sendmail 8.10.1. You can read more
 details about this vulnerability at www.securityfocus.com/bid/1322/discuss.

File Security
Every file on a UNIX system has a set of attributes stored in the file system alongside
the file’s content. These attributes describe properties of the file, such as file size, file
owner, security permissions, and access and modification timestamps. When a
process attempts to act on a file, the kernel consults these file attributes to determine
whether the process is permitted to proceed. The following sections describe these file
attributes and explain how the kernel uses them to make access control decisions, and
what kind of mistakes might be made in applications that interact with the file system.

File IDs
As mentioned previously, every file in a UNIX system has an owner, who is a system
user with responsibility for the file and extended control over it. Every file also
belongs to a single group on the system so that the members of that group can be
granted certain privileges on the file. Files have two integer attributes representing
this ownership information: owner ID and group ID.
     The kernel sets the file’s owner and group when the file is first created. The
owner is always set to the effective user ID of the process that created the file. The
initial group membership is a little trickier, as there are two common schemes by
which the group ID can be initialized. BSD-based systems tend to set the initial
group ID to the group ID of the file’s parent directory. The System V and Linux
approach is to set the group ID to the effective group ID of the creating process. On
systems that favor effective group IDs, you can usually use the BSD-style directory

inheritance approach for whole file systems via mount options or for specific direc-
tories by using special permission flags.
    File IDs can be changed after file creation by using the system calls chown(),
lchown(), and fchown(), which permit the caller to specify a new owner ID and a
new group ID. On BSD and Linux systems, only the superuser can change a file’s
owner. However, System V systems have historically allowed file owners to give
away ownership to another user. This option is configurable system-wide in most
System V derivatives, and it’s disabled by default in Solaris.
    On most systems, the superuser and file owner can change group
memberships. File owners can change a file’s group only to a group of which they
are a member. Again, System V derivatives, excluding Solaris, tend to allow arbi-
trary group changes by the file owner, but overall, this behavior is uncommon.

File Permissions
File permissions are represented by a small, fixed-width set of bits stored as a file
attribute on the file system. Figure 9-1 shows the permission bitmask. It’s divided
into four components, each composed of three bits. Because each section is a 3-bit
value with a possible range of 0 to 7, octal notation lends itself quite naturally to
describing file permissions.

      Special               Owner           Group                 Other

 su     sg      st      r    w      x   r    w      x         r    w      x

Figure 9-1       Permission bitmasks

     The four components of the permission bitmask are owner permissions, group
permissions, other permissions, and a set of special flags. The owner permissions
apply to only one user: the owner of the file. The group permissions apply to members
of the file’s group, but they don’t apply to the file’s owner if he or she is a member of
that group. The “other” permissions (sometimes known as “world permissions”) apply
to any other user on the system. The special component of the bitmask is a little
different; it doesn’t contain permissions that apply to a particular set of users; instead,
it has flags indicating special file properties the kernel will honor. These special bits are
discussed in more detail momentarily.
     Each component has three bits. For the owner, group, and other components,
the three bits indicate read, write, and execute permissions. These three bits are
interpreted in different ways depending on the type of the file. For a normal file,

the read permission generally refers to the user’s ability to open the file for
reading with the open() system call. The write permission refers to the user’s
ability to open a file for writing with the open() system call. The execute
permission refers to the user’s ability to run a file as a program with the
execve() system call.
    If a permission bit is set, it indicates that the associated privilege is granted to
the associated set of users. So a file with a permission bit-string of octal 0645
(binary 000 110 100 101) indicates that none of the special bits are set, the file owner
has read and write permission, members of the file’s group have read permission,
and everyone else on the system has read and execute permission.
    The kernel looks only at the most specific set of permissions relevant to a given
user. This can lead to confusing situations, such as a member of the file’s group being
forbidden from performing an action that everyone else on the system is permitted to
do or the file owner being forbidden to do something that other system users are
allowed to do. For example, a file with a permission string of octal 0606 (binary 000
110 000 110) specifies that the file owner and everyone else on the system have read
and write access to the file, except members of the file’s group, who have no access to
the file.

        Auditing Tip
        It’s a common misunderstanding to think that the less specific per-
        mission bits are consulted if the more specific permissions prevent
        an action.

     The three special permission bits are the setuid bit, the setgid bit, and the
sticky (or tacky) bit. If the setuid bit is set on an executable file, the program runs
with the privileges of the file’s owner, which means the effective user ID and
saved set-user-ID of the new process are set to the file’s owner ID. The setgid bit is
similar: A program with the setgid bit set runs with the effective group privileges
of the file’s group. This means the effective group ID and saved set-group-ID of
the process are set to the file’s group ID. The sticky bit isn’t widely used or
supported for normal files, but it usually indicates that the file is heavily used and
the system should act accordingly, which might entail keeping it resident in
memory for longer periods.
     File permissions can be changed on an existing file by using the chmod() system
call, which takes a filename, or the fchmod() system call, which operates on a file the
process has already opened. The only two users who can change permissions on a file
are the file owner and the superuser.

Umask
Each process has a umask, which is a 9-bit mask used when creating files. Most file
creation system calls take a mode parameter; users set this parameter to specify the
12-bit permission string they want the file to have when it’s created. The kernel
takes these mode permissions and uses the umask value to further restrict which
privilege bits are set. So if a process tries to create a file with read and write access
for all users, but the umask prohibits it, the file is created without the access bits.
    To calculate the initial permission bits for a new file, the permission argument of
the file creation system call is calculated with a bitwise AND operation with the
complement of the umask value. This process is shown in Figure 9-2. The process has a
umask value of 022, which tells the kernel to turn off group write and world write
permissions on any file this process creates. With the 022 umask, an open() call with a
permission argument of octal 0777 results in a file being created with permissions of
octal 0755.

                        Owner            Group                   Other

Mode passed
 to open( )         1     1     1    1     1     1         1      1      1
    0777

                                    Bitwise AND

 Inverse of
 umask 022          1     1     1    1     0     1         1      0      1
   0755

                                          =

 Initial File
Permissions         1     1     1    1     0     1         1      0      1
    0755

Figure 9-2      Permission bitmasks and umask

    A process may manually set its umask with the umask() system function. It has
the following prototype:
mode_t umask(mode_t mask);

    The umask() function will set the process umask to the 9-bit permissions string
indicated by mask. This function always succeeds. A process’s umask is inherited

when a new program is run. You will learn more about attribute inheritance in
Chapter 10, “UNIX II: Processes.” If a process doesn’t manually set its umask, it will
likely inherit a default umask (022 in most cases).

Directory Permissions
As mentioned, directories are a special type of file for containing other files. They
have a set of permissions like any file on the file system, but the kernel interprets
the permission flags a little differently.
     If users have read permissions to a directory, they can view the list of files the
directory contains. To do this, they open the directory with the open() system call,
and then use a special system call to read the directory entries, such as getdents(),
readdir(), or getdirentries().
     If users have write permissions to a directory, they are allowed to alter the direc-
tory’s contents. This means users can create new files in the directory through
several system calls, such as creat(), open(), and mkdir(). Write permissions allow
users to delete files in a directory by using unlink() or rmdir() and rename files in
a directory by using the rename() system call. Note that the actual permissions and
ownership of the files being deleted or renamed don’t matter; it’s the directory file
that is being altered.
     Execute permissions, also called search permissions, allow users to enter the
directory and access files in it. Basically, you need search permissions to enter a
directory and access the files it contains. If you don’t have search permissions, you
can’t access any files in the directory; consequently, any subdirectories of that
directory are also closed to you. You need search permissions on a directory to
enter it with the chdir() system call. Generally, if you have write permissions on a
directory, you also need search permissions on it to be able to do anything. Read
permissions, however, work without search permissions.
     The setuid bit typically has no meaning for directories on modern UNIX systems.
The setgid bit is used on some Linux and System V systems to indicate that a directory
has BSD semantics. For these systems, if a directory is marked with the setgid bit, any
file created in that directory automatically inherits the directory’s group ID. Any
directory created in one of these special setgid directories is also marked setgid.
     If the sticky bit is set on a directory, the directory effectively becomes
“append-only.” If users have write permissions on a directory, they can rename
and delete files in the directory at will, regardless of the actual file’s permissions
and ownership. A sticky directory, however, lets users delete and rename only
files they own. This permission bit is used to implement public temporary direc-
tories, such as /tmp. Because /tmp is sticky, if one user creates a temporary file in
there, another random user can’t come along and rename or delete it.

    Directory permissions are initially set just as normal file permissions are. The
mkdir() system call takes the mode argument into account and further restricts per-
missions based on the process’s current umask. Directory permissions are changed
by using the same API calls used for file permissions.

Privilege Management with File Operations
A process can attempt numerous actions that cause the kernel to perform a security
check. Generally, creating or opening a file is subject to an access control check as
well as operations that alter the directory a file resides in and operations that change
file attributes. File opening is typically done with the open(), creat(), mknod(),
mkdir(), or socket() system calls; a file’s directory is altered with calls such as
unlink() and rename(); and file attributes are changed with calls such as chmod(),
chown(), or utimes(). All these privilege checks consider a file’s permission bit-
mask, ownership, and group membership along with the effective user ID, effective
group ID, and supplemental groups of the process attempting the action.
     The effective permissions of a process are critical for file system interaction
because they determine which actions the kernel allows on certain files and affect
the initial ownership and group membership of any files or directories created by
the process. You’ve already seen how UNIX processes manage their privileges and
the pitfalls these programs can encounter. Naturally, applications running with
privilege have to be extremely careful about how they interact with the file system.

Privilege Recklessness
The most straightforward type of file system interaction vulnerability is one that’s
already been discussed—a privileged process that simply doesn’t take any precau-
tions before interacting with the file system. This recklessness usually has serious
consequences, such as allowing unprivileged users to read or modify critical system
files. You saw an example of this in Listing 9-1, which was a vulnerability in the
XFree86 server.

Libraries
Sometimes a program is diligent about managing its elevated privileges but can run
into trouble when it relies on third-party libraries to achieve some desired functional-
ity. Shared libraries can often be the source of potential vulnerabilities, since users of
the library don’t know how the library functions internally; they only know the API
that the library exports. Therefore, it is quite dangerous for libraries to access file sys-
tem resources haphazardly, because if the library is used in a privileged application,
the library functionality could be used as a vehicle for privilege escalation. If devel-
opers aren’t made aware of the potential side effects of using a particular library,

they might inadvertently introduce a vulnerability into an otherwise secure applica-
tion. As an example, consider the bug related to the login class capability database in
FreeBSD that Przemyslaw Frasunek discovered (documented at www.osvdb.org/
displayvuln.php?osvdb_id=6073). This researcher noted that both the portable
OpenSSH program and the login program call various functions in libutil to read
entries from the login capabilities database before they drop privileges. This behav-
ior is dangerous because if libutil is called in a certain way, it looks in a user’s home
directory for a .login.conf file, which contains user-specific login capability data-
base entries. This code is encapsulated in the libutil library, so the problem wasn’t
immediately obvious. Here’s one of the vulnerable code excerpts from OpenSSH:
           if (newcommand == NULL && !quiet_login

           && !options.use_login) {
                    fname = login_getcapstr(lc, “copyright”,
                         NULL, NULL);
                    if (fname != NULL && (f =
                         fopen(fname, “r”)) != NULL) {
                             while (fgets(buf, sizeof(buf), f)
                                   != NULL)
                                         fputs(buf, stdout);
                               fclose(f);

     The intent of this code is to print a copyright message defined by the system
when users log in. The name of the copyright file, if one is defined, is obtained by
calling login_getcapstr(). The login_getcapstr() function, defined in libutil, pulls
an entry from the login capabilities database by using the libc function cgetstr().
The database it uses is referenced in the lc argument set by a previous call to
login_getpwclass(), which essentially looks in a user’s home directory for the
user-specific class file.
     Say a user creates a ~/login.conf file containing these lines:
default:\
 :copyright=/etc/master.passwd:

      If the user logs in to the system, the preceding OpenSSH code returns
/etc/master.passwd as the copyright string, and the ssh daemon proceeds to open
the password file as root and print its contents.

File Creation
Applications that create new files and directories in the file system need to be
careful to select appropriate initial permissions and file ownership. Even if the

process is working within a fairly safe part of the file system, it can get into trouble
by leaving newly created files and directories exposed to attackers.

The UNIX open() interface
The primary interface on a UNIX system for creating and opening files is the open()
system call. The open() function has the following semantics:
int open(char *pathname, int flags, mode_t mask);

    As you can see, open () has three parameters. The pathname and mask parameters
specify the name of the file to create or open and the 12-bit permission mask to apply to
the file if one is being created. (If a file is being opened rather than created, the permis-
sions mask is ignored.) The flags parameter specifies how open() should behave. This
parameter is composed of 0 or more special flag values that are OR’d together to create a
bitmask. You will be introduced to these flags throughout the rest of this chapter.

Permissions
When reviewing a UNIX application, you should ensure that reasonable permission
bits are initially chosen when a file or directory is created. If the file is created with
open(), creat(), or a special function such as mknod(), programmers will likely
specify an explicit file creation mode, which should be easy to spot-check. Keep in
mind that the creation mode specified will silently be combined with the process’s
umask value which was discussed previously. Although the functions mentioned
here use explicit file creation modes, you will see later on in “The Stdio File Inter-
face” that the standard C libraries provide file I/O APIs that implicitly determine
permissions—a much more dangerous programming model.

Forgetting O_EXCL
Creating a new file is easy to get wrong. Often when a developer writes code that is
intended to open a file, the same code can inadvertently open an existing file. This
kind of attack is possible because the open() function is responsible for both creat-
ing new files and opening existing ones. It will do one or the other depending on
which flags are present in the flags parameter. The O_CREAT flag indicates that
open() should create a new file if the requested file name doesn’t already exist.
Therefore, any invocation of open() that has the O_CREAT flag passed to it will
potentially create a new file, but also might just open an existing one if it is already
there (and the calling program has sufficient access to open it). When the O_EXCL
flag is used in conjunction with O_CREAT, the open() function will exclusively cre-
ate a new file. If the specified file name already exists, the open() function will fail.
So, if open() is called with O_CREAT but not O_EXCL, the system might open an
existing file instead of creating a new one. To see how this might be a problem, con-
sider the following example:

if ((fd=open(“/tmp/tmpfile.out”,
          O_RDWR|O_CREAT, 0600)) < 0)
          die(“open”);

...

    The code presented in the example creates a temporary file named /tmp/
tmpfile.out. However, because the O_EXCL flag isn’t specified, it is also possible
that this code opens a pre-existing file if /tmp/tmpfile.out already exists. You see
in “Race Conditions” later on in this chapter that attackers can use file sym-links to
exploit a problem like this to force an application to open sensitive system files.
    Also keep in mind that if a file is opened rather than created, the permissions
mask passed to open() is completely ignored. Returning to the previous code
snippet, if an application created the file /tmp/tmpfile.out with restrictive per-
missions as shown because it was going to store sensitive data in the file, any
user could access that data by creating a file of the same name first.

Unprivileged Owner
Applications that run with special privileges often relinquish some or all of their
privileges when performing potentially dangerous operations, such as creating or
opening files. In general, this approach is reasonable, but there are definitely some
pitfalls to watch out for.
      If the process creates a file or directory, it’s created as the lesser privileged user.
If it’s a setuid root program, and the attacker is the lesser privileged user, this can
have some serious consequences. Remember that if you own a file, you can change
its group ownership and permission bitmask. Because you control the permissions,
you can read, write, and truncate the file at will. Consider this code:
drop_privs();

if ((fd=open(“/usr/safe/account3/resultfile”,
                 O_RDWR | O_CREAT, 0600))<0)
      die(“open”);

regain_privs();
...

    This code is simple, but it shows what a file creation might look like in a privilege-
savvy setuid program. There may or may not be a security issue with this program; it
depends on what the program does with the file later. As it’s written, if the file isn’t

already on the file system, it’s created by the call to open(). It would be owned by
the attacker, who could then manipulate the file’s contents and permissions at will.
These actions could include changing file contents out from under the program as it
worked with the file, changing permissions to prevent the program from reopening
the file later, or just reading the content in the file.

Directory Safety
As discussed, a process that creates files needs to make sure it chooses an appropriate
set of permissions and an appropriate owner and group for the file. This is not an
application’s only concern, as directories containing the file are also key to the file’s
overall security.
      If the new files are created in a directory that’s writeable by an unprivileged
user, the program needs to be capable of dealing with attackers doing things such
as deleting files it creates, creating files with names that conflict with names the
program is using, and renaming files after the program creates them. You see some
examples of these attacks in “Links” and “Race Conditions” later in this chapter.
      If the directory is writeable by an attacker but is a sticky directory, the program is still
in dangerous territory, but it doesn’t need to worry about attackers renaming or deleting
its files after it successfully creates them. However, it can run into plenty of trouble when
creating these files, which you’ll also see in “Race Conditions” later in this chapter.
      If the containing directory is actually owned by the attacker, the program has a
different, yet equally serious, set of problems to worry about. An attacker who owns
the directory can change the file permissions and group ownership of the directory
to lock the process out or prevent it from doing certain actions at certain times.

Parent Directories
For a file to be safe, it isn’t enough for it to be created securely and be in a secure
directory. Every directory referenced in the filename has to be equally safe. For
example, say a program works with a file in this location: /tmp/mydir/safedir/
safefile. If safedir and safefile are secure and impervious to attack, but unprivi-
leged users have ownership or write access to mydir, they can simply rename or
remove the safedir entry and provide their own version of safedir and safefile. If
the program uses this pathname later, it refers to a completely different file. This is
why it’s important for every directory to be secure, starting at the file’s parent direc-
tory and going all the way up to the root directory.

Filenames and Paths
You already know about pathnames, but in this section you revisit them, focusing
on security-relevant details. A pathname is a sequence of one or more directory
components separated by the directory separator character, /. The pathname, like

any other C string, is terminated with the NUL character (\x00). A pathname tells
the kernel how to follow a path from a known directory location to a file or direc-
tory by traversing through the directory tree. For example, a pathname of /home/
jm/test tells the kernel it should start at the root directory (/), then go to the home
directory, then go to the jm directory, and then open the test file.
     The terminology for files and paths isn’t set in stone. Some sources separate a
pathname into two parts: a path and a filename. In this context, the path is every
directory component in the pathname except the last one, and it tells the kernel
how to get to the directory containing the requested file. The filename is the last
directory component, which is the name of the file in that directory. So the file ref-
erenced by the /home/jm/test pathname has a path of /home/jm/ and a filename of
test. In practice, however, most people use the terms “pathname” and “filename”
interchangeably. Usually, the term “path” indicates the directory containing a file,
but it’s also used when talking about any pathname that refers to a directory.
     There are two kinds of paths: absolute and relative. Absolute paths always start
with the / character, and they describe how to get from the root directory, which
has the name /, to another file or directory on the file system. Relative paths start
with any character other than / or NUL, and they tell the kernel how to get from the
process’s current working directory to the target.
     Every directory has two special entries: the . entry, which refers to the directory
itself, and the .. entry, which points to its parent directory. The root directory,
which has a name of /, has a special .. entry that points back to itself. Files can’t
contain the / character in their names, nor can they contain the NUL character, but
every other character is permitted. More than one slash character in a row in a path-
name is treated as just one slash, so the path /////usr////bin//// is the same as
/usr/bin. If the pathname refers to a directory, generally it can have any number of
trailing slashes because they’re effectively ignored.
     Say you have the pathname /usr/bin/find. Because it begins with a /, you know
that it’s an absolute path that tells the kernel how to get to the find program from the
root directory. /./////././usr/bin/../share/../bin/find is also an absolute path
that references the same file, although it does so in a more circuitous fashion. If the
currently running process has its current working directory set to the/usr/bin
directory, perhaps as a result of using chdir(“/usr/bin”), the relative pathname
find references the program, as does ./find or ../../../../../../usr/bin/find.
     It might seem strange, but every time you use a system call that takes a pathname,
the kernel goes through the process of stepping through each directory to locate the
file. For the kernel to follow a path, you must have search permissions on every
directory in that path. A lot of caching goes on to avoid a performance hit, but it’s
worth keeping that behavior in mind when you look at some of the attack vectors later
in this section.

Pathname Tricks
Many privileged applications construct pathnames dynamically, often incorporat-
ing user-malleable data. These applications often do sanity checking on constructed
filenames to ensure that they’re in a safe location or don’t contain any malicious
components. For example, imagine you have a privileged program that can be used
to parse special data files, but these data files can be located in only two directories.
The program contains the following code:
if (!strncmp(filename, “/usr/lib/safefiles/”, 19))
{
       debug(“data file is in /usr/lib/safefiles/”);
       process_libfile(filename, NEW_FORMAT);
}
else if (!strncmp(filename, “/usr/lib/oldfiles/”, 18))
{
       debug(“data file is in /usr/lib/oldfiles/”);
       process_libfile(filename, OLD_FORMAT);
}
else
{
       debug(“invalid data file location”);
       app_abort();
}

    Suppose this program takes the filename argument from users. The code tries
to ensure that the pathname points to a safe location by checking the filename’s
prefix to make sure it points to an appropriate directory in /usr/lib, for which
users shouldn’t have write access. Users could potentially bypass these checks by
providing a filename such as the following:
/usr/lib/safefiles/../../../../../../../../etc/shadow

     This filename would pass the filename check, yet still make the privileged appli-
cation open the shadow password file as its data file, which is likely to have
exploitable consequences.
     An old Linux version of tftpd had a vulnerability of this nature that a researcher
named Alex Belits discovered. The following code from tftpd is supposed to validate
a filename (taken from his original bugtraq post, archived at http://insecure.org/
sploits/linux.tftpd.dotdotbug.html):

          syslog(LOG_ERR, “tftpd: trying to get file: %s\n”,

                filename);

          if (*filename != ‘/’) {
                    syslog(LOG_ERR,
                     “tftpd: serving file from %s\n”, dirs[0]);
                    chdir(dirs[0]);
          } else {
                    for (dirp = dirs; *dirp; dirp++)
                              if (strncmp(filename,
                                    *dirp, strlen(*dirp)) == 0)
                                          break;
                    if (*dirp==0 && dirp!=dirs)
                              return (EACCESS);
          }
          /*
        * prevent tricksters from getting around the directory
➥ restrictions
           */
          for (cp = filename + 1; *cp; cp++)
                    if(*cp == ‘.’ && strncmp(cp-1, “/../”, 4) == 0)
                              return(EACCESS);

     If the filename’s first character is a slash, tftpd assumes the directory is an
absolute path and checks to make sure the initial directory matches up with one it
knows about. If the filename’s first character isn’t a slash, ttfpd assumes it’s a relative
pathname, referring to a file in the first predefined directory.
     The code then checks that the filename doesn’t contain any /../ sequences; if it
does, the filename is rejected as being an attack attempt. The problem is that if the
filename starts with the characters ../, it isn’t caught by the check, and remote users
can retrieve arbitrary files from the system by recursing out of the tftp directory,
which is usually /tftpd.

Embedded NUL
The NUL character terminates a pathname, as a pathname is just a C string. When
higher-level languages interact with the file system, however, they mostly use
counted strings and don’t use a NUL character to indicate string termination. Java,
PHP, Visual Basic, and Perl programs can often be manipulated by passing

filenames containing embedded NUL characters. The programming language views
these characters as part of the pathname, but the underlying OS views them as a
terminator. You delve into this pathname-related issue in Chapter 8, “Strings
and Metacharacters.”

Dangerous Places
The file system of a multiuser UNIX machine is much like a modern metropolis;
most neighborhoods are safe, assuming you don’t do anything stupid, but in a few
parts of town, even the police warn you not to stop at traffic lights. On a UNIX
machine, the “safe neighborhoods” are like gated communities: directories and files
that only you and your trusted friends have control over. “Doing something stupid”
would include creating new files and directories with insufficient permissions, the
digital equivalent of not locking your doors. It would also include asking potentially
malicious users for input on which files to process, which is akin to asking a thief to
help you find a good place to hide your money. The dangerous parts of town would
correspond to public directories that can be a bit scary on large multiuser boxes,
such as /tmp, /var/tmp/, and the mail spool directory.
      In general, an application can be fairly insulated from file-related vulnerabilities
if it stays within the safer parts of the file system. For example, if a program
interacts with the file system just to read static files owned by privileged users, such
as configuration files in /etc, it’s likely to be immune to tampering from malicious
third parties. If an application has to do more involved file system interaction, but it
works with files in a safe location and makes sure to create and manipulate new
files and directories safely, it’s still likely to be safe.
      Any time a program has to go beyond these simple use cases, it runs into potential
problems with malicious third parties manipulating the file system out from under it.
From this perspective, potentially vulnerable programs are those that have to interact
with files and directories in hostile locations on the file system. A hostile location is a
place where other users and programs can interfere with, manipulate, interrupt, or
hijack the use of files. The following locations are potentially hostile:
    ■ User-supplied locations—Any time a file or directory name is constructed based
      on user input, a potential risk emerges. Any daemon or setuid application that
      takes a filename as input from a user of lesser privilege or a network connec-
      tion has to be cautious in how it makes use of that filename. Users could easily
      point a process to a place in the file system where they have total control, and
      then pull off some subtle manipulation of files behind the program’s back.
    ■ New files and directories—A privileged process can work in a totally safe and
      protected location in the file system, but if it creates a new file or directory
      with overly lenient permissions, attackers might be able to manipulate it
      surreptitiously.

      ■ Temporary and public directories—Many applications make use of temporary
        files in public directories, and if they are used improperly, the applications are
        exposed to various attacks. Daemons and setuid applications are certainly
        susceptible to these problems, but unprivileged applications can also run into
        trouble. If a program running as a unprivileged user can be tricked into
        exposing that user’s files or privileges to other users on the system, it can
        result in a serious vulnerability.
      ■ Files controlled by other users—Some setuid applications work with files controlled
        by the unprivileged user who called the program, such as a configuration file in
        the user’s home directory. Many daemons make similar use of other users’ files,
        and some daemons even traverse portions of the file system periodically to
        perform maintenance tasks. Privileged programs have to be careful about how
        they interact with these user-controlled files.

Interesting Files
A typical UNIX system has several files and directories that are interesting to code
auditors because they contain secret information or configuration or control data
for privileged programs, encapsulate hardware or kernel objects, or have behaviors
or attributes that could be leveraged in an attack.
    When you’re auditing code, having a general knowledge of what exists on a
typical UNIX system is useful because this information can help you brainstorm
potential attacks. The files covered in the following section are by no means an
exhaustive list of potentially risky files, but they address some of the more
interesting places in the file system.

System Configuration Files
Configuration files in /etc/ are generally a good target for attackers. Certain
daemons, such as radius, OpenSSH, VPN daemons, and ntpd, might use shared
secrets or private keys to encrypt network communication. Attackers who can read
the configuration files containing these secrets might be able to launch an attack
against the service or its clients. In general, being able to write to configuration files
often leads to security exposures, and being able to corrupt or delete them often
disables a system. The following list describes some commonly targeted files and
explains the advantages attackers might gain from accessing them:
      ■ Authentication databases (/etc/passwd, /etc/shadow, /etc/master.passwd, /tcb/)—
       The shadow password file on a UNIX system typically contains a hashed form
       of passwords for each user. An unprivileged program being able to read the
       shadow password information can often lead to further compromise. Weakly
       constructed passwords can be discovered through a dictionary attack with the
       use of a password-cracking program, such as Solar Designer’s John the Ripper

      tool (www.openwall.com). Unpassworded accounts stick out in the shadow
      file because they are missing a hash. A program that can write to these files
      can typically grant itself root access. Manipulating or corrupting these files
      usually disables a machine until an administrator re-creates them.
    ■ Host equivalency (/etc/hosts.equiv, .rhosts, .shosts)—These files indicate which hosts
      and users can log in to the machine without authentication—that is, which hosts
      and users are considered to be trusted. Trust relationships are sometimes found
      in internal networks because they make administration and scripted tasks
      simpler. Note that ssh daemons honor these trust configurations if they are con-
      figured to do so. Attackers who discover these trust relationships can attempt to
      access trusted machines or even launch a network-level attack via IP spoofing
      (masquerading as being from a trusted IP address). Attacker who can write to
      these files can often gain root access by forcing the machine to trust them.
    ■ /etc/ld.preload.so—If attackers can write to certain shared libraries, they
      can potentially insert code that multiple programs on the machine run.
    ■ /etc/nologin, /etc/hosts.allow—Creating these files can effectively disable
      a system.

Personal User Files
Personal user files might also be of interest to attackers, because there are not only
sensitive files in a typical user’s directory, but also configuration files that are used by
various applications on the system. This list is a brief summary of some interesting
personal user files:
    ■ Shell histories (.sh_history, .ksh_history, .bash_history, .history)—Shell histories
      are files containing a log of each command users enter in their command
      shells. Attackers could use these files to observe the behavior of other users in
      an attempt to discover potential attack targets on the system or discover other
      systems users commonly log into.
    ■ Shell login and logout scripts (.profile, .bashrc, cshrc, .login)—These files run automat-
      ically when users log in or out. Attackers might be able to use these files to find
      potential attack targets on the system, such as programs with temporary file
      race conditions that are run by root at login. Of course, the ability to write to
      these files would represent an imminent threat, because the attacker could add
      arbitrary commands to the file that will be executed when the user next logs in.
    ■ Mail spools—Mail for system users is another target that could prove quite useful
      to attackers, as users often have sensitive and confidential information in their
      e-mail, and administrators discuss security issues, such as account credentials
      and existing vulnerabilities. The mail spool directory is often a mode 777 sticky
      directory, which is susceptible to manipulation by unprivileged attackers.

Program Configuration Files and Data
Program-specific configuration files and data can also be useful to attackers.
Reading configuration files might enable them to find weaknesses or sensitive
information that can be used to achieve a higher level of compromise. Modifying
file data usually has more immediate and drastic consequences, such as gaining
privileges of the application using the configuration file. The following list
describes some configuration and data files that would be of interest to
an attacker:
      ■ Web-related files—Web applications typically have static configuration files
        with database credentials inline. Any authentication mechanism that’s local
        to the Web server might use static files with password information, such as
        Apache’s .htpasswd file. Furthermore, because Web applications are often
        written in scripting languages, the source code might be valuable to attackers.
        Because the source gives them a detailed understanding of how the Web
        application works, they could use it to attempt to find a vulnerability in a Web
        service. Web applications are discussed in Chapters 17, “Web Applications,”
        and 18, “Web Technologies.”
      ■ SSH configuration files—The secure shell (SSH) program contains
        configuration files and parameters that can be used to compromise other
        users’ accounts if they can be read and modified. As noted previously,
        placing an .shosts file in a user’s directory allows you to log in as them
        without any credentials (if rhosts configuration options are enabled in the
        SSH server). Being able to read and modify sensitive key files can similarly
        lead to account compromises.
      ■ Temporary files—Temporary files are usually stored in a public directory such
        as /var/tmp or /tmp, which is usually a sticky directory that’s mode 777.

Log Files
Logs sometimes contain sensitive information, such as users’ passwords if they
mistakenly enter them at a username prompt. Editing logs allows attackers to cover
up evidence of any attack behavior. Log files are often in subdirectories of /var,
such as /var/log.

Program Files and Libraries
Being able to write over a program file or library can almost certainly lead to a privi-
lege escalation. For example, in a BSD system, the pwdb_mkdb program runs as
root when users modify their account information entry in the password file. Users
who can overwrite this binary could run arbitrary code in the context of the root
user. Similarly, if attackers can write over shared libraries, they can potentially
insert code that’s run by multiple programs across the machine.

Kernel and Boot Files
If attackers can write to the kernel file or files used in the booting process, they can
potentially insert or modify code that’s used the next time the machine is rebooted.

Device Files
As mentioned, device files look just like regular files available to users on the file
system, except they access devices rather than regular files. The device files present
on a UNIX system vary widely depending on the UNIX variant, but some common
ones are listed here:
    ■ Virtual device drivers—Denial-of-service conditions can often be caused by
      forcing a program to read a file of infinite size or a file that causes constant
      blocking. On UNIX systems, files such as /dev/zero, /dev/random, and
      /dev/urandom can be used to generate endless amounts of data, which can
      keep a process tied up parsing meaningless information or blocking.
    ■ Raw memory devices—Some systems contain raw memory devices that allow read-
      ing and writing directly to memory. Usually, a system contains a /dev/mem file,
      which provides access to physical memory available on the system. Being able to
      write to this file would result in a kernel-level compromise. Other memory files,
      such as /dev/kmem, also allow writing to virtual memory locations in the kernel.
    ■ Hardware device drivers—Hardware devices often have corresponding device
      files used to access the device in question. For example, a printer device might
      be accessible via /dev/lpX. Accessing hardware devices when a program
      intends to manipulate regular files usually results in the application ceasing to
      function correctly.
    ■ Terminal devices—Users interact with the shell through the use of terminal
      devices (or pseudo-terminal devices). They are usually named /dev/ttyX,
      /dev/ptyX, or something similar. Gaining access to these devices might allow
      attackers to read data from other users’ sessions or insert keystrokes in their
      session, thus assuming their privileges.

Named Pipes
Providing named pipes instead of regular files could be of interest to attackers, par-
ticularly for timing-based attacks (discussed in the IPC section in Chapter 10,
“UNIX II: Processes”). In addition, if an application opens a named pipe, it allows
the owner of the pipe to deliver the SIGPIPE signal, which could be used to perform
a signal-based attack. Signals are covered in depth in Chapter 13.

The Proc File System
Some UNIX OSs provide other interesting files in /proc that could be leveraged for
file-based attacks. For example, a daemon running as an unprivileged user has

permissions to read its own /proc/pid/mem file—a virtual file that can be used to
read and write to the current process’s memory. If the daemon is tricked into
reading this file and outputting the results, it could leak sensitive information to
users. Another useful file in the proc file system is the kcore file, which could be
used to read sensitive data in kernel memory.

File Internals
When you’re studying complex file vulnerabilities, such as race conditions and link-
ing attacks, having a basic grasp of UNIX file internals is useful. Naturally, UNIX
implementations differ quite a bit under the hood, but this explanation takes a gen-
eral approach that should encompass the major features of all implementations.
This discussion doesn’t line up 100% with a particular UNIX implementation, but it
should cover the concepts that are useful for analyzing file system code.

File Descriptors
UNIX provides a consistent, file-based interface that processes can use to work
with a fairly disparate set of system resources. These resources include files,
hardware devices, special virtual devices, network sockets, and IPC mechanisms.
The uniformity of this file-based interface and the means by which it’s supported
in the kernel provide a flexible and interoperable system. For example, the code
used to talk with a peer over a named pipe could be used to interact with a net-
work socket or interact with a program file, and retargeting would involve little to
no modification.
     For every process, the UNIX kernel keeps a list of its open files, known as the
file descriptor table. This table contains pointers to data structures (discussed in
more detail in Chapter 10) in the kernel that encapsulate these system resources. A
process generally opens a normal, disk-backed file by calling open() and passing a
pathname to open. The kernel resolves the pathname into a specific file on the disk
and then loads the necessary file data structures into memory, reading some
information from disk. The file is added to the file descriptor table, and the posi-
tion, or index, of the new entry in the file descriptor table is handed back to the
process. This index is the file descriptor, which serves as a unique numeric token
the process can use to refer to the file in future system calls.
     Figure 9-3 shows a file descriptor table for a simple daemon. File descriptors 0,
1, and 2, which correspond to standard input, standard output, and standard error,
respectively, are backed by the device driver for the /dev/null file, which simply
discards anything it receives. File descriptor 3 refers to a configuration file the pro-
gram opened, named /etc/config. File descriptor 4 is a TCP network connection to
the 1.2.3.4 machine’s Web server.

                                                File Internals

                                                   File Descriptor Table
          Resources
                                                       Process 1000

 Device Driver: /dev/null                      0: Standard Input

                                               1: Standard Output

                                               2: Standard Error
 File: /etc/config
                                               3: Config File

                                               4: Network Connection

 Socket: 1.2.3.4 port 80

Figure 9-3    Simplified view of a file descriptor table

     File descriptors are typically closed when a process exits or calls close() on a
file descriptor. A process can mark certain file descriptors as close-on-exec, which
means they are automatically closed if the process executes another program.
Descriptors that aren’t marked close-on-exec persist when the new program runs,
which has some security-related consequences addressed in Chapter 10. File
descriptors are duplicated automatically when a process uses a fork(), and a
process can explicitly duplicate them with a dup2() or fcntl() system call.

Inodes
The details of how file attributes are stored are up to the file system code, but UNIX
has a data structure it expects the file system to be able to fill out from its backing
data store. For each file, UNIX expects an information node (inode) that the file sys-
tem can present. In the more straightforward, classic UNIX file systems, inodes are
actual data structures existing in physical blocks on the disk. In modern file systems,
they aren’t quite as straightforward, but the kernel still uses the concept of an inode to
track all information for a file, regardless of how that information is ultimately stored.
    So what’s in an inode? Inodes have an inode number, which is unique in the file
system. Every file system mounted on a UNIX machine has a unique device number.
Therefore, every file on a UNIX system can be uniquely identified by the combina-
tion of its device number and its inode number. Inodes contain a file type field that
can indicate the file is an ordinary file, a character device, a block device, a UNIX
domain socket, a named pipe, or a symbolic link. Inodes also contain the owner ID,
group ID, and file permission bits for the file as well as the file size in bytes; access,
modification, and inode timestamps; and the number of links to the file.
    The term “inode” can be confusing, because it refers to two different things:
an inode data structure stored on a disk and an inode data structure the kernel

keeps in memory. The inode data structure on the disk contains the aforemen-
tioned file attributes as well as pointers to data blocks for the file on the disk.
The inode data structure in kernel memory contains all the disk inode informa-
tion as well as additional attributes and data and pointers to associated kernel
functions for working with the file. When the kernel opens a file, it creates an
inode data structure and asks the underlying file system driver to fill it out. The
file system code might read in an inode from the disk and fill out the kernel’s
inode data structure with the retrieved information, or it could do something
completely different. The important thing is that for the kernel, each file is
manipulated, tracked, and maintained through an inode.
     Inodes are organized and cached so that the kernel and file system can access
them quickly. The kernel primarily deals with files using inodes rather than file-
names. When a process makes a system call that has a pathname argument, the
kernel resolves the pathname into an inode, and then performs the requested
operation on the inode. This explanation is a bit oversimplified, but it’s enough
for the purposes of this discussion. Anyway, when a file is opened and stored in
the file descriptor table, what’s placed there is a pointer to a chain of data struc-
tures that eventually leads to the inode data structure associated with the file.

        Note
        Chapter 10 explains the data structures involved in associating the
        file descriptor table with an inode data structure. These constructs
        are important for understanding how files and file descriptors are
        shared among processes, but you can set them aside for now.

Directories
A directory’s contents are simply the list of files the directory contains. Each item in
the list is called a directory entry, and each entry contains two things: a name and
an inode number. You might have noticed that the filename isn’t stored in the file
inode, so it’s not kept on the file system as a file attribute. This is because filenames
are only instructions that tell the kernel how to walk through directory entries to
retrieve an inode number for a file.
    For example, specifying the filename /tmp/testing/test.txt tells the kernel to
start with the root directory inode, open it, and read the directory entry with the
name tmp. This information gives the kernel an inode number that corresponds to
the tmp directory. The kernel opens that inode and reads the entry with the name
testing. This information gives the kernel an inode number for the testing direc-
tory. The kernel then opens this inode and reads the directory entry with the name

test.txt. The inode number the kernel gets is the inode of the file, which is all that
the kernel needs for operating on the file.
    Figure 9-4 shows a simple directory hierarchy. Each box represents an inode. The
directory inodes have a list of directory entries below them, and each ordinary file
inode contains its file contents below its attributes. The figure shows the following
simple directory hierarchy:
fred.txt
jim/
          bob.txt

     The leftmost inode is a directory containing the fred.txt file and the jim
directory. You don’t know this directory’s name because you have to see its parent
directory to learn that. It has an inode number of 1000. The jim directory has an
inode of 700, and you can see that it has only one file, bob.txt.
     If a process has a current directory of the directory in inode 1000, and you call
open(“jim/bob.txt”, O_RDWR), the kernel translates the pathname by reading the
directory entries. First, the directory at inode 1000 is opened, and the directory
entry for jim is read. The kernel then opens the jim directory at inode 700 and
reads the directory entry for bob.txt, which is 900. The kernel then opens bob.txt
at inode 900, loads it into memory, and associates it with an entry in the file
descriptor table.

Links
UNIX provides two mechanisms for users to link files—hard links and soft links.Hard
links allow users to create a single file with multiple names that can be located in dif-
ferent directories. Symbolic links allow users to create a special file that points to a file
or directory in a different location. Attackers have used both mechanisms to subvert
file system interaction code, so you examine them in detail in the following sections.

Symbolic Links
Symbolic links, also known as symlinks or soft links, allow users to create a file or
directory that points to another file or directory. For example, an administrator can
make a symbolic link called /home that points to the /mnt/disks/disk3a/ directory.
Users could then work with files in their home directories in /home/, and everything
would be redirected behind the scenes to the disk3a directory. Similarly, a user could
make a symbolic link named computers in his home directory that points to the system
file /etc/hosts. If the user opens computers for reading, he is actually opening the
/etc/hosts file, but it would appear as though the file is in the user’s home directory.

516

                            inode 1000
                          type: directory
                           Perms: 0755
                            Owner: bin
                             Group: bin               inode 500                  inode 900
                                                       type: file                 type: file
                                                     Perms: 0666                Perms: 0666
                   .                    1000         Owner: admin               Owner: bob
                                                     Group: admin               Group: bob
                   ..                    200

                   fred.txt              500        This is a test file.    This is bob’s test file.

                                                                                                       Chapter 9—UNIX I: Privileges and Files
                   jim                   700

                                                       inode 700
                                                     type: directory
                                                      Perms: 0755
                                                       Owner: bin
                                                       Group: bin

                                               .                      700

                                               ..                    1000

                                               bob.txt                900

Figure 9-4        Directories at play

    Symbolic links, created with the symlink() system call, are actually special
small files placed in the file system. Their inodes are marked as a type symbolic
link, and their actual file contents are a file path. When the kernel is resolving a
pathname, if it encounters a symbolic link file, it reads in the file path in the sym-
bolic link, follows the symlink’s file path until it’s complete, and then resumes its
original path traversal. The file path in the symlink can be an arbitrary pathname,
as long as it’s valid enough to get the kernel to a destination.
    Figure 9-5 shows what soft links look like at the directory entry level. In this fig-
ure, you have two directories. The name of the top directory isn’t visible in the dia-
gram, but assume it’s thatdir. Say you’re in the bottom directory, inode 1100, and
you open the test.txt file. It has the inode 1300, and you can see it’s a symbolic
link inode. The kernel automatically opens the symbolic link file at inode 1300 and
reads in the file path ../thatdir/fred.txt. The kernel opens ../ and goes back to
inode 200. It then opens thatdir and enters inode 1000 (the top directory). It looks
up fred.txt and goes to inode 500, which is the text file.

                        inode 1000
                      type: directory
                       Perms: 0755
                        Owner: bin
                         Group: bin

             .                          1000

             ..                         200                     inode 500
                                                                 type: file
             fred.txt                   500                   Perms: 0666
                                                              Owner: admin
                                                              Group: admin
                                                              Link Count: 2

                                                       This is a test file.
                        inode 1100
                      type: directory
                       Perms: 0755
                        Owner: bin
                         Group: bin
                                                                inode 1300
                                        1100                   type: symlink
             .

             ..                         200

             test.txt                   1300           ../thatdir/fred.txt

Figure 9-5        Symbolic link diagram

Symlink Syscalls
Because symbolic links are actually files on the file system, system calls can react to
their presence in two ways. Some system calls follow symbolic links automatically,
and others operate on the special symbolic link file. The following calls have
symlink-aware semantics:
      ■ If unlink() is provided a file that’s a symbolic link, it deletes the symbolic
        link, not the target.
      ■ If lstat() is provided a file that’s a symbolic link, it returns the information
        about the symbolic link, not about its target.
      ■ If lchown() is provided a file that’s a symbolic link, it changes the user and
        group of the symbolic link file, not the target.
      ■ readlink() is used to read the contents of the symbolic link file specified in
        its argument.
      ■ If rename() has a from argument that’s a symbolic link, the symbolic link file
        is renamed, not its target. If rename() has a to argument that’s a symbolic
        link, the symbolic link file is overwritten, not its target.

Symbolic Link Attacks
Symbolic links can be used to coerce privileged programs into opening sensitive files.
For example, consider a privileged program that reads an optional configuration file
from a user’s home directory. It has the following code:
void start_processing(char *username)
{
      char *homedir;
      char tmpbuf[PATH_MAX];
      int f;
      homedir=get_users_homedir(username);
      if (homedir)
      {
          snprintf(tmpbuf, sizeof(tmpbuf),
                “%s/.optconfig”, homedir);
            if ((f=open(tmpbuf, O_RDONLY))>=0)
            {
                parse_opt_file(tmpbuf);
                close(f);
            }
            free(homedir);
      }
      ...

      This code looks in a user’s home directory to see whether that user has a
.optconfig file. If the file is present, the program opens that file and reads in
optional configuration entries. You might think this behavior is safe as long as the
file-parsing capabilities of parse_opt_file() are safe, but this is where link
attacks can come into play. If attackers issue a command like the following:
$ ln -s /etc/shadow ~/.optconfig

    They would create a symbolic link to the shadow password file in their home
directory named .optconfig. The privileged program could then be tricked into
opening and parsing the shadow password file, which could lead to a security vul-
nerability if it exposes secret hash information.
    Some older UNIX variants had a symbolic link problem with their core-
dumping functionality. In UNIX, if a program crashes, the kernel can write the con-
tents of that program’s memory to a core file on the file system. This file is useful
for debugging program crashes. In HPUX, Digital Unix, and probably a few other
older systems, the kernel follows symbolic links when creating this core file. A nor-
mal user could, therefore, create a symbolic link to an important file, run a setuid
root program, and crash it somehow, and then the kernel would write a memory
dump over the important file. The attack would look something like this:
$ export SOMEVAR=”
+ +
“
$ ln -s ~root/.rhosts core
$ ./runandcrashsuid.sh
$ rsh 127.0.0.1 -l root /bin/sh -i
#

    The environment variable SOMEVARcontains the string + + on its own line, which
would end up in the memory dump. The memory dump would replace root’s
.rhosts file, which specifies which hosts and users are allowed to log in as root on
the machine without authenticating. The remote shell daemon interprets the + +
line as indicating that any user from any machine is allowed to log in to the host as
root. Users would then be allowed to start a shell on the machine as root.

Creation and Symlinks
The open() system call has an interesting nuance when creating files that end in
symbolic links. Say you have this empty directory:
/home/jim/test

      Then you add a symbolic link to this directory:

$ ln -s /tmp/blahblah /home/jim/test/newfile

    This command creates a symbolic link at /home/jim/test/newfile that points
to /tmp/blahblah. For now, assume the /tmp/blahblah file doesn’t exist on the file
system. Now try to create a file with open(), using the following call:
open(“/home/jim/test/newfile”, O_RDWR|O_CREAT, 0666);

      You’re telling open() that it should open a file for reading and writing, creating
it if necessary from the location /home/jim/test/newfile. That location is a sym-
bolic link pointing to /tmp/blahblah. The open() function actually creates a new
file in /tmp/blahblah!
      This behavior has interesting consequences from a security perspective. Code that
has file creation semantics when it opens a file can be tricked into creating files any-
where on the file system if you can get a symbolic link in the right place. To prevent this
behavior, application developers can specify the O_EXCL flag along with the O_CREAT
flag, which indicates that the open() call must create a unique file (not return an already
existing file) and prevents open() from dereferencing symbolic links in the last compo-
nent. Another flag to open(), O_NOFOLLOW, also makes sure that open() doesn’t follow a
symbolic link if it’s the last component of the specified filename, but it can be used
when the program allows opening an existing file as long as it isn’t a symbolic link.

         Note
         The O_NOFOLLOW flag isn’t a portable solution that developers can
         use; it’s a FreeBSD extension that’s now supported by Linux, too (as
         of version 2.1.126). When you’re auditing an application that relies
         on this flag to provide security, remember that some target plat-
         forms might ignore it.

Accidental Creation
In some situations, the mere creation of a file can be an undesired behavior, even
if it’s not malleable by unprivileged users. If an application uses a fopen() call
with a writeable mode, it uses open() with an O_CREAT flag, and the kernel
creates the requested file. Keep this in mind when you see custom-created
protections for file attacks; developers might inadvertently use an open() that’s
capable of creating a file as part of the initial security check. Either situation
could create a file in the file system that hampers the system’s functionality, such
as /etc/nologin. The presence of the /etc/nologin file prohibits any non-root
users from logging in to the system. Similarly, if an empty /etc/hosts.allow file
is created, all TCP-wrapped services deny incoming connections.

Attacking Symlink Syscalls
It’s essential to understand that although the unlink(), lstat(), lchown(), read-
link(), and rename() functions operate on a symbolic link file instead of following
it to its target file, these functions do follow symbolic links for every path compo-
nent except the last one. To understand this concept, imagine you have the follow-
ing files in your current directory:
drwx------         2 jm      jm                  96 Dec 31 09:06 ./
drwx------         3 jm      jm                  72 Dec 31 09:05 ../
-rw------          1 jm      jm                   0 Dec 31 09:06 testfile
lrwxrwxrwx         1 jm      jm                   8 Dec 31 09:06

 testlink -> testfile

   If you use unlink(“testlink”), it should end up deleting the symbolic link file
testlink instead of the target, testfile. As you can see in the following code,
that’s exactly what happened:
drwx------         2 jm      jm                  72 Dec 31 09:09 ./
drwx------         3 jm      jm                  72 Dec 31 09:05 ../
-rw------          1 jm      jm                   0 Dec 31 09:06 testfile

    This behavior is what you’d expect from the five system calls listed previously.
Now take a look at how they do follow symbolic links. Assume you restore the
directory to the way it was and also add one more symbolic link:
drwx-------        2 jm      jm                 128 Dec 31 09:14 ./
drwx------         3 jm      jm                  72 Dec 31 09:05 ../
lrwxrwxrwx         1 jm      jm                   1 Dec 31 09:12
testdirlink -> ./
-rw-------         1 jm      jm                   0 Dec 31 09:06 testfile
lrwxrwxrwx         1 jm      jm                   8 Dec 31 09:14

testlink -> testfile

    If you use unlink(“testdirlink/testlink”), you end up with the following:
drwx------         2 jm      jm                 104 Dec 31 09:16 ./
drwx------         3 jm      jm                  72 Dec 31 09:05 ../
lrwxrwxrwx         1 jm      jm                   1 Dec 31 09:12 testdirlink ->
./
-rw------          1 jm      jm                   0 Dec 31 09:06 testfile

    What happens is that unlink() follows the symbolic link testdirlink and then
deletes the symbolic link testlink. The symlink-aware system calls still follow
symbolic links; however, they don’t follow the last component if it’s a symbolic link.
Attackers can still play games with these system calls, but they must use symbolic
links in the paths of file arguments they provide.

Hard Links
Hard links allow users to create multiple filenames on a file system that all refer to
the same underlying file. For example, on one particular OpenBSD machine, the
/usr/bin/chfn, /usr/bin/chpass, and /usr/bin/chsh files refer to the same pro-
gram file, located on the disk at inode 24576. This chpass/chfn/chsh program is
written so that it looks at what name it runs as and changes its behavior accord-
ingly. This way, the same binary works as expected regardless of whether the the
user ran it using the chpass command, the chfn command, or the chsh command.
    A hard link is created when you add a new directory entry that points to an
already existing file by using the link() system call. Basically, what you’re doing is
creating multiple directory entries that all point to the same underlying inode.
Every time you add a new link to an existing inode, that inode’s link count goes up.
Using the previous example, the link count of inode 24576, the chpass/chfn/chsh
program file, is three because three directory entries reference it.
    Figure 9-6 shows what a hard link looks like in actual directory files. You have two
directories on the left, one with an inode of 1000 and one with an inode of 1100. The
top directory has a file named fred.txt that points to inode 500. The bottom directory
has a file named test.txt that also points to inode 500. You could say that fred.txt is
a hard link to test.txt, or vice versa, as they both reference the same underlying file.
    Inode 500 has a link count attribute of two, meaning two directory entries refer
to the file. Every time a new hard link is created, the link count is incremented. If a
user deletes fred.txt or test.txt, the link count is decremented by one. The inode
isn’t released until all relevant names are removed, reducing the link count to zero,
and all processes have closed any open file descriptors referencing inode 500.
    Hard links appear to be separate files, with separate pathnames, but they refer to
the same underlying inode. So if a file has multiple hard links, and the permissions or
ownership IDs change for one of them, all the other hard links reflect those changes.
    Hard links don’t work across file systems because a directory entry can’t point to
an inode on an different file system; this limitation makes hard links less flexible on
UNIX systems that have several mounted partitions. Another limitation is that normal
users are allowed to create hard links only to files, not to directories, because creating
infinite loops in the directory tree is quite simple, so you don’t want normal users to
have this capability. Therefore, creating directory hard links is a privilege reserved for
the superuser. You can create infinite loops with symbolic links, too, but the kernel
has code to detect whether this has occurred and return an appropriate error.

                       inode 1000
                     type: directory
                      Perms: 0755
                       Owner: bin
                        Group: bin

          -                            1000

             --                        200               inode 500
                                                          type: file
          fred.txt                     500
                                                       Perms: 0666
                                                       Owner: admin
                                                       Group: admin
                                                       Link Count: 2

                                                  This is a test file.
                       inode 1100
                     type: directory
                      Perms: 0755
                       Owner: bin
                        Group: bin

          -                            1100

             --                        200

          test.txt                     500

Figure 9-6        Hard links

Attacks
From a security perspective, the critical feature of hard links is that you can create
links to various files without needing any particular privileges, which could lead to
possible security problems. For example, say you want to write exploits for certain
setuid binaries on a system, but you’re concerned that the administrator might delete
them. You don’t have the permissions necessary to copy them, but you could create
hard links to those binaries in a directory you have control over. If the administrator
deletes the binaries later, your hard links still refer to them, and you might still have
time to construct an attack.
    This technique might also prove useful when you want to prevent a program
from deleting a file. You could create a hard link to that file that would still be pres-
ent after the program attempts to delete the original file. You don’t need any special
permissions or ownership on that file to create the link, either.
    Another thing to note about hard links: If you create a hard link to a file you
don’t own in a sticky directory, you can’t delete the hard link because the sticky

semantics prevent you from unlinking a file that isn’t yours. This might prove useful
when mounting sophisticated file-based attacks against a privileged application.

Sensitive Files
Hard links can be quite useful in launching attacks against privileged processes. They
are more limited in utility than soft links, but they can come in handy sometimes. They
are most useful when privileged processes open existing files and modify their content
or change their ownership or permission. Take a look at this simple code excerpt:
      fd = open(“/home/jm/.conf”, O_RDWR);
      if (fd<0)
            die(“open”);
      write(fd, userbuf, userlen);

    Assume this code runs in a setuid root application with effective root privileges.
It opens the /home/jm/.conf file, if it exists, and writes some data to it. Assume the
.conf file is in your home directory and you have total control over it. Assume you
can control some data that gets written in the call to write(), and your home direc-
tory is in the same file system as the /etc file system.
    Exploiting this code with a hard link would be quite straightforward. You’d simply
do something like this:
$ cd /home/jm
$ ln /etc/passwd .conf
$ runprog
$ su evil
#

     First, you create a hard link so that the.conf file is linked to the /etc/passwd
authentication file. Then you run the vulnerable program, which opens the file for
writing as root. It writes out some information you control to the password file,
which adds a new root account with no password. You then use su to switch to that
account and claim root access.
     In general, this kind of attack can be useful if the privileged application reads from
a file without first relinquishing its privileges. If the application opens a file that’s
really a hard link to a critical system file, such as /etc/shadow, you can probably elicit
an error message that might expose some secret information.
     Remember that permission and ownership changes affect the underlying inode
of a hard link, so you should also check for code that might alter a privileged file’s
permissions. Take a look at the following code:

     fd = open(“/home/jm/.conf”, O_RDWR);
     if (fd<0)
           die(“open”);

     fchmod(fd, 644);
     exit(1);

    In this code, the /home/jm/.conf file is opened, and then permissions are set to
644. One possible attack is linking the pathname being opened with some other file
that has tight permissions, such as /etc/shadow. If you create a hard link to /etc/
shadow, and the code changes its permissions from 0600 to 0644, every user on the sys-
tem could read the authentication database.

Circumventing Symbolic Link Prevention
In general, soft link attacks are more flexible and powerful. However, because spe-
cial API calls deal with symbolic links, and symbolic link attacks have been widely
published, developers are far more likely to prevent symbolic link attacks than hard
link attacks.
     In general, developers can use the lstat() function to analyze a file and deter-
mine whether it’s a symbolic link. Note that lstat() can’t distinguish between a
hard link to a regular file and a regular file because a hard link is a legitimate direc-
tory entry. The only clue applications can use to test for hard links is to check the
link count resulting from a stat(), lstat(), or fstat() function.
     Here’s an example of code that’s vulnerable to a hard link attack (if it were
being run in a privileged context):
     if (lstat(fname, &stb1) != 0)
           die(“file not there”);

     if (!S_ISREG(stbl.st_mode))
           die(“it’s not a regular file - maybe a symlink”);

     fd = open(fname, O_RDONLY);

    This code uses the lstat() function to make sure the provided file isn’t a sym-
bolic link. If it’s a symbolic link, it doesn’t pass the S_ISREG test (explained in “The
stat() Family of Functions” later in this chapter). A hard link works just fine, however,
causing this program to read the contents of whatever fname is hard-linked to. (Note
that this code is also vulnerable to race conditions, discussed in the next section.)

Race Conditions
UNIX applications have to be very careful when interacting with the file system,
because of the danger of race conditions. Race conditions, in general, are situations
in which two different parties simultaneously try to operate on the same resource
with deleterious consequences. In the context of security flaws, attackers try to
manipulate the resource out from underneath the victim. For UNIX file system code,
these issues usually occur when you have a process that gets preempted or enters a
blocking system call at an inopportune moment. This inopportune moment is typi-
cally somewhere in the middle of a sensitive multiple-step operation involving file
and directory manipulation. If another process wins the race and gets scheduled at
the right time in the middle of this “window of inopportunity,” it can often subvert a
vulnerable nonatomic sequence of file operations and wrest privileges from the
application. Listing 9-3 shows an example.
Listing 9-3
Race Condition in access() and open()
res = access(“/tmp/userfile”, R_OK);
if (res!=0)
    die(“access”);

/* ok, we can read from /tmp/userfile */
fd = open(“/tmp/userfile”, O_RDONLY);
...

    This code represents a setuid root program opening the /tmp/userfile file,
which can be controlled by users. It uses the access() function to make sure users
running the program have permission to read from the /tmp/userfile file.
access() is specially designed for setuid programs; it performs the privilege check
by using the process’s real user ID rather than the effective user ID. For a setuid root
program, this is typically the user that ran the executable. If users don’t have per-
mission to read /tmp/userfile, the program exits. This call to access() protects
the program from following a symbolic link at /tmp/userfile and opening a sensi-
tive file or from opening a hard link to a sensitive file.
    The problem is that attackers can alter /tmp/userfile after the access() check
but before opening the file. Figure 9-7 outlines this attack. Say attackers create an
innocuous regular file named /tmp/userfile. They let the preceding code do its
access check and come back with a clean result. Then the process gets swapped out,
and a process controlled by attackers runs. This evil process can unlink /tmp/user-
file and replace it with a symbolic link to /etc/shadow. When the privileged pro-
gram resumes, it does open(“/tmp/userfile”, O_RDONLY), which causes it to follow
the symbolic link to /etc/shadow. The privileged program then reads in the shadow
password file, which likely leads to an exposure of sensitive information later on.

                                               Race Conditions

         Auditing Tip
         The access() function usually indicates a race condition because
         the file it checks can often be altered before it’s actually used. The
         stat() function has a similar problem.

TOCTOU
The concept of exploiting the discrepancy between a security check on a resource and
the use of a resource is known as a time of check to time of use (TOCTOU or
TOCTTOU) issue. This concept doesn’t apply to just file manipulation. Any time that
the state of a resource can change in between when an access check is done and when
an action is performed on it creates an opportunity for TOCTOU attacks. If you refer
to Figure 9-7, you can see the time of check and time of use labeled for clarity.

Attacker creates
  /tmp/userfile

                        Program checks
                     access(“/tmp/userfile”);               Time of Check
                           Succeeds

 Attacker unlinks
  /tmp/userfile

Attacker creates
      symlink
 /tmp/userfile->
   /etc/shadow

                         Program does
                      open(“/tmp/userfile”);                Time of Use
                           Succeeds

                          Program uses
                          /etc/shadow

Figure 9-7   Program flow for Listing 9-3

    It might seem unrealistic that a program could get swapped out at the exact
moment for attackers to take advantage of this “window of inopportunity.” Remember
that attackers are determined and resourceful, and it’s usually safe to bet they can find
some way to exploit even an improbable vulnerability. In the scenario depicted in

Figure 9-7, attackers could take action in the background to try to slow down the sys-
tem, such as a network-intensive flood of data or heavy use of the file system. They
could also send job control signals to the setuid root program that is performing the
potentially dangerous file operations to stop and start it constantly in a tight loop.
Depending on the file system, they might be able to watch for access times on files that
are being updated or even watch the progress of the setuid program through system-
specific interfaces. There’s plenty of system-specific functionality that can be leveraged
with some creativity. For example, Linux 2.4 and later has a flag that can be used with
the fcntl() function, F_NOTIFY, that causes a signal to be delivered to your program
when certain actions occur in a directory. Several advanced race condition exploits for
Linux make use of this flag.

The stat() Family of Functions
Many of the TOCTOU examples you encounter feature the use of stat() or one of
its variations. These functions are designed to give the caller extensive information
about a file. The three primary functions that return this information are stat(),
lstat(), and fstat(). The stat() function has the following prototype:

int stat(const char *pathname, struct stat *buf);

     The pathname parameter specifies the file to be checked and the buf parameter
points to a structure that’s filled in with file information. lstat() works similarly,
except, as noted in “Symbolic Links,” if pathname is a symbolic link, information is
returned about the link rather than the link’s target. Finally, there is fstat(), which
takes a file descriptor rather than a pathname. Of these functions, fstat() is the
most resilient function in terms of race conditions, as it’s operating on an previ-
ously opened file.
     The information returned in the stat structure includes most of the statistics about
a file that might be useful to developers. Information returned includes, but is not lim-
ited to, the owner of the file, the owning group of the file, the number of hard links to
the file, and the type of the file. By examining the type of the file, it is possible to use
these functions to determine whether a file is really a regular file, a link file, a device
file, and so on. The following macros are defined for testing the file type:
      ■ S_ISREG—tests if the file is a regular file.

      ■ S_ISDIR—tests if the file is a directory.

      ■ S_ISCHR—tests if the file is a character device.

      ■ S_ISBLK—tests if the file is a block device.

      ■ S_ISFIFO—tests if the file is a named pipe.

      ■ S_ISLNK—tests if the file is a symbolic link.

      ■ S_ISSOCK—tests if the file is a socket.

                                       Race Conditions

      As you have probably guessed, a standard method for protecting against link-
based attacks is to use lstat() on a requested filename and either explicitly check
if it’s a link, or check if it’s a regular file and fail if it is not.
      Say a privileged program wants to work with a file but wants to make sure it
isn’t going to be tricked into following a symbolic link. Listing 9-4 shows some code
from the Kerberos 4 library that’s used by a kerberized login daemon.
Listing 9-4
Race Condition from Kerberos 4 in lstat() and open()
      errno = 0;
      if (lstat(file, &statb) < 0)
         goto out;

    if (!(statb.st_mode & S_IFREG)
#ifdef notdef
      || statb.st_mode & 077
#endif
      )
       goto out;

      if ((fd = open(file, O_RDWR|O_SYNC, 0)) < 0)
         goto out;

    This code uses lstat() to check whether the file is a symbolic link. If it isn’t,
the program knows it’s safe to open the file. However, what happens if attackers
replace the file with a symbolic link after the lstat() call but before the open()
call? It causes a TOCTOU situation. The potential attack is shown in Figure 9-8. In
this vulnerability, attackers are able to overwrite arbitrary files as root when the ker-
berized login daemon creates new tickets. (Note that this code is also vulnerable to
a hard link attack because it doesn’t check the link count lstat() returns.)
    Note that it’s possible to have a race condition if you do things in the opposite
order, with the check coming after the use, as shown in Listing 9-5.
Listing 9-5
Race Condition in open() and lstat()
      fd = open(fname, O_RDONLY);
      if (fd==-1)
          perror(“open”);

      if (lstat(fname, &stb1) != 0)
          die(“file not there”);

      if (!S_ISREG(stbl.st_mode))
          die(“its a symlink”);
...

Attacker creates
  /tmp/userfile
   Regular File

                        Program checks
                     access(“/tmp/userfile”);             Time of Check
                       shows a regular file
                           Succeeds
 Attacker unlinks
  /tmp/userfile

Attacker creates
      symlink
 /tmp/userfile->
   /etc/shadow

                          Program does
                       open(“/tmp/userfile”);             Time of Use
                            Succeeds

                          Program uses
                          /etc/shadow

Figure 9-8   Program flow for Listing 9-4

     It might seem as though this program isn’t susceptible to a race condition because
it opens the file first, and then checks whether it’s valid. However, it suffers from a
similar problem. Attackers can create the malicious symbolic link the program opens,
and then delete or rename that symbolic link and create a normal file with the same
name. If they get the timing right, lstat() operates on the normal file, and the security
check is passed. The kernel doesn’t care if the file that fd indexes has been deleted or
renamed. As long as the file descriptor is kept open, the file and its corresponding
inode in the file system stay available. This process is shown in Figure 9-9.
     Here’s another example of a race condition from an old version of the SunOS
binmail program, discovered by a rather clever hacker group known as “8 Little
Green Men,” or 8lgm for short. Binmail runs as root and is used to deliver mail to
local users on the system. This local mail delivery is performed by opening the
user’s mail spool file in a public sticky directory and appending the new mail to that
file. The following code is used to open the mail spool file:
      if (!(created = lstat(path, &sb)) &&
             (sb.st_nlink != 1 || S_ISLNK(sb.st_mode))) {
             err(NOTFATAL, “%s: linked file”, path);
             return(1);

                                                 Race Conditions

     }
     if ((mbfd = open(path, O_APPEND|O_WRONLY|O_EXLOCK,
             S_IRUSR|S_IWUSR)) < 0) {
             if ((mbfd = open(path, O_APPEND|O_CREAT|O_WRONLY|O_EXLOCK,
                    S_IRUSR|S_IWUSR)) < 0) {
                    err(NOTFATAL, “%s: %s”, path, strerror(errno));
                    return(1);
             }
     }

 Attacker creates
      symlink
 /tmp/userfile–>
   /etc/shadow
                          Program does
                       open(“/tmp/userfile”);                 Time of Use
                            Succeeds

 Attacker unlinks
  /tmp/userfile

 Attacker creates
   /tmp/userfile
    Regular File

                          Program checks
                       lstat(“/tmp/userfile”);               Time of Check
                        shows a regular file
                              Succeeds
                          Program uses
                          /etc/shadow

Figure 9-9   Program flow for Listing 9-5

     This program first checks to see whether the mail spool is a symbolic link or a hard
link by performing an lstat(). If the file doesn’t exist or looks like a normal file,
binmail attempts to open the file for appending. If the open fails, binmail attempts to
open the file again, but it tells the OS to create the file if it doesn’t exist. The problem is
the race condition between the lstat() call and the open() call. Attackers can place an
innocuous file there or delete the mail spool, wait for the lstat() to occur, and then
place a symbolic link or hard link pointing to a sensitive file. The mail sent to that user
is appended to the sensitive file, if it exists; if it doesn’t, it’s created as root and written
to. Furthermore, a symbolic link pointing to a target file that isn’t present can be used

to have binmail create an arbitrary file as root. (This bug is documented in a bugtraq
post by 8lgm, archived at http://seclists.org/bugtraq/1994/Mar/0025.html.)

File Race Redux
Most file system race conditions can be traced back to using system calls that work
with pathnames. As discussed, every time a system call takes a pathname
argument, the kernel resolves that pathname to an inode by traversing through the
relevant directory entries. So if you have this code:
stat(“/tmp/bob”, &sb);
stat(“/tmp/bob”, &sb);

    The first call to stat() causes the kernel to look up the inode for the /tmp/bob
pathname, open that inode, and collect the relevant information. The second time
stat() is called, the same thing happens all over again. If someone changes /,
/tmp, or /tmp/bob between the two stat() calls, the system could easily end up
looking at two different files. Now take a look at this code:
fd=open(“/tmp/bob”, O_RDWR);
fstat(fd, &sb);
fstat(fd, &sb);

     The call to open() resolves the /tmp/bob pathname to an inode. It then loads
this inode into kernel memory, creates the required data structures to track an open
file, and places a pointer to them in the process’s file descriptor table. The call to
fstat() simply takes the file descriptor index fd, looks in the table and pulls out
the pointer, and ends up looking directly at the data structure encapsulating the
inode. The second fstat() does the same thing as the first one.
     If someone unlinked /tmp/bob in the middle of the fstat() calls, it wouldn’t
matter because the file descriptor would still reference the inode on the disk that
was /tmp/bob when open() was called. That inode isn’t deallocated until its refer-
ence count goes away, which doesn’t happen until the process uses close(fd).
Renaming and moving the file doesn’t change the target of fstat(), either. The
permissions are established by how the file is opened and the security checks
occurring at the time it’s opened, so even if the file is marked with permission
bits 0000, it doesn’t matter to the process after it has successfully opened the file
for reading.

Pathnames Versus File Descriptors
The basic difference between pathnames and file descriptors is in how they’re used
by functions. Functions that take pathnames are looking up which file to work with

                                      Race Conditions

each time they’re called. Functions that work with file descriptors are going straight
to the same inode that was opened initially. Any time you see multiple system calls
that use a file path, it’s worth considering what would happen if the file was
changed in between those calls. Remember that changing any directory component
between the starting directory and the target file can potentially disrupt a process’s
intended file actions.
    In general, if you see anything besides a single filename-based system call to
open a resource followed by multiple file-descriptor-based calls, there’s a reasonable
chance of a race condition occurring.

Evading File Access Checks
One basic pattern to look for is a security check function that uses a filename fol-
lowed by a usage function that uses a filename. The basic vulnerability pattern is
the file being checked using something like stat(), lstat(), or access(), and, pro-
viding that the check succeeds using something like open(), fopen(), chmod(),
chgrp(), chown(), unlink(), rename(), link(), or symlink().
    In general, the safe form of a security check involves checks and usage on a file
descriptor. It’s guaranteed that a file descriptor, after the kernel creates it, refers to
the same file system object for the duration of its lifetime. Therefore, functions that
work with a file descriptor can often be used in a safe fashion when their filename
counterparts can’t. For example, fstat(), fchmod(), and fchown() can be used to
query or modify a file that has already been opened safely, but the corresponding
stat(), chmod(), and chown() functions might be susceptible to race conditions if
the file is tampered with right after it has been opened.

Permission Races
Sometimes an application will temporarily expose a file to potential modification
for a short window of time by creating it with insufficient permissions. If attackers
can open that file during this window, they get an open file handle to the file that
locks in the insufficient permissions, and lets them retain access to the file after the
permissions have been corrected, as shown in this example:
FILE *fp;
int fd;

if (!(fp=fopen(myfile, “w+”)))
     die(“fopen”);

/* we’ll use fchmod() to prevent a race condition */
fd=fileno(fp);

/* lets modify the permissions */
if (fchmod(fd, 0600)==-1)
      die(“fchmod”);

     This code excerpt opens a file for reading and writing by using the fopen() func-
tion. If the file doesn’t already exist, it’s created by the call to fopen(), and the umask
value of the process determines its initial file permissions. This will be discussed in
more detail in “The Stdio File Interface,” but the important detail that need to know for
now is that fopen() calls open() with a permission argument of octal 0666. Therefore,
if the process’s umask doesn’t take away world write permissions, any user on the file
system is able to write to the file. The program immediately changes its file to mode
0600, but it’s too late—a race condition has already occurred. If another process can use
open() on the file requesting read and write access, immediately after it’s created but
before its permission bits are changed, that process has a file descriptor open to the file
with read and write permissions.

Ownership Races
If a file is created with the effective privileges of a nonprivileged user, and the file
owner is later changed to that of a privileged user, a potential race condition exists,
as shown in this example:

drop_privs();

if ((fd=open(myfile, O_RDWR | O_CREAT | O_EXCL, 0600))<0)
      die(“open”);

regain_privs();

/* take ownership of the file */
if (fchown(fd, geteuid(), getegid())==-1)
      die(“fchown”);

     This code is similar to the permission race code you examined previously. A
privileged application temporarily drops its privileges to create a file safely. After
the file is created, it wants to set file ownership to root. To do this, the program
regains its root privileges and then changes the file’s ownership with the fchown()
system call. The vulnerability is that if unprivileged users manage to open the file
between the call to open() and the call to fchown(), they get a file descriptor with a
file access mask permitting read and write access to the file.

                                             Race Conditions

Directory Races
Programs that traverse through directories in the file system have to be careful
about trusting the integrity of the directory hierarchy. If a program descends into
user-controllable directories, users can often move directories around in devious
ways from under the program and cause it to operate on sensitive files
inadvertently.

Caveats
If a program attempts to recurse through directories, it needs to account for infi-
nitely recursive symbolic links. The kernel notices infinite symbolic links as it
resolves a pathname, and it returns an error in the case of too much recursion. If a
program attempts to traverse a path itself, it might need to replicate the logic the
kernel uses to avoid ending up in an infinite loop.
     Another possible point of confusion that you need to be aware of is that symbol-
ically linked directories are not reflected in pathnames returned by system calls that
retrieve a current path. If you’re using a command shell and issue cd to change to a
directory that’s a symbolic link, typing pwd reflects that symbolic link. However,
from the kernel’s perspective, you’re in the actual target directory, and any system
call to return your current path doesn’t include the symbolic link. If a symbolic link
named /bob points to the /tmp/bobshouse directory, and you change your current
directory to /bob, the getcwd() function reports your current directory to you as
/tmp/bobshouse, not /bob.

Directory Symlinks for Exploiting unlink()
It’s important to consider the effects of malicious users manipulating directories that
are one or two levels higher than a process’s working space. Wojciech Purczynski
discovered a vulnerability in the Solaris implementation of the UNIX job-scheduling
at command. The -r argument to at tells the program to delete a particular job ID.
According to Wojciech, at had roughly the following logic:
logic for /usr/bin/at -r JOBNAME

/* chdir into at spool directory */
chdir(“/var/spool/cron/atjobs”)

/* check to make sure that the file is owned by the user */
stat64(JOBNAME, &statbuf)
if (statbuf.st_uid != getuid())
    exit(1);

/* unlink the file */
unlink(“JOBNAME”)

     The at command changes to the atjobs spool directory, and if users own the
file corresponding to the job they specify, the job file is deleted. The first
vulnerability in at is that the job name can contain ../ path components. So
attackers could use the following command:
at -r ../../../../../../tmp/somefile

    The at command would delete /tmp/somefile, but only if somefile is owned by
the user. So you can use it to delete files you own, which isn’t all that interesting.
However, there’s a race condition between the call to stat() and the call to
unlink() in the code.

 Attacker creates
     /tmp/bob
     Directory

 Attacker creates               Program checks
/tmp/bob/shadow              stat(“/var/spool/cron/                     Time of Check
   Regular File             atjobs/../../../../tmp/bob/
                                   shadow”);
                               shows a regular file
                                    Succeeds
 Attacker unlinks
/tmp/bob/shadow

 Attacker unlinks
    /tmp/bob/

 Attacker creates
     symlink
   /tmp/bob–>
       /etc
                                  Program does
                             unlink(“/var/spool/cron/                   Time of Use
                             atjobs/../../../../tmp/bob/
                                     shadow”);
                                The symlink bob is
                                      followed.
                              At unlinks /etc/shadow

Figure 9-10   Attacking the Solaris at command

                                          Race Conditions

     Keep in mind that unlink() doesn’t follow symbolic links on the last directory
component. So if you use the normal attack of putting a normal file for stat() to see,
deleting it, and placing a symlink to the sensitive file, the unlink() call would just
delete the symbolic link and not care what it pointed to. The trick to exploiting this
code is to remember that unlink() follows symbolic links in directory components
other than the last component. This attack is shown in Figure 9-10.
     First, attackers create a /tmp/bob directory, and in that directory create a normal
file called shadow. The attackers let at run and perform the stat() check on the
/tmp/bob/shadow file. The stat() check succeeds because it sees a normal file
owned by the correct user. Then attackers delete the /tmp/bob/shadow file and the
/tmp/bob directory. Next, they create a symbolic link so that /tmp/bob points to /etc.
The at command proceeds to unlink /tmp/bob/shadow, which ends up unlinking
/etc/shadow and potentially bringing down the machine.

Moving Directories Underneath a Program
Wojciech Purczynski also discovered an interesting vulnerability in the GNU file
utils package. The code is a bit complicated, so the easiest way to show the issue is
show the program’s behavior at a system call trace level. The following code is based
on his advisory (archived at http://seclists.org/bugtraq/2002/Mar/0160.html):
Example of ‘rm -fr /tmp/a’ removing ‘/tmp/a/b/c’ directory tree:

(strace output simplified for better readability)

chdir(“/tmp/a”)                                       = 0
chdir(“b”)                                            = 0
chdir(“c”)                                            = 0
chdir(“..”)                                           = 0
rmdir(“c”)                                            = 0
chdir(“..”)                                           = 0
rmdir(“b”)                                            = 0
fchdir(3)                                             = 0
rmdir(“/tmp/a”)                                       = 0

    If you have a directory tree of /tmp/a/b/c, and you tell rm to recursively delete
/tmp/a, it basically recurses into the deepest directory /tmp/a/b/c, and then uses
chdir(“..”) and removes c. The rm program then uses chdir(“..”) to back up one
more directory and delete b. Next, it uses fchdir() to go back to the original start-
ing directory and delete /tmp/a.

     Wojciech’s attack is quite clever. Say you let the program get all the way into
the c directory, so it has a current working directory of /tmp/a/b/c. You can mod-
ify the directory structure before rm uses chdir(“..”). If you move the c directory
so that it’s underneath /tmp, the rm program is suddenly in the /tmp/c directory
instead of /tmp/a/b/c. From this point, it recurses upward too far and starts
recursively removing every file on the system.

        Note
        Nick Cleaton discovered similar race conditions in the fts library
        (documented at http://security.freebsd.org/advisories/FreeBSD-SA-
        01:40.fts.asc), which is used to traverse through file systems on BSD
        UNIX derivatives. He’s quite clever, too, even though he’s not Polish.

Temporary Files
Applications often make use of temporary files to store data that is in some inter-
mediate format, or to channel data between related processes. This practice has
proved dangerous, however; innumerable local UNIX security vulnerabilities are
related to temporary file use. Public temporary directories can be an extremely
hostile environment for programs attempting to make use of them.
     On most UNIX systems, there’s a public temporary directory in /tmp and one in
/var/tmp. Programs are free to create files in those directories for the purpose of
temporary storage. The temporary directories are marked as sticky directories, which
means only the file owner can delete or rename that file. These directories are usu-
ally mode octal 1777, granting everyone full read, write, and search permissions.
     Programs typically use temporary directories in two ways. Most programs want
to create a new, unique temporary file they can use once and then discard. Some
programs, however, want to open an existing temporary file, which they expect to
have been created by a related program in the past. The following sections describe
issues in both uses of temporary directories.

Unique File Creation
Many applications want to create a unique temporary file, use it, and then delete it
or hand it off to another program. In general, you should check for all the file cre-
ation issues outlined earlier and the creation-related issues with symbolic links and
race conditions. Several library calls, described in the following sections, are
designed to assist in obtaining these unique temporary files. Unfortunately, the
majority of them are fairly broken, as you will see.

The mktemp() Function
The mktemp() function takes a template for a filename and fills it out so that it repre-
sents a unique, unused filename. The template the user provides has XXX characters
as placeholders for random data. However, that data is fairly easy to predict because
it’s based on the process ID of the program that calls mktemp() plus a simple static
pattern. Here’s some code that uses mktemp():
char temp[1024];
int fd;

strcpy(temp, “/tmp/tmpXXXX”);
if (!mktemp(temp))
      die(“mktemp”);

fd=open(temp, O_CREAT | O_RDWR, 0700);
if (fd<0)
{
      perror(“open”);
      exit(1);
}
...

    The problem with this code, and the problem with all nearly uses of mktemp(), is
a race condition between when the file is verified as unique and when the file is
opened. If attackers can create a symbolic link after the call to mktemp() but before
the call to open(), the program opens that symbolic link, potentially creating a file
wherever it points, and starts writing to it. If the program is running with sufficient
privileges, it could be coerced into overwriting sensitive system files with data that
could lead to an exploitable situation.
    Here’s a real-world example of a vulnerability resulting from the use of mktemp().
Michael Zalewski observed that the GNU C Compiler (GCC) uses temporary files
during its compilation process. The following slightly edited code is from a vulnerable
version of gcc:
#define TEMP_FILE “ccXXXXXX”

char *
choose_temp_base ()
{
    char *base = 0;

    char *temp_filename;
    int len;
    static char tmp[] = { DIR_SEPARATOR, ‘t’, ‘m’, ‘p’, 0 };
    static char usrtmp[] = { DIR_SEPARATOR, ‘u’, ‘s’, ‘r’,
        DIR_SEPARATOR, ‘t’, ‘m’, ‘p’, 0 };

    base = try (getenv (“TMPDIR”), base);
    base = try (getenv (“TMP”), base);
    base = try (getenv (“TEMP”), base);

    /* Try /usr/tmp, then /tmp.       */
    base = try (usrtmp, base);
    base = try (tmp, base);

    /* If all else fails, use the current directory!                */
    if (base == 0)
      base = “.”;

    len = strlen (base);
    temp_filename = xmalloc (len + 1 /*DIR_SEPARATOR*/
                    + strlen (TEMP_FILE) + 1);
    strcpy (temp_filename, base);

    if (len != 0
        && temp_filename[len-1] != ‘/’
        && temp_filename[len-1] != DIR_SEPARATOR)
      temp_filename[len++] = DIR_SEPARATOR;
    strcpy (temp_filename + len, TEMP_FILE);

    mktemp (temp_filename);
    if (strlen (temp_filename) == 0)
      abort ();
    return temp_filename;
}

    As you can see, gcc uses mktemp() to create temporary files in a public temporary
directory. When you compile a program, gcc first creates an intermediate file in
/tmp/ccXXXXXX.i. The X characters are filled in by mktemp(). When gcc goes to create
other files, such as the assembly file (.s) and the object file (.o), it reuses that same
ccXXXXXX base that was used for the intermediate file. Attackers can simply watch
/tmp and look for .i files. As soon as they find one, they can create links to other files
with the name gcc attempts to use for other temporary compilation files, and then gcc
overwrites the linked files with the contents of the intermediate compilation file. If
attackers wait for root to compile something, they can obtain root privileges by tricking
root into overwriting a sensitive file.

        Note
        mktemp() almost always indicates a potential race condition because
        the unique filename it returns can often be predicted and taken
        before it’s actually used by an application.

The tmpnam() and tempnam() Functions
The tmpnam() and tempnam() functions are similar to mktemp(), in that they’re used
to return the name of a temporary file available for use. tmpnam() looks for files in
the system temporary directory, and tempnam() lets users specify the directory and
file prefix to use for creating a temporary filename. Both functions have the same
race condition issues as mktemp(), so you can consider them similar in terms of
security.
     Here’s a real-world example from xpdf-0.90, which contains a vulnerable use of
tmpnam():

       tmpnam(tmpFileName);
       if (!(f = fopen(tmpFileName, “wb”))) {
     error(-1, “Couldn’t open temporary Type 1 font file ‘%s’”,
             tmpFileName);
     return -1;
       }

    If attackers create a symbolic link to a sensitive file after the call to tmpnam() but
before the call to fopen(), xpdf creates or opens that file with the privileges of the
user running xpdf.
    In addition, Eric Raymond’s cstrings utility was vulnerable to a race condition
involving the use of tempnam() (documented at www.securityfocus.com/bid/
9391/info):

           if (argv[optind][0] != ‘/’)
                  (void) getcwd(buf, BUFSIZ);
           else
                  buf[0] = ‘\0’;
           (void) strcat(buf, argv[optind]);
           if (cp = strrchr(buf, ‘/’))
                  *cp = ‘\0’;
           if ((tf = tempnam(buf, “cstr”)) == (char *)NULL)
           {
                  perror(“cstrings, making tempfile”);
                  exit(1);
           }

           if ((ofp = fopen(tf, “w”)) == (FILE *)NULL)
           {
                  perror(“cstrings, making output file”);
                  exit(1);
           }

      Again, if attackers create a symbolic link to a sensitive file after the call to
tempnam() but before the call to fopen(), the process opens the symbolic link target
as the user running cstrings and writes font information to it.

The mkstemp() Function
The library function mkstemp() is much safer than mktemp(), assuming it’s used
correctly. It finds a unique filename, like mktemp(), but then proceeds to create the
file and return a file descriptor to the program that has read and write access to the
file. It does all this in a safe fashion. However, it is still possible for a developer to
misuse mkstemp() in other ways, as shown in Listing 9-6.
Listing 9-6
Reopening a Temporary File
char g_mytempfile[1024];

void init_prog(void)
{
    int fd;

      strcpy(g_mytempfile, “/tmp/tmpXXXXXX”);

     fd = mkstemp(g_mytempfile);
     if (fd==-1)
         die(“mkstemp”);

     initialize_tmpfile(fd);
     close(fd);
}

void main_loop(void)
{
    FILE *fp;
...
    /* open temporary file */
    if ((fp=fopen(g_mytempfile,”rw”))==NULL)
        die(“fopen”);
...

     You might see this code if a programmer tries to fix a program using mktemp() so
that it uses mkstemp() instead. The init_prog() function creates a temporary file and
initializes it to contain a default set of contents. The path to this temporary file is
stored in g_mytempfile. Later in the application, the temporary file is reopened for
further processing. The problem is that, although the initial creation of the temporary
file was done safely, it’s reopened later in an unsafe fashion. Malicious users might be
able to manipulate that temporary file if they have sufficient permissions in the direc-
tory. If they could delete or rename the file and replace it with a symbolic link to a
sensitive file, the program could potentially manipulate that sensitive file in an
exploitable way. If users didn’t have permissions for that kind of manipulation, they
might still be able to place the process in a suspended state long enough that the tem-
porary directory would be cleaned out by an administrative daemon. They could then
re-create the file so that it points to a sensitive system file.
     Keep in mind that some System V UNIX implementations might honor the
umask when creating a temporary file with mkstemp(), so it’s a good idea for pro-
grams to set it properly beforehand.

The tmpfile() and mkdtemp() Functions
The tmpfile() function is similar to mkstemp(); its purpose is to create a unique file
in the system’s temporary directory and return a stream pointer to the file. This func-
tion is generally implemented in a safe, atomic fashion, often using mkstemp().
According to Casper Dik, Solaris versions before 2.6 have a tmpfile() function
that’s vulnerable to race conditions, and IRIX and AIX are probably also vulnerable.
    mkdtemp() is used to create a unique directory. It takes a template similar to
mkstemp() and creates a directory with mode 0700. This directory is then a safe
place in which the program can operate.

The O_CREAT | O_EXCL Flags
Say that attackers can predict the filename an application uses, or the
application uses a predetermined filename such as /tmp/.ps_data. In general,
unless an application does something like the following, it’s probably vulnerable
to an attack:
          fd = open(filename, O_RDWR | O_CREAT | O_EXCL, FMODE);
          if (fd < 0)
               abort();

     The call to open() specifies the O_CREAT | O_EXCL flag, which means the file is cre-
ated only if a file with the same name does not already exist. If a file exists with that
name, the open() call returns an error, which the application should expect in case of
attack. Using O_CREAT | O_EXCL also means that if the last path component of the
filename is a symbolic link, the kernel won’t follow it. These flags make sure the file is
created safely, as long as the application is ready for open() to return a failure condi-
tion in case of any funny business.

File Reuse
So far, you’ve focused on the creation of temporary files that are unique and don’t
already exist on the file system. Applications also might have a requirement to open
temporary files that already exist in a temporary directory. These files might have a
known, fixed filename, or they might have a unique filename that’s explicitly
passed along to program components that need to open the file. Programs might
use these files to share information as a simple form of IPC or to cache processing
results for use by a subsequent execution of a program.
    Opening these files safely is difficult. First, you want to make sure you aren’t
opening a symbolic link or hard link to a sensitive file. If you try to use lstat()
to determine whether the file is a symbolic link, you introduce a race condition
before the call to open(). If you call open() and then fstat() on the file, you end
up following symbolic links unless your open() call supports the nonstandard
Linux O_NOFOLLOW flag (and even then, O_NOFOLLOW only ensures that the last
component of the pathname isn’t a symbolic link).
    If you try to prevent a hard link attack, you can run into trouble. If you use
lstat() and then check the link count, you introduce a race condition before the
call to open(). If you open the file first and then use fstat() to check the link
count, you’re again exposed to symbolic link attacks. If attackers can delete the
link they made you open, the result of the fstat() might indicate a link count of
one, even though you opened a sensitive file.

Cryogenic Sleep Attacks
Olaf Kirch, a well known security researcher, published an interesting vulnerability
related to reusing temporary files. The following code, which is slightly modified
from Olaf’s Bugtraq post (available at http://seclists.org/bugtraq/2000/Jan/
0016.html), represents an idiom for a safe way to open a persistent temporary
file:
     if (lstat(fname, &stb1) >= 0)
     {
            if (!S_ISREG(stb1.st_mode) ||
                (stb1.st_nlink>1))
                raise_big_stink();

            fd = open(fname, O_RDWR);
            if (fd < 0 || fstat(fd, &stb2) < 0)
                raise_big_stink();
            if (stb1.st_ino    != stb2.st_ino       ||
                stb1.st_dev    != stb2.st_dev       ||
                stb2.st_nlink>1)
                raise_big_stink();
     }
     else
     {
            fd = open(fname, O_RDWR | O_CREAT | O_EXCL, FMODE);
            if (fd < 0)
                raise_big_stink();
     }

     This code represents a reasonably safe idiom for opening a potentially existing
file in a public directory. The code first checks the file with lstat() and stores the
results in the stat buffer structure stb1. If the lstat() fails, indicating that the file
doesn’t exist, the code attempts to create the file by using open() with the O_CREAT
| O_EXCL flags. This open() doesn’t follow symbolic links in the last path compo-
nent, and it succeeds only if it’s successful in creating the file.
     So if the file doesn’t exist, the open() call attempts to create it in a safe fashion.
If the file does exist, it’s first analyzed with lstat() to make sure it’s not a symbolic
link or hard link. Naturally, attackers could delete or rename the file and replace it
with another file, device file, hard link, or symbolic link immediately after the

lstat() security check. So the program opens the file and uses fstat(), and then
uses the inode and device numbers from the fstat() and lstat() calls to check
that the pathname hasn’t been manipulated in the time that has elapsed since the
program first called lstat(). If the pathname hasn’t been tampered with, lstat()
and fstat() should both indicate that the file has the same device and inode num-
bers. Note that the call to open() in the first block uses the O_RDWR flag, but not
O_CREAT, ensuring that it doesn’t create a file accidentally.
     This solution seems fairly robust, assuming the application can deal with the file
open failing if tampering is detected. Kirch observed that in some situations, the inode
and device check might be circumvented. Say that attackers create a regular file in the
temporary directory with the filename the program is expecting. This program would
call lstat() on the regular file and learn that it existed and wasn’t a symbolic link. Say
attackers then manage to send a job control signal, such as a SIGSTOP, to the application
immediately after the lstat() but before the call to open(). This would be possible if
the program is a setuid root program users had started in their terminal session.
     At this point, attackers would make note of the inode and device of the tem-
porary file they created. They would then delete that file and wait for a sensitive
file to be created with the same inode and device number. They could simply
wait for something to happen, or they could call other privileged programs in
ways designed to get them to create sensitive files.
     As soon as a sensitive file is created with an inode and device number equal to
that of the original file, attackers would create a symbolic link to that file and
resume the program. The program would perform the open() call, which would fol-
low the symbolic link and open the sensitive file. However, when it analyzes the
file, it would find that the inode and device numbers hadn’t changed, so it wouldn’t
suspect anything odd was afoot.

Temporary Directory Cleaners
Michael Zalewski described an interesting class of attacks that can undermine the
security of mkstemp() in certain environments (available at www.bindview.com/
Services/Razor/Papers/2002/mkstemp.cfm). Many UNIX systems have a daemon
that runs periodically to clean out public temporary directories, such as /tmp and
/var/tmp. The program Zalewski analyzed, tmpwatch, is a popular program that
performs this task. It goes through each file in the temporary directory and uses
lstat() to determine the age of the file. If the file is old enough, the cleaning dae-
mon uses unlink() on the file to delete it.
     Say you have a program that creates a temporary file securely by using
mkstemp(), but later it uses the file in a potentially unsafe fashion by reopening the
file or performing operations such as chmod() and chown() that work with
filenames rather than file descriptors. If the temporary file is created properly, with

the correct umask, ownership, and permissions, usually this isn’t a problem in a
sticky directory, as only the file’s owner is able to rename or unlink the file. You’ve
already looked at a code snippet with these characteristics in Listing 9-6.
     If you could get a temporary file to be unlinked after it was created but before an
application used it again, you could potentially create an exploitable condition.
Zalewski outlined two attacks that could do just this. The simplest attack is to start
a privileged setuid program, let it create its temporary file, and then suspend the
program with a SIGSTOP signal. Then simply wait the requisite number of days for
the cleaning daemon to decide that the temporary file is old enough to be purged.
After the daemon purges the file, create a symbolic link in its place and resume the
privileged program.
     Zalewski outlined a more complex attack that requires considerably more delicate
timing. The cleaning daemons are implemented so that there’s a race condition
between lstat() and unlink(). If you let the cleaner daemon use lstat() on a file
and decide to unlink it, you could unlink it preemptively out from under the daemon.
If another application creates a file with that name right before the cleaning daemon
uses unlink(), that program’s file would be deleted right out from under it.

The Stdio File Interface
The UNIX kernel provides an interface for manipulating files based on file descrip-
tors. The C stdio system provides a slightly richer interface for file interaction,
which is based on the FILE structure. It’s implemented as an abstraction layer on
top of the kernel’s file descriptor interface. UNIX application code commonly uses
stdio in lieu of the lower-level system call API because it automatically implements
buffering and a few convenience functions for data formatting. The extra layer of
abstraction doesn’t change the basic problems discussed so far, but it adds a few
scenarios in which vulnerabilities can be introduced.
    A number of functions are provided to manipulate files by using these struc-
tures and to convert between file structures and file descriptors. A typical FILE
structure contains a pointer to buffered file data (if it’s a buffered stream), the file
descriptor, and flags related to how the stream is opened. The glibc FILE structure is
shown in the following code (slightly modified for brevity):
struct _IO_FILE {
  int _flags;              /* High-order word is _IO_MAGIC;
                             rest is flags. */
#define _IO_file_flags _flags

  /* The following pointers correspond to the C++
   streambuf protocol. */

  /* Note:       Tk uses the _IO_read_ptr and
      _IO_read_end fields directly. */
  char* _IO_read_ptr;         /* Current read pointer */
  char* _IO_read_end;         /* End of get area. */
  char* _IO_read_base;         /* Start of putback+get area. */
  char* _IO_write_base;          /* Start of put area. */
  char* _IO_write_ptr;         /* Current put pointer. */
  char* _IO_write_end;         /* End of put area. */
  char* _IO_buf_base;         /* Start of reserve area. */
  char* _IO_buf_end;         /* End of reserve area. */
  /* The following fields are used to support
      backing up and undo. */
  char *_IO_save_base; /* Pointer to start of
                               non-current get area. */
  char *_IO_backup_base;       /* Pointer to first valid
                                   character of backup area */
  char *_IO_save_end; /* Pointer to end of non-current
                              get area. */

  int _fileno;

  ...
  _IO_lock_t *_lock;
};

    These structures can also be used for operating on other resources that can be
represented by descriptors, such as sockets.

Opening a File
The fopen() function is used for opening files. It takes a path argument as well as a
string indicating the mode for opening the file. The prototype is as follows:
FILE *fopen(char *path, char *mode);

    Programs that use fopen() are subject to the same potential problems as those that
use open(); the specified path must be validated correctly if it contains user-malleable
data, and code should be careful not to work in directories where malicious attackers
have influence. fopen()’s mode argument is a textual representation of what access the
program needs for the file. The modes are listed in Table 9-6.

Table 9-6
File Access Modes for fopen()
Mode String   Meaning
r             Open the file for read-only access
r+            Open the file for reading and writing. The file offset pointer is pointing to the beginning
              of the file, so a write to this file causes data already in the file to be overwritten.
w             Open the file for writing. If the file already exists, it’s truncated to 0 bytes. If it doesn’t
              exist, it’s created.
w+            Identical to “r+” except the file is truncated if it exists. Additionally, this mode creates
              a file if it exists, whereas “r+” doesn’t.
a             Open in append mode—that is, the file is opened for writing. If the file already exists,
              the file offset pointer points to the end of the file so that writing to the stream doesn’t
              overwrite data already in the file. If the file doesn’t exist, it’s created.
a+            Open in append mode for both reading and writing. The file offset points to the
              beginning of the file so that data can be read from it, but when data is written, it’s
              appended to the file. If the file doesn’t exist, it’s created.

    Of these six modes, only two don’t implicitly create a new file. Therefore, it’s
very easy to accidentally create new files unintentionally with fopen(). Further-
more, because fopen() does not explicitly take a permissions bitmask argument,
the default permissions of octal 0666 are applied (that is, everyone can read and
write to the file). fopen() always further restricts file permissions based on the
umask value of the current process. Because this umask value is an inheritable
attribute, users can quite easily abuse calls to fopen() in a privileged application to
create a file that anyone is able to write to. Therefore, careful attention should be
paid to how fopen() is used in a privileged context, especially when it’s using
modes that result in file creation. Even when it’s creating a temporary file in a loca-
tion that attackers can’t generally control, modifying the umask and then writing
malicious data can often result in a compromise of the application.

        Note
        Recent glibc fopen() implementations also allow developers to specify
        an ‘x’ in the mode string parameter. This causes fopen() to specify the
        O_EXCL flag to open(), thus ensuring that a new file is created.

    Two other functions are provided for opening file streams: freopen() for reopen-
ing a previously opened file stream and fdopen() for creating a FILE structure for a
preexisting socket descriptor. The freopen() function is vulnerable to the same sort of
problems related to file creation as fopen() is; however, fdopen() is not because all it
does is create a FILE structure and associate it with a preexisting file descriptor.

Reading from a File
The fread() function can be used to read data from files in a manner similar to the
way read() works, except it’s intended to read a certain number of elements of a
specific size. The prototype for fread() is as follows:
int fread(void *buffer, size_t size, size_t count, FILE *fp)

     This function reads count elements (each of which is size bytes long) from the
file pointed to by fp.

        Note
        Notice that fread() takes two parameters, indicating the size of an
        element and the number of elements to be read. Since these parame-
        ters will eventually be multiplied together, there is the potential for
        fread() to contain an integer overflow internally (glibc has this
        problem). In certain situations, such an overflow might create an
        opportunity for exploitation.

    Because many applications process files containing text data, the fgets() func-
tion is provided, which is used to read a single line of the input from the file. The
function prototype looks like this:
char *fgets(char *buffer, size_t size, FILE *fp);

    This function returns a pointer to the input buffer when it’s able to read a line
from the file successfully. It returns NULL if an error has occurred (usually an EOF
was encountered). The fgets() function could be used in a manner that exposes
the application to problems when parsing files. First, ignoring the return value can
lead to problems, as you’ve seen in previous examples. When fgets() returns
NULL, the contents of the destination buffer are unspecified, so a program that fails
to check the return value of fgets() probably ends up processing uninitialized data
in the destination buffer. An example of this mistake would look this:
int read_email(FILE *fp)
{
      char user[1024], domain[1024];
      char buf[1024];
      int length;

      fgets(buf, sizeof(buf), fp);

    ptr = strchr(buf, ‘@’);

    if(!ptr)
          return –1;

    *ptr++ = ‘\0’;

    strcpy(user, buf);
    strcpy(domain, ptr);
    ...
}

    In the read_email() function, the fact that the return value of fgets() is
ignored means the content of buf remains undefined if fgets() fails. The fgets()
function guarantees NUL-termination only when it returns successfully, so the buf
variable that’s subsequently copied out of might contain a text string that’s longer
than 1024 bytes (because it’s uninitialized and fgets() hasn’t done anything to it).
Therefore, either of the calls to strcpy() can potentially overflow the user and
domain stack buffers.

       Note
       Saying that the buffer contents aren’t touched by fgets() when an
       error is encountered is an oversimplification, and isn’t true for all
       fgets() implementations. If the file finishes with a partial line, BSD
       implementations copy the partial line into the buffer and then
       return NULL, indicating an EOF was encountered. The buffer is not
       NUL-terminated in this case. Using this behavioral quirk might
       allow easier exploitation of bugs resulting from unchecked fgets()
       return values because the stack buffer can have user-controllable
       data from the file in it. The Linux glibc implementation does not
       exhibit the same behavior; it copies a partial line into the buffer,
       NUL-terminates it, and returns successfully; then it signals an error
       the next time fgets() is called.

    Another potential misuse of fgets() happens when a privileged file containing
some user-controlled data is incorrectly parsed. For example, say a file is being
parsed to check user credentials. Each line contains a valid user in the system and
has the format user:password:real name (not unlike the UNIX /etc/passwd file
format). The following code authenticates users:

struct entry {
      char user[256];
      char password[256];
      char name[1024];
};

int line_to_entry (char *line, struct entry *ent)
{
      char *ptr, *nptr;

      ptr = strchr(line, ‘:’);

      if(ptr == NULL || (ptr – line) >= sizeof(ent->user)))
          return –1;

      *ptr++ = ‘\0’;

      strcpy(ent->user, line);

      nptr = strchr(ptr, ‘:’);

      if(nptr == NULL || (nptr – ptr) >= sizeof(ent->password))
          return –1;

      *nptr++ = ‘\0’;

      strcpy(ent->password, ptr);

      if(strlen(nptr) >= sizeof(ent->name))
          return –1;

      strcpy(ent->name, nptr);

      return 0;
}

int auth_user(char *user, char *password)
{
    FILE *fp;
    struct entry ent;

    fp = fopen(“/data/users.pwd”, “r”);

    if(fp == NULL)
         return 0;

    while(fgets(filedata, sizeof(filedata), fp) != NULL){
         if(line_to_entry(filedata, &ent) < 0)
              return 0;
         if(strcmp(user, ent.user) != 0)
              continue;
         if(strcmp(password, ent.password) != 0)
              break;            /* correct user,
                                  incorrect password */

         fclose(fp);
         return 1;                  /* success! */
    }

    fclose(fp);

    return 0;
}

    This example runs through each username and password in the file attempting
to authenticate a user. The problem is that the bolded call to fgets() is potentially
flawed. The fgets() function reads only up to the specified size (in this case, 1024
bytes), so if the line is longer, only the first 1023 bytes are returned in the first call
to fgets(), and the rest of the line is returned in the next call. If attackers could
specify a real name written to this file of 1024 bytes (or thereabouts), their user-
name entry would be incorrectly parsed as two entries—the first 1023 bytes being
one entry, and the remaining data in the line being a new entry. They could use
this result to effectively authenticate themselves as any user they wanted (includ-
ing adding new usernames to the database).

    Finally, the fscanf() function is used to read data of a specified format directly
into variables, eliminating the need for application developers to interpret text data
as integer values, strings, and so forth. As discussed in Chapter 8, “Strings and
Metacharacters,” it’s easy for buffer overflows to occur when using this function to
read in string values. To recap, here’s a quick example:
struct entry {
      char user[256];
      char password[256];
      char name[1024];
};

int line_to_entry (FILE *fp, struct entry *ent)
{
      int rc;

      rc = fscanf(fp, “%s:%s:%s”, ent->user,
         ent->password, ent->name);

      return (rc == 3) ? 0 : -1;
}

    This code is a slightly modified example of the fgets() vulnerability you saw pre-
viously. Notice how much work using fscanf() cut out. The function in the example is
vulnerable to simple buffer overflows, however, because there are no limits on how
large the username, password, and real name entries can be. Using qualifiers can help
limit the length of strings being read in so that overflows don’t occur.
    Another important thing about fscanf() is checking that the return value is
equal to the number of elements it successfully parsed according to the input string
format. Like fgets(), a failure to check the return value means the program might
deal with potentially uninitialized variables. It’s a little more common that the
return value from fscanf() isn’t checked (or not adequately checked) than fgets().
Consider the following example:
struct entry {
      char user[256];
      char password[256];
      char name[1024];
};

int line_to_entry (FILE *fp, struct entry *ent)
{
     if(fscanf(fp, “%s:%s:%s”, ent->user,
           ent->password, ent->name) < 0)
           return -1;
     return 0;
}

    This code checks that fscanf() returns a value greater than 0, but this check is
insufficient; if the code encounters a line from the file it’s parsing that doesn’t
contain any separators (:), ent->password and ent->name are never populated, so
referencing them would result in the program processing uninitialized data.

         Note
         You might wonder why the discussion on format string vulnerabili-
         ties in Chapter 8 mentioned the printf() family of functions but not
         scanf(). The reason is that the authors have never encountered code
         in which a user can control part of the format string to a scanf()
         function, and it seems unlikely that would happen. However, if a
         user could partially control a format string passed to scanf(), it
         would likely be exploitable (depending on certain conditions, such as
         what data is on the stack). Malicious users who supplied extraneous
         format specifiers could corrupt memory and probably gain complete
         control over the application.

Writing to a File
Each function described in the previous section has a counterpart that writes data
into a file. There are more limitations on users’ ability to adversely affect an
application that’s writing to a file because the data being manipulated is already in
memory; the process of writing it into a file doesn’t often have as many security
implications as reading and operating on data (except, of course, if you have already
caused the application to open a sensitive file). Having said that, there are definitely
things that can go wrong.
     The first problem associated with writing to files is using the printf() functions.
Chapter 8 discussed format string vulnerabilities that could occur when users can par-
tially control the format string argument. This class of vulnerabilities allows users to

corrupt arbitrary locations in memory by specifying extraneous format specifiers and
usually result in a complete compromise of the vulnerable program.
    Another problem with file output is inconsistencies in how the file should be
formatted. If users can insert delimiters the application didn’t adequately check for,
that might allow malformed or additional entries to be inserted in the file. For
example, the following code shows a privileged process charged with updating real
name information in the system password file (/etc/passwd):
int update_info(FILE *fp, struct passwd *pw)
{
      if(fprintf(fp, “%s:%s:%lu:%lu:%s:%s%s\n”,
          pw->pw_name, pw->pw_passwd, pw->pw_uid, pw->pw_gid,
          pw->pw_gecos, pw->pw_dir, pw->pw_shell) < 0)
          return -1;

      return 0;
}

     This example is almost identical to the putpwent() implementation in glibc.
Obviously, any program using this function would need to be careful; if the pw_gecos
field, for example, is being updated and contains extra delimiters (in this case, : or \n),
it could be used to insert arbitrary password entries in the passwd file. Specifically, if a
pw_gecos field contains the string hi:/:/bin/sh\nnew::0:0:, this function would
inadvertently create a username called new that has no password and root privileges!
     You learn about more types of writing-related problems when rlimits are
discussed in Chapter 10, “UNIX II: Processes.”

Closing a File
Finally, when a program is done with a file stream, it can close it in much the same
way close() is used on a file descriptor. Here’s the prototype:
int fclose(FILE *stream);

    Because the file API uses descriptors internally, failure to close a file that has
been opened results in file descriptor leaks (covered in the “File Descriptors” sec-
tion earlier in this chapter).
    Additionally, most fclose() implementations free memory that’s being used to
buffer file data and might also free the FILE structure. For example, look at the glibc
fclose() implementation:

int
_IO_new_fclose (fp)

                                        Summary

       _IO_FILE *fp;
{
    int status;

    CHECK_FILE(fp, EOF);

      ...

    if (fp != _IO_stdin && fp != _IO_stdout && fp != _IO_stderr)
      {
          fp->_IO_file_flags = 0;
          free(fp);
      }

    return status;
}

    Notice the call to free() that passes fp as a parameter. If a program calls fclose()
twice on a FILE structure using this implementation, a double free() would occur, and
the heap could potentially be corrupted. Other implementations (such as OpenBSD’s)
are a little more resistant to these problems; however, closing a file twice might still
result in vulnerable situations related to a different file being closed unexpectedly.

          Note
          In the OpenBSD 3.6 fclose(), it might also be possible to trigger a
          double free() by closing a file twice, if the double fclose() was
          caused by a well-timed signal handler or competing thread.

Summary
UNIX systems present an ostensibly clean and simple interface for privilege
management and file manipulation. Closer inspection, however, reveals many
subtle nuances that can conspire to make things difficult for security-conscious
developers. At the end of the day, it’s not easy to create totally bug-free secure code,
especially when you’re trying to make applications portable across a number of
different UNIX systems. You have explored myriad problems that can occur in file
and privilege code and auditing techniques that should equip you to audit
security-sensitive UNIX applications.

This page intentionally left blank
