                 Chapter 10
                UNIX II: Processes

“I can’t believe how UNIX you look now.”
     M. Dowd, commenting on J. McDonald’s appearance after not shaving for
     eight months

Introduction
Chapter 9, “UNIX I: Privileges and Files,” introduced the essential concepts of how
UNIX OSs provide security. This chapter extends the discussion of UNIX by focusing
on the security of UNIX processes and the environment in which they run. You will
learn how to evaluate the security implications of how a process is invoked, as well as
the security-relevant considerations of the process environment. You will also see
how small changes in process behavior can have a major impact that manifests as
exploitable privilege-escalation vulnerabilities. This coverage will provide you with the
understanding necessary to audit a UNIX application for vulnerabilities that exist when
the process environment is not adequately protected.

Processes
Before jumping into vulnerabilities that can occur based on a process’s context and
environment, you need to understand how processes operate in a typical UNIX
system. A process is a data structure that an OS maintains to represent one
instance of a program running in memory. A UNIX process has a considerable
amount of state associated with it, including its own virtual memory layout and all
the machine-specific information necessary to stop and start the flow of execution.
    As noted in the previous chapter, each process has an associated process ID
(PID), which is typically a small positive integer that uniquely identifies that process
on the system. Most operating systems assign process IDs to new processes based
on a systemwide counter that’s incremented with each process that is created.

        Note
        Although this setup is typical, it’s not universally true for all UNIX
        systems. One system that differs is OpenBSD, which selects a random
        PID for each new process. Generating random PIDs is intended to
        augment the security of an application that might use its PID in a
        security-sensitive context (such as using a PID as part of a filename).
        Using random PIDs can also make it more difficult for malicious par-
        ties to probe for the existence of running processes or infer other
        information about the system such as its current workload.

Process Creation
New processes are created in the UNIX environment with the fork() system call.
When a process calls fork(), the kernel makes a nearly identical clone of that process.
The new process will initially share the same memory, attributes, and resources as the
old process. However, the new process will be given a different process ID, as well as
some other minor differences; but in general, it’s a replica of the original process.
    When a new process is created with the fork() system call, the new process is
referred to as a child of the original process. In UNIX, each process has a single parent
process, which is usually the process that created it, and zero or more child processes.
Processes can have multiple children, as they can make multiple copies of themselves
with fork(). These parent and child relationships are tracked in the kernel structures
that represent processes. A process can obtain the process ID of its parent process
with the system call getppid(). If a process terminates while its children are still
running, those child processes are assigned a “foster” parent: the special process init,
which has a static PID (1) across all systems.
    Consider what happens when a process calls fork(). The fork() system call
creates another process that’s a copy of the first one, and then the old and new

                                       Processes

processes are handed back over to the system to be scheduled at the next appropriate
time. Both processes are running the same program, and both start processing at the
instruction immediately after the system call to fork(). However, the return value of
fork() differs based on whether the process is the parent or the child. The parent
process receives the PID of the newly created child process, and the child process
receives a return value of 0. A return value of -1 indicates that the fork() operation
failed, and no child was spawned. Here’s an example of creating a process with fork():

pid_t pid;

switch (pid=fork())
{
     case -1:
       perror(“fork”);
       exit(1);

     case 0:
       printf(“I’m the child!\n”);
       do_child_stuff();
       exit(1);

     default:
       printf(“I’m the parent!\n”);
       printf(“My kid is process number %d\n”, pid);
       break;
};

/* parent code here */

    If new processes are created only by the kernel duplicating an existing process,
there’s an obvious chicken-and-egg problem; how did the first process come about if no
process existed beforehand to spawn it? However, there is a simple explanation. When a
UNIX kernel first starts, it creates one or more special processes manually that help
keep the system running smoothly. The first process is called init, and, as mentioned
previously, it takes the special process ID of 1. init is synthesized from scratch when
the kernel starts—it is an Adam in the Garden of Eden, if you will. After that, userland
processes are created with fork(). Therefore, almost every process can trace its origins
back to a common ancestor, init, with the exception of a few special kernel processes.

fork() Variants
fork() is the primary way processes are created in a UNIX system. There are a
few other similar system calls, but their use is generally deprecated or specific to
a particular system. In older systems, vfork() was useful for creating a new
process without having to suffer the performance hit of replicating its memory. It
was typically used for the purpose of spawning a child process to immediately
run a new program. As copy-on-write implementations of fork() became
pervasive throughout UNIX, vfork() lost its usefulness and is now considered
deprecated and bug prone. In some systems, a process created with vfork() has
access to the virtual memory of its parent process, and the parent process is
suspended from execution until the vfork() child runs a new program or
terminates. On other systems, however, vfork() is just a wrapper for fork(), and
address spaces aren’t shared.
     rfork() is another variation of fork() from the plan9 OS, although it isn’t widely
supported on other UNIX variants. It lets users specify the behavior of the forking
operation at a more granular level. Using rfork(), a caller can toggle sharing process
file descriptor tables, address spaces, and signal actions. clone() is a Linux variant of
fork() that also allows callers to specify several parameters of the forking operation.
Usually, these more granular process creation system calls are used to create threads,
sometimes referred to as “lightweight processes.” They enable you to create two or
more processes that share a single virtual memory space, equivalent to multiple
threads running in a single process.

Process Termination
Processes can terminate for a number of reasons. They can intentionally end their
existence in several ways, including calling the library function exit() or returning
out of their main function. These terminations result in the process calling an
underlying exit() system call, which causes the kernel to terminate the process
and release data structures and memory associated with it.
     Certain signals can cause processes to terminate as well. The default handling
behaviors for many signals is for the recipient process to be terminated. There’s also
a hard kill signal that can’t be ignored or handled by a process. These kill signals can
come from other processes or the kernel; a process can even send the signal to itself.
     Any signal other than the kill and stop signals can be handled by your process,
if you want. For example, if your program has a software bug that causes it to deref-
erence a pointer to an unmapped address in memory, a hardware trap is generated
that the kernel receives. The kernel then sends your process a signal indicating that
a memory access violation has occurred—UNIX calls this signal a “segmentation
fault.” Your process could handle this signal and keep on processing in light of this
fault, but the default reaction is for the process to be terminated. There is also a

                                        Processes

library function abort(), which causes a process to send itself an abort signal, thus
terminating the process. Signals are a complex topic area that is covered in depth in
Chapter 13, “Synchronization and State.”

fork() and Open Files
A child process is a nearly identical copy of its parent process, with only a few
small differences. If everything is more or less identical, what happens to the files
and resources the parent process already has open when it calls fork()? Intuition
tells you that these open files must be available to both processes, which means
the kernel must be handling sharing resources between the two processes. To
understand this implicit file sharing relationship between a parent and a child, you
need to be somewhat familiar with how resources are managed by the kernel on
behalf of a process.
     If you recall, you learned in Chapter 9 that when a process tells the kernel to
open a file with the open() system call, the kernel first resolves the provided path-
name to an inode by walking through all relevant directory entries. The kernel
creates an inode data structure to track this file and asks the underlying file system
to fill out that structure. The kernel then places an indirect reference to the inode
structure in the process’s file descriptor table, and the open() system call returns a
file descriptor to the userland process that can be used to reference the file in future
system calls.

System File Table
How the kernel places this “indirect” reference from the process file descriptor table to
the inode structure hasn’t been explained in much detail yet, but you explore this topic
in depth in this section. Keep in mind that this chapter generalizes kernel internals
across all UNIX implementations, so explanations capture the general behavior of the
common UNIX process maintenance subsystem but it might not match a specific
implementation exactly.
    An open file is tracked by at least two different data structures, and each structure
contains a different complementary set of data. The first of these structures is an
inode structure, and it contains information about the file as it exists on the disk,
including its owner and group, permission bits, and timestamps. The second struc-
ture, the open file structure, contains information about how the system is currently
using that file, such as the current offset in the file for reading and writing, flags
describing how the file is used (append mode, blocking mode, and synchronization),
and the access mode specified when the file is first opened (read, write, or
read/write). These open file structures (sometimes just called file structures) are
maintained in a global table called the system file table, or the open system file
table. This table is maintained by the kernel for the purposes of tracking all of the
currently open files on the system.

      File descriptor table                File descriptor table
         Process 1000                         Process 1010

 3: Config file                        3: Config file

                                      File structure
        System file table       Access mode: read/write
                                   File offset 0x1020

                         inode structure
                            ID: 0x456
                        Permission: 0644
                           Owner: bin
                           Group: bin

Figure 10-1       File data structures after fork

Sharing Files
So what do these data structures have to do with fork()? Take a look at Figure 10-1,
which shows the internal file data structures in a UNIX kernel after a fork().
Process 1000 has just forked a child process, process 1010. You can surmise that
before the fork(), process 1000 had file descriptor 3 open to one of its configuration
files. After the fork, you can see that the child process also has a file descriptor 3,
which references the config file.
     Both file descriptors point to the same open file structure, which tells you that
the configuration file was opened with read/write access, and the current offset in
the file is the location 0x1020. This open file structure points to the inode structure
for the file, where you see that the file has an inode number of 0x456, has permission
bits of octal 0644, and is owned by the bin user and bin group.
     What does that tell you about how the kernel handles open files across a
fork()? You can see that child processes automatically get a copy of the parent
process’s file descriptors, and one non-obvious result of this copying process is that
both processes share the same open file structure in the kernel. So if you have a file
descriptor open to a particular file, and you create a child process with fork(), your
parent process can end up fighting with the child process if both processes try to
work with that file. For example, if you’re writing several pieces of data to the file in
a loop, each time you write a piece, the file offset in the open file structure is
increased past the piece you just wrote. If the child process attempts to read in this
file from the beginning, it might do an lseek() on the file descriptor to set the file
offset to the beginning of the file. If the child does this while you’re in the middle of
writing pieces of data, you start inadvertently writing data to the beginning of the

file! Along those same lines, if the child changes the file to use a nonblocking
interface, suddenly your system calls return with errors such as EAGAIN instead of
blocking, as the parent process might expect.
     As a code auditor, you need to be aware of resources that might be inadvertently
available when a fork happens. Bugs involving leaked resources are often difficult to
spot because descriptor sharing is an implicit operation the OS performs. Some
basic techniques for recognizing vulnerabilities of this nature are described in the
“File Descriptors” section later in this chapter.

Program Invocation
Program invocation is provided by a flexible programmatic API that’s buttressed by
even more accommodating programs, such as command shells. History has shown
that it’s quite easy to shoot yourself in the foot when attempting to run external
programs. The following sections explain calling programs directly through the
system call interface and calling programs indirectly through an intermediary, such
as a command shell or library code.

Direct Invocation
Processes are a generic data structure that OSs use to represent the single execution of
a program. So far, you’ve seen that new processes are created by copying an existing
process with fork(). Now you see how a process can load and run a program.
    A process typically runs a new program by calling one of the exec family of func-
tions. On most UNIX systems, several variations of these functions are provided by
the standard libraries, which all end up using one powerful system call, execve(),
which has the following prototype:
int execve(const char *path, char *const argv[],
           char *const envp[]);

    The first parameter, path, is a pathname that specifies the program to run. The
second parameter, argv, is a pointer to command-line arguments for the program.
The third argument, envp, is a pointer to environment variables for the program.

        Note
        The standard C libraries (libc) supplied with contemporary UNIX-based
        OSs provide a number of different functions to call a new program
        directly: execl(), execlp(), execle(), execv(), and execvp(). These
        functions provide slightly differing interfaces to the execve() system
        call, so when execve() is mentioned in this section, any of these func-
        tions should be considered to behave in the same manner.

    The command-line arguments pointed to by argv are an array of pointers to
character strings with a NULL pointer marking the end of the array. Each pointer in
the array points to a different command-line argument for the program. By convention,
the first argument, known as argument zero, or argv[0], contains the name of the
program. This argument is controlled by the person who calls exec, so programs can’t
place any trust in it. The rest of the arguments are also C strings, and they can
contain almost anything without a NUL byte. The environment argument, envp,
points to a similarly constructed array of pointers to strings. Environment variables
are explained in detail in “Environment Arrays” later in this chapter.

Dangerous execve() Variants
All exec functions are just variants of the execve() system call, so they should be
regarded similarly in terms of process execution issues. Two variants of execve()—
execvp() and execlp()—have an additional security concern. If either function is
used with a filename that’s missing slashes, it uses the PATH environment variable to
resolve the location of the executable. (The PATH variable is discussed in “Common
Environment Variables” later in this chapter.) So if either function is invoked without
a pathname, users can set PATH to point to an arbitrary location on the file system
where they can create a program to run code of their choosing. The following code
shows a vulnerable invocation:
int print_directory_listing(char *path)
{
      char *av[] = { “ls”, “-l”, path, NULL };
      int rc;

      rc = fork();

      if(rc < 0)
           return -1;

      if(rc == 0)
           execvp(“ls”, av);

      return 0;
}

    If this process is running with special privileges or if environment variables can
be set remotely to a program containing this code, setting the PATH variable to some-
thing like PATH=/tmp runs the /tmp/ls file if it exists.

    Both execvp() and execlp() have another behavioral quirk that might be
exploitable in certain situations. Regardless of whether a full path is supplied in
the filename argument, if the call to execve() fails with the return code ENOEXEC
(indicating an error loading the binary), the shell is opened to try to run the file.
This means all shell metacharacters and environment variables (discussed in more
detail in “Indirect Invocation”) come into play.

        Auditing Tip
        When auditing code that’s running with special privileges or running
        remotely in a way that allows users to affect the environment, verify
        that any call to execvp() or execlp() is secure. Any situation in
        which full pathnames aren’t specified, or the path for the program
        being run is in any way controlled by users, is potentially dangerous.

The Argument Array
When a program is called directly, you need to know how the argument list is built.
Most programs process argument flags by using the - switch. Programs that fail to
adequately sanitize user input supplied as arguments might be susceptible to argu-
ment switches being supplied that weren’t intended.
    David Sacerdote of Secure Networks Inc. (SNI) discovered a way to abuse addi-
tional command-line arguments in the vacation program (archived at http://
insecure.org/sploits/vacation_program_hole.html), which can be used to
automatically respond to incoming e-mails with a form letter saying the person is on
vacation. The following code is responsible for sending the response message:
/*
 * sendmessage --
 *        exec sendmail to send the vacation file to sender
 */
void
sendmessage(myname)
          char *myname;
{
          FILE *mfp, *sfp;
          int i;
          int pvect[2];
          char buf[MAXLINE];

          mfp = fopen(VMSG, “r”);

      if (mfp == NULL) {
              syslog(LOG_NOTICE, “vacation: no ~%s/%s ”
                      “file.\n”, myname, VMSG);
              exit(1);
      }
      if (pipe(pvect) < 0) {
              syslog(LOG_ERR, “vacation: pipe: %s”,
                  strerror(errno));
              exit(1);
      }
      i = vfork();
      if (i < 0) {
              syslog(LOG_ERR, “vacation: fork: %s”,
                  strerror(errno));
              exit(1);
      }
      if (i == 0) {
              dup2(pvect[0], 0);
              close(pvect[0]);
              close(pvect[1]);
              fclose(mfp);
              execl(_PATH_SENDMAIL, “sendmail”, “-f”,
                  myname, from, NULL);
              syslog(LOG_ERR, “vacation: can’t exec %s: %s”,
                      _PATH_SENDMAIL, strerror(errno));
              _exit(1);
      }
      close(pvect[0]);
      sfp = fdopen(pvect[1], “w”);
      fprintf(sfp, “To: %s\n”, from);
      while (fgets(buf, sizeof buf, mfp))
              fputs(buf, sfp);
      fclose(mfp);
      fclose(sfp);
}

    The vulnerability is that myname is taken verbatim from the originating e-mail
address of the incoming message and used as a command-line argument when
sendmail is run with the execl() function. If someone sends an e-mail to a person
on vacation from the address -C/some/file/here, sendmail sees a command-line
argument starting with -C. This argument typically specifies an alternative
configuration file, and Sacerdote was able to leverage this to get sendmail to run
arbitrary commands on behalf of the vacationing user.
    Typically, when looking for vulnerabilities of this nature, you must examine
what invoked applications do with command-line arguments. Most of the time, they
parse option arguments by using the getopt() function. In this case, you need to be
aware of these points:
    ■ If an option takes an argument, it can be specified in the same string or in separate
      strings. For example, if the argument -C takes a file parameter, the argv array can
      contain one entry with just the string -C followed by another entry containing the
      filename, or it can contain just one entry in the form -C/filename.
    ■ If an argument with just two dashes is specified (--), any switches provided
      after that argument are ignored and treated as regular command-line
      arguments. For example, the command line ./program –f file -- -C file
      results in the -f switch being processed normally and the -C switch being
      ignored by getopt().
    The first point gives attackers more of a chance to exploit a potential vulnerability.
It might be useful when user input hasn’t been filtered adequately, but users can
specify only a single argument. A bug of this nature existed in old versions of the Linux
kernel when it invoked the modprobe application to automatically load kernel
modules on a user’s behalf. The vulnerable code is shown in Listing 10-1.

Listing 10-1
Kernel Probe Vulnerability in Linux 2.2
static int exec_modprobe(void * module_name)
{
    static char * envp[] = { “HOME=/”, “TERM=linux”,
        “PATH=/sbin:/usr/sbin:/bin:/usr/bin”, NULL };
    char *argv[] = { modprobe_path, “-s”, “-k”,
        (char*)module_name, NULL };
    int i;

     use_init_file_context();

     ...

     /* Allow execve args to be in kernel space. */
     set_fs(KERNEL_DS);

      /* Go, go, go... */
      if (execve(modprobe_path, argv, envp) < 0) {
          printk(KERN_ERR
                 “kmod: failed to exec %s -s -k %s, errno =”
                 “ %d\n”,
                 modprobe_path, (char*) module_name, errno);
          return -errno;
      }
      return 0;
}

    The Linux kernel would run modprobe in certain circumstances to locate a module
for handling a user-specified device. Using the ping utility (a setuid program was
required to trigger the vulnerable code path), users could specify a utility with a
leading dash, which resulted in modprobe interpreting the value as an argument
switch rather than a normal argument. Using the -C switch, local users could exploit
this vulnerability to gain root privileges.
    The second point listed previously gives developers an easy-to-use mechanism
for avoiding security problems when building argument lists. The Linux kernel
example in Listing 10-1 was fixed by inserting a -- argument (among other things)
to prevent future attacks of this nature. When auditing code where a program
builds an argument list and calls another program, keep in mind that getopt()
interprets only the arguments preceding --.

Indirect Invocation
Many libraries and language features allow developers to run a program or
command by using a command subshell. Generally, these approaches aren’t as
safe as a straightforward execve(), because command shells are general-purpose
applications that offer a lot of flexibility and potentially dangerous extraneous
functionality. The issues outlined in this section apply to programs that use a
command shell for various purposes and they also apply to shell scripts.
    The library functions popen() and system() are the most popular C mechanisms
for making use of a command subshell. Perl provides similar functionality through its
flexible open() function as well as the system() function and backtick operators.
Other languages also provide similar functionality; Python has a myriad of os
modules, and even Java has the Runtime.getRuntime().exec() method.

Metacharacters
A shell command line can have a formidable amount of metacharacters. Stripping
them all out is difficult unless you use a white-list approach. Metacharacters can be
useful to attackers in a number of ways, listed in Table 10-1.

Table 10-1
Metacharacter Uses
Metacharacter Type        Explanation
Command separators        Command separators might be used to specify more commands in a shell
                          invocation than the developer intended.
File redirection          Redirection operators might be used to trick a program into reading or writ-
                          ing files (or sockets, pipes, and so on) from the system. This might allow users
                          to see contents of files that they shouldn’t be able to or even create new files.
Evaluation operators      Most shells provide evaluation operators that perform some statement or
                          expression and return a result. If users can specify them, they might be
                          able to run arbitrary commands on the system.
Variable definitions      By specifying new environment variables or being able to include previ-
                          ously defined ones, users might be able to adversely affect the way the shell
                          performs certain function. A good example is redefining the IFS environ-
                          ment variable (discussed later in “Common Environment Variables”).

   The subject of dealing with shell metacharacters (and associated data filters)
was covered in depth in Chapter 8, “Strings and Metacharacters.”

Globbing
In addition to the standard metacharacters a typical shell processes, it also supports
the use of special characters for file system access. These characters, called
globbing characters, are wildcards that can be used to create a pattern template for
locating files based on the specified criteria. Most people use simple globbing
patterns on a daily basis, when performing commands such as this one:
ls *.c
   The characters that glob() interprets are ., ?, *, [, ], {, and }. Globbing
functionality is inherent in shell interpreters as well as a number of other places,
such as FTP daemons. If programs aren’t careful to filter out these characters, they
might render themselves susceptible to files being accessed that weren’t intended.

 Globbing Security Problems
 In many circumstances, users can take advantage of globbing, and it doesn’t represent
 a security threat, as in FTP. However, because of implementation problems within the
 glob() function in a number of libc implementations, users have been able to supply
 malformed pathnames that result in memory corruption vulnerabilities—both buffer
 overflows and double-frees. Anthony Osborne and John McDonald (one of this book’s
 authors) published an advisory for Network Associates (NAI)’s Covert Labs that
 outlined multiple buffer overflows in several glob() implementations used in FTP
 daemons. The advisory is archived at www.securityfocus.com/advisories/3202.

Environment Issues
In addition to the problems with metacharacter and globbing character filters, an
application is also at risk because of the shell’s inherent interaction with its environ-
ment. Environment trust issues are covered in “Environment Arrays” later in this
chapter, but they are mentioned here because shells tend to alter their behavior signifi-
cantly based on certain environment variable settings. Depending on the shell, certain
environmental variables can be supplied that cause the shell to read arbitrary files on
the file system and, in some cases, execute them. Most modern libc’s filter out
potentially dangerous environment variables when a setuid root process invokes a
shell (such as PATH, all the LD_* variables, and so on). However, this filtering is very
basic and might not be sufficient in some cases. In fact, shell behavior can change
dramatically in response to a wide variety of environment variables. For example, the
sudo application was vulnerable to attack when running shell scripts at one point
because of a feature in bash; certain versions of bash search for environment variables
beginning with () and then create a function inside the running shell script with the
contents of any matching environment variable. (The vulnerability is documented at
www.courtesan.com/sudo/alerts/bash_functions.html.) Although this behavior might
seem quirky, the point remains that shells frequently expand their functionality in
response to certain environment variables. This rapid expansion combined with each
shell using slightly different environment variables to achieve similar goals can make it
hard for applications to protect themselves adequately. Most applications that deal
with environment variable filtering perform a black-list approach rather than a white-
list approach to known problem-prone environment variables, so you often find that
unanticipated feature enhancements in shell implementations introduce the capability
to exploit a script running with elevated privileges.

Setuid Shell Scripts
Running shell scripts with elevated privileges is always a bad idea. What makes it
so dangerous is that the shell’s flexibility can sometimes be used to trick the script
into doing something it shouldn’t. Using metacharacters and globbing, it might be
possible to cause the script to run arbitrary commands with whatever privileges the
shell script is running with.
    An additional problem with running shell scripts is that they aren’t directly
invoked. The shell program is invoked with the shell script as an argument, in much
the same way execvp() and execlp() work when ENOEXEC is returned. Because of
this indirection, symlink attacks might also be possible.

Process Attributes
Numerous data structures associated with each process are typically maintained in
the system kernel and exposed to end users with varying degrees of transparency.

This section isolates the process attributes and behaviors that are most important
when evaluating an application’s security.
     The attack surface available to malicious local users invoking a privileged
application is largely defined by those process attributes that they are able to
directly control. In particular, attributes that are inherited from the invoking application
must be handled with exceptional care by the privileged application, as they are
essentially in an undefined state. As such, process attribute retention is the
initial focus of this section. You will see what kind of attributes a process inherits
from its invoker and what kind of a risk that each attribute class represents.
     The next step is to consider the security impact of process resource limits. This
section will show you how resource limits affect the running of a process, and how
careful manipulation of these limits can have interesting security consequences.
The semantics of file sharing across multiple processes and program executions is
also considered, to give you an idea of how implicit file descriptor passing can result
in dangerous exposures of sensitive data.
     You finish up with a study of the process environment array, which contains a
series of key/value pairs that are intended to express user and system preferences
for the application to utilize at its discretion. Finally, you examine groups of
processes used by UNIX systems to implement job control and an interactive
terminal user interface.

Process Attribute Retention
The execve() system call is responsible for loading a new program into process
memory and running it. Typically, it involves getting rid of memory mappings and
other resources associated with the current program, and then creating a fresh envi-
ronment in which to run the new program file. From a security standpoint, you
need to be aware that the new process inherits certain attributes of the old one,
which are as follows:
    ■ File descriptors—File descriptors usually get passed on from the old process to
      the new process. Potential problem areas are discussed shortly in the “File
      Descriptors” section.
    ■ Signal masks (qualified)—The new process loses all signal handlers that were
      installed in by the previous process but retains the same signal mask. Signals
      are explained in Chapter 13, “Synchronization and State.”
    ■ Effective user ID—If the program is setuid, the effective user ID becomes the user
      ID of the program file owner. Otherwise, it stays the same across the execution.
    ■ Effective group ID—If the program is setgid, the effective group ID becomes the
      group ID of the program file group. Otherwise, it stays the same across the
      execution.

      ■ Saved set-user-ID—This attribute is set to the value of the effective user ID after
       any setuid processing has been completed.
      ■ Saved set-group-ID—This attribute is set to the value of the effective group ID
        after any setgid processing has been completed.
      ■ Real user ID—This attribute is preserved across the execution.

      ■ Real group ID—This attribute is preserved across the execution.

      ■ Process ID, parent process ID, and process group ID—These attributes don’t
        change across an execve() call.
      ■ Supplemental groups—Any supplemental group privileges the process is
        running with are retained across a call to execve().
      ■ Working directory—The working directory of the new process is the same as
        that of the old process.
      ■ Root directory—The root directory of the new process is the same as that of the old
        process. This is particularly relevant for processes running in an environment
        restricted by chroot-style mechanisms.
      ■ Controlling terminal—The new process inherits the controlling terminal of the
        old process.
      ■ Resource limits—Resource limits enforce maximum limits for accessing system
        resources such as files, stack and data sizes, and number of pending core file
        sizes. They are discussed in the next section.
      ■ Umask—This attribute is used to derive a set of default permissions applied to
        new files the process creates. Security issues related to umask settings are
        described in Chapter 9.
    Many attributes listed here can be the source of potential vulnerabilities when
the old and new processes run with different privileges—that is, when a privileged
process is called or when a privileged process drops its permissions and calls an
unprivileged application. Bear in mind that the following discussion focuses on the
most common scenarios a program might encounter when traversing an execve().
There might be other situations in which privileged applications honor specific
attributes in such a way that they’re exploitable.

Resource Limits
Resource limits (abbreviated as “rlimits”) are a process-specific set of attributes that
enforce restrictions on the system resources that a process may use. The getrlimit()
and setrlimit() functions allow a process to examine and modify (to a certain
extent) its own resource limits. There are multiple resources for which each process
has defined limits. For each defined system resource a process has two associated
resource values: a soft limit and a hard limit. The soft limit value is more of a warning

threshold than a limit, in that the process may not exceed it but it is free to change the
soft limit up or down as it pleases. In fact, a process is free to move the soft limit so
that it’s any value between zero and its hard limit. Conversely, a hard limit represents
the absolute maximum resource usage that a process is allowed. A normal process
can change its hard limit, but it can only lower it, and lowering a hard limit is irre-
versible. Superuser processes, however, can also raise hard limits. The following list of
supported resource limits can be called and set via setrlimit() and
getrlimit() in Linux; other UNIX systems support some or all of these values:

    ■ RLIMIT_CORE—Maximum size in bytes of a core file that can be generated by
      the process. If this value is set to 0, the process doesn’t dump the core file.
    ■ RLIMIT_CPU—Maximum amount of CPU time in seconds that the process can
      use. If this time limit is exceeded, the process is sent the SIGXCPU signal,
      which terminates the process by default.
    ■ RLIMIT_DATA—Maximum size in bytes of the data segment for the process. It
      includes the heap as well as static variables (both initialized and uninitialized).
    ■ RLIMIT_FSIZE—Maximum size in bytes that can be written to a file. Any file
      opened by the process for writing can’t exceed this size. Any attempts to write
      to files that exceed this size result in the SIGXFSZ signal being sent to the
      process, which causes termination by default.
    ■ RLIMIT_MEMLOCK—Specifies the maximum number of bytes that can be locked
      in physical memory at one time.
    ■ RLIMIT_NOFILE—Specifies the maximum number of files a process can have
      open at one time.
    ■ RLIMIT_NPROC—Specifies the maximum amount of processes that specific user
      can run.
    ■ RLIMIT_OFILE—The BSD version of RLIMIT_NOFILE.

    ■ RLIMIT_RSS—Specifies the resident set size, which is the maximum number of
      virtual pages residing in physical memory.
    ■ RLIMIT_STACK—Specifies the maximum size in bytes for the process stack. Any
      attempt to expand the stack beyond this size generates a segmentation fault
      (SIGSEGV), which typically terminates the process.
    ■ RLIMIT_VMEM—Maximum bytes in the mapped address space.

    Rlimits are useful for developers to curtail potentially risky activities in secure
programs, such as dumping memory to a core file or falling prey to denial-of-service
attacks. However, rlimits also have a dark side. Users can set fairly tight limits on a
process and then run a setuid or setgid program. Rlimits are cleared out when a
process does a fork(), but they survive the exec() family of calls, which can be
used to force a failure in a predetermined location in the code. The reason that

setting limits is so important is that developers often don’t expect resources to be
exhausted; as a result, even if they do handle the error to some degree, the error-
handling code is usually less guarded than more well-traveled code paths. When
developers do devote effort to securing error handling code, it is usually focused on
dealing with input errors, so they rarely devote much effort to handling resource
exhaustion securely. For example, take a look at Listing 10-2 taken from the BSD
setenv() implementation.

Listing 10-2
Setenv() Vulnerabilty in BSD
int
setenv(name, value, rewrite)
        register const char *name;
        register const char *value;
        int rewrite;
{
    extern char **environ;
    static int alloced;        /* if allocated space before */
    register char *C;
    int l_value, offset;

      if (*value == ‘=’)         /* no ‘=’ in value */
          ++value;
      l_value = strlen(value);
      if ((C = __findenv(name, &offset))) {/* find if already
                                              exists */
          ...
      } else {                   /* create new slot */
          register int    cnt;
          register char   **P;

         for (P = environ, cnt = 0; *P; ++P, ++cnt);
         if (alloced) {         /* just increase size */
             P = (char **)realloc((void *)environ,
             (size_t)(sizeof(char *) * (cnt + 2)));
             if (!P)
                 return (-1);
             environ = P;
         }
         else {                 /* get new space */
             alloced = 1;       /* copy old entries into it */
             P = (char **)malloc((size_t)(sizeof(char *) *
                 (cnt + 2)));
             if (!P)
                 return (-1);
             bcopy(environ, P, cnt * sizeof(char *));

                  environ = P;
          }
          environ[cnt + 1] = NULL;

      Obviously, it’s unlikely for any of these calls to malloc() to fail, and their failure
certainly isn’t expected. Say alloced is set to 0 and malloc() does fail, however
(shown in the bolded code lines). In this case, alloced will be set to 1 to indicate that
the environment is allocated dynamically, but environ is never updated because the
call to malloc() failed. Therefore, subsequent calls to setenv() cause the original
stack buffer that environ still references to be passed as an argument to realloc()as
if it is a heap buffer!
      Although it might be possible for users to exhaust resources naturally, triggering
these code paths can often be complicated, and that’s where setting resource limits
comes in. Say you want a call to malloc() to fail at a certain point in the code; this
might not even be possible if the program hasn’t dealt with enough input data yet.
Even if it has, because malloc() occurs so often, making a specific call fail is
difficult. Using setrlimit(), attackers can have some control over the amount of
total memory the process can consume, which gives them a chance to trigger the
vulnerable code path fairly accurately.
      Michael Zalewski, a noted security researcher, noticed a similar problem in the
way that crontab functions (archived at http://seclists.org/bugtraq/1998/ Feb/
0018.html). When crontab first starts, it creates a root-owned temporary file in the
crontab directory. It reads the user’s crontab file and copies it to the temporary file.
When the copy is completed, crontab renames this temporary file with the user’s
name so that the cron daemon parses it. Zalewski noticed that if you submit a file
large enough to reach the resource limit for the file size, the soft limit signal kills
crontab while it’s still writing the file, before it can rename or unlink the temporary
file. These temporary files stay lodged in the crontab directory and evade quotas
because they are owned by root.
      Rafal Wojtczuk explained in a bugtraq post how he was able to exploit a prob-
lem in old versions of the Linux dynamic loader. Take a look at the following code:
int fdprintf(int fd, const char *fmt, ...)
{
     va_list args;
     int i;
     char buf[1024];

     va_start(args, fmt);
     i=vsprintf(buf,fmt,args);
     va_end(args);
     write(fd, buf, i);

    return i;
}
...
static int try_lib(char *argv0, char *buffer,
    char *dir, char *lib)
{
    int found;

      strcpy(buffer, dir);
      if (lib != NULL)
      {
          strcat(buffer, “/”);
          strcat(buffer, lib);
      }

      if (!(found = !uselib(buffer)))
      {
          if (errno != ENOENT)
          {
              fdprintf(2, “%s: can’t load library ‘%s’\n”,
                  argv0, buffer);
              fdprintf(2, “\t%s\n”, strerror(errno));
          }
      }

      return found;
}

     The try_lib() function is called by the dynamic loader to see whether a library
file is present. It constructs the pathname and then attempts to call uselib(), which
is a Linux system call that loads a shared library. uselib() returns errors similar to
open(), such as ENFILE. If the shared library file can’t be opened, the loader con-
structs an error message using fdprintf(). This function obviously has a buffer
overflow with its use of vsprintf() to print into the 1024-byte stack buffer buf. If
users can trigger the error that results in a call to fdprintf() and supply a long
argv0 string when loading a setuid binary, they are able to exploit the overflow.
     To exploit this error, Wojtczuk had to time it so that the system consumed the
total limit of file descriptors right before the loader attempted to load the library. He
came up with a clever attack: He used file locking and the close-on-exec flag to
ensure that his exploit program ran immediately after the exec() system call was

completed and before the kernel invoked the dynamic loader. His exploit program
then sent a SIGSTOP to the setuid program that ran, consumed all available file
descriptors, and then sent a SIGCONT. When processing returned to the dynamic
loader, no file descriptors were left to be allocated, causing the error message to be
printed and the buffer overflow to occur.
     In addition, a program that writes data to a sensitive file might be exploitable if
rlimits can be used to induce unexpected failure conditions. RLIMIT_FSIZE enforces a
maximum limit on how many bytes a file can be that a process writes to. For example,
setting this value to 5 means that any write()operation to a file will fail once the file
becomes larger than 5 bytes in length. A single write() on a new file, therefore, results
in five bytes being written to the file (and write() successfully returns 5). Any subse-
quent writes to the same file fail, and a SIGXFSZ signal is sent to the process, which will
terminate if this signal doesn’t have a handler installed. A file being appended to fails
when its total size exceeds the value set in RLIMIT_FSIZE. If the file is already larger
than the limit when it’s opened, the first write() fails. Because signal masks are also
inherited over an exec() system call, you can have a privileged program ignore the
SIGXFSZ signal and continue processing. With the combination of setting a signal
mask and imposing a file resource limit (RLIMIT_FSIZE), you can arbitrarily cause file
writes to fail at any place you choose. For example, consider a setuid root program that
does the following:
struct entry {
     char name[32];
     char password[256];
     struct entry *next;
};

int write_entries(FILE *fp, struct entry *list)
{
     struct entry *ent;

     for(ent = list; ent; ent = ent->next)
          fprintf(fp, “%s:%s\n”, ent->name, ent->password);

     return 1;
}

   This code iterates through a linked list of username/password pairs and prints
them to an output file. By using the setrlimit() function to set RLIMIT_FSIZE,
you can force fprintf() to print only a certain number of bytes to a file. This

technique might be useful for cutting an entry off just after the username: part has
been written on a line, thus causing the password to be truncated.

        Auditing Tip
        Carefully check for any privileged application that writes to a file
        without verifying whether writes are successful. Remember that
        checking for an error when calling write() might not be sufficient;
        they also need to check whether the amount of bytes they wrote
        were successfully stored in their entirety. Manipulating this
        application’s rlimits might trigger a security vulnerability by cutting
        the file short at a strategically advantageous offset.

     Often code reviewers and developers alike tend to disregard code built to han-
dle an error condition caused by resource exhaustion automatically, because they
don’t consider the possibility that users can trigger those code paths. In short, they
forget about setting resource limits. When you’re auditing applications that interact
with system resources, make sure you address this question: “If I somehow cause a
failure condition, can I leverage that condition to exploit the program?”

        Auditing Tip
        Never assume that a condition is unreachable because it seems
        unlikely to occur. Using rlimits is one way to trigger unlikely
        conditions by restricting the resources a privileged process is allowed
        to use and potentially forcing a process to die when a system
        resource is allocated where it usually wouldn’t be. Depending on the
        circumstances of the error condition you want to trigger, you might
        be able to use other methods by manipulating the program’s environ-
        ment to force an error.

File Descriptors
Many security-related aspects of UNIX are properties of how file descriptors behave
across process creation and execution. You know that file descriptors are duplicated
when a process is forked, and you’ve seen how the processes end up sharing their
access to an underlying file object through these duplicated file descriptors.
    A process can also explicitly make a copy of a file descriptor, which results in
the same underlying semantics as a file descriptor duplicated through forking. This
copying is usually done with the dup(), dup2(), or fcntl() system calls. Processes
normally pass file descriptors on to their children via fork(), but UNIX does
provide ways for file descriptors to be shared with unrelated processes by using

IPC. Interested readers can refer to W.R. Stephen’s coverage of UNIX domain sockets
in Advanced Programming in the Unix Environment (Addison-Wesley, 1992).

File Sharing
Whether process descriptors are duplicated through fork() or the dup() family of
calls, you end up with multiple file descriptors across one or more processes that
refer to the same open file object in the kernel. Consequently, all these processes
share the same access flags and internal file pointer to that file.
     If multiple processes in a system open the same file with open(), they have their
own open file structures. Therefore, they have their own file position pointers and
could have different access modes and flags set on their interface with the file. They
are still working with the same file, so changes to file contents and properties kept
in the file’s inode structure still affect a file’s concurrent users.
     You can see an example in Figure 10-2, which shows two processes that aren’t
related to each other. Both processes have the password file open. Process 2000 has
it open as its third file descriptor, and it opened the password file for read-only
access, shown in the associated open file structure. The process on the right,
process 3200, has the password file for both read and write access and has
advanced its file pointer to the location 0x33. The two processes have different levels
of access to the password file, and they have independent file pointers that track
their location in the file.
     The access a process has to a file is determined when that file is opened. In
Figure 10-2, process 3200 opened the password file with read/write access, so it
has a file descriptor and open file pointer representing that information. If
someone renames the password file, changes its permissions to octal 0000,
changes its owner and group to arbitrary people, and even deletes it from the file
system, process 3200 still has an open descriptor to that file that allows it to read
and write.

Close-on-Exec
File descriptors are retained in a process across the execution of different
programs, unless the file descriptors are especially marked for closure. This behav-
ior might not be quite what you’d expect, as UNIX tends to start most other aspects
of a process over with a clean slate when a new program runs. UNIX does allow
developers to mark certain file descriptors as close-on-exec, which means they are
closed automatically if the process runs a new program. Close-on-exec can be a
useful precaution for sensitive or critical files that developers don’t want to be
inherited by a subprogram. The file descriptor is usually marked with the fcntl()
system call, and the kernel makes a note of it in the process descriptor table for the
process. For applications that spawn new processes at any stage, always check to
see whether this step is taken when it opens files. It is also useful to make a note of

those persistent files that aren’t marked to close when a new program starts. In the
next section, you will see that haphazardly leaving these files around can have
interesting consequences.

      File descriptor table                  File descriptor table
         Process 2000                           Process 3200

  3: Password file                     5: Password file

                         System file table

        File structure                       File structure
      Access mode: read                 Access mode: read/write
        File offset 0x0                     File offset 0x33

                           inode structure
                              ID: 0x52
                          Permission: 0644
                             Owner: root
                            Group: wheel

Figure 10-2     Independent opens of the same file

File Descriptor Leaks
The possible actions a process can perform on a file descriptor are determined
when the file descriptor is first created. To put it another way, security checks are
performed only once, when the process initially creates a file descriptor by opening
or creating a resource. If you can get access to a file descriptor that was opened with
write access to a critical system file, you can write to that file regardless of your
effective user ID or other system privileges. Therefore, programs that work with file
descriptors to security-sensitive resources should close their descriptors before
running any user-malleable code. For example, take a look at a hypothetical com-
puter game that runs with the privileges necessary to open kernel memory:
      int kfd;
      pid_t p;
      char *initprog;

      kfd = safe_open(“/dev/kmem”, O_RDWR);

      init_video_mem(kfd);

      if ((initprog=getenv(“CONTROLLER_INIT_PROGRAM”)))
      {
          if ((p=safe_fork()))                 /* PARENT     */
          {
                 wait_for_kid(p);
                 g_controller_status=CONTROLLER_READY;
          }
          else                                 /* CHILD */
          {
                 drop_privs ();
                 execl(initprog, “conf”, NULL);
                 exit(0);                      /* unreached */
          }
      }

      /* main game loop */
...

      This game first opens direct access to the system’s memory via the device driver
accessible at /dev/kmem. It uses this access to directly modify memory mapped to
the video card for the purposes of performance. The game can also run an external
program to initialize a game controller, which users specify in the environment
variable CONTROLLER_INIT_PROGRAM. The program permanently drops privileges
before running this program to prevent users from simply supplying their own
program to run with elevated privileges.
      The problem with this code is that the file descriptor that references the /dev/kmem
file, kfd, is never closed before the game runs the external controller initialization pro-
gram. Even though permissions have been fully dropped, attackers could still take con-
trol of the machine by providing a malicious controller initialization program. This
attack is possible because the executed program starts with an open, writeable file
descriptor to /dev/kmem. Attackers would need to construct a fairly straightforward pro-
gram that could modify critical kernel data structures and elevate user privileges.
      This example might seem a bit contrived, but it’s quite similar to a vulnerability
in recent versions of FreeBSD. FreeBSD’s libkvm library provides access to kernel
symbols, addresses, and values for programs that need to work with kernel memory.
A researcher named badc0ded discovered that this library could leave file descriptors
open to critical files, such as /dev/kmem, and because of the library’s interface, it was
difficult for application authors to prevent a leak. Although no programs in the
standard FreeBSD distribution were found to use the library in an nonsecure fashion,

badc0ded found several ports that could be exploited to gain root privileges. (The
FreeBSD advisory can be found at http://security.freebsd.org/advisories/FreeBSD-
SA-02:39.libkvm.asc.)
     Another classic example of a file descriptor leak vulnerability is OpenBSD 2.3’s
chpass program, which had a local root vulnerability discovered by Oliver
Friedrichs from NAI (archived at http://seclists.org/bugtraq/1998/Aug/0071.html).
chpass is a setuid root application that allows nonprivileged users to edit
information about their accounts.
     In OpenBSD, user account information is stored in a database file in
/etc/pwd.db. It can be read by everyone and contains public information about user
accounts. Sensitive information, such as password hashes, is stored in the
root-owned, mode 0600 database /etc/spwd.db. The system administrator works
with these databases by editing the text file /etc/master.passwd, which resembles
the shadow password file in other UNIX systems. After an administrator edits this
file, administrative tools can use the pwd_mkdb program behind the scenes to
propagate the master.passwd file’s contents into the pwd.db and spwd.db password
databases and to a /etc/passwd file in a compatible format for general UNIX
applications to use. Chpass is one of these administration tools: It lets users edit
their account information, and then it uses pwd_mkdb to propagate the changes.
     Chpass first creates a writeable, unique file in /etc called /etc/ptmp. When
chpass is almost finished, it fills /etc/ptmp with the contents of the current
master.passwd file, making any changes it wants. Chpass then has pwd_mkdb
turn /etc/ptmp in the master.passwd file and propagates its information to the
system password databases. The /etc/ptmp file also serves as a lock file because
while it’s present on the file system, no other programs will attempt to manipulate
the password database. The following code (slightly edited) is taken from the
vulnerable version of chpass:

         tfd = pw_lock(0);
         if (tfd < 0) {
                  if (errno == EEXIST)
                            errx(1, “the passwd file is busy.”);
                  else
                            err(1, “can’t open passwd temp file”);
         }
         pfd = open(_PATH_MASTERPASSWD, O_RDONLY, 0);
         if (pfd < 0)
                  pw_error(_PATH_MASTERPASSWD, 1, 1);

         /* Edit the user passwd information if requested. */

         if (op == EDITENTRY) {
                   dfd = mkstemp(tempname);
                   if (dfd < 0)
                             pw_error(tempname, 1, 1);
                   display(tempname, dfd, pw);
                   edit(tempname, pw);
                   (void)unlink(tempname);
         }

         /* Copy the passwd file to the lock file,
             updating pw. */
         pw_copy(pfd, tfd, pw);

         /* Now finish the passwd file update. */
         if (pw_mkdb() < 0)
                  pw_error(NULL, 0, 1);

         exit(0);

     The program first uses the pw_lock() function to create /etc/ptmp, which is kept
in the file descriptor tfd (which stands for “to file descriptor”). Keep in mind that
chpass ultimately places its version of the new password file in /etc/ptmp. Chpass
then opens a read-only copy of the master.passwd file and stores it in pfd (“password
file descriptor”). This copy is used later as the source file when filling in /etc/ptmp.
     Chpass then creates a temporary file via mkstemp() and places a text description
of the user’s account information in it with display(). It then spawns an editor
program with the edit() function, allowing the user to change the information. The
edit() function first forks a new process that drops privileges fully and runs an
editor specified by the user. Once that process is completed, the changes that the
user has made are evaluated, and if they are okay, the struct passwd *pw is
updated to reflect the new changes.
     After the user edits the file and chpass updates the pw structure, chpass copies the
master.passwd file from /etc/master.passwd (via pfd) to /etc/ptmp file (via tfd).
The only thing changed in the copy is the information for the account described by
pw. After the copy is completed, pw_mkdb() is called, which is responsible for propa-
gating /etc/ptmp to the system’s password database and password files.
     There are a couple of problems related to file descriptors throughout this update
process. You can run any program of your choice when chpass calls the edit()
function, simply by setting the environment variable EDITOR. Looking at the previous

code, you can see that pfd, which has read access to the shadow password file, isn’t
closed before the editor runs. Also, tfd, which has read and write access to
/etc/ptmp, isn’t closed. Say attackers write a simple program like this one:

#include <stdio.h>
#include <fnctl.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
      int i;
      for (i=0; i<255; i++)
        if (fcntl(i, F_GETFD)!=-1)
               printf(“fd %d is active!\n”, i);
}

   This program uses a simple fcntl() call on each file descriptor to see which
ones are currently valid. Attackers could use this program as follows:
$ gcc g.c -o g
$ export EDITOR=./g
$ chpass
0 is active
1 is active
2 is active
3 is active
4 is active
chpass: ./g: Undefined error: 0
chpass: /etc/master.passwd: unchanged
$

    File descriptors 0, 1, and 2 correspond to standard in, standard out, and stan-
dard error, respectively. File descriptor 3 is a writeable descriptor for /etc/ptmp,
which is stored in the tfd variable in chpass. File descriptor 4 is a readable
descriptor for /etc/master.passwd, which is stored in pfd in chpass. Attackers
can do a few things to exploit this problem. The most straightforward is to read in
the master.passwd file from descriptor 4 and display its contents, as it contains
password hashes they might be able to crack with a dictionary password cracker.
    File descriptor 3, however, offers a better attack vector. Remember that after the
editor finishes, chpass copies the current master.passwd file’s contents into
/etc/ptmp, makes the necessary changes, and then tells pwd_mkdb to propagate that

information to the system databases. The editor can’t simply write to descriptor 3
because after it exits, pw_copy() causes tfd to be repositioned at the beginning of the
file and overwrites the changes. This is a minor obstacle: One approach to exploiting
this condition is to write data past the expected end of the file, where attackers could
place extra root-level accounts. Another approach is to fork another process and let
chpass think the editor has finished. While chpass is performing the copy operation,
the grandchild process can make modifications to /etc/ptmp, which gets propagated
to the password databases. The OpenBSD developers fixed this problem by marking
all file descriptors that chpass opens as close-on-exec with fcntl().
     Programs that drop privileges to minimize the impact of running potentially
unsafe code should be evaluated from the perspective of file descriptor management.
As you saw in the previous examples, if a program unintentionally exposes a file
descriptor to users of lesser privileges, the security consequences can be quite serious.
     Open file descriptors can also be used to subvert security measures that have
been put in place to limit the threat of a successful compromise of an application. In
setuid programs, a defensive programming technique often used is to drop privi-
leges as early as possible so that a security flaw in the program doesn’t result in
unfettered access to the machine. However, developers often neglect to ensure that
sensitive files are closed (or, depending where the vulnerability is in the program,
sensitive files might be required to be open). Network servers also use least privi-
lege designs to try to limit the impact of remote code execution vulnerabilities.
Often these servers have a large number of files open that could be of use to attack-
ers, such as configuration files, logs files, and, of course, sockets.

         Note
         The discussion on file descriptor leakage isn’t limited to files; it
         applies to any resource that can be represented with a file
         descriptor—sockets, pipes, and so on. These resources can also give
         attackers some opportunities for exploitation. One example is
         exploiting a server that has its listening socket open; by accepting
         connections on this socket, an attacker might be able to discover
         confidential information, such as passwords, usernames, and other
         sensitive data specific to the server’s tasks.

File Descriptor Omission
Every time a process opens a new file or object that causes the creation of a file
descriptor, that descriptor is placed in the process’s file descriptor table at the low-
est available numerical position. For example, say a process has file descriptors 1, 2,
3, 4, and 5 open. If it closes file descriptors 2 and 4, the next file descriptor that gets
created is 2, and the file descriptor created after that is 4.

    There’s a convention in the UNIX library code that the first three file descriptors
are special: File descriptor 0 is standard input, file descriptor 1 is standard output,
and file descriptor 2 is standard error. As you might expect, there have been security
vulnerabilities related to these assumptions. In general, if you open a file that is
assigned a file descriptor lower than 3, library code might assume your file is one
of the standard I/O descriptors. If it does, it could end up writing program output
or error messages into your file or reading program input from your file.
    From a security perspective, the basic problem is that if attackers start a setuid
or setgid program with some or all of these three file descriptors unallocated, the
privileged program might end up confusing files it opens with its standard input,
output, and error files. Consider a setuid-root application with the following code:
/* open the shadow password file */
if ((fd = open(“/etc/shadow”, O_RDWR))==-1)
      exit(1);

/* try to find the specified user */
user=argv[1];

if ((id = find_user(fd, user))==-1)
{
      fprintf(stderr, “Error: invalid user %s\n”, user);
      exit(1);
}

     This setuid root application opens the shadow password file and modifies a user
attribute specified in the program’s argument. If the user is not a valid system user,
the program prints out a brief error message and aborts processing.
     Say you go to run this program, but first you close the standard error file descriptor,
file descriptor 2. The setuid program first opens /etc/shadow in read/write mode. It’s
assigned file descriptor 2, as it’s the first available position. If you provide an invalid
username in argv[1], the setuid program would attempt to write an error message to
standard error with fprintf(). In this case, the standard I/O library would actually
write to file descriptor 2 and write the error message into the /etc/shadow file! You
could then provide a username with newline characters embedded, insert your own
entry lines in the shadow password file, and gain root access to the system.
     Joost Pol and Georgi Guninski, two independent security researchers, were most
likely the first researchers to publish an attack for this class of vulnerability
(summarized at http://security.freebsd.org/advisories/FreeBSD-SA-02:23.stdio.asc),
although the OpenBSD developers addressed it previously in a kernel patch in 1998,

and it appears to have been discussed as early as 1987. Pol and Guninski were able to
compromise the keyinit program in FreeBSD by letting it open /etc/skeykeys as file
descriptor 2 and having it write specially crafted error messages intended for standard
error to the skey configuration file.
    Many modern UNIX distributions have addressed this issue via modifications to
the kernel or the C libraries. Typically, they make sure that when a new process
runs, all three of its first file descriptors are allocated. If any aren’t, the fixes usually
open the /dev/null device driver for the missing descriptors.
    There have been a few vulnerabilities in the implementations of these protections,
however. For example, OpenBSD 3.1, 3.0, and 2.9 had a patch that wasn’t quite enough
to prevent the problem if attackers could starve the system of resources. This issue
was discovered by the researcher FozZy, and is documented at http://archives.neo-
hapsis.com/archives/vulnwatch/2002-q2/0066.html. The following code (slightly
edited) is from the vulnerable version of the sys_execve() system call in the kernel:
       /*
         * For set[ug]id processes, a few caveats apply to
         * stdin, stdout, and stderr.
         */
       for (i = 0; i < 3; i++) {

                  struct file *fp = NULL;

                  fp = fd_getfile(p->p_fd, i);

                  /*
                   * Ensure that stdin, stdout, and stderr are
                   * already allocated. You do not want
                   * userland to accidentally allocate
                   * descriptors in this range, which has
                   * implied meaning to libc.
                   *
                   * XXX - Shouldn’t the exec fail if you can’t
                   *         allocate resources here?
                   */
                  if (fp == NULL) {
                            short flags = FREAD |
                                 (i == 0 ? 0 : FWRITE);
                            struct vnode *vp;

                             int indx;

                             if ((error = falloc(p, &fp, &indx)) != 0)
                                         break;

                             if ((error = cdevvp(
                                    getnulldev(), &vp)) != 0) {
                                         fdremove(p->p_fd, indx);
                                         closef(fp, p);
                                         break;
                             }

                             if ((error = VOP_OPEN(vp, flags,
                                    p->p_ucred, p)) != 0) {
                                         fdremove(p->p_fd, indx);
                                         closef(fp, p);
                                         vrele(vp);
                                         break;
                             }
                             ...
                  }
       }

      This code goes through file descriptors 0, 1, and 2 in a new setuid or setgid process to
ensure that all the standard file descriptors are allocated. If they aren’t present and
fd_getfile() returns NULL, the rest of the code opens the null device for each unallo-
cated file descriptor. The null device is a special device that discards everything it reads;
it’s typically accessed in userland via the device driver /dev/null. This code seems to do
the trick for setuid and setgid applications, as any unallocated file descriptor in position 0,
1, or 2 is allocated with a reference to the /dev/null file.
      The problem with this code is that if any of the three file operations fail, the code
breaks out of the loop and continues running the new program. The developers were
aware of this potential problem, as evidenced by the comment about exec() failing.
The bug ended up being locally exploitable to gain root access. The described attack is
this: If attackers fill up the kernel’s global file descriptor table by opening many pipes,
they can cause the falloc() call (bolded) in the code to fail. The for loop is broken out
of, and a setuid program can be spawned with a low-numbered file descriptor closed.
The author, FozZy, was able to exploit the /usr/bin/skeyaudit program by running it

so that file descriptor 2 was unallocated. skeyaudit opened /etc/skeykeys as file
descriptor 2, and then proceeded to write attacker-controllable error messages in the
file and consequently allowing attackers to gain root access.
     Georgi Guninski found a similar problem in FreeBSD’s code to prevent this
issue. The code was basically the same as the previous example, except in certain
conditions, the kernel system call closed a file descriptor later in the processing.
Guninski was able to open a file as file descriptor 2 that the kernel would later close
if the file that the descriptor references is /proc/curproc/mem. By running
/usr/bin/keyinit with this file assigned to descriptor 2, he was able to get a string
of his choosing inserted into /etc/skeykeys, which equated to a root compromise.
This vulnerability is documented at www.ciac.org/ciac/bulletins/m-072.shtml.
     From an auditing perspective, you should consider this vulnerability for cross-
platform UNIX applications. Arguably, the OS should handle it in the kernel or
standard libraries, but a case could definitely be made for cross-platform programs
needing a more defensive approach. OpenBSD, FreeBSD, NetBSD, and Linux have
patched this issue in recent versions, but the status of older versions of these OSs
and commercial UNIX versions is less certain.

Environment Arrays
A process maintains a set of data known as its environment or environment
variables, which is a collection of configuration strings that programs reference to
determine how a user wants certain actions to be performed. A process’s
environment is usually maintained by the standard library, but the UNIX kernel
provides special mechanisms for transferring a process environment across the
execve() system call.
     The environment is represented in memory as an array of pointers to C strings. The
last element in this array is a NULL pointer that terminates the list. The array is pointed
to by the global libc variable environ. Each pointer in the environment array is a pointer
to a separate NULL-terminated C string, which is called an environment variable.
Figure 10-3 shows a process environment in a program running on a UNIX system.
     When a process calls execve() to run a new program, it provides a pointer to
the new program’s environment using the envp parameter. If a process passes a
pointer to its own array of environment strings, the UNIX kernel takes responsibility
for transferring that environment over to the new process image. Environment vari-
ables are transferred to the new process in a particular way by the execve() system
call. A UNIX kernel goes through the provided environment array and copies each
environment string to the new process in a tightly packed format. Then it builds a
corresponding array of pointers to these strings by walking through the adjacent
strings it placed together. Figure 10-4 shows what the process environment depicted
in Figure 10-3 might look like after an execve(). Notice how all the environment
variables are adjacent in memory, and they are placed in order of their appearance

in the original environment. Don’t pay too much attention to the addresses. On a
real UNIX system, the environment strings would likely be next to the program
argument strings, at the top of the program stack.

       BOB=HITHERE

                   BOBO=BOBOPO                  environ

                                                0x4000

       IFS=SILLY                                0x1000

                                                0x12003

                                                0x12003

                                                 0x510

                          JIM=TEST               NULL

Figure 10-3     Environment of a process

      environ

      0x100

      0x10a                  IFS=SILLY     BOBO=BOBOPO          JIM=TEST

      0x116                 JIM=TEST       BOB=HITHERE

      0x11F

      0x128

      NULL

Figure 10-4     Process environment immediately after an execve()

    After the kernel has finished setting up the process, it’s up to the standard sys-
tem libraries to manage the environment. These libraries maintain a global variable
called environ that always points to the array of strings composing the process’s
environment. The first piece of runtime glue code that’s called when a new program
runs immediately sets environ to point to the array of environment variables set up
by the kernel at the top of the stack.

    As a process runs, it can add, modify, and delete its environment variables.
When additions are made, the environment manipulation functions (described
momentarily) are responsible for finding new memory to store the environment list
and the strings when required. They do so by using memory from the heap, allocated
with malloc() and resized with realloc().
    Different UNIX implementations have different semantics for handling the
environment. In general, processes use five main functions to manipulate their
environment: getenv(), used to retrieve environment variables; setenv(), used to
set environment variables; putenv(), a different interface for setting environment
variables; unsetenv(), used for deleting an environment variable; and clearenv(),
used to clear out a process’s environment. Not all UNIX implementations have all
five functions, and the semantics of functions vary across versions.
    As far as the kernel cares, the environment is simply an array of NULL-termi-
nated strings. The standard C library, however, expects strings to be in a particular
format, separating environment variables into a name and a value. The = character
is used as the delimiter, so a typical environment variable is expected to follow
this format:
NAME=VALUE

    The library functions provided for programs to manipulate their environment
generally work with this expectation. These functions are described in the following
paragraphs.
    The getenv() function is used to look up environment variables by name and
retrieve their corresponding values:
char *getenv(const char *name);

     It takes a single argument, which is the name of the environment variable to
retrieve, and searches through the program’s environment for that variable. Say you
call it like this:
res = getenv(“bob”);

     getenv() would go through each string in the environment, starting at the
first one in the array pointed to by environ. The first environment string it finds
starting with the four characters bob= will be returned to the caller (actually, it
returns a pointer to the byte immediately following the = character). So for an
environment string defined as bob=test, getenv(“bob”) would return a pointer to
the string test. getenv() is supported across practically all UNIX environments.
     The setenv() function is used to add or update environment variables:
int setenv(const char *name, const char *val, int rewrite);

      This function takes a name of an environment variable and a potential value. If the
name environment variable doesn’t exist, the function creates it and sets it to the value
indicated in the second argument. If the name environment variable does exist, the
behavior depends on the rewrite argument. If it’s set, setenv()replaces the existing
environment variable, but if it’s not, setenv() doesn’t do anything to the environment.
    If setenv() needs to add a new environment variable to the array pointed to by
environ, it can run into one of two situations. If the original environ set up by the
kernel is still in use, setenv() calls malloc() to get a new location to store the array
of environment variables. On the other hand, if environ has already been
allocated on the process heap, setenv() uses realloc() to resize it. setenv()
usually allocates memory off the heap to store the environment variable string,
unless there’s room to write over an old value.
    On the surface, the putenv() function seems similar to setenv():
int putenv(const char *str);

    However, there’s an important difference between the two. putenv() is used for
storing an environment variable in the environment, but it expects the user to pro-
vide a full environment string in str in the form NAME=VALUE. putenv() replaces any
existing environment variable by that name. On many systems, putenv() actually
places the user-supplied string in str directly in the environment array. It doesn’t
allocate a copy of the string as setenv() does, so if you give it a pointer to a string
you modify later, you’re tampering with the program’s environment. Under BSD
systems, however, putenv() does allocate a copy of the string; it’s implemented as a
wrapper around setenv().

          Note
          Linux used to allocate a copy of the environment string in the past,
          but changed this behavior in recent glibc versions. The man page on
          a Linux system for putenv() explicitly notes this behavior change in
          the Notes section:
              The putenv() function is not required to be reentrant, and the
              one in libc4, libc5 and glibc2.0 is not, but the glibc2.1 version is.
              Description for libc4, libc5, glibc: If the argument string is of
              the form name, and does not contain an = character, then the
              variable name is removed from the environment. If putenv()
              has to allocate a new array environ, and the previous array
              was also allocated by putenv(), then it will be freed. In no
              case will the old storage associated to the environment vari-
              able itself be freed.

              The libc4 and libc5 and glibc 2.1.2 versions conform to
              SUSv2: the pointer string given to putenv() is used. In
              particular, this string becomes part of the environment;
              changing it later will change the environment. (Thus, it is an
              error is to call putenv() with an automatic variable as the
              argument, then return from the calling function while string
              is still part of the environment.) However, glibc 2.0-2.1.1
              differs: a copy of the string is used. On the one hand this
              causes a memory leak, and on the other hand it violates
              SUSv2. This has been fixed in glibc2.1.2.
              The BSD4.4 version, like glibc 2.0, uses a copy.

   The unsetenv() function is used to remove an environment variable from the
environment array:
void unsetenv(const char *name);

    It searches through the array for any environment variables with the name name.
For each one it finds, it removes it from the array by shifting all remaining pointers
up one slot.
    The clearenv() function is used to clear the process environment completely
and get rid of all environment variables:
int clearenv(void);

Binary Data
One interesting feature of the environment is that it can be used to place arbitrary
data at the top of the stack of a program you intend to run. While this is more of
an interesting topic in the context of writing exploits, it’s worth covering here.
The kernel reads the environment strings you pass execve() in order and places
them adjacent to each other at the top of the new process’s stack. It works out so
that you can supply mostly arbitrary binary data. Say you have an array like this:

env[0]=”abcd”;
env[1]=”test”;
env[2]=””;
env[3]=”hi”;
env[4]=””;
env[5]=NULL;

      In memory, you would expect the kernel to create the following sequence of bytes:
abcd\0test\0\0hi\0\0

     The use of an empty string (“”) causes a single NUL byte to be written to the envi-
ronment. Because environment strings need to be preserved across a call to execve(),
the strings need to be manually copied into the new process’s address space before the
new program can be run. This is logical; because execve() unmaps all memory of the
old process, which includes environment strings. If you know where the stack starts
for the new process (usually a known location, except when memory randomization
mechanisms are used) and what environment variables exist, you know exactly where
these environment strings reside in memory in the newly running process. The envi-
ronment maintenance routines don’t impose any limitations on the nature of data that
can exist in the environment, so you’re free to add binary data containing machine
code designed to spawn a shell or another nefarious task.

Confusing putenv() and setenv()
Because of the slight semantic differences between putenv() and setenv(), these
functions could possibly be used in the wrong context. To review, the putenv()
function doesn’t actually make a copy of the string you’re setting in the environ-
ment in many systems. Instead, it just takes the pointer you pass and slots it directly
into the environment array. This behavior is definitely a problem if you can modify
data that is being pointed to later on in the program, or if the pointer is discarded,
as shown in the following example:
int set_editor(char *editor)
{
      char edstring[1024];

      snprintf(edstring, sizeof(edstring), “EDITOR=%s”, editor);

      return putenv(edstring);
}

      This function seems to be doing the right thing, but there’s a problem: The
edstring variable is directly imported into the environment array (providing that it
is not being run on BSD or older Linux versions). In this example, a local stack vari-
able is inserted in the environment. Since stack variables are automatically cleaned
up when the function returns, the pointer in the environment then points to unde-
fined stack data! Through careful manipulation of the program, attackers might be
able control data placed on the stack where edstring used to be and hence intro-
duce arbitrary variables into the environment.

    A bug of this nature might also surface when applications are designed to
work on a number of platforms. Specifically, if Solaris is one of the target
platforms, developers are required to use putenv() because Solaris doesn’t imple-
ment setenv(). Here’s a slightly modified example showing what this code might
look like:
int set_editor(char *editor)
{
#ifdef _SOLARIS
      char edstring[1024];

      snprintf(edstring, sizeof(edstring), “EDITOR=%s”, editor);

      return putenv(edstring);
#else
      return setenv(“EDITOR”, editor, 1);
#endif                                  /* _SOLARIS */
}

    This code seems as though it should be functionally equivalent regardless of the
target platform. But, as you already know, the call to putenv() is unsafe in this
instance whereas setenv() is not.
    Another possible vulnerability is one in which the argument passed to putenv()
contains an environment value rather than the name followed by the value.
Although this type of error might seem unlikely, it has happened in the past. Listing
10-3 is from the Solaris telnetd code.
Listing 10-3
Misuse of putenv() in Solaris Telnetd
char      binshellvar[] = “SHELL=/bin/sh”;

if (curshell = getenv(“SHELL”)) {
    oldshell = strdup(curshell);
    (void) putenv(binshellvar);
} else
    oldshell = (char *)NULL;

...

if (oldshell)
    (void) putenv(oldshell);

    The SHELL variable is retrieved from the environment and then later reinserted
in the environment with putenv() without prepending SHELL=. If users can supply
the SHELL variable, they are able make the value of that variable an arbitrary
environment name-and-value pair (such as LD_PRELOAD=/tmp/lib) and thus intro-
duce potentially dangerous environment values into the program that might lead to
further compromise.

          Note
          Upon further examination, it turns out this bug isn’t exploitable,
          because even though environment variables have been read from
          the user during option negotiation, they haven’t been entered in the
          environment at this point in execution. However, it’s worth showing
          the code in Listing 10-3 because the use of putenv() is incorrect.

Extraneous Delimiters
You know that standard library functions expect to see environment variables with
the NAME=VALUE format. However, consider the case where you have a variable for-
matted like this:
NAME=LASTNAME=VALUE=ADDEDVALUE

    Variations in how environment variables are formatted can be important,
depending on how the algorithms responsible for fetching and storing values are
implemented. Bugs of this nature have surfaced in the past in how the libc functions
setenv()/unsetenv() work. The following is a quote from a post made by a security
researcher named David Wagner (the post can be read in full at
http://archives.neohapsis.com/archives/linux/lsap/2000-q3/0303.html):

      ObHistoricalNote: By the way, does anyone remember the bug in telnetd accepting
      environment variables? There was a fascinating bug explained there: setenv
      (name,val) and unsetenv(name) do not behave as expected when ‘name’ contains
      an ‘=’ character! setenv(“x=y”,”z”) defines the environment variable called “x”;
      unsetenv(“x=y”) deletes the variable called “x=y”. Subtle, eh? Perhaps it would be
      nice if setenv() refused to set a variable with ‘=’ in its name, what do you think?
     As a result of these problems, current setenv() and unsetenv() implementations
are selective about allowing names with delimiters (=) in them. That said, it’s usually a
good idea to err on the side of caution when making assumptions about library
support of production systems.
     Extending on this idea, if an application decides to manually edit the environment
without the aid of library APIs, comparing how variables are found and how they are
set is a good idea. These functions should be complementary, and if they’re not, the

opportunity to insert variables that should have been weeded out might be possible.
After all, libcs for a number of UNIX variants made these mistakes in the past, and so
it’s likely that developers writing new code will fall into the same traps. The same
possibility exists for simulated environments (such as those generated by scripting
languages). If in principle they’re attempting to achieve the same effect with a synthe-
sized environment structure, they are liable to make the same sort of mistakes. For
example, take a look at these two functions:
struct env_ent {
     char *name,
     char *value;
     struct env_ent *next;
};

int process_register_variable(struct env_ent *env,
char *valuepair)
{
     char *val;
     int i, name_len;
     struct env_ent *env0 = env;

     val = strchr(valuepair, ‘=’);

     if(!val)
         return –1;

     name_len = val – valuepair;

     for(; env; env = env->next){
         if(strncmp(env->name, valuepair, name_len) == 0)
              break;
     }

     if(!env)
         return create_new_entry(env0, valuepair);

     free(env->value);

      env->value = strdup(val+1);

      return 1;
}

char      *process_locate_variable(struct env_ent *env, char *name)
{
      char *n, *d;

      for(; env; env = env->next){
           if(strcmp(env->name, name) == 0)
               return env->value);
      }

      return NULL;
}

    Do you see the problem? The way that variables are located when determining
whether to overwrite a value already in the environment differs from the way they
are located when just fetching a value. Specifically, the use of strncmp() in
process_register_variable() is a little faulty because it returns 0 if a length of 0 is
passed to it. If the string =BOB is passed in, the function replaces the first entry in
the environment with the value BOB!
    Another important problem to focus on is code that makes the assumption
about input not containing extraneous delimiters when using putenv(). Consider
the following example:
int set_variable(char *name)
{
      char *newenv;

      intlength = strlen(“APP_”) + strlen(“=new”) + strlen(name) + 1;

      newenv = (char *)malloc(length);

      snprintf(newenv, length, “APP_%s=new”, name);

      return putenv(newenv);
}

   The set_variable() function makes the assumption that the name variable
doesn’t contain a delimiter. However, if it does, the user is free to select an arbitrary
environment value for the variable, which obviously isn’t what the code intended.

Duplicate Environment Variables
Another potential pitfall in programs that interact with environment variables is
having more than one variable with the same name defined in the environment.
This error was more of a problem in the past because many libc implementations
neglected to remove multiple instances of a variable (because of faulty unsetenv()
implementations). Having said that, it’s still an issue occasionally, so keep it in
mind when you’re auditing environment sanitization code for two reasons:
    ■ Although most modern UNIX implementations now have environment APIs
      that are quite thorough in managing variables, you can’t assume that the
      deployment environment of an application will provide a safe libc implemen-
      tation. Depending on the application and its intended purpose, it might be
      destined for installation on older systems that are vulnerable to some of the
      tricks described previously.
    ■ Every now and then a program might choose to manually manipulate the
      environment instead of using the libc functions. In these cases, the
      program could make the same mistakes that were made in older
      implementations of libc.
     If the function terminates when it finds the requested variable in question, it’s
likely vulnerable to attackers sneaking values through by setting multiple instances
of the same value. This problem existed in the loadmodule program in SunOS 4.1.x.
The environment was manually cleaned out before a call to system() to stop attack-
ers from setting the IFS variable (discussed later in “Other Environment Variables”)
and, therefore, being able to run arbitrary commands with root privileges. Unfortu-
nately, the code neglected to correctly deal with multiple instances of the same vari-
able being set, so the call to system() was still vulnerable to exploitation. This bug
is documented at www.osvdb.org/displayvuln.php?osvdb_id=5899.
     To cite a more recent example, the accomplished researcher Solar Designer noted
a problem in the Linux loader supplied with older versions of glibc. The loader checks
for the existence of environment variables prefixed with LD_ and uses them to deter-
mine behavioral characteristics of how the loader functions. These variables allow
loading additional or alternate libraries into the process’s address space. Naturally,
this behavior isn’t desirable for setuid applications, so these variables were filtered
out of the environment when loading such a program. However, a bug in the loaders
unsetenv() function caused it to neglect filtering out duplicate environment variables
correctly, as shown in the following code:

static void
_dl_unsetenv(const char *var, char **env)
{
         char *ep;

         while ((ep = *env)) {
                   const char *vp = var;

                   while (*vp && *vp == *ep) {
                             vp++;
                             ep++;
                   }
                   if (*vp == ‘\0’ && *ep++ == ‘=’) {
                             char **P;

                             for (P = env;; ++P)
                                       if (!(*P = *(P + 1)))
                                                 break;
                   }
                   env++;
         }
}

    When a variable is found that needs to be stripped, this function moves all other
environment variables after it back one place in the environment array. However,
then it increments the environment variable pointer (env), so if two entries with the
same name are in the environment right next to each other, the program misses the
second instance of the variable!

        Note
        During the process of researching loader behavior for this book, the
        authors noticed that as of this writing, this bug is also present in the
        ELF loader shipped with the OpenBSD (3.6) version.

    So even when code does attempt to deal with multiple instances of the same
variable, a program might accidentally expose itself to potential security risks if it
doesn’t analyze the environment correctly.

Common Environment Variables
Now that you’re familiar with the details of how a typical UNIX environment is
managed, you can begin to examine some common variables used by applications.
The variables described in the following sections are just a few of the environment
variables you’ll encounter regularly in applications you audit, so don’t assume that
variables not listed here are innocuous.
Shell Variables
A number of variables can modify how the typical UNIX shell behaves. Many of these
values are always present because they’re initialized with default values if a shell is
started without them. You have already seen that system shells can play a big part in
how applications operate when indirect program invocation is used or privileged shell
scripts are running. Many other programs use a number of these variables as well.
Note that in contemporary UNIX variants, many of these variables are considered
potentially dangerous and are filtered out when a setuid process runs. Still, this is by
no means true of all systems. Also, keep in mind that those applications you interact
with remotely and supply environment variables to are not automatically subject to
the same environment restrictions if the program isn’t setuid.

PATH
The PATH environment variable is intended to contain a list of directories separated
by colons (:). When the shell needs to run a program that’s specified without direc-
tory path components, it searches through each directory in the PATH variable in the
order that they appear. The current directory is checked only if it’s specified in the
PATH variable.
     Programs that run with privilege and make use of subshells can run into trouble
if they don’t use explicit paths for command names. For example, take a look at the
following code:
snprintf(buf, sizeof(buf),
         “/opt/ttt/logcat%s | gzcat | /opt/ttt/parse >
/opt/ttt/results”,
           logfile);
system(buf);

    This program makes use of the system() function to run the /opt/ttt/logcat
program, pipe its output to the gzcat program to decompress the log, pipe the
decompressed log to the /opt/ttt/parse program, and then redirect the parsing
results to the /opt/ttt/results file. Note that gzcat is called without specifying a
directory path, so the shell opened with the system() function searches through the
PATH environment variable to find the gzcat binary. If this code was part of a setuid
root application, attackers could do something like this:

$ cd /tmp
$ echo ‘#!/bin/sh’ > gzcat
$ echo ‘cp /bin/sh /tmp/sh’ >> gzcat
$ echo ‘chown root /tmp/sh’ >> gzcat
$ echo ‘chmod 4755 /bin/sh’ >> gzcat
$ chmod 755 ./gzcat
$ export PATH=.:/usr/bin:/usr/local/bin
$ /opt/ttt/start_process
$ ./sh
#

    In this code, attackers change the PATH environment variable so that the current
directory is the first directory that’s searched. This way, the shell script gzcat in the
current directory, /tmp/, runs instead of the intended program, /usr/bin/gzcat.
Attackers made a simple shell script in the place of gzcat that allowed them to
obtain root access by creating a setuid root copy of /bin/sh.

HOME
The HOME environment variable indicates where the user’s home directory is
placed on the file system. Naturally, users can set this variable to any directory
they want, so it’s important for privileged programs to actually look up the
user’s home directory in the system password database. If a privileged program
tries to use a subshell to interact with a file that’s specified relative to a user’s
home directory, such as ~/file, most shells use the value of the HOME
environment variable.

IFS
IFS (which stands for “internal field separator”) is an environment variable that tells
the shell which characters represent whitespace. Normally, it’s set to break input on
space, tabs, and new lines. On some shells, IFS can be set so that it interprets other
characters as whitespace but interprets straightforward commands in odd ways.
Consider the following program excerpt:
system(“/bin/ls”);

    This simple program excerpt makes use of the system() function to run the
/bin/ls program. If an attacker sets the IFS variable to / and the shell honors it,
the meaning of this command would be changed entirely. With a normal IFS set-
ting, the string /bin/ls is interpreted as one token, /bin/ls. If the attacker set IFS
to /, the shell interprets it as two tokens: bin and ls. The shell would first try to run
the bin program and pass it an argument of ls. If a program named bin happened

to be in the current PATH, the shell would start that program. An attacker could
exploit this situation as shown in the following example:
$ cd /tmp
$ echo ‘sh -i’ > bin
$ chmod 755 ./bin
$ export PATH=.:/usr/bin:/usr/local/bin
$ export IFS=”/”
$ run_vuln_program
$ ./sh
#

   The attacker changed the IFS variable so that / would be interpreted as
whitespace, and the system() function would try to run the program named bin.
The attacker created a suitable program named bin that opened a shell as root, and
then set PATH so that his bin program was first on the list. IFS attacks don’t really
work against modern shells, but ENV attacks, described in the next section, are a bit
more plausible.

ENV
When a noninteractive shell starts, it often looks to a certain environment variable
for a filename to run as a startup script. This environment variable is typically
expanded, so one can use a malicious value, as in this example:
ENV=``/tmp/evil``

    Any subshells that are opened actually run the /tmp/evil file. BASH_ENV is a
similar variable honored by bash. Old versions of sliplogin were vulnerable to this
issue, as shown in the following code:
    (void)sprintf(logincmd, “%s %d %ld %s”, loginfile,

    unit, speed, loginargs);

     ...

    /*
     * Run login and logout scripts as root (real and
     * effective); current route(8) is setuid root and
     * checks the real uid to see whether changes are
     * allowed (or just “route get”).

       */
      (void) setuid(0);
      if (s = system(logincmd)) {
            syslog(LOG_ERR, “%s login failed: exit status
➥ %d from %s”,
                    loginname, s, loginfile);
            exit(6);
      }

      This error could be exploited by logging in to a slip-enabled account and having
telnet set an environment variable of ENV that the shell opened by system() would
expand and run.
SHELL
Some programs use the SHELL environment variable to determine a user’s
preferred command shell. Naturally, if privileged programs honor this variable,
trouble can ensue.
EDITOR
Some programs use the EDITOR environment variable to determine users’ preferred
editors. Obviously, this variable is also dangerous for a privileged program
to trust. Sebastian Krahmer noted a vulnerability in the setuid program cron on a
number of UNIX distributions that resulted in the program pointed to in the
EDITOR variable running with elevated privileges (announced by SuSE at
http://lists.suse.com/archive/suse-security-announce/2001-May/0001.html).

Runtime Linking and Loading Variables
Most current UNIX OSs use make extensive use of shared libraries, so that
commonly required functionality doesn’t need to be continually re-implemented by
each application. The creation of an executable program file involves the use of a
special program called a linker, which tries to find program-required symbols in a
list of libraries. If the program is being statically compiled, required library code is
simply copied from the library into the executable program file, thus the program
will be able to run without having to dynamically load that library. Conversely,
dynamically linked executables are created by compiling a list of required modules
for the various symbols that the application needs, and storing this list within the
executable file. When the OS runs a dynamically linked program, startup frame-
work code finds the shared libraries in this list and maps them into the process’s
memory when they are needed.

LD_PRELOAD
LD_PRELOAD provides a list of libraries that the runtime link editor loads before it
loads everything else. This variable gives you an easy way to insert your own
code into a process of your choosing. In general, UNIX doesn’t honor LD_PRELOAD
when running a setuid or setgid program, so this variable isn’t likely to be a
direct vulnerability. However, if users can influence the environment of a
program running with privilege (but isn’t setuid), LD_PRELOAD and similar
variables can come into play.
    For example, the telnet daemon allows a network peer to define several envi-
ronment variables. These environment variables are typically set before the login
program runs, and if the telnet daemon doesn’t strip out LD_PRELOAD properly, it
can lead to an exploitable condition. Several years ago, many telnet daemons hon-
ored the LD_PRELOAD environment variable, thus creating an opportunity for attack-
ers to load arbitrary libraries and run code of their choosing.
LIBRARY PATH
LD_LIBRARY_PATH provides a list of directories containing shared libraries. The
runtime link editor searches through this list first when looking for shared libraries.
This variable is ignored for setuid/setgid binaries. Again, when users might have
influence over the environment of a privileged application, sanitizing linking/load-
ing-related environment variables correctly is important.

 Object Linking Vulnerabilities
 On a related note to environment variables for the linker, a few isolated cases of vul-
 nerabilities have been found in executables in the way they’re compiled. Specifically,
 the vulnerabilities have to do with the way library files required by a program are
 located on the file system. The dlopen() man page specifies this resolution process:
    ■ (ELF only) If the executable file for the calling program contains a DT_RPATH

      tag and doesn’t contain a DT_RUNPATH tag, the directories listed in DT_RPATH
      are searched.
    ■ If the environment variable LD_LIBRARY_PATH is defined as containing a
      colon-separated list of directories, these directories are searched. (As a
      security measure, this variable is ignored for setuid and setgid programs).
    ■ (ELF only) If the executable file for the calling program contains a DT_RUNPATH
      tag, the directories listed in that tag are searched.
    ■ The cache file /etc/ld.so.cache maintained by ldconfig(8) is checked to see
      whether it contains an entry for the filename.
    ■ The /lib and /usr/lib directories are searched (in that order).

                                                                             continues...

 Object Linking Vulnerabilities, Continued
 More steps are involved in this process than you might expect, and a number of
 vulnerabilities have surfaced in the past because of this resolution procedure (in
 addition to the LD_LIBRARY_PATH and LD_PRELOAD attacks already mentioned).
 In a few cases, the DT_RPATH or DT_RUNPATH tags embedded in ELF executables
 have listed nonsecure directories that are searched for libraries the program
 depends on. These tags are usually added to an executable with the -R or –rpath
 linker options. With relative paths or paths that are writeable, it’s possible for an
 attacker to have a rogue library loaded into the process and run arbitrary code.
 One example in the CVSup package is documented at www.securiteam.com/
 securitynews/5LP020UC0Q.html.
 Additionally, the AIX linker was found to exhibit odd behavior compared with
 other standard linkers; any program compiled with the -L flag (used to locate
 libraries at compile time) added those paths to the DT_RPATH tag in the executable.
 Because the -L flag is frequently used to set relative paths, a number of programs
 were vulnerable to privilege escalation caused by inappropriate search paths. This
 bug is documented at www.securiteam.com/unixfocus/5EP0I000JC.html.
 There has also been at least one attack against the resolution of paths via the
 /etc/ld.so.cache file. Previously, glibc allowed passing the LD_PRELOAD variable to
 setuid and setgid applications as long as the names didn’t contain a / character and
 the library to be preloaded was setuid. This second check was neglected if the library
 to be preloaded existed in the /etc/ld.so.cache file. This in turn provided attackers
 with the opportunity to create or modify local files with elevated privileges (as
 pointed out at www.securityfocus.com/archive/1/158736/2005-02-06/2005-02-12/2).

Other Environment Variables
The environment variables you have looked at so far are widely used, but they aren’t
the only ones that have caused problems in the past—far from it! Whenever programs
run with privileges different from the user interacting with it on a local system or run
on a remote system in which users can influence the environment, there’s the danger
of the program exposing itself to risk when it interprets values from the environment.
The values you have seen are standard shell environment variables, but less
commonly used or application-specific variables have also been manipulated to
compromise an application. This vulnerability is possible especially when libraries are
performing actions based on the environment; application developers might not be
aware those values are being read and acted on because it’s all happening behind the
scenes. Indeed, some of the most prevalent environment-related vulnerabilities in
UNIX have been a result of libraries using environment variables in an unsafe

manner. Take the UNIX locale vulnerability Andreas Hasenak discovered, for
example (www1.corest.com/common/showdoc.php?idx=127&idxseccion=10). Many
UNIX OSs were vulnerable to local (and sometimes remote) compromise because the
formatting of output was dictated according to language files specified by certain
environment variables (NLSPATH, LC_MESSAGES, and LANG in this case, although it
varies slightly among operating systems).
    Another notable example was abusing TERM and TERMCAP environment variables
via telnetd in a number of UNIX systems (BSD and Linux). Theo De Raadt discov-
ered that these variables, if present, specified a file that ws parsed to determine
certain terminal capabilities (more details at www.insecure.org/sploits/
bsd.tgetent.overflow.html). Attackers who were able to write an arbitrary file to a
target host’s file system could upload erroneous TERMCAP files and then connect via
telnetd and have them parsed, thus triggering a buffer overflow in the tgetent()
function.
    Performing a thorough application audit of a UNIX program requires identify-
ing variables that an application is using explicitly and having a reasonable idea of
the environment variables standard libraries use behind the scenes.

Process Groups, Sessions, and Terminals
Each process belongs to a process group, which is a related set of processes. One
process in the group is the process group leader, and the process group’s numeric
ID is the same as its group leader’s process ID. Programs that are descendents of
the group leader remain in the process group, unless one of them creates their own
process group with setpgid() or setsid().
     A session is a collection of process groups, usually tied to a terminal device. The
session leader has a connection with this device, known as the controlling terminal.
Each session with a terminal has a single foreground process group, and the rest of
the process groups are background process groups. This organization of processes
around the terminal allows for the natural interface that UNIX users are accustomed
to. The terminal device takes certain input from the user, and then sends signals to
all processes in the foreground process group.

Terminal Attacks
Terminal emulation software interprets a number of escape sequences to help format
data on the screen and perform other tasks, such as taking screen captures, altering
terminal parameters, and even setting background images. This flexibility might allow
data being displayed via a terminal emulator to perform unintended actions on behalf
of users viewing the data. HD Moore published an interesting paper (available at
http://archives.neohapsis.com/archives/bugtraq/2003-02/att-0313/01- Termulation.txt)
that details a few attacks on popular terminal emulation software, with consequences

ranging from simple denial-of-service vulnerabilities to stealing privileges from the vic-
tim viewing data that contains embedded escape sequences.
    From a code-auditing perspective, you can’t audit applications for bugs related
to program output if the output is viewed by a third party via a terminal emulator
program. However, you need to be aware that these bugs exist, and sometimes it
makes sense to recommend that an application sanitize output so that nonprintable
characters don’t appear because of problems such as the ones described in HD
Moore’s paper. He points out the syslog daemon as an example and describes the
behavior of other popular implementations.

Session Logins
Occasionally, you encounter code running in a privileged context that determines the
user interacting with it by using the getlogin() function. This function exists in BSD-
based UNIX implementations, and it returns the current user associated with the
session. This value is set at some earlier point with setlogin(). Applications that use
these functions have to be careful, particularly with setlogin() because it affects all
processes in the process group, not just the current process. To use setlogin() safely,
processes need to make themselves the leader of a new session; otherwise, they
inadvertently set the login name for the entire process group. (Only processes running
with superuser privileges can use the setlogin() function.) As the OpenBSD man page
points out, this mistake is easy to make because this behavior is the opposite of tradi-
tional models of UNIX inheritance of attributes. A process becomes a process group
leader by using setsid() or setpgrp(); however, only setsid() is adequate for use
before a call to setlogin() because setpgrp() doesn’t put the process as a new session,
just a new process group. The following code shows an incorrect use of setlogin():
int initialize_user(char *user)
{
      if(setpgid(0, 0) < 0)
          return –1;
      return setlogin(user);
}

    Because this code incorrectly uses setpgid() instead of setsid(), the
setlogin() call alters the login name of every process in the session to user.
    For an incorrect use of setlogin() to be exploited, a program running in the same
session must use the getlogin() function in an insecure manner. Because setlogin()
can be used inappropriately (as in the preceding example), the getlogin() function
could return a username that’s not the user whose privileges the process is running
with. Any application that assumes the username is correct is potentially making a big
mistake. Here’s an example of a dangerous use of getlogin():

int exec_editor(char *filename)
{
    char *editor;
    char *username;
    struct passwd *pw;

    username = getlogin();

    if((editor = getenv(“EDITOR”)) == NULL)
         return –1;
    if((pw = getpwnam(username)) == NULL)
         return –1;

    setuid(pw->pw_uid);

    execl(editor, editor, filename, NULL);
}

    This (contrived) example sets the user ID inappropriately if the value returned
from getlogin() is incorrect. If it returns an inappropriate username, this program
sets the user ID to the wrong person!
    When auditing code that uses setlogin() or getlogin(), you should make the
assumption that any insecure use of setlogin() can result in compromise. Even if
getlogin() isn’t used in the application being audited, it’s used plenty of other
places on a default system. Similarly, an application shouldn’t be putting too much
faith in the value returned by getlogin(). It’s a good idea to approach the audit
under the assumption that you can abuse some other application on the system to
incorrectly setlogin(). Any time you encounter getlogin() used in place of more
secure alternatives (the getpw* functions based on the UID returned from the
getuid() function), carefully trace the username returned under the assumption
you can specify an arbitrary value for that username.

Interprocess Communication
UNIX systems provide several mechanisms for processes to communicate with each
other to share information or synchronize their activities. These mechanisms are typi-
cally used for transactions across multiple processes, sharing data elements, and coor-
dinating resource sharing. Naturally, the power that IPC primitives afford also presents
a potential for vulnerability in applications that use these mechanisms haphazardly.

Pipes
Pipes are a simple mechanism for IPC in UNIX. A pipe is a unidirectional pair of file
descriptors; one descriptor is used for writing information, and the other is used for
reading information. A process can write data to the write side of the pipe, and another
process can read that data from the read side of the pipe. The pipe descriptors are
created at the same time by the pipe() system call, so they are useful for setting up IPC
in advance, typically by handing one side of the pipe to a child process via a fork().
    Not surprisingly, pipes are the underlying mechanism shell programs use when
you link programs by using pipe characters. Say you run a command like this:
echo hi | more

    The shell creates a pipe and gives the write end to a child process that uses it as its
standard output descriptor (which is file descriptor 1, if you recall). The read end is
handed to a different child process that uses it as its standard input. Then one process
runs echo hi and the other process runs the more program, and communication takes
place across that pipe.
    You’ve already looked at a library function based on the use of pipes, popen(). It
creates a pipe and hands one end of it to the child process running the requested
program. In this way, it can read from the standard output of the subprogram or
write to the standard output of the subprogram.
    One interesting feature of a pipe is that writing to a pipe with a closed read end
causes your program to receive a SIGPIPE, which has a default behavior of terminat-
ing the process. If the process deals with the SIGPIPE, the write call returns a failure
code of EPIPE to the program.

Named Pipes
Named pipes (also called “FIFOs” because of their first-in, first-out nature) are pipes
that exist on the file system and can be opened just like normal files. Software can
use named pipes to set up IPC with a process it isn’t related to. Pipes are typically
created with mkfifo() or mknod() and then opened with open(). Like regular files,
named pipes have associated file permissions specified in the creation call, and they
are modified by the umask. Therefore, an application that creates a FIFO needs to
ensure that it applies appropriate permissions to the new object. In this context,
“appropriate” means using a restrictive set of permissions that only allows specific
applications access to the pipe.
    Pipes have an interesting behavior in how they’re opened by a process that
might prove useful in an attack. If a process opens a pipe for reading, the pipe is
blocked until another process opens the same pipe for writing. So open() doesn’t
return until a peer process has joined the game. Similarly, opening a pipe for
writing causes a program to block until another process opens the pipe for reading.

Opening a pipe in read/write mode (O_RDWR) is undefined behavior, but it usually
results in the pipe being opened as a reader without blocking occurring. You can
open pipes in nonblocking mode if you want to avoid the blocking behavior.
Programs expecting regular files could instead be passed a named pipe that causes
the blocking behavior. Although this isn’t a security problem in-itself, it could slow
down the program when attempting to perform some other TOCTOU-based attack.
In addition to open() blocking, attackers can cause the read pipe to block whenever
they choose if they are the only writer attached to the other end of the pipe, thus
providing additional control over process execution. In fact, Michael Zalewski (a
researcher that we have noted previously in this chapter) demonstrated this attack
when exploiting a race condition in the GNU C Compiler (GCC). It’s more of an
exploitation technique but is worth mentioning because race conditions that might
have seemed infeasible become more readily exploitable (the technique is detailed
at http://seclists.org/bugtraq/1998/Feb/0077.html).
    There are also quirks in writing to named pipes. If you try to write to a named
pipe with no attached reader, you the get same result as with a normal pipe:
a SIGPIPE signal and the EPIPE error from the write system call.
    Another potential problem when dealing with pipes is nonsecure use of mkfifo()
and mknod(). Unlike open(), these two functions don’t return a file descriptor upon
successful creation of a resource; instead, they return a value of 0 indicating success.
Therefore, a program that creates a named pipe must subsequently call open() on the
created pipe to use it. This situation creates the potential for a race condition; if the
pipe is deleted and a new file is created in its place between the time mkfifo() is used
and open() is called, the program might inadvertently open something it didn’t
intend to. Here’s an example of vulnerable code:
int open_pipe(char *pipename)
{
    int rc;

    rc = mkfifo(pipename, S_IRWXU);

    if(rc == -1)
         return –1;

    return open(pipename, O_WRONLY);
}

    In this case, if the process can be interrupted between mkfifo() and open(), it
might be possible to delete the created file and create a symlink to a system file or
perform a similar attack.

    From a code-auditing standpoint, the existence of named pipes introduces three
potential issues in UNIX-based applications:
      ■ Named pipes created with insufficient privileges might result in unauthorized
        clients performing some sort of data exchange, potentially leading to
        compromise via unauthorized (or forged) data messages.
      ■ Applications that are intended to deal with regular files might unwittingly
        find themselves interacting with named pipes. This allows attackers to cause
        applications to stall in unlikely situations or cause error conditions in
        unexpected places. When auditing an application that deals with files, if it
        fails to determine the file type, consider the implications of triggering errors
        during file accesses and blocking the application at those junctures.
      ■ The use of mknod() and mkfifo() might introduce a race condition between
        the time the pipe is created and the time it’s opened.

System V IPC
System V IPC mechanisms are primitives that allow unrelated processes to
communicate with each other or achieve some level of synchronization. Three IPC
mechanisms in System V IPC are message queues, semaphores, and shared memory.
    Message queues are a simple stateless messaging system that allows processes
to send each other unspecified data. The kernel keeps messages until the message
queue is destroyed or a process receives the messages. Unlike file system access,
message queue permissions are checked for each operation instead of just when the
process is opened. The functions for using message queues are msget(), msgctl(),
msgrcv(), and msgsend().
    Semaphores are a synchronization mechanism that processes can use to control
the sequence of activities that occur between them. The semaphore primitives
provide the capability to manipulate semaphore sets, which are a series of semaphores
that can be operated on independently. The functions for manipulating semaphores
are semget(), semop(), and semctl().
    Finally, shared memory segments are a mechanism whereby a memory segment
can be mapped to more than one process simultaneously. By reading or writing to
the memory in this segment, processed can exchange information or maintain state
and variables among a number of processes. Shared memory segments can be cre-
ated and manipulated with shmget(), shmctl(), shmat(), and shmdt().
    The System V IPC mechanisms have their own namespace in kernel memory
that isn’t tied to the file system, and they implement their own simple permissions
model. In reality, these mechanisms are rarely used in applications; however, you
should know about them in case you encounter code that does use them. The most
important issue is permissions associated with an IPC entity. IPC implements its

own simple permissions model. Each IPC object has its own mode field that
describes the requirements for accessing it. This field is nine bits: three bits
describing the owner’s privileges, three bits describing the group privileges (of the
group the owner belongs to), and three bits describing the permissions for
everybody else. The bits represent whether the object can be read from or written to
for the appropriate group (with one extra bit that’s reserved).
     These permissions are a simplified version of how file system permissions work
(except IPC mechanisms don’t have the execute permission). Obviously, programs
that set these permissions inappropriately are vulnerable to attacks in which
arbitrary processes interfere with a communication channel being used by a more
privileged process. The consequences can range from simple denial-of-service
attacks to memory corruption vulnerabilities to logic errors resulting in privilege
escalation. Recently, a denial-of-service vulnerability was found in Apache Web
server related to shared memory access for users who could run data with privileges
of the Apache user (that is, could write scripts for the Web server to run). In an
article at www.securityfocus.com/archive/1/294026, Zen-parse noted that running
scripts in this context allowed users to access the HTTPd scoreboard, which was
stored in a shared memory segment. He describes several attacks that resulted in
Apache spawning endless numbers of processes or being able to send signals to
arbitrary processes as root.
     Another issue when dealing with shared memory segments is that when a
process forks, both the child and parent receive a copy of the mapped shared
memory segment. This means if one of the processes is compromised to a level that
user-malleable code can be run, each process can access shared memory segments
with the permissions it was mapped in with. If an exec() occurs, the shared
memory segment is detached.
     Finally, the use of shared resources might introduce the possibility of race
conditions, particularly in shared memory segments. Because the data segment
can be mapped into multiple processes simultaneously, any of those processes
that can write to the segment might be able to cause race conditions by modifying
data after another process has read it but before the data has been acted on. Of
course, there are also complications if multiple writers are acting at the same
time. Synchronization issues are covered in more depth in Chapter 13,
“Synchronization and State.”

UNIX Domain Sockets
UNIX domain sockets are similar to pipes, in that they allow processes on a local
system to communicate with each other. Like pipes, UNIX domain sockets can be
named or anonymous. Anonymous domain sockets are created by using the
socketpair() function. It works similarly to the pipe() function; it creates a pair
of unnamed endpoints that a process can use to communicate information.

Anonymous domain sockets are typically used when a process intends to fork
and needs a communication channel between a parent and a child.
    Named domain sockets provide a general-purpose mechanism for
exchanging data in a stream-based or record-based fashion. They use the socket
API functions to create and manage a connection over a domain socket. In
essence, the code to implement connection management and data exchange
over named pipes is almost identical to networked applications, although the
security implications of using local domain sockets are quite different. Named
sockets are implemented by using special socket device files, created
automatically when a server calls bind(). The location of the filename is
specified in the socket address structure passed to the bind() function. A socket
device file is created with permissions (777 & ~umask). Therefore, if a setuid pro-
gram creates a socket, setting the umask to 0 before starting the program
creates the socket file with full read, write, and execute privileges for everyone,
meaning any user on the system could connect to the socket and write arbitrary
data to the process that bound the socket. An example of a dangerous socket
creation is shown:
int create_sock(char *path)
{
      struct sockaddr_un sun;
      int s;

      bzero(&sun, sizeof(sun));

      sun.sun_family = AF_UNIX;
      strncpy(sun.sun_path, path, sizeof(sun.sun_path)-1;

      s = socket(AF_UNIX, SOCK_STREAM, 0);

      if(s < 0)
          return s;

      if(bind(s, (struct sockaddr *)&sun, sizeof(sun)) < 0)
          return -1;

      return s;
}

     Assuming this code is running in a privileged context, it could be dangerous
because it doesn’t explicitly set the umask before creating the socket. Therefore,
the calling user might be able to clear the umask and write to a socket that’s not
intended to receive connections from arbitrary clients. It’s easy to overlook file
permissions in this situation because they aren’t addressed in the socket functions
(as opposed to pipe functions such as mkfifo(), which have a mode argument for
creating a new pipe).
     Of course, if users can specify any part of the pathname generated to store the
socket or if any writeable directories are used in the path, race attacks could be
performed to intercept traffic between a client and server. Specifically, consider the
following code:
int create_sock(void)
{
    struct sockaddr_un sun;
    char *path = “/data/fifo/sock1”;
    int s;

    bzero(&sun, sizeof(sun));

    sun.sun_family = AF_UNIX;
    strncpy(sun.sun_path, path, sizeof(sun.sun_path)-1);

    s = socket(AF_UNIX, SOCK_STREAM, 0);

    if(s < 0)
         return s;

    if(bind(s, (struct sockaddr *)&sun, sizeof(sun)) < 0)
         return -1;

    return s;
}

    This slightly modified example shows that a socket is created in /data/fifo. If
the /data directory is writeable, you could let the server create the socket, and then
unlink the /fifo directory or symlink it to some other location where another
socket named sock1 has been created. Any client connecting to this socket would

then be connecting to the wrong program unwittingly. This might have security
implications if sensitive data is being transmitted or if resources are being passed
across the socket, such as file descriptors.
    Auditing code that uses UNIX domain sockets requires paying attention to the
manner in which the socket is created. Because socket files need to be opened
explicitly with the socket API, socket files can’t be passed as arguments to setuid
programs in an attempt to manipulate the speed at which a process is running, as
described for named pipes. There is one exception—when the socket has already
been opened and a new process inherits the descriptor via a call to execve().

        Note
        Also, bear in mind that when a server closes a socket, the socket file
        isn’t deleted from the file system; it needs to be deleted with the
        unlink() function. Failure to do so by the server might result in it
        being unable to bind again when it needs to be restarted (if a static
        pathname is used) or a directory being continually filled up with
        unused socket files. This isn’t so much a security issue but can result
        in the application not being able to bind sockets when it needs to.

Remote Procedure Calls
Remote Procedure Calls (RPC) allow applications to be designed and deployed in a
distributed fashion by using a client/server architecture. Programmers can develop
applications without worrying too much about the details of data encapsulation and
transmission because the RPC interface handles these tasks automatically. There
are two main RPC implementation and encoding standards: Open Network Com-
puting (ONC) and Distributed Computing Environment (DCE). UNIX implements
ONC-RPC (also known as Sun-RPC).
    RPC applications are constructed by developing a server that exports a number of
routines clients can call, provided they have adequate credentials. Each server program
has a unique program number handed off to a special process known as portmap.
When clients want to call a routine for an RPC server, several steps are involved:
      1. They connect to the portmapper service on a well-known port (UDP port
         111 and TCP port 111).
      2. The client requests a specific service by supplying the unique program
         number associated with that service.
      3. Provided the service has been registered, portmap starts the service on an
         ephemeral port, and then reports back to the client with the port number
         the service is listening on.

                                   Remote Procedure Calls

     4. The client connects to the appropriate port, requests the routine it wants to
        call, and supplies arguments that the routine requires.
    This description is a bit general. Some RPC servers have well-known ports (such
as rpc.nfsd), and the interaction with portmap is sometimes unnecessary. Note that
querying the portmapper service isn’t necessarily required, and anyone who
chooses to enforce access restrictions on clients by controlling access to the
portmapper service isn’t protecting the application.

RPC Definition Files
Most RPC applications implement their interfaces by using an RPC definition file
(usually with .x as a file suffix). This file defines structures used throughout the
program and the interface the server exports. The rpcgen tool on most modern
UNIX systems can process these files and automatically generate client and server
stub routines for communicating data between client and server applications. This
tool takes a lot of the developer’s work out of dealing with data transmission
primitives in accordance with RPC design principles.
     For code reviewers, this file is a convenient starting point for auditing RPC
applications. You can quickly ascertain what functions are available to connecting
clients and what arguments they take. The file format is quite straightforward.
Developers can declare structures that the program is using as well as the RPC
server interface (which is a structure definition). RPC abstracts the details of data
transmission by using External Data Representation (XDR), a standard developed
to represent data elements in a machine- and implementation-independent
fashion. An RPC definition file that describes an RPC interface can represent
arguments of different types. These types correspond directly to XDR basic types
or structures composed of XDR basic types. The basic types in RPC definition
files are as follows:
    ■ bool—This is a Boolean value and can be in one of two states: true and false
      (nonzero and zero).
    ■ char—This data type is identical to the char data type in C. As in C, characters
      can be signed or unsigned.
    ■ short—This data type is the same as the C/C++ short data type. It can be
      signed or unsigned.
    ■ int—An integer data type that’s identical to the C/C++ int type and can be
      qualified with the unsigned keyword.
    ■ float—Identical to the C/C++ float data type.

    ■ double—Identical to the C/C++ double data type.

    ■ hyper—The a 64-bit integer is the same as long long in C/C++.

      ■ string—A string is a variable-length character array. Array definitions are
       described momentarily.
      ■ opaque—Used to represent a byte stream of unspecified contents. It’s much
       like the string type except that the RPC runtime doesn’t NUL-terminate or
       attempt to interpret or decode it. Opaque data fields must be a fixed size.
    In addition to basic data types, XDR allows the declaration of arrays and
vectors. (Vectors are fixed-length arrays, so just the term “arrays” is used in this
section.) Arrays are defined by using brackets (<>) with an optional size parameter.
A fixed-length array looks like this:
int numberarray<1024>;

   In this case, the RPC runtime ensures that an array supplied by a client doesn’t
exceed this maximum limit. Arrays can also be unbounded, as in this example:
int numberarray<>;

    In this case, clients are free to supply any number of integers they choose.
When used with the string and opaque types, the brackets indicate the length of the
string, not an array of strings. A string with a maximum length of 255 bytes is
declared like so:
string mystring<255>;

     The server interface is defined by using the program keyword followed by the
structure describing what routines have been exported. This structure can define
multiple versions of the RPC program (using the version keyword), with each ver-
sion exporting a unique set of procedures (although typically, they export the same
ones). The prototype for an exported function is much like a C function prototype,
with some differences; primarily, the function name is in uppercase letters and is
followed by the procedure number assigned to that routine. Each routine that has
been exported appears in the source code, but it’s lowercase and has _svc appended
to indicate it’s a service routine. For example, you have the following declaration in
the RPC definition file:
int HELLO_WORLD_1(void) = 1;

      The server routine that implements it in the source is named
hello_world_1_svc().
    Here’s an example of a server definition. The following code fragment is from
the sm_inter.x file, which defines the interface for the well-known rpc.statd service:
program SM_PROG {
      version SM_VERS      {

                                Remote Procedure Calls

         /* res_stat = stat_succ if status monitor agrees
             to monitor */
         /* res_stat = stat_fail if status monitor
             cannot monitor */
         /* if res_stat == stat_succ, state = state
             number of site sm_name */
         struct sm_stat_res      SM_STAT(struct sm_name) = 1;

         /* res_stat = stat_succ if status monitor agrees
             to monitor */
         /* res_stat = stat_fail if status monitor
             cannot monitor */
         /* stat consists of state number of local site */
         struct sm_stat_res                   SM_MON(struct mon) = 2;

         /* stat consists of state number of local site */
         struct sm_stat      SM_UNMON(struct mon_id) = 3;

         /* stat consists of state number of local site */
         struct sm_stat      SM_UNMON_ALL(struct my_id) = 4;

         void                SM_SIMU_CRASH(void) = 5;

         void                SM_NOTIFY(struct stat_chge) = 6;

    } = 1;
} = 100024;

    The statd program has only one available version: version 1. It also exports
six functions that clients can call remotely: sm_stat, sm_mon, sm_unmon,
sm_unmon_all, sm_simu_crash, and sm_notify. To audit this application, an
excellent starting point is looking for these functions in the source code because
you know they’re taking data from the client and processing it. You can also
deduce what kind of data they’re accepting from these prototypes; in the
preceding example, they’re specially defined structures, except sm_simu_crash,
which doesn’t take any arguments. To audit these functions, you can look up
these structures to see what data you can supply. For example, if you want to
audit the sm_stat function, you look for the definition of the sm_name
structure, as shown:

const      SM_MAXSTRLEN = 1024;

struct sm_name {
      string mon_name<SM_MAXSTRLEN>;
};

    In this instance, you can supply a string that can be at most 1024 bytes. As you
can see, RPC definition files allow you to quickly identify what code the server
exposes to the client.

RPC Decoding Routines
The RPC definition file isn’t required to create an RPC application. Developers
might choose to hand-code the client and server stubs, which involves creating
decoders for data manually by using the XDR routines exported for encoding and
decoding. (Usually, the rpcgen tool uses XDR subroutines to encode structures
and types defined in the RPC specification file.) XDR exports encoding and
decoding routines for all its basic types: xdr_int(), xdr_string(), xdr_bool(),
and so on. This lower-level manipulation introduces the opportunity for
mistakes in the routines responsible for decoding data destined for certain
routines. For example, the sm_name structure above has one element: a string
with a maximum length of 1024. The XDR routine generated by rpcgen looks
like this:
bool_t
xdr_sm_name(XDR *xdrs, sm_name *objp)
{
      register int32_t *buf;

      if(!xdr_string( xdrs, &objp->mon_name, SM_MAXSTRLEN))
         return FALSE;
      return TRUE;
}

    If developers create these types of routines, they might accidentally use the
wrong constants for maximum string lengths, not deal with errors properly, and
so on. Therefore, when a developer doesn’t use the RPC definition file, there’s an
additional lower layer where things might go wrong.

                                   Remote Procedure Calls

        Note
        Whether developers use the RPC definition file or not, there’s a
        chance some implementations of rpcgen will make mistakes or the
        XDR libraries might have decoding errors. However, the system
        libraries usually aren’t your primary concern when auditing an
        application—but they are well worth browsing in your spare time!

Authentication
RPC provides a number of authentication methods that can be used in applications
that need to enforce access control for the functions they export:
    ■ AUTH_NONE—When this method is selected, no authentication is required to use
      the RPC server; clients can call any routines they like. It’s also referred to as
      AUTH_NULL in some implementations.
    ■ AUTH_UNIX—Also commonly referred to as AUTH_SYS, with this authentication
      method, users provide a user ID, group ID list, and hostname indicating on
      which host they have the indicated privileges. For example, users connecting
      to an RPC server on host A might transmit credentials indicating they are the
      root user on host B. Because this mechanism relies on trust, it’s totally unreli-
      able. Indeed, this security is no better than no security enforcement because
      users can always transmit credentials indicating they are root (or any other
      user) on the local host where the RPC server resides. If you encounter a program
      that relies on this authentication mechanism, you have free access to any functions it
      provides.
    ■ AUTH_DES—This method provides a more secure authentication mechanism that
      requires clients to verify their identity by encrypting a message with a private
      key (usually a timestamp). The server can use DES authentication to verify the
      client’s identity, and the client can use DES to verify the server’s identity.
    RPC applications could possibly implement additional security features to help
tighten control over applications, although additional features are used less often than
they should be. If RPC authentication is in place, there’s code to manually verify cre-
dentials in server routines or a dispatch function. In either case, some code is available
to examine authentication data supplied with requests. It looks something like this:
int authenticate(struct svc_req *svc)
{
     struct authunix_params *aup;

      switch(rqstp->rq_cred.oa_flavor){
           case AUTH_SYS:
                aup = (struct authunix_params *)rqstp->rq_cred;

                if(aup->aup_uid != 0)
                     return –1;
                return 0;

           default:
                return –1;
      }
}

      This code has some verification of the requester’s credentials, but it’s using the
AUTH_UNIX authentication method. As you know now, that method isn’t much better
than having no authentication at all.

Summary
The environment in which programs run in UNIX has many idiosyncrasies that
affect how processes can function safely. You have seen mechanisms to pass extra-
neous data and resources into a process, such as environment variables and file
descriptors, as well as mechanisms such as rlimits that impose certain restrictions
on how a process operates. Because UNIX provides such fine-tuned access over the
environment in which a process runs, processes that are called with elevated privi-
leges need to be careful when interacting with sensitive resources. Auditing process
calls in UNIX requires being aware of all the security implications of the myriad
actions performed implicitly when a program runs. You have explored issues in
direct program invocation via the execve() system call and indirect invocation via a
command shell interpreter. The security-related behaviors you examined include
file descriptor passing, command-line arguments, and trusting environment vari-
ables. In addition, you learned how mechanisms can be misused to adversely affect
the way a process runs. The use of signals, IPC, and resource limits can contribute
to a program encountering unexpected errors when performing normal tasks,
which in turn might lead to a security compromise or aid an attacker in exploiting a
vulnerability that requires precise timing. Finally, you have learned about process
interaction via external mechanisms, such as IPC mechanisms and RPC. This infor-
mation should give you a solid foundation for reviewing modern UNIX software.

