                  Chapter 12
     Windows II: Interprocess
         Communication

“Give me back my elephant!”
    Tony Jaa as Kham, Tom yum goong (2005)

Introduction
Chapter 11, “Windows I: Objects and the File System,” explored general architectural issues
that affect the security of Windows applications. It focused on developing an understanding
of the Windows security model and its object-based architecture. Up to this point, however,
you have looked at these components only in isolation from the rest of the system. To com-
plete your understanding of Windows, you need to consider the interprocess communica-
tions (IPC) mechanisms Windows provides and how they affect application security.
    IPC refers to the mechanisms for passing data (in a myriad of forms) between two
related or unrelated processes. These processes can exist on the same machine or could be
located on different machines that communicate across a network. Windows operating
systems provide a wide variety of native IPC mechanisms, each with a rich feature set for
controlling communication details and access controls. These mechanisms are used
extensively to transmit data, apportion workloads, and signal events between processes on
the same system or across a network.

    Of course, all this capability comes at a price; communication mechanisms
must expose some attack surface and open the potential for new vulnerabilities. In
the most severe cases, Windows IPC vulnerabilities have allowed remote
unauthenticated users to gain full administrative access to a vulnerable machine.
This chapter examines several popular IPC mechanisms in Windows operating
systems and explains how to apply what you have already learned to assess services
using these IPC mechanisms.

Windows IPC Security
Before you delve into the coverage of IPC mechanisms, you need to expand your
knowledge of Windows security a bit. Chapter 11 explained the core elements of
the security model; however, there are more complicated situations to consider
when you’re dealing with IPC communications. In particular, you need to
understand how security is affected by communication across a network and how
impersonation affects the user security context. The following sections explain
some basic principles of IPC security that lay the foundation for the discussion in
the remainder of this chapter.

The Redirector
Windows network authentication can be confusing from the programmer’s per-
spective because so many things seem to happen implicitly, and you might not be
sure what’s going on under the hood. The redirector is the component that acts as
the man behind the curtain. It provides the mapping that makes it possible to use
the same API calls for local files, remote files, named pipes, mailslots, and WebDAV
shares. The following sections cover some security-relevant elements of the redirec-
tor without the distraction of unnecessary details.

Universal Naming Convention
Universal Naming Convention (UNC) paths were mentioned briefly in Chapter 11.
For networking purposes, a UNC path provides a standardized way of referencing
files and devices across networked systems. UNC paths take the following form:
\\server\share\path

    The server is simply the name of the system; depending on the environment, it
can be a NETBIOS name, an IP address, or a qualified DNS name. Supplying a
period (.) character for the server is an alias for the local system. The share is the
exported name assigned to a directory or device on the remote system. Finally, the
path is just the qualified path to a file.

                                  Windows IPC Security

Session Credentials
Chapter 11 discussed how user logon sessions are containers for tokens associated
with a user logon, but this explanation can be expanded to include connections to
remote systems. Connecting to any remote system generates a set of session creden-
tials for that machine, and these credentials are stored in the logon session. A logon
session can have at most one session credential for each remote system.
     To understand how this works, consider a connection to the remote share stuff
on the host Bob; the UNC path for this share is \\Bob\stuff. You can map this share
to the drive letter X with the following command:
net use X: \\Bob\stuff

    Now any references to the X: drive are redirected to the stuff share on Bob. One
thing you may notice about this command line is that no explicit credentials are
passed for connecting to this share. The credentials are not passed explicitly
because the OS passed the existing logon session credentials automatically. This
implicit behavior is what saves you the trouble of reentering your password in an
NT Domain or Active Directory environment. However, it can be the source of some
issues when the remote system isn’t in a trusted domain.
    Assume that you and Bob aren’t in the same domain. This means Bob’s computer
has an account matching your user name and password, or he has enabled
anonymous access for the share. So you poke around a bit and discover that Bob
does in fact allow anonymous access to the share, but these credentials are
insufficient to access the share’s contents. Fortunately, Bob is a friend and you have
an account on his computer. So you can simply run the following command to
connect with the appropriate credentials:
net use Y: \\Bob\stuff /user:Bob\Joe

    This command should allow you to log on to Bob’s system as a local user
named Joe; issuing this command then displays a prompt for Joe’s password.
Unfortunately, the password still won’t work at this time. To see why, just issue a
net use command with no arguments. You will see that the logon session still has
your connection to Bob’s computer from when you mapped the X: drive. Remem-
ber that Windows allows only one set of session credentials for a remote server
from a logon session. The anonymous connection to X: already established a ses-
sion, so you need to disconnect that existing session before you can log on as Joe.
You can unmap the X: drive with the following command:
net use X: /D

    After unmapping the X: drive, you can successfully establish a new connection
to Bob’s system. This example should demonstrate that a logon session can main-
tain only one set of session credentials per remote system. This restriction isn’t just

limited to file shares. It’s a core part of the security model and applies to all network
IPC mechanisms using built-in Windows authentication.

SMB Relay Attack
The previous section stated that Windows passes your credentials automatically when
connecting to another system, but this isn’t exactly true. In traditional Windows
authentication, the server actually presents the client with a random challenge value.
The client then responds with a message authentication code (MAC) incorporating the
password hash and challenge value. This challenge sequence is how LAN Manager
(LM) and NT LAN Manager (NTLM) authentication avoid presenting the password
hash to a potentially malicious server.
    The downside to this authentication mechanism is that the server’s identity is
never verified. As a result, LM and NTLM authentication are vulnerable to a type of
man-in-the-middle attack known as an SMB relay or SMB proxy attack. To exploit
this vulnerability, an attacker causes a victim to establish a Server Message Block
(SMB) connection to an attacker-controlled system. This could be done by e-mailing
the victim a link to a UNC file path or through a variety of other means. The
attacker then initiates a connection to a target system and acts as a proxy between
the victim and the target. After the challenge exchange is completed, the attacker is
connected to the target server with the victim’s credentials. As an auditor, you need
to be aware of situations in which an application can be coerced into connecting to
untrusted machines, as it can expose the application’s credentials to these attacks.

Impersonation
Impersonation is one of the components that might be most responsible for
Windows popularity in enterprise environments. It allows credentials to be trans-
ferred automatically to processes in another session on the same machine or a dif-
ferent system.Impersonation is one of the foundational components of Windows
single sign-on (SSO) capability. However, all the flexibility and convenience of this
system does require devoting some extra care to its use.
    Impersonation plays a major role in implementing security for Remote Procedure
Call (RPC) and Distributed Component Object Model (DCOM) services, Dynamic
Data Exchange (DDE) client/servers, and named pipe client/servers. The functions
of each of these IPC mechanisms are covered individually over the course of this
chapter, but first you need to learn a few common aspects of impersonation that
apply to all these IPC mechanisms.

Impersonation Levels
Impersonation levels allow a client to restrict the degree to which an IPC server can
use the client’s credentials. When these values are supplied, they provide a level of
protection for the client; otherwise, the client might accidentally supply its credentials

to a malicious server, allowing that server to access network resources on the client’s
behalf. Table 12-1 summarizes the impersonation levels from the Microsoft Developer
Network (MSDN, msdn.microsoft.com).

Table 12-1
Impersonation Levels
Level                    Meaning
SecurityAnonymous        The server can’t impersonate or identify the client.
SecurityIdentification   The server can verify the client’s identity but can’t impersonate the
                         client.
SecurityImpersonation    The server can impersonate the client’s security context on the local system.
SecurityDelegation       The server can impersonate the client’s security context on remote systems.

   Where are these impersonation levels specified by the client? Usually, they
appear as a parameter in IPC connection functions. The security implications of
impersonation levels are best understood in the context of a specific IPC
mechanism. So you will revisit impersonation levels throughout the chapter as each
IPC mechanism is discussed.

SeImpersonatePrivilege
Impersonation issues provide opportunities for privilege escalation vulnerabilities,
so Microsoft made a fundamental change in the way impersonation is handled.
Windows Server 2003, Windows XP SP2, and Windows 2000 SP4 added
SeImpersonatePrivilege, which is a required privilege for impersonating another
user. A normal user doesn’t have this privilege by default, although it’s granted to
the built-in service accounts. This change significantly reduces the chances of
impersonation-based attacks in later versions of Windows. However, for code
auditors, it’s best to assume the application is deployed in an environment where
normal users can perform impersonation.

Window Messaging
Windows messaging is a bit confusing to people coming from other platforms, even
earlier versions of Windows. The user interface (UI) is message driven; however, it’s
a poor choice for general-purpose IPC on modern Windows systems. This is in
direct contrast to earlier versions of Windows, which used the message system to
meet many IPC requirements. This change in approach is primarily because of the
security issues associated with window messaging.
    Windows provides two types of securable GUI objects: window stations
(WindowStation) and desktops (Desktop). Their architecture and caveats for their use

are covered in the following sections. However, note that this security model doesn’t
extend to the actual Window objects. This distinction is important to make, as it
helps you grasp the implicit vulnerability in a privileged process being exposed to
potentially malicious input in the form of window messages.

Window Stations Object
The window station is the primary method of isolating GUI-based communication. It
contains essential GUI information, including a private atom table (a shared collec-
tion of strings), a clipboard, windows, and one or more desktop objects. Each logon
session is associated with a single window station, along with every process on a
Windows system. Processes can be moved between window stations, assuming the
associated tokens have adequate privileges. Windows provides a single window station
for keyboard, mouse, and the primary display: Winsta0. It’s referred to as the “interac-
tive window station.” Windows Terminal Services creates an additional Winsta0 for
each connected terminal session.
     Each unique account associated with a running service has a separate window
station, so all services running under the network service account share a single
window station and desktop. Meanwhile, all services running under the local service
account share a separate desktop and window station. The service window stations are
named for the logon session identifier of the associated account. This means network
services are on the Service-0x0-3e6$ window station, which corresponds to the
hard-coded session identifier for the network service account. Meanwhile, local
services are on the Service-0x0-3e5$ window station, which corresponds to the
hard-coded session identifier for the local service account. Services that run in the
context of other accounts are associated with similarly named window stations,
although the session identifier is somewhat random.
     The discretionary access control list (DACL) on a window station is quite strict;
it limits window station access to essentially the system account and the owning
user. For services, the DACL is assigned when the window station is created for the
service account. For Winsta0, an access control entry (ACE) for the user’s security
ID (SID) is added to the DACL at logon and removed at logoff. One interesting
twist occurs when a process is started in a context other than the window station’s
owner, such as through the RunAs service. In this case, the ACL of the window
station isn’t modified; instead, the process inherits an open handle to the window
station from the parent process. Therefore, communication is allowed without
violating security requirements.

The Desktop Object
A desktop object is a securable UI object that functions as a display surface for
attached threads; every thread on the system is associated with a single desktop.

Desktops exist as objects inside a window station, and a window station can
contain any number of Desktops, although there are only two common configura-
tions: Winsta0 and service window stations. Winsta0 contains three desktop
objects: default (the interactive user desktop), Winlogon (the logon screen
desktop), and the screen saver. Service window stations typically have only a
default desktop.
    The access control on a desktop determines which users can manipulate the
display surface. Although it’s important that attackers can’t read a victim’s screen
arbitrarily, the standard DACL addresses this concern reasonably well. What a
desktop doesn’t handle is actually more interesting. That is, a desktop doesn’t affect
processing of window messages. A window is associated with a desktop at creation,
but it’s just a tag for display purposes. The actual messaging is handled via the win-
dow station, so you don’t need to be very concerned with desktops in code auditing
because they don’t affect how input is processed.

Window Messages
Before you dig into the hazards of Windows messaging, you need some background
on how everything works, especially if you’ve never programmed for Windows
before. This section explains the basics of a windowed program. Readers already
familiar with UI programming in Windows can choose to skip to the next section.
UI windows receive events through the use of window messages that have the fol-
lowing structure:
typedef struct {
    HWND hwnd;
    UINT message;
    WPARAM wParam;
    LPARAM lParam;
    DWORD time;
    POINT pt;
} MSG, *PMSG;

    The message member indicates the type of event the target window is being
informed of. The wParam and lParam values specify additional information about the
message. The interpretation of these fields depends on the type of message. Finally,
the time parameter indicates when the message was posted, and the pt variable
indicates the coordinates of the mouse at the time the message was posted. Most
message-handling routines are concerned only with the message, wParam, and
lParam members, which are passed as separate parameters instead of being part of a
single MSG structure parameter.

    The OS delivers messages to windows in a first in, first out (FIFO) queue. These
messages can be generated by system events, such as mouse movements or key
presses. They can also be generated by other threads on the same desktop. Window
messages control most aspects of the UI, including clipboard operations and the
properties of a window.
    These are the four essential steps in creating a functional windowed application:
      1. Creating a WindowProc() function to handle messages.
      2. Defining a class that associates this WindowProc() to a window type.
      3. Creating an instance of the Window class.
      4. Creating a message-processing loop
    The first step in creating a window is to create the WindowProc() function,
which handles all the messaging. The following code is a simple WindowProc() func-
tion that demonstrates the basic layout:
int MainWindowProc(HWND hWnd, UINT iMsg, WPARAM wParam,
                        LPARAM lParam)
{
      switch(iMsg)
      {
      case WM_CREATE: // Initialize
          return 0;

      ... handle additional messages here ...

      case WM_DESTROY: // Exit on WM_DESTROY
          return PostQuitMessage( 0 );

      default:
          return DefWindowProc(hWnd,iMsg,wParam,lParam);
      }
}

     As you can see, this function is primarily just a switch statement for handling win-
dow messages passed via the iMsg parameter. This example shows processing for the
WM_CREATE and WM_QUIT messages, although it doesn’t do much with them. The default
message handler, DefWindowProc(), does most of the heavy lifting. It’s the default case
in the switch statement that handles all system messages and other messages not
explicitly handled by the application, which make up the bulk of the message traffic.

    Now that you understand a bit about the handler, you need to see how it’s registered
with the system. This registration is done with the RegisterClassEx() function,
which associates a name with the handler in the context of a process. The following
code is a simple function that registers the handler created in the previous example:
BOOL InitClass(HINSTANCE hInst)
{
    WNDCLASSEX wc; // Defines the class

    ZeroMemory(&wc, sizeof(wnd));

    wc.hInstance = hInst;
    wc.lpszClassName = “Main”;
    wc.lpfnWndProc = ( WNDPROC ) MainWindowProc;
    wc.cbSize = sizeof(WNDCLASSEX);

    return RegisterClassEx( &wnd );
}

    After the handler is registered, the final two steps are to create the window and
start the window’s message pump, as shown in the following code:
int APIENTRY WinMain( HINSTANCE hInst, HINSTANCE hPrev, LPSTR lpCmdLine,
    int nCmdShow )
{
    WINDOW hwnd;

    InitClass(hInst);

    // Create a message-only window
    hwnd = CreateWindow( “Main”, “Main”, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
         0, 0, HWND_MESSAGE, 0 );

    // This is the message pump
    while( GetMessage( &msg, 0, 0, 0 )
         && GetMessage(&msg, (HWND) NULL, 0, 0) != -1)
    {
         TranslateMessage( &msg );
         DispatchMessage( &msg );

      }

      return msg.wParam;
}

     This example shows the standard window message pump. The GetMessage() call
simply blocks until it receives a message. It’s followed by the TranslateMessage()
call, which queues up and translates a series of virtual key signals (from keyboard
input) and sends them as a single character string. Finally, the DispatchMessage()
call forwards the message on to the appropriate WindowProc().
     The code passes the HWND_MESSAGE parameter to CreateWindow(), which creates a
message-only window. This type of window is never displayed; it just exists so that a
process can receive and handle window messages. This window type was chosen for
two reasons. First, it’s the shortest one, which keeps you from being distracted with
unnecessary details. Second, and more important, this type of window is used by
services that accept window message input. You should be familiar with this
window type because it’s associated with the kinds of applications attackers target.
     There’s one final function to mention, which is SendMessage():
LRESULT SendMessage(HWND hWnd, UINT Msg, WPARAM wParam,
                      LPARAM lParam );

    This function doesn’t matter when you’re reviewing code, but you need to be famil-
iar with it to understand exploits associated with window messages. This function
simply accepts a handle to a window, a message ID, and two parameters that are inter-
preted differently, depending on the message type. You’ve already seen the WM_CREATE
and WM_QUIT messages, and the WM_TIMER and WM_PASTE messages are explained in the
next section. Note that any process with a handle to a window station can send mes-
sages to any other window on a desktop object within that window station. All that’s
needed is a simple call to SendMessage().

Shatter Attacks
You might be wondering why the previous sections have gone through a whirlwind
introduction to the Windows GUI. After all, the basic shatter attack was described in
Chapter 2, “Design Review,” so the concept should be clear. However, it’s important
to understand the extent of this issue. The Windows API ties a lot of functionality
into a simple, unprotected, messaging architecture. Every aspect of the user interface
is controlled by window messages, and the design of the API provides no method of
restricting or verifying a message source. Of course, attackers must have access to a
window station before they can send messages, but after they do, the potential for
exploit can be fairly open ended.

    The original shatter attack exploited window message design by sending a
WM_PASTE message to a privileged process with a message pump on the same
window station. The WM_PASTE message allows attackers to place a buffer of shell
code in the address space of the privileged process. The attack is then completed by
sending a WM_TIMER message that includes the address of the shell code buffer. The
default handler for the WM_TIMER message simply accepts the address parameter as a
function pointer, and then immediately runs the code that’s pointed to. The result is
a straightforward privilege escalation performed by running arbitrary code in the
context of a privileged process.
     The immediate response to the shatter vulnerability was to simply filter the
WM_TIMER message in any privileged process interacting with a user’s desktop. Unfortu-
nately, the WM_TIMER message is just a symptom of the problem. The reality is that
many messages allow manipulation of memory in a target process’s address space or
could lead to arbitrary execution. Brett Moore demonstrated a number of these mes-
sages in a speech at the Blackhat security conference (http://blackhat.com/
presentations/bh-usa-04/bh-us-04-moore/bh-us-04-moore whitepaper.pdf). However,
there are certainly new exploitable messages that have yet to be considered. Plus,
there are unique exploit vectors in each windowed process, which make it unrea-
sonable to expect developers to anticipate every one. The root of the problem is that
a privileged process, or specifically a service, can’t safely interact with a potentially
hostile desktop.
     As a code auditor, you need to identify situations that cause a privileged service
to interact with normal user desktops. This interaction can happen in two basic
ways. The first is a simple operational concern; you just need to check the proper-
ties for a service and make sure the service isn’t interactive. To do this, use the Ser-
vices Microsoft Management Console (MMC) to open the Properties dialog box for
the service. Then check the “Log On” tab to see whether the “Allow Service to Inter-
act with Desktop” option is selected. If it is, the service is potentially vulnerable to a
shatter attack. Figure 12-1 shows the Properties dialog box for the Windows Task
Scheduler, which is an interactive service.
     Services can use another method to interact with a user desktop; they can
manually create a thread and window on the user’s desktop. The following code
shows this process:
HWINSTA hWinsta;
HDESK hDesk;

hWinsta = OpenWindowStation(“Winsta0”, FALSE, MAXIMUM_ALLOWED);
SetProcessWindowStation(hwinsta);
hdesk = OpenDesktop(“default”, 0, FALSE, MAXIMUM_ALLOWED);
SetThreadDesktop(hDesk);

Figure 12-1   An interactive Windows service

     For brevity’s sake, the error checking has been left out, but this code is essentially
how a service sets up a thread on a normal user’s desktop. This code simply opens a
handle to Winsta0 and then uses the returned handle to open the default desktop. The
current thread is then switched to this desktop, and the thread can interact with the
logged-on user’s desktop. Of course, the thread isn’t vulnerable until it starts process-
ing messages. Fortunately, you know how to identify that because you walked
through a message window setup earlier. However, don’t discount the existence of a
message window just because you can’t see it. For instance, certain COM applications
can create background message windows (as explained in “COM” later in this chap-
ter), so you need to be aware of these possibilities.
     To summarize, when you audit a service, you should perform the following
steps to identify potential shatter-attack exposures:
      1. Check the MMC snap-in for the service to see whether it runs as the
         interactive user.

      2. Examine the code to determine whether it manually attaches to the
         interactive user’s desktop.
      3. If either case is true, determine whether a message pump is in operation for
         receiving window messages. If a message pump is in operation, you can
         consider the application to be at risk.

DDE
Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) is a legacy form of IPC that exchanges data by
using a combination of window messages and shared memory. It’s done in one of
two ways. This first requires handling WM_DDE_* window messages with the
PackDDElParam() and UnpackDDElParam() functions. The second method uses the
DDE Management Library (DDEML) API, which includes a set of Dde* functions
that wrap the window message handling. You can refer to the MSDN for more par-
ticulars on using DDE communications.
     DDE was a common form of IPC in earlier versions of Windows, but it has been
mostly superseded by more robust mechanisms. DDE has no real security impact
when used to establish communication between processes with the same security
context. However, it can be used to establish communication between different user
contexts on a shared window station or even exchange data over a network by using
file shares. Just to make it more confusing, DDE supports impersonation of clients in
a DDE communication. What you need to keep in mind is that any use of DDE
between security contexts represents a potential shatter vulnerability. This includes
network DDE, which requires a privileged service on the desktop. So vulnerable uses
of DDE include the same type of setup as the shatter attacks described previously.

Terminal Sessions
Windows Terminal Services (WTS) provides the capability for a single Windows
system to host multiple interactive user sessions. Originally, this capability was
available as a separate product in Windows NT Terminal Server. However, it was even-
tually incorporated into the base product line in all versions of Windows XP. Terminal
Services is not fully functional in most Windows XP versions, but it is a necessary
component of the Remote Assistance and Fast User Switching (FUS) capabilities.
    The introduction of WTS required some additional framework for interacting with
different connections; this requirement was addressed by the addition of terminal
sessions and their associated WTS API functions. Terminal sessions place additional
restrictions on the interaction between processes in different sessions. For example,
each terminal session has a unique Winsta0 associated with it, and objects are
distinguished between sessions by using the Global\ and Local\ namespace prefixes.
This naming setup allows the standard API functions to still work as expected, while
the WTS API can be used for WTS-specific manipulation.

     Versions of WTS before the Vista release have an interesting quirk. They run all
services in session 0, which is the first session the system creates. It also happens to
be the same session used by the first interactively logged-on user. Running all
services in session 0 unintentionally grants some extra privilege to the console user
on a terminal server and the first user on an FUS-enabled system. The main impact
is that a session 0 user can communicate with interactive services.
     As mentioned, an interactive service represents a serious vulnerability that
could allow attackers to run arbitrary code in the context of a privileged service
account. Windows Vista addresses this vulnerability by eliminating interactive serv-
ices entirely. It restricts session 0 to services only and makes it a completely nonin-
teractive session. You should make note that any software specifically targeting
Windows Vista won’t be vulnerable to the general class of shatter vulnerabilities.

Pipes
Pipes are a connection-oriented IPC mechanism that can be used to communicate
data between two or more processes. There are two types of pipes: anonymous pipes
and named pipes. An anonymous pipe is a unidirectional pipe that transfers data
locally between two processes. Because anonymous pipes have no names, they can’t
be referred to by arbitrary processes. Generally, this means only the creating process
can make use of an anonymous pipe, unless the pipe handle is duplicated and
passed to another process. Usually, anonymous pipes are used for communication
between threads in a single process or between a parent and child process. Named
pipes, conversely, can be referred to by arbitrary processes and be accessed remotely,
depending on the access rights associated with the pipe when it’s created. Because
anonymous pipes are local and have only a few of the problems associated with
named pipes, the following sections focus on named pipes.

Pipe Permissions
All pipes are securable objects, so they have specific access rights associated with
their DACL entries. Table 12-2 summarizes the pipe permissions listed in the MSDN.
Table 12-2
Pipe Access Rights
Access Right                               Meaning
PIPE_ACCESS_DUPLEX                        Allows the caller to read and write to the pipe and
                                          gives them SYNCHRONIZE access.
PIPE_ACCESS_INBOUND                       Allows the caller to read from the pipe and gives them
                                          SYNCHRONIZE access.
PIPE_ACCESS_OUTBOUND                      Allows the caller to write to the pipe and gives them
                                          SYNCHRONIZE access.

                                           Pipes

     As you can see, access rights for pipes are simpler than most other objects, such as
files, so developers are less likely to inadvertently set incorrect permissions on a pipe.
Still, vulnerabilities can result when access permissions are applied haphazardly. It
might be possible for rogue processes to have read or write access to a pipe when they
shouldn’t, which could lead to unauthorized interaction with a pipe server. This
problem can even occur with anonymous pipes because attackers can enumerate the
process handle table and duplicate a handle to a pipe with weak access permissions.

Named Pipes
Named pipes are a multidirectional IPC mechanism for transferring data between
unrelated processes on the same machine or different machines across a network.
A named pipe can be uni- or bi-directional, depending on how it’s created. Pipes
work in a client/server architecture; pipe communications are made by having one
pipe server and one or more clients. So a number of clients can be connected to a
pipe simultaneously, but there can be only one server.

Pipe Creation
Pipes can be created by using CreateFile() or CreateNamedPipe(). You have already
examined the semantics for creating and accessing pipes with CreateFile(), so you
don’t need to review this function again. The prototype for CreateNamedPipe() is
shown as follows:
HANDLE CreateNamedPipe(LPCSTR lpName, DWORD dwOpenMode,
                DWORD dwPipeMode, DWORD nMaxInstances,
                DWORD nOutBufferSize, DWORD nInBufferSize,
                DWORD nDefaultTimeout,
                LPSECURITY_ATTRIBUTES lpSecurityAttributes)

     As you can see, the CreateNamedPipe() function allows more control over certain
characteristics of the named pipe than CreateFile() does. In addition to the regular
attributes, developers can optionally specify an input and output buffer size for the
pipe, although they are only advisory values the system isn’t required to honor. The
dwOpenMode value specifies which access rights the pipe should be opened with
(PIPE_ACCESS_DUPLEX, PIPE_ACCESS_INBOUND, or PIPE_ACCESS_OUTBOUND). In addition,
one or more flags can be specified:
    ■ FILE_FLAG_FIRST_PIPE_INSTANCE—This flag causes the function to fail if the
      pipe already exists.
    ■ FILE_FLAG_WRITE_THROUGH—On certain types of pipes where the client and
      server processes are on different machines, this flag causes the client to not
      return until all data has been written to the pipe successfully.

      ■ FILE_FLAG_OVERLAPPED—Overlapped I/O is enabled; a process doesn’t need to
       wait for operations on the pipe to finish to continue running.
    The dwPipeMode value specifies what type of pipe should be created. A pipe can
be PIPE_TYPE_BYTE, which causes pipe data to be treated as a single-byte stream, or
PIPE_TYPE_MESSAGE, which causes data to be treated as a series of separate messages.
The nDefaultTimeout value specifies a timeout value in milliseconds for an opera-
tion to be performed on the pipe, and finally, lpSecurityAttributes specifies a
security descriptor for the pipe.
    Clients that just want to send a single message to a pipe (of type PIPE_TYPE_
MESSAGE) don’t have to go through the whole process of opening it and closing it.
Instead, they can use the CallNamedPipe() function, which has the following
prototype:
BOOL CallNamedPipe(LPCSTR lpNamedPipe, LPVOID lpInBuffer,
            DWORD nBufferSize, LPVOID lpOutBuffer, DWORD
            nOutBufferSize, LPDWORD lpBytesRead, DWORD nTimeOut)

    This function opens the pipe specified by lpNamedPipe, writes a single message,
reads a single response, and then closes the pipe. It’s useful for clients that just
need to perform a single pipe transaction.

Impersonation in Pipes
A named pipe server can impersonate the credentials of client servers that connect
to it. This impersonation is achieved by using the ImpersonateNamedPipeClient()
function, which has the following prototype:
BOOL ImpersonateNamedPipeClient(HANDLE hNamedPipe)

      As you can see, this function simply takes a handle to a named pipe and then
returns a value of TRUE or FALSE, depending on whether impersonation is successful.
If it’s successful, the thread impersonates the context associated with the last message
read from the pipe. The last message read requirement gets a bit sticky. If the
connection is local, impersonation always fails unless data has first been read from and
written to the pipe. However, if the client is remote, the impersonation might succeed
because messages are transferred in establishing the connection. In either case, it’s
best to make sure the pipe is read from before impersonation is attempted.
      Next, you need to examine the use of impersonation levels. In the context of
named pipes, clients can restrict the degree to which a server can impersonate them
by specifying an impersonation level in the call to CreateFile(). Specifically, the
impersonation level can be indicated in the dwFlagsAndAttributes parameter.
Here’s the CreateFile() function prototype again:

                                          Pipes

HANDLE CreateFile(LPCSTR lpFileName, DWORD dwDesiredAccess,
             DWORD dwSharedMode,
             LPSECURITY_ATTRIBUTES lpSecurityAttributes,
             DWORD dwCreationDisposition,
             DWORD dwFlagsAndAttributes,
             HANDLE hTemplateFile)

   By including the SECURITY_SQOS_PRESENT flag in the dwFlagsAndAttributes
parameter, you can specify the following impersonation flags:
    ■ SECURITY_ANONYMOUS—This flag enforces the SecurityAnonymous impersonation
      level for the object being opened.
    ■ SECURITY_IDENTIFICATION—This flag enforces the SecurityIdentification
      impersonation level for the object being opened.
    ■ SECURITY_IMPERSONATION—This flag enforces the SecurityImpersonation
      impersonation level for the object being opened.
    ■ SECURITY_DELEGATION—This flag enforces the SecurityDelegation impersonation
      level for the object being opened.
    ■ SECURITY_EFFECTIVE_ONLY—This flag causes any changes made via
      AdjustToken*() functions to be ignored.
    ■ SECURITY_CONTEXT_TRACKING—The security tracking mode is dynamic.

     Clients can protect their credentials from malicious servers by using these flags, so
you should always be on the lookout for instances in which a client is overly permissive
in the impersonation it allows. You also need to pay close attention to common
oversights when applying these protections. Try to spot the bug in the following code.
BOOL SecureOpenPipe(void)
{
    HANDLE hPipe;

    hPipe = CreateFile(“\\\\.\\pipe\\MyPipe”, GENERIC_ALL, 0, NULL,
         OPEN_EXISTING, SECURITY_IDENTIFICATION, NULL);

    if(hPipe == INVALID_HANDLE_VALUE)
         Return FALSE;

    ... do pipe stuff ...
}

     Did you see it? The developers are trying to protect the client from connecting to
a malicious server by enforcing the SECURITY_IDENTIFICATION impersonation level.
It’s a great idea, but poor execution. They forgot to use the SECURITY_SQOS_PRESENT
flag, so the SECURITY_IDENTIFICATION flag is completely ignored! A correct imple-
mentation would look like this:
BOOL SecureOpenPipe(void)
{
      HANDLE hPipe;

      hPipe = CreateFile(“\\\\.\\pipe\\MyPipe”, GENERIC_ALL, 0, NULL,
          OPEN_EXISTING,
          SECURITY_SQOS_PRESENT|SECURITY_IDENTIFICATION, NULL);

      if(hPipe == INVALID_HANDLE_VALUE)
          Return FALSE;

      ... do pipe stuff ...
}

    It is also important to audit how servers might use impersonation. In “Imperson-
ation Issues” (MSDN Code Secure, March 2003; http://msdn.microsoft.com/library/
en-us/dncode/html/secure03132003.asp), Michael Howard points out the dangers of
not checking return values of an impersonation function. Say a server accepts a con-
nection from a client and then wants to access an object on the client’s behalf. To do
this, it impersonates the user and then proceeds to access the object, as shown in
this example:
BOOL ProcessRequest(HANDLE hPipe)
{
      BOOL rc;
      DWORD bytes;
      unsigned char buffer[BUFSIZ], fname[BUFSIZ];

      for(;;)
      {
          rc = ReadFile(hPipe, buffer, BUFSIZ, &bytes, NULL);

          if(rc == FALSE)
                 break;

                                         Pipes

         if(bytes <= 0)
                 break;

         switch(buffer[0])
         {
                 case REQUEST_FILE:
                    extract_filename(buffer, bytes, fname);

                    ImpersonateNamedPipeClient(hPipe);
                    write_file_to_pipe(hPipe, fname);
                    RevertToSelf();

                    break;

                 ... other request types ...
         }
    }
    ... more stuff here ...
}

    This code is from a named pipe server that can receive a number of requests,
one of which is for reading certain files. The code fails to check the return value of
the ImpersonateNamedPipeClient() function, however. If this function fails, the
application’s privileges and access rights are unchanged from its original state.
Therefore, a file is accessed with the original permissions of the server process
instead of the connecting client’s.
    You might be wondering “But why would impersonation functions fail? Can a
malicious client prompt that?” Yes, it can. You just learned that when auditing
clients, you want to look for the presence or absence of enforcing impersonation
levels on the server. A malicious client could also use these levels to prohibit the
server from impersonating the client. Even something as simple as failing to read
from the pipe first may cause the impersonation call to fail. This failure could result
in the object being accessed at a higher privilege than intended.

Pipe Squatting
As with many other types of objects, named pipes existing in the object namespace
introduces the possibility for name-squatting vulnerabilities. Developers must be
careful in deciding how applications create and access named pipes. When auditing

an application, you need to look at this issue from both sides of the fence: the
implications for servers that are vulnerable to name squatting and the implications
for clients that are vulnerable to name squatting.

Servers
A server can be vulnerable to name squatting if it uses a predictable pipe name and fails
to check whether the pipe has already been created. A server can also be
vulnerable to name squatting if it creates a pool of pipes and uses ConnectNamedPipe()
to service multiple connections. A pool of pipes is established by creating and
connecting multiple instances of the same pipe and specifying the same value for
nMaxInstances on each call to CreateNamedPipe(). Depending on the timing of pipe
creation and connection, attackers might be able to squat on a pipe and impersonate
the server.
     When creating a single-instance pipe using CreateFile(), a squatting vulnerability
can occur in much the same way it does with files: The server neglects to use the
CREATE_NEW flag in its dwCreationDisposition parameter. When CreateNamedPipe()
is used for a single instance, the problem happens when the dwOpenMode parameter
doesn’t contain FILE_FLAG_FIRST_PIPE_INSTANCE (available only in Windows 2000
SP2 and later). Here’s an example of a vulnerable call:
BOOL HandlePipe(SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR *psd)
{
      HANDLE hPipe;

      hPipe = CreateNamedPipe(“\\\\.\\pipe\\MyPipe”,
          PIPE_ACCESS_DUPLEX, PIPE_TYPE_BYTE,
          PIPE_UNLIMITED_INSTANCES, 1024, 1024,
          NMPWAIT_USE_DEFAULT_WAIT, psd);

      if(hPipe == INVALID_HANDLE_VALUE
          || ConnectNamedPipe(hPipe, NULL)) {
          CloseHandle(hPipe);
          return FALSE;
      }

      ... do stuff with the pipe ...

      DisconnectNamedPipe();
}

                                         Mailslots

    This server fails to specify FILE_FLAG_FIRST_PIPE_INSTANCE or limit the number
of connections. Therefore, attackers can create and connect to a pipe named
“MyPipe” before this application. Because attackers start listening on the pipe first,
the client connects to them first. Depending on timing and the number of instances
allowed, the real server might receive an error or have a valid pipe handle that’s last
in the connection queue. If the server creates a pipe successfully and is the last
thread in the connection, it can just continue along happily. It might even perform
sensitive operations based on the assumption that the pipe is valid.

Clients
Clients are actually more susceptible to name squatting with named pipes because
they might unintentionally connect to a malicious pipe server. Guardent Technologies
disclosed this type of vulnerability in August 2000 (www.securityfocus.com/
advisories/2472). The Windows 2000 Service Control Manager (SCM) uses a
predictable named pipe for communication with services. However, the SCM didn’t
check for preexisting pipes when starting a service. This meant attackers could simply
create the pipe and start any service that could be started by a normal user (the ClipBook
service, for example). The target service would then connect to the attacker-controlled
pipe and the attacker would escalate privilege by impersonating the service account.
    Fortunately, the introduction of the SeImpersonatePrivilege has gone a long way
toward eliminating this type of impersonation vulnerability. However, it’s still a
viable attack for older systems and for breaking the isolation of restricted service
accounts. Even without impersonation, this attack is still a successful denial of
service. It also provides a trusted channel into a privileged process, which could
expose sensitive data or other potential vulnerabilities.

Mailslots
Mailslots are another IPC mechanism offered by Windows. In contrast to named
pipes, mailslots are neither connection-oriented nor bidirectional; clients simply
send messages to a server process. Mailslot clients never read from a mailslot; only
servers can (the server being the process that has a handle to the mailslot object).
The limited functionality mailslots offer translates into much less work for code
auditors. However, for the sake of completeness, the following sections run through
some basics.

Mailslot Permissions
Mailslots don’t have a unique set of access rights. Instead, they use the standard file
access rights discussed in Chapter 11. Their permissions can be audited in the same
manner as standard file permissions.

Mailslot Squatting
Mailslot squatting isn’t possible in the same way it is with most other named
objects because mailslots have only a creation function, CreateMailslot(), which
fails if a mailslot of the same name already exists. The client end of a mailslot is
then opened with CreateFile(), which fails if you attempt to open a mailslot that
doesn’t exist.
     There’s the possibility of a client sending messages to a server it didn’t intend
to. This error occurs when a malicious user creates the mailslot before the server, so
when the server starts and fails to create a mailslot, it simply exits, leaving the mali-
cious mailslot in the object namespace for clients to connect to. This attack allows
the rogue application to impersonate the server and read messages from clients,
which could result in an information leak.

Remote Procedure Calls
The Remote Procedure Call (RPC) is an integral part of Windows operating systems.
Essentially, RPC is a client/server protocol that application developers can use to
call procedures on a local or remote node. Although developers often need to direct
a client application to specifically connect to a remote machine, the connection
details and data marshalling are done behind the scenes by the RPC layer. This
behavior shelters developers from the details of how data is passed between the two
machines and the manner in which procedures are called.
     There are two primary RPC protocols: Open Network Computing (ONC) RPC
(sometimes called SunRPC) and Distributed Computing Environment (DCE) RPC.
Chapter 10, “UNIX II: Processes,” discusses ONC RPC as it pertains to UNIX
applications. Microsoft uses DCE RPC, which is quite different, but from a code-
auditing perspective, the basic procedures for locating exposed code are similar.
Microsoft RPC programs have some additional complications, discussed in the
following sections.

RPC Connections
Before you get into the details of auditing RPC programs, you need to be aware of
some basics of how clients and servers communicate. Before a client can call a
remote procedure, it needs to create a binding to the destination interface. A binding
is an application-level connection between the client and server. It contains connec-
tion details, including the authentication state, and is expressed structurally in RPC
programs through binding handles. Binding handles are used to subsequently per-
form operations such as calling procedures, establishing authentication, and so on.
    The following sections refer to an endpoint mapper, which is an RPC component
used to establish bindings. Most of the endpoint mapper’s operation is handled

                                 Remote Procedure Calls

implicitly from a code-auditing standpoint, so you don’t need to concern yourself
too much with it. Just be aware it exists and is responsible for establishing a binding
between the RPC client and server.

RPC Transports
The Windows RPC layer is transport independent, meaning it can package its
data structures on top of a variety of underlying protocols. When you see a func-
tion that takes a “protocol sequence” argument, it’s referring to the protocol used
to transport RPC data between two endpoints. The selected transport can
definitely affect the application’s security, as explained in the following sections.
These RPC protocols are divided into three categories, described in the next three
sections.

NCACN
The network computing architecture connection-oriented protocol (NCACN) is for
RPC applications that need to communicate remotely across a network. Protocols in
these categories are connection oriented, meaning they provide reliable, two-way,
end-to-end connections for the duration of a session. Table 12-3 lists the protocols
available in this category.

NCADG
The network computing architecture datagram protocol (NCDAG) is also reserved
for RPC applications that need to communicate with remote nodes across a net-
work. Unlike NCACN protocols, however, the NCADG protocols provide a connec-
tionless transport. Table 12-4 lists the valid protocol sequences.

Table 12-3
NCACN Protocol Sequences
Protocol Sequence                        Description
ncacn_nb_tcp                             NetBIOS over TCP
ncacn_nb_ipx                             NetBIOS over Internetwork Packet Exchange (IPX)
ncacn_nb_nb                              NetBIOS Enhanced User Interface (NetBEUI)
ncacn_ip_tcp                             RPC data sent over regular TCP/IP connections
ncacn_np                                 RPC data sent over named pipes
ncacn_spx                                RPC data sent over Sequenced Packet Exchange (SPX)
ncacn_dnet_nsp                           DECnet transport
ncacn_at_dsp                             AppleTalk DSP
ncacn_vns_spp                            Vines scalable parallel processing transport
ncacn_http                               RPC over HTTP (which runs on top of TCP)

Table 12-4
NCADG Protocol Sequences
Protocol Sequence                            Description
ncadg_ip_udp                                 RPC traffic sent over User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
ncadg_ipx                                    RPC traffic sent over IPX

NCALRPC
The network computing architecture local remote procedure call protocol (NCALRPC)
is used by RPC applications in which the client and server reside on the same machine.
Local RPC calls, also know as local procedure calls (LPC), are a function of the OS and
don’t require any further qualification; that is, there’s no requirement for other proto-
cols or IPC mechanisms to be used to send RPC data between the client and the server.
Hence, the only protocol sequence for local RPC calls is simply ncalrpc.

Microsoft Interface Definition Language
When auditing RPC servers, you should start with procedures that can be called
remotely with untrusted user input. A lot of RPC servers define their interface in
terms of the available procedures and what arguments those procedures take.
Microsoft provides Microsoft Interface Definition Language (MIDL), a simplified
language for defining these interfaces. MIDL has a C-like structure, which makes it
fairly easy for most programmers to use. Look for .idl files when you’re reviewing
code; they contain the definitions that generate C/C++ stubs for RPC applications.
The structure of these files and how they produce the client and server interfaces
RPC applications use are covered in the following sections.

IDL File Structure
An IDL file is composed of two main parts: an interface header and an interface body.
These two sections define an RPC interface for a program and are quite easy to follow.

IDL Interface Header
An interface header appears at the beginning of an interface definition and is
enclosed in square brackets ([ and ]). Within those brackets is a series of interface-
specific attributes separated by commas. These attributes have the following syntax:
attribute_name(attribute_arguments)

    For example, an attribute with the name version and the argument 1.1
would appear as version(1.1). Many attributes can be used, but the main ones
are uuid, version, and endpoint. The first two simply provide the universal
unique ID (UUID) of the RPC interface and the version number of the application
                                  Remote Procedure Calls

this interface definition represents. The endpoint attribute specifies where the
RPC server receives requests from. Endpoint transports are described in terms of
a protocol sequence and a port. The protocol sequence describes what transports
the RPC interface is accessible over. The format of the port (or, more appropriately,
the endpoint) is specific to the protocol sequence. Putting all this information
together, here’s an example of an interface header:
[
     uuid(12345678-1234-1234-1234-123456789012),
     version(1.1),
     endpoint(“ncacn_ip_tcp:[1234]”)
]

    In this example, the RPC server accepts requests only via TCP/IP on port 1234.

IDL Definition Body
After the interface definition header is the definition body, which details all the pro-
cedures available for clients to use and the arguments those procedures take. The
definition body begins with the interface keyword, followed by the interface’s
human-readable name and the interface definition enclosed in curly braces. Here’s
an example of a definition body:
interface myinterface
{
     ... definition goes here ...
}

    Inside the curly braces are the definitions for procedures that can be called by
clients and are implemented elsewhere in the application. The remote procedure
prototypes are similar to C function prototypes, except each function and argument
to a function can contain additional attributes enclosed in square brackets. Again,
you might encounter quite a few of these attributes, but most of them are fairly self-
explanatory. Typically, the only information that needs to be indicated is whether
the argument is for input (function attribute in) or output (function attribute out).
An example of an interface definition is shown:
interface myinterface
{
     int RunCommand([in] int command,
                      [in, string] unsigned char *arguments,
                      [out, string] unsigned char *results);
}

    This interface definition is quite simple; it provides just one interface for
running a command. It fails to address some important considerations, such as
authentication and maintaining session state. However, it does show what a
basic interface looks like, so you can move on to the details in the following
sections.

Compiler Features
The Microsoft IDL compiler includes a few options that can improve an RPC appli-
cation’s security. The range attribute provides a method for restricting the values of
a numeric field. It can be used to restrict data types along with attributes such as
size_is and length_is. Here’s an example:
interface myinterface2
{
      int SendCommand([in, range(0, 16)] int msg_id,
                    [in, range(0, 1023)] int msg_len,
                    [in, length_is(msg_len)] unsigned char *msg);
}

    This interface restricts the value of msg_len to a known range and forces the
length of msg to match. These types of rigid interface restrictions can prevent vul-
nerabilities in the code. Of course, defining restrictions doesn’t help if the compiler
does not apply them. The /robust switch must be used as a compilation option.
This compiler switch handles the range keyword and builds in additional consis-
tency checks. This capability is available only in Windows 2000 and later .

Application Configuration Files
In addition to IDL files, each interface has application configuration files (ACFs).
Whereas the IDL file describes an interface specification that clients and servers
need to adhere to, the ACF describes attributes that are local to the client or server
application and affect certain behaviors. For example, code and nocode attributes
can be used in an ACF to direct the MIDL compiler to not bother generating stubs
for various parts of the interface because they aren’t used in this
application. ACFs have the same format as their IDL counterparts, except the
attributes they specify don’t alter the interface definition. They have an attribute
list defined in square brackets followed by the interface keyword and an interface
definition. The definition must be identical to the one in the IDL file that defines
the same interface.
     You should note a couple of points about ACFs and IDL files. First, they are
optional. An application doesn’t need to make an ACF to build a working RPC
application. If the ACF doesn’t exist, no special options are enabled. Further, the

                                  Remote Procedure Calls

contents of the ACF can be put in an IDL file; it doesn’t matter to the MIDL com-
piler. So you often encounter ACF attributes in an IDL file.

RPC Servers
Now you have a basic idea of what to audit and where to start. Next, you need to
examine how an RPC server might control the exposure of its network interfaces.
This means you need to be familiar with how the RPC interface is registered and
what impact registration might have on the application’s attack surface.

Registering Interfaces
The basic registration of an RPC interface is achieved with one of two functions,
described in the following paragraphs.
    The RpcServerRegisterIf() function is the primary means for registering an
interface with the endpoint mapper:
void RPC_ENTRY RpcServerRegisterIf(RPC_IF_HANDLE IfSpec,
             UUID *MgrTypeUuid, RPC_MGR_EPV *MgrEpv)

     The first parameter is an RPC interface handle, which is a structure generated
automatically by the MIDL compiler. The second argument associates a UUID with
the third argument, an entry point vector (EPV). The EPV is a table of function point-
ers to the RPC routines available to clients connecting to the interface. Generally, the
second and third arguments are NULL, which causes no UUID to be associated with
the EPV and accepts the default EPV generated by the MIDL compiler.
     The RpcServerRegisterIfEx() function gives developers more control in
registering an RPC interface:
RPC_STATUS RPC_ENTRY RpcServerRegisterIfEx(RPC_IF_HANDLE IfSpec,
           UUID *MgrTypeUuid, RPC_MGR_EPV *MgrEpv,
           unsigned int Flags, unsigned int MaxCalls,
           RPC_IF_CALLBACK_FN *IfCallback)

     This function can be used to restrict the interface’s availability. Of particular
note is the last parameter, which is a security callback function. It’s called whenever
a client attempts to call a procedure from the interface being registered. This func-
tion is intended to evaluate each connecting client and whether it should have
access to the interface. It’s called automatically whenever a client attempts to access
an interface. The Flags parameter also has some interesting side effects on how the
server behaves. These are the two most security-relevant flags:
    ■ RPC_IF_ALLOW_CALLBACKS_WITH_NO_AUTH—Normally, registering a security call-
      back function doesn’t prevent unauthenticated RPC calls from being rejected

        automatically. Specifying this flag negates that behavior, permitting
        unauthenticated calls. This flag requires the callback function to permit or
        deny the request based on other criteria.
      ■ RPC_IF_ALLOW_LOCAL_ONLY—Requests are allowed only from local named pipes
        (ncacn_np) or local RPC (ncalrpc). All requests from other protocol sequences
        or via remote named pipes are rejected automatically.
      RPC interfaces can also be registered through the following function:
RPC_STATUS RPC_ENTRY RpcServerRegisterIf2(RPC_IF_HANDLE IfSpec,
           UUID *MgrTypeUuid, RPC_MGR_EPV *MgrEpv,
           unsigned int Flags, unsigned int MaxCalls,
           unsigned int MaxRpcSize,
           RPC_IF_CALLBACK_FN *IfCallbackFn)

    This function is identical to RpcServerRegisterIfEx(), except it contains an
additional parameter, MaxRpcSize, used to specify a maximum size in bytes for RPC
messages. It can be especially useful for preventing buffer manipulation attacks
when the message size is fixed or within a known range.
    A quick glance at these three functions should make it clear that how a server is
registered has a impact on security. For example, take a look at the following server
registration:
RpcServerRegisterIfEx(hSpec, NULL, NULL, 0, 20, NULL)

      The preceding registration has fairly relaxed security compared with this one:
RpcServerRegisterIfEx(hSpec, NULL, NULL,
                               RPC_IF_ALLOW_LOCAL_ONLY, 20,
                               MyCallback)

    This registration allows only locally originated requests to be processed and has
a security callback function. Of course, having a security callback function isn’t
enough; it has to perform its job. You see how this is done in “Authenticating
Requests” later in this chapter.

Binding to an Endpoint
After an interface is registered with the RPC runtime, the server needs to bind to
endpoints so that clients can contact it, which is a two-step process. The first step is
to register protocol sequences that the server should accept connections on. These
protocol sequences are the ones described previously in the “RPC Transports” sec-
tion. They are bound by using the RpcServerUseProtseq() family of functions. Take
a look at the prototype for RpcServerUseProtseq():

                                 Remote Procedure Calls

RPC_STATUS RPC_ENTRY RpcServerUseProtseq(unsigned char *ProtSeq,
         unsigned int MaxCalls, void *SecurityDescriptor)

    This function causes the current process to listen for RPC requests over a
specific protocol, so it affects all RPC servers in the current process. Each call
allows you to specify one protocol sequence as the first parameter, so an RPC
server listening on multiple transports needs to call this function multiple
times. The protocol sequence functions can optionally take a security descriptor
for the ncalrpc and ncan_np protocol sequences. This security descriptor is the
most effective method of restricting RPC connections to a specific group
of users.
    The RpcServerUseProtseqEx() functions add the capability to include a
transport policy as part of the protocol registration. Including the transport policy
allows developers to restrict the allocation of dynamic ports and selectively
bind interfaces on multihomed computers. Although this level of specificity
isn’t required for many applications, certain deployment environments might
necessitate it .
    Up to this point, the RpcServerUseAllProtseqs() family of functions haven’t
been discussed. However, it’s important to make note of these functions because
their use generally presents an unnecessarily high security risk and should be
reviewed closely when encountered. These functions bind to all available interfaces,
potentially creating a dangerous exposure of the RPC server. In particular, they
might bind to interfaces with insufficient access control or interfaces on hostile
networks.

       Note
       Don’t forget that protocol registration affects all RPC servers in the
       process. This means any servers with differing protocol security
       must run in different processes.

   The next part of binding involves registering the endpoints for each protocol
sequence. The endpoint is protocol-specific information required for contacting the
RPC server. For example, the TCP protocol sequence uses a TCP port for its endpoint.
Endpoints are registered with the RpcEpRegister() function, which works as shown:
RPC_STATUS RPC_ENTRY RpcEpRegister(RPC_IF_HANDLE IfSpec,
         RPC_BINDING_VECTOR *BindingVector,
         UUID_VECTOR *UuidVector, unsigned char *Annotation)

    This function supplies the endpoint mapper with the endpoints of an RPC inter-
face. The first parameter is RPC_IF_HANDLE, mentioned in the previous section. The

next two parameters contain vectors of binding handles and UUIDs to register with
the endpoint mapper.
     Some utility methods simplify endpoint registration, however. The
RpcServerUseProtseqEp() can be used to register the endpoint and protocol sequence
in a single call. However, the easiest way to handle registration is to use the
RpcServerUseProtseqIf() functions; they register all endpoints specified in the IDL file.

Listening for Requests
The only thing left in setting up the server is to listen for RPC requests by using the
RpcServerListen() function. This function isn’t that interesting, except it indicates
that the server application is expecting requests from that point forward and poten-
tially exposed to malicious input. All code to handle those requests is indicated in
the previous steps of interface registration.

Authentication
As you would expect, the attack surface of an RPC application depends heavily
on the level of authentication it requires. Windows provides several different
levels of authentication, which are layered on top of each other. This means each
new level of authentication performs the authentication of the previous levels
and adds some requirements. The authentication levels are listed in ascending
order:
      ■ RPC_C_AUTHN_LEVEL_DEFAULT—Default level of authentication chosen by the
       current OS settings. (This level is not additive.)
      ■ RPC_C_AUTHN_LEVEL_NONE—No authentication; any anonymous user can access
       the service
      ■ RPC_C_AUTHN_LEVEL_CONNECT—Authentication is done only at connection
        establishment and not for individual calls.
      ■ RPC_C_AUTHN_LEVEL_CALL—This level specifies that users must authenticate for
        each procedure call they make. It’s intended primarily for use with connec-
        tionless transports.
      ■ RPC_C_AUTHN_LEVEL_PKT—This level ensures that any data received is from the
        client that originally established the connection. No data validation is per-
        formed, however.
      ■ RPC_C_AUTHN_LEVEL_PKT_INTEGRITY—This level is like RPC_C_AUTHN_LEVEL_PKT,
        except it also ensures that no data has been modified en route.
      ■ RPC_C_AUTHN_LEVEL_PKT_PRIVACY—This level does the same as
        RPC_C_AUTHN_LEVEL_PKT_INTEGRITY and uses encryption to ensure that third
        parties can’t read data being transmitted.

                                  Remote Procedure Calls

    In addition to the authentication level performed on incoming packets,
programmers can also select the services for authenticating clients. These
authentication services include NTLM authentication and Kerberos. There’s also
the provision for no authentication, indicated by the RPC_C_AUTHN_NONE constant.
    Each authentication service must be registered by calling
RpcServerRegisterAuthInfo() with the appropriate parameters for the service. For
most applications, RPC_C_AUTHN_GSS_NEGOTIATE provides the best results, as it attempts
to use Kerberos authentication but can downgrade to NTLM if required. You should be
wary of any application that doesn’t require at least an RPC_C_AUTHN_LEVEL_CONNECT
authentication, using the RPC_C_AUTHN_GSS_NEGOTIATE service or better.
Authenticating Requests
You’ve seen how the server can restrict interfaces and provide a basic authentica-
tion requirement, but what about authenticating the actual calls and providing
authorization? RPC authorization and authentication are specific to a binding. You
know that a server can provide a DACL for a binding, which should be the founda-
tion of any RPC security. However, two routines can be used in a security callback
(or in a call itself, for that matter) to provide detailed client authentication informa-
tion from a binding handle. The first is as follows:
RPC_STATUS RPC_ENTRY RpcBindingInqAuthClient(
         RPC_BINDING_HANDLE ClientBinding,
         RPC_AUTH_HANDLE *Privs, unsigned char **ServerPrincName,
         unsigned long *AuthnLevel, unsigned long *AuthnSvc,
         unsigned long *AuthsSvc)

    The second and third parameters of this function provide all authentication
information associated with the client’s binding handle. The remaining parameters
cover the authentication of the client requests. When supporting the
RPC_C_AUTHN_WINNT service, the final parameter is always RPC_C_AUTHZ_NONE.
    The RpcBindingInqAuthClient() function is superseded in Windows XP and
later by the following function:
RPCRTAPI RPC_STATUS RPC_ENTRY RpcServerInqCallAttributes(
         RPC_BINDING_HANDLE ClientBinding,
         void *RpcCallAttributes)

    This function meets the same requirements as RpcBindingInqAuthClient() and
provides additional client binding information. This information is returned in the
second parameter in the RPC_CALL_ATTRIBUTES_V2 structure. In addition to the
authentication level and service, it indicates whether a NULL session is used, what
protocol sequence is used, whether the client is local or remote, and a multitude of

other useful tidbits. Note that this function isn’t supported over ncacn_dg protocols,
so the return values need to be checked to make sure the function was able to
obtain the correct information.

Impersonation in RPC
RPC can impersonate authenticated clients via the same basic infrastructure as
named pipes. Generally, it’s the most effective method for accessing secure objects
safely in the calling user’s context. It allows developers to use the familiar DACL
structure on objects and place the burden of security enforcement on the OS. An
RPC server can impersonate a client with one of two functions: RpcImpersonate-
Client() and RpcGetAuthorizationContextForClient(). The prototypes for these
functions are explained in the following paragraphs.
    The following function impersonates the client indicated by the binding handle:
RPC_STATUS RPC_ENTRY RpcImpersonateClient(
         RPC_BINDING_HANDLE BindingHandle)

    The BindingHandle parameter can be 0, in which case the server impersonates
the context of the client currently being served by the thread. This function is the
primary mechanism used for impersonation of a client.
    The main purpose of the following function is to return an AUTHZ_CLIENT_
CONTEXT_HANDLE structure that represents the client indicated by the first parameter:

RPC_STATUS RPC_ENTRY RpcGetAuthorizationContextForClient(
         RPC_BINDING_HANDLE ClientBinding,
         BOOL ImpersonateOnReturn, PVOID Reserved1,
         PLARGE_INTEGER pExpirationTime, LUID Reserved2,
         DWORD Reserved3, PVOID Reserved4,
         PVOID *pAuthzClientContext)

    Of particular interest is the ImpersonateOnReturn parameter. If it’s set to true,
the function impersonates the client indicated by the ClientBinding binding han-
dle, just as though RpcImpersonateClient() has been called.
    When auditing RPC applications, you need to be aware of how clients can
restrict servers’ capability to impersonate them. Neglecting to take this step might
expose a client’s credentials to a malicious server. A client application can enforce
impersonation restrictions on a per-binding basis with RpcBindingSetAuthInfoEx().
This function has the following prototype:
RPC_STATUS RPC_ENTRY RpcBindingSetAuthInfoEx(
         RPC_BINDING_HANDLE Binding,

                                 Remote Procedure Calls

         unsigned char PAPI *ServerPrincName,
         unsigned long AuthLevel, unsigned long AuthnSvc,
         RPC_AUTH_IDENTITY_HANDLE AuthIdentity,
         unsigned long AuthzSvc, RPC_SECURITY_QOS *SecurityQOS)

     Note the last parameter, which points to an RPC_SECURITY_QOS structure.
Although there are several variations of this structure, depending on the version,
each has an ImpersonationType member that indicates what level of impersonation
a server can use with the connecting client. The legal values for this member are as
follows:
   ■ RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_DEFAULT—Use the default impersonation level.

   ■ RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_ANONYMOUS—Use the SecurityAnonymous impersonation
     level.
   ■ RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_IDENTIFY—Use the SecurityIdentify impersonation level.

   ■ RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_IMPERSONATE—Use the SecurityImpersonate impersonation
     level.
   ■ RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_DELEGATE—Use the SecurityDelegation impersonation level
     (cloaking).
    Of these values, obviously the most dangerous are RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_IMPERSONATE
and RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_DELEGATE. By permitting either impersonation level, the
client allows the server to make use of its credentials. The delegation impersonation
level extends the server’s capabilities even more than typical impersonations. It
allows the server to authenticate across the network on behalf of the client—that is,
the server can access anything on the network as though it’s the connected client.
You should inspect any code using either value to ensure that impersonation is
required and being used properly.

       Note
       If the local RPC endpoint is used (ncalrpc), RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_
       IMPERSONATE and RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_DELEGATE are equivalent. Even if
       RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_IMPERSONATE is used, the server is permitted to
       make network accesses on behalf of the client.

    As with named pipes, failure to check return values of impersonation functions
can result in an RPC request being given more privileges than it’s supposed to have.
In fact, this type of error is even more relevant in RPC because many factors can
cause impersonation functions to fail.

Context Handles and State
Before you go any further, you need to see how RPC keeps state information about
connected clients. RPC is inherently stateless, but it does provide explicit mechanisms
for maintaining state. This state information might include session information
retrieved from a database or information on whether a client has called procedures in
the correct sequence. The typical RPC mechanism for maintaining state is the context
handle, a unique token a client can supply to a server that’s similar in function to a ses-
sion ID stored in an HTTP cookie. From the server’s point of view, the context handle
is a pointer to the associated data for that client, so no special translation of the context
handle is necessary. The server just refers to a context handle as though it’s a void
pointer. Of course, transmitting a pointer to a potentially malicious client would be
extremely dangerous. Instead, the RPC runtime sends the client a unique context
token and translates the token back to the original pointer value on receipt. Context
handles aren’t a mandatory part of RPC and aren’t required to make an RPC program
work. However, most RPC services require context handles to function properly and
prevent disclosing any sensitive information to the client.
     Context handles are useful for maintaining application state; however, they
aren’t intended for maintaining authentication state. A context handle could be
exposed to malicious users in a variety of ways, such as by sniffing the network
transport or through the actions of a malicious client. Another RPC interface might
even reveal the context handle if strict context handles aren’t used. This simple
interface uses a context handle for security purposes:
BOOL LogonUser([out] PCONTEXT_HANDLE ctx)
BOOL LogoffUser([in] PCONTEXT_HANDLE ctx)
BOOL GetTableList([in] PCONTEXT_HANDLE ctx,
         [out] PTABLE_DESCRIPTOR tables)
BOOL JoinTable([in] PCONTEXT_HANDLE ctx, [in] int table_id)
BOOL SitOut([in] PCONTEXT_HANDLE ctx)
BOOL SetBack([in] PCONTEXT_HANDLE ctx)
BOOL CashIn([in] PCONTEXT_HANDLE ctx,
         [in] PCREDIT_CARD ccDetails)
BOOL CashOut([in] PCONTEXT_HANDLE ctx,
         [out] PMAIL_INFO mailInfo)

    This interface represents a simple RPC poker game that uses a context handle to
maintain the session. The first step in using this application is to log in. Like any
well-behaved RPC service, this application determines the user’s identity via native
RPC authentication, but after that, it relies on the context handle. So your first con-
sideration is whether that context handle can be exposed to anyone. For instance,

                                 Remote Procedure Calls

most RPC interfaces don’t require an encrypted channel, so attackers might be able
to sniff the context handle over the network. After attackers have the context
handle , they can take control of the session and steal a player’s winnings.

Strict Context Handles
Generally, an RPC interface has no need to share a context handle with another
interface. However, the RPC subsystem has no way of determining this implicitly.
So the RPC service normally accepts any valid context handle, regardless of the
originating interface. Developers can prevent this issue by using strict context
handles defined by using the strict_context_handle attribute. A strict context
handle is valid only for the originating interface, and the originator doesn’t accept
context handles from any other interface.
    In the poker example, context handles are used to validate authentication. If
this interface fails to use strict context handles, attackers could go to an unrelated
interface and receive a valid context handle for the poker interface. A nonstrict con-
text handle allows attackers to bypass the authentication system easily because the
application checks credentials only in the logon method. If attackers provide a han-
dle from another interface, they have implicit access to all methods of the poker
interface.
    Of course, the poker game probably won’t do well if attackers provide a context
handle from another interface. Effectively, they are just giving the application an
arbitrary data structure that has no relation to what it expects. This input would
probably cause a crash or throw some other error. However, what would happen if
the other interface could be manipulated enough to make the arbitrary structure
recognizable to the poker game? The following structure represents the context for
the poker game followed by an implementation of the CashOut() function:

// Game implementation
struct GAME_CONTEXT {
     long iBalance;
     BOOLEAN isComplete;
     HAND myHand;
}

BOOL CashOut(PCONTEXT_HANDLE ctx, PMAIL_INFO mailInfo) {
     struct GAME_CONTEXT *game = ctx;

     if (game->isComplete) {
           DepositWinnings(game->iBalance);
           return TRUE;

      }
      return FALSE;
}

... more game handling functions ...

    Now you need to consider another interface on the same server. Assume the
poker game is part of a casino application that exposes a separate RPC interface for
account management. The following code is the context structure for the account
management interface, along with a function to update account information:
// Account implementation

struct ACCT_CONTEXT {
      long birthDate;
      char sName[MAX_STR];
      char sAcctNum[MAX_STR];
}

void UpdateAcctInfo(PCONTEXT_HANDLE ctx, long bDate,
                         char *name, char *acctnum) {
      struct ACCT_CONTEXT *acct = ctx;
      acct->birthDate = bDate;
      strncpy(acct->sName, name, MAX_STR - 1);
      strncpy(acct->sAcctNum, acctnum, MAX_STR - 1);
}

... more account management functions ...

    This example is simple, but it should help make the vulnerability apparent.
Attackers could use these interfaces to build an account structure with an extremely
large balance. All that’s necessary is calling the UpdateAcctInfo() function and
passing a large value as the bDate parameter. Then attackers can call the CashOut()
function on the poker interface. This interface pays out the amount passed as bDate
in the earlier call because birthDate in ACCT_CONTEXT is at the same offset as
iBalance in GAME_CONTEXT. So attackers can simply log in to the account manager
interface, select how much money they want, and then cash out of the poker game.
    This example is contrived, but it does demonstrate the point of this attack.
A real vulnerability is usually more complicated and has a more immediate impact.
For example, a context handle pointing to a C++ class instance might allow

                                  Remote Procedure Calls

attackers to overwrite vtable and function pointers, resulting in arbitrary code
execution.

         Note
         The exact meaning and implementation of a vtable depends on the
         language and object model. However, for most purposes you can
         assume a vtable is simply a list of pointers to member functions asso-
         ciated with an object.

    One more quirk is that the other interface need not be implemented by a single
application. It might be exposed by the OS or a third-party component. Developers
might be unaware of what else is occurring and, therefore, consider strict context
handles unnecessary. So you need to keep an eye out for this issue if you identify an
interface that isn’t using strict context handles, and see what functionality other
interfaces might provide.

Proprietary State Mechanisms
Some application developers choose to write their own state-handling code in
lieu of the mechanisms the RPC layer provides. These mechanisms generally
exist for historical reasons or compatibility with other systems. As an auditor,
you need to assess state-handling mechanisms by looking for the following
vulnerabilities:
    ■ Predictable (not cryptographically random) session identifiers

    ■ Short session identifiers vulnerable to brute-force attacks

    ■ Discoverable session identifiers (access control failure)

    ■ Session identifiers that leak sensitive information

    Generally, you’ll find that custom state mechanisms fail to address at least one
of these requirements. You might be able to use this information to identify a
vulnerability that allows state manipulation or bypassing authentication.

Threading in RPC
The RPC subsystem services calls via a pool of worker threads. It’s an efficient way
of handling calls in Windows, but it does have some drawbacks. First, an RPC call
can occur on any thread in the pool, so an RPC server can’t expect any thread affin-
ity between calls. This means the call should behave the same, regardless of the
thread it’s executing in. Second, an RPC call can be preempted at any time, even by
another instance of the same call. This behavior can lead to vulnerabilities when
access to shared resources isn’t synchronized properly. Threading and concurrency

issues are a topic of their own, however, so they are discussed in Chapter 13,
“Synchronization and State.”

Auditing RPC Applications
Now that you know the basics of RPC, you can use the following checklist as a
guideline for performing RPC audits:
       1. Look for any other RPC servers in the same process that might expose
          protocols the developer didn’t expect.
       2. If the application doesn’t use strict context handles, look for any other inter-
          faces that can be leveraged for an attack.
       3. Look for any proprietary state-handling mechanisms, and see whether they
          can be used for spoofing or state manipulation.
       4. Check for weaknesses in the ACLs applied to the protocol sequence.
       5. Look for authentication bypasses or spoofing attacks that are possible
          because of weak transport security.
       6. Look for authentication bypasses in custom authentication schemes, weak
          use of authentication, or the absence of authentication.
       7. Check to see whether state mechanisms are being used to maintain security
          state. If they are, try to find ways to bypass them.
       8. Audit any impersonation to see whether a client can evade it or use it to
          steal the server’s credentials.
       9. Pay special attention to possible race conditions and synchronization issues
          with shared resources (discussed in more detail in Chapter 13).
      10. Review all exposed interfaces for general implementation vulnerabilities. If the
          IDL isn’t compiled with the /robust switch and interface parameters aren’t
          restricted, you need to spend more time checking for memory corruption
          vulnerabilities.

RPC Interface Binary Audits
If you don’t have the source code for an RPC service, you need to be able to locate
RPC interfaces in the corresponding application binaries. This section explains a
simple technique for locating all relevant methods in an RPC binary.
     First, recall that an RPC server registers its interfaces by using the RpcServer-
RegisterIf() and RpcServerRegisterIfEx() functions. Here’s the prototype of the
RpcServerRegisterIfEx() function:

RPC_STATUS RPC_ENTRY RpcServerRegisterIfEx(RPC_IF_HANDLE IfSpec,
           UUID *MgrTypeUuid, RPC_MGR_EPV *MgrEpv,

                                  Remote Procedure Calls

         unsigned int Flags, unsigned int MaxCalls,
         RPC_IF_CALLBACK_FN *IfCallback)

    The RpcServerRegisterIf() function has a similar prototype. Servers need to use
one of these functions to indicate what methods are available. These methods are
specified in the RPC_IF_HANDLE structure, the first argument. This structure isn’t
documented very well, but you can examine it by looking at the IDL-generated C
server file that creates this structure. Essentially, RPC_IF_HANDLE contains only one
member, which is a pointer to a RPC_SERVER_INTERFACE structure. This structure has
the following format (as noted in rpcdcep.h):
typedef struct _RPC_SERVER_INTERFACE
{
    unsigned int Length;
    RPC_SYNTAX_IDENTIFIER InterfaceId;
    RPC_SYNTAX_IDENTIFIER TransferSyntax;
    PRPC_DISPATCH_TABLE DispatchTable;
    unsigned int RpcProtseqEndpointCount;
    PRPC_PROTSEQ_ENDPOINT RpcProtseqEndpoint;
    RPC_MGR_EPV __RPC_FAR *DefaultManagerEpv;
    void const __RPC_FAR *InterpreterInfo;
    unsigned int Flags ;
} RPC_SERVER_INTERFACE, __RPC_FAR * PRPC_SERVER_INTERFACE;

    In a typical binary, this structure looks something like this:
.text:75073BD8 dword_75073BD8         dd 44h, 300F3532h, 11D038CCh, 2000F0A3h,
0DD0A6BAFh, 20001h
.text:75073BD8                                                       ;
DATA XREF: .text:off_75073B88o
.text:75073BD8                                                       ;
.data:off_7508603Co
.text:75073BD8                 dd 8A885D04h, 11C91CEBh,
8E89Fh, 6048102Bh, 2 ; Interface ID
.text:75073C04                        dd offset DispatchTable
.text:75073C08                 dd 3 dup(0)             ;
RpcProtseqEndpointCount, RpcProtseqEndpoint, DefaultMgrEpv
.text:75073C14                        dd offset InterpreterInfo
.text:75073C18                        dd 4000001h                    ;
flags

   Of particular interest is the InterpreterInfo field, which points to a
MIDL_SERVER_INFO structure defined in rpcndr.h as the following:

typedef struct       _MIDL_SERVER_INFO_
      {
      PMIDL_STUB_DESC                   pStubDesc;
      const SERVER_ROUTINE *            DispatchTable;
      PFORMAT_STRING                    ProcString;
      const unsigned short *            FmtStringOffset;
      const STUB_THUNK *                ThunkTable;
      PFORMAT_STRING                    LocalFormatTypes;
      PFORMAT_STRING                    LocalProcString;
      const unsigned short *            LocalFmtStringOffset;
      } MIDL_SERVER_INFO, *PMIDL_SERVER_INFO;

      In a binary, the structure looks like this:
.text:75073C1C InterpreterInfo dd offset pStubDesc                         ;
DATA XREF: .text:75073C14o
.text:75073C20                          dd offset ServerDispatchTable
.text:75073C24                          dd offset ProcString
.text:75073C28                          dd offset FmtStringOffset
.text:75073C2C                          dd 5 dup(0)

    The second member, named ServerDispatchTable in this example, contains a
pointer to a table of all exposed server routines for the interface. To find RPC server
routines in a binary, use the following steps:
       1. Find the import for RpcServerRegisterIf() or RpcServerRegisterIfEx()
          and cross-reference to find where it’s used.
       2. Examine the first argument; it points to a single pointer that points to an
          RPC_SERVER_INTERFACE structure.
       3. Follow the InterpreterInfo structure member in the RPC_SERVER_
          INTERFACE structure.
       4. Follow the DispatchTable memory in the MIDL_SERVER_INFO structure to
          the table of server routines.
   Voilà! You’re done. Notice all the interesting information you pick up along the
way, such as whether a callback function is passed to RpcServerRegisterIfEx(),
endpoints associated with the server interface, format string information,
and so on.

The Component Object Model (COM) and Distributed Component Object Model
(DCOM) facilities in Windows provide a framework for developing language- and
location-independent components. These components can be created and accessed
from within a process, between different processes on the same computer, or
remotely over a network.

        Note
        COM has become an umbrella term that encompasses DCOM
        (remote COM) and other COM-related technologies. Previously, the
        term COM referred to object access and manipulation between dif-
        ferent processes on the same computer; DCOM extended this func-
        tionality to make objects accessible over the network. Presently, they
        can all be referred to as COM technologies.

    COM is essentially an object-oriented wrapper for RPC; in fact, DCOM uses
RPC for method invocation and communication. For the purposes of this discus-
sion, COM and DCOM are viewed more as extensions of RPC. These similarities
can help you apply what you’ve already learned about RPC.

COM: A Quick Primer
The following sections give you a brief rundown of the COM architecture, in case you
have limited experience with COM programming. These basics are essential to under-
standing the information that follows on potential security issues in COM applications.

Components
COM promotes the development of reusable components, much like the use of
classes in object-oriented programs. Each component provides an interface (or sev-
eral interfaces) that describes a series of methods for manipulating the object. In
the context of COM, “interface” refers to a contract between COM objects and their
clients. This contract specifies a series of methods the object implements.
    There are some major differences between a COM object and a class in an
object-oriented program. COM objects are already precompiled and are accessible
system-wide to any process that wants to use them. They are language independent
and available to any application without having to be recompiled. Indeed, COM is a
binary specification of sorts; it requires that objects export interfaces in a certain
manner but doesn’t care about the internal structure of how those objects can be
implemented. In addition to being accessible to any language, COM objects can be
implemented in a variety of languages; their internals are irrelevant as long as they
adhere to their contracts.

    COM objects are uniquely identified on the system by a globally unique identifier
(GUID) called a class ID (CLSID). When a COM object is registered on the system, it
adds a key to the registry with the same name as the object’s CLSID. This key is
stored in HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Classes\CLSID.

         Note
         The HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT key is an alias for the
         HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Classes\CLSID, so the same
         CLSIDs can also be found at HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\CLSID.

    These keys are installed so that the COM subsystem can locate and instantiate
objects as they’re requested. You can view registered COM objects on the system
with the Registry Editor (regedit.exe), shown in Figure 12-2.

Figure 12-2   Viewing COM objects with Regedit

     As you can see, quite a few subkeys and values are installed for each CLSID;
they’re described as needed in the following discussion.
     Because CLSIDs are hard to remember and aren’t meaningful to people, COM
objects often have names—aliases that can be used to refer to the object in place of
the CLSID. These aliases are called program IDs (ProgIDs) and are entirely optional.
A program ID is stored in the ProgID value in the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\
Software\Classes\CLSID\<CLSID> key. A program ID can have any format, but the
MSDN-recommended format is Program.Component.Version. For example, one of
the Microsoft Excel component is named Excel.Sheet.8. Of course, it would take a
long time to look up program IDs if every CLSID key were queried to see whether
its ProgID matches a request, so another key is used for forward lookups:
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Classes\<ProgID>. This key has a CLSID
value that points to the ProgID’s associated class.

    COM objects operate in a client/server architecture; the endpoints of a COM
connection can be different threads in the same process, threads in different
processes, or even on different systems. An exposed COM interface is accessed in
much the same way an RPC function is called. In DCOM, this launching process
includes starting applications if necessary, applying security permissions, and reg-
istering DCOM applications as being available on certain endpoints.
    A COM object can be an in-process server or out-of-process server. In-process
servers are implemented in DLLs that are loaded into the client process’s address
space on instantiation. For the most part, you don’t need to worry about in-process
servers because they are in the caller’s address space and security context. Of
course, ActiveX controls represent a special case of an in-process server, and they
are discussed in “ActiveX Security” later in this chapter.
    An out-of-process server, however, runs inside its own process space. There are
two types of out-of-process servers: local servers on the same system as the caller
and remote servers on another machine. Communication is performed via IPC primi-
tives exposed by the COM runtime. In fact, DCOM uses RPC to transport
messages behind the scenes. An out-of-process server can potentially run in a
different context from the client, so it might have additional security considerations.

Interfaces
The whole point of COM objects is that they expose interfaces that are accessible to
any clients that can use their functionality. A COM object can expose any number of
interfaces, which consist of a series of functions related to the task. Each interface has
a registered interface ID (IID) that uniquely identifies the interface. IIDs are recorded
in the registry at HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\Classes\Interface\<Interface ID>.
    This key contains a series of subkeys for each registered interface. As a code
auditor, you need to examine these interfaces to see what attack surface they
expose.
    Each COM interface is derived directly or indirectly from a base class called
IUnknown, which provides a generic method of interaction with every COM object.
Every COM object must provide an interface with the following three methods:
    ■ QueryInterface()—Used to retrieve a pointer to a COM interface, given the
      IID of that interface
    ■ AddRef()—Used to increment the reference count of an instantiated object

    ■ Release()—Used to decrement the reference count of an instantiated object
      and free the object when the reference count drops to zero
   The QueryInterface() method is the real core of the IUnknown interface. It
provides the capability to acquire instances of other interfaces the COM object
supports. When reading COM documentation and technical manuals, you often
encounter references to IUnknown. For example, the CoCreateInstance() function

takes LPUNKNOWN type as a parameter, which allows the function to create an
instance of any COM object because all COM objects are derived from IUnknown.

Application IDs
A collection of COM objects is referred to as a COM application or component.
Each COM application has a unique ID, called an AppID, used to uniquely refer to a
COM application on the system. Like CLSIDs, AppIDs are installed in the registry
and contain a number of subkeys and values for per-application security settings.
The AppID key provides a convenient location for enforcing security for applica-
tions hosting multiple COM objects. AppID keys are located in the registry at
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Classes\AppId.

          Note
          AppID keys are also accessible at HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\AppId.

Mapping CLSIDs to Applications
You’ve learned how to look up registered COM objects in the registry, but how do
you find the implementation of each object? This information can also be found in
the registry. The HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Classes\CLSID\<CLSID>
keys have one or more of the following values, depending on the threading capabili-
ties of the COM object. The values of interest are as follows:
      ■ InprocHandler32 or InprocHandler—Used to indicate a handler DLL that pro-
        vides the COM API interface; this DLL is normally ole32.dll (or ole2.dll for
        16-bit servers). It’s rare, although possible, for a COM server to specify its own
        handler.
      ■ InprocServer32 or InprocServer—Used to indicate a server DLL that houses
        the implementation of the COM object. This value is used when the COM
        object is an in-process server.
      ■ LocalServer32 or LocalServer—Used to indicate an executable that houses
        the implementation of the COM object. It’s used when the COM object is an
        out-of-process server.

OLE
Object Linking and Embedding (OLE) is the predecessor to modern Windows
COM. The original version of OLE uses DDE to allow interaction between compo-
nents of different applications. This functionality is still part of the basic COM
infrastructure, although it doesn’t affect the discussions of DCOM. However, it’s
worth mentioning this relationship because the term “OLE” appears in many COM
functions and data types.

Automation Objects
Automation objects are a special subclass of COM objects that originally provided a
simpler form of IPC for controlling another application (referred to as an automa-
tion server). For example, Internet Explorer and Microsoft Word expose automation
interfaces that allow clients to completely control the application and documents it
contains. Automation servers generally expose scriptable methods, which are meth-
ods called through an IDispatch interface accepting VARIANT arguments. This inter-
face is compatible with scripting languages because it doesn’t use language specific
elements such as object vtables and typed parameters. When a script invokes a
method on an object, the scripting engine can use the IDispatch interface to ask for
the unique ID of a method. The ID is then passed along with an array of VARIANT
arguments via the IDispatch::Invoke() method.

Threading in COM
Windows evolved from a simple single-threaded OS to a true multiuser, multi-
threaded OS. This evolution has required some scaffolding to allow older, thread-
unsafe COM objects to function properly in multithreaded versions of Windows.
This scaffolding is provided in the form of apartments.
    The historical version of COM is the single-threaded apartment (STA); a COM
process can have any number of STAs, with each one running on a separate thread.
The STA uses DDE to perform method calls on objects, thus requiring a window
message pump to function. The advantage of using the STA is that it synchronizes
all messages processed by the application. This synchronization makes it fairly easy
to implement a basic single-threaded COM object. From a security perspective, an
STA COM object presents unique concerns only if it’s running in a privileged con-
text on an interactive desktop. These issues have been discussed previously in the
sections on window messaging and shatter vulnerabilities.
    The multithreaded apartment (MTA) is also referred to as the free threaded
apartment; a COM process has at most one MTA shared across all MTA objects in
the process. The COM subsystem makes direct use of the object vtable when dis-
patching methods in an MTA, so it doesn’t require any mechanism for handling
window messages. Of course, this means COM method calls provide no guarantee
of sequencing or serialization for an MTA.
    A thread must set its apartment model before calling any COM functions. This
is done by calling CoInitializeEx(), which has the following prototype:
HRESULT CoInitializeEx(void *pReserved, DWORD dwCoInit)

    The dwCoInit argument dictates whether the thread enters a new STA or enters
the process’s MTA. It can take the following values:
    ■ COINIT_MULTITHREADED—Indicates the thread enters the MTA.

    ■ COINIT_APARTMENTTHREADED—Indicates the thread should create a new STA.

    Of course, an in-process server has no way of knowing what model its client
process is using, so it can’t rely on CoInitializeEx() for properinitialization. In
this case, the in-process server must specify at registration what threading models it
supports, which is done in the registry value
HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\Classes\<CLSID>\InprocServer32\ThreadingModel.
    The in-process server can specify one of three options in this value:
      ■ Apartment—The STA model.

      ■ Free—The MTA model.

      ■ Both—An STA or MTA.

When an object is created, the COM runtime examines this registry key and tries to
put the object in an existing MTA. If the correct apartment isn’t present, COM cre-
ates a new one of the required type. If this value isn’t present, the COM runtime
assumes the in-process server requires the STA model.
     Threading issues come into play when more than one thread can operate on an
object; that is, more than one thread is in the same apartment as the object. This
issue occurs in-process when both the client and server run in an MTA; however, it
can occur out-of-process with an MTA server accessed by more than one client of
any type. In both cases, COM developers must make the server object thread safe
because any number of threads can be operating on it simultaneously.
     One more important detail on COM threads is how the COM subsystem
manages threads. Like RPC, the COM subsystem manages calls via a pool of worker
threads. This means a call can occur on any thread, and developers can’t assume that
calls in sequence occur on the same thread. So a COM MTA can have no thread affin-
ity, which means it can’t make any assumptions about its thread of execution between
calls. Threading issues in general are a complex topic, covered in depth in Chapter 13.
Keep threading issues in mind when auditing COM objects in the MTA model.

Proxies and Stubs
COM objects can’t directly call routines between different apartment models or
across process boundaries. Instead, COM provides an IPC method in the form of
proxies and stubs. Much like RPC requests, the COM subsystem handles calling
remote components and marshalling data. In fact, DCOM uses the native Windows
RPC mechanisms for its COM remoting.
    On the client side, the code that bundles the data and sends it to the server is
referred to as an interface proxy (or sometimes just “proxy”) because it looks and
acts exactly like the real object to the caller. The proxy has the same interface as the
real object. The fact that the proxy is just a stand-in is transparent to the rest of the
client application.

    The server code responsible for decapsulating a request and delivering it to the
server application is called a stub. A server application receives a request from a
client stub and performs the necessary operations. It then returns a result to the
stub, which handles all marshaling and communications.

Type Libraries
The easiest method of deploying and registering a COM component generally
involves using type libraries. A type library describes all the interface and typing
information for COM objects. It can include a variety of information, such as
COM object names, supported interfaces, method prototypes, structures,
enumerations, and relevant GUIDs for interfaces and objects. Developers can
use type libraries to incorporate components into their applications with
minimal effort.
    Each type library can be registered with the system. Like interfaces and COM
classes, they are given a unique GUID to ensure that each type library can be identi-
fied. Type library IDs are stored in the registry in HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\Classes\
Typelib, with subkeys identifying the location of the type library. In addition,
CLSIDs and interfaces can indicate that a type library applies to them by using the
Typelib subkey in their locations in the registry.
    Type libraries can be in a standalone file (usually with the extension .tlb) or
included as a resource in a DLL or executable. As you see later in “Auditing DCOM
Applications,” type libraries provide a wealth of essential information, especially
when you don’t have access to the source code.

DCOM Configuration Utility
The following sections focus on programmatic configuration of DCOM applica-
tions. You can also use the DCOM Configuration utility to view and manipulate the
registered attributes of DCOM components. To run this utility, type dcomcnfg.exe
at the command line or in the Run dialog box. In Windows XP and later, this com-
mand starts an instance of the Microsoft Management Console (MMC), as shown in
Figure 12-3.
     The DCOM Configuration utility can be used to manipulate all DCOM-related
security settings, including the base subsystem security, default component secu-
rity, and individual component security. This utility should be your starting point
for reviewing an installed DCOM application. The Properties dialog box for a COM
object shows you the application name, the application ID, security permissions
associated with the object, and more useful tidbits of information you need to evalu-
ate application exposure (see Figure 12-4).

Figure 12-3   Viewing all registered DCOM objects

Figure 12-4   Viewing properties of COM objects

DCOM Application Identity
Unlike local COM, a remote COM server often doesn’t run under the access token
of the launching user. Instead, the base identity is designated by the DCOM object’s
registration parameters. A DCOM server can run in these four user contexts:

    ■ Interactive user—This context causes the application to run as whichever user is
     currently logged on. If no users are logged on, the application can’t be started.
    ■ Launching user—This context causes the application to run with the creden-
      tials of the user who’s launching the server. If no identity is established in the
      registry, this context is the default setting.
    ■ Specified user—This context causes the application to be launched by using a
      specific user’s identity, no matter who the launching user is. The credentials
      of the target user are required to configure this context.
    ■ Service—The application DCOM server is hosted inside a service and runs
      under a local service account.
     Generally, running as the launching user is the simplest, most secure option.
This context causes the application to impersonate the launching user; however,
accessing objects across the network from the server fails in Windows 2000 and ear-
lier because of the lack of impersonation delegation. Long-lived COM servers might
require running under a local service account or a specified account. In Windows
XP and later, the network service account is often used. Developers can also create a
tightly restricted account for the DCOM object.
     The most dangerous application identity is probably the interactive user
because any method of running arbitrary code results in unrestricted impersonation
of the interactive user. This identity is especially dangerous if the COM interface
allows remote access. If you encounter this identity setting, examine all interfaces
closely. Pay special attention to any capabilities (intentional or otherwise) that allow
code execution or arbitrary file and object manipulation.

DCOM Subsystem Access Permissions
Starting with Windows XP SP2 and Windows Server 2003 SP1, Microsoft provides
granular system-wide access control for DCOM, which can be accessed through the
DCOM configuration in the System Properties dialog box. To manipulate these
system-wide settings, click the Edit Limits buttons on the Security tab. These config-
uration parameters supersede the default and component-specific settings, so they
can be used to completely restrict DCOM access. The access rights are summarized
in Table 12-5.

Table 12-5
COM Object Access Rights
Access Right                        Meaning
COM_RIGHTS_EXECUTE                  Allows users to make calls on a COM interface.
COM_RIGHTS_EXECUTE_LOCAL            Required to allow local clients to make calls on a COM
                                    interface.
                                                                                      continues...

Table 12-5    continued
COM Object Access Rights
COM_RIGHTS_EXECUTE_REMOTE            Required to allow remote clients to make calls on a COM
                                     interface.
COM_RIGHTS_ACTIVATE_LOCAL            Required to allow local clients to activate the interface.
COM_RIGHTS_ACTIVE_REMOTE             Required to allow remote clients to activate the interface.

    The COM_RIGHTS_EXECUTE right is required for remote COM to function at all.
The default assignment of the remaining rights allows only administrators to acti-
vate and launch remote COM objects. However, all users are allowed to launch local
COM objects and connect to existing remote objects. Earlier versions of Windows
support only the COM_RIGHTS_EXECUTE permission.

DCOM Access Controls
You’ve already learned how RPC can use native Windows access control mechanisms
to provide fine-grained authentication and authorization. DCOM makes use of this
same infrastructure for its own access control features. However, DCOM authoriza-
tion comes into play in a slightly different manner: at activation time and call time.

Activation
A DCOM object must be instantiated before a client can receive an interface pointer
to it and before any of its methods can be called by that client. Usually, this instantia-
tion—called activation—is done via RPC. The RPC subsystem locates the DCOM
server a client is trying to access and launches it if it’s not already running.
     The Service Control Manager (SCM) determines whether the requesting principal
is allowed to launch the object by examining the launch permission ACL for the
requested class. This ACL is maintained in the registry key HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\
APPID\<APPID>\LaunchPermission.
     The LaunchPermission value might be absent if no special permissions are
required. If so, the class inherits the default permissions. This ACL is stored in the
system registry at HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Microsoft\OLE\
DefaultLaunchPermission.

         Note
         A DCOM server can’t set launch permissions programmatically for
         the current call. Generally, the installing application or system
         administrator sets these permissions programmatically or with the
         DCOM Configuration utility. Therefore, insufficient launch permis-
         sions fall into the operational vulnerability classification.

Invocation
After a DCOM object is activated, developers can apply additional levels of control
by enforcing call-level security, which controls the principals allowed to make inter-
face calls on a specific object. There are two ways to enforce call-level security:
through registry key settings and programmatically. The first method involves con-
sulting the registry. First, the ACL for the application is checked, which is in the reg-
istry key HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\APPID\<APPID>\AccessPermission. If this
value is absent, application access has no special security requirements, and the
default ACL is applied from the Registry key HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Soft-
ware\Microsoft\OLE\DefaultAccessPermission.
    These registry keys are set manually or via the DCOM Configuration utility. The
other way to enforce call access permissions is programmatically with the
CoInitializeSecurity() function:

HRESULT CoInitializeSecurity(PSECURITY_DESCRIPTOR pVoid,
             LONG cAuthSvc, SOLE_AUTHENTICATION_SERVICE *asAuthSvc,
             void * pReserved1, DWORD dwAuthLevel, DWORD dwImpLevel,
             SOLE_AUTHENTICATION_LIST *pAuthList,
             DWORD dwCapabilities, void * pReserved3)

     The CoInitializeSecurity() function gives developers extensive control over
the basic security of COM objects. The security measures this function puts in place
are process wide; that is, if a process has multiple DCOM object interfaces exposed,
all interfaces are affected by a call to this function. The first argument actually pro-
vides the majority of the security capability. Although the prototype indicates that
this argument is a pointer to a security descriptor, it can also point to two other
structures: an AppID structure or an IAccessControl object. When an AppID struc-
ture is specified, the relevant AppID is located in the registry and permissions are
applied according to the subkey values stored there. An IAccessControl object is a
system-provided DCOM object that supplies methods for enforcing restrictions on
other interfaces. The client can call CoInitializeSecurity() only once, and any
attempt to call it again fails.

         Note
         Remember that CoInitializeSecurity() restrictions are applied to
         every interface the calling process has registered.

    In addition to security descriptor settings, quite a few other security restric-
tions can be put in place with CoInitializeSecurity(). The dwAuthLevel
parameter can also be used to enforce certain authentication levels. DCOM uses

the same authentication levels as RPC, so they aren’t repeated here. Refer to the
“RPC Servers” section earlier in this chapter for details on these authentication
levels.
    The downside of CoInitializeSecurity() is that it can be called only once and
affects all DCOM calls in the current process. However, to modify authentication
behavior on a per-proxy basis, clients can also use the CoSetProxyBlanket() func-
tion, which has the following prototype:
HRESULT CoSetProxyBlanket(IUnknown * pProxy, DWORD dwAuthnSvc,
         DWORD dwAuthzSvc, WCHAR * pServerPrincName,
         DWORD dwAuthnLevel, DWORD dwImpLevel,
         RPC_AUTH_IDENTITY_HANDLE pAuthInfo,
         DWORD dwCapabilities)

    This function operates similarly to CoInitializeSecurity(), except the authen-
tication parameters affect only the proxy indicated by the pProxy argument rather
than every proxy interface a client uses. Also, unlike CoInitializeSecurity(),
CoSetProxyBlanket() can be called more than once.

Impersonation in DCOM
DCOM allows servers to impersonate clients by using the underlying RPC imple-
mentation. A DCOM application enforces impersonation levels programmatically
and through the use of registry settings. Registry settings provide initial security
requirements, but they can be overridden programmatically while the application
is running. You might have noticed that both CoInitializeSecurity() and
CoSetProxyBlanket() have a dwImpLevel parameter. This parameter allows clients to
specify the impersonation level, and it works just as it does in RPC. This parameter is
simply passed to the underlying RPC transport, discussed earlier in this
chapter. However, impersonation can be performed only if the authentication
level is RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_IMPERSONATE or higher; the default value is
C_IMP_LEVEL_IDENTIFY.
     In addition to the standard IPC impersonation issues, DCOM objects might be
more at risk from impersonation attacks. As Michael Howard and David Leblanc
point out in Writing Secure Code, a server application is likely to act as a client
when an event source/sink pair is set up and interfaces are passed as arguments to
a server process.
     For those unfamiliar with sources and sinks, they are older COM mecha-
nisms for handling asynchronous events through the use of connection points.
A connection point is simply a communication channel an object can establish
with another object. You’ve seen examples of the client making calls to a server

and receiving a result immediately. Sometimes, however, the server needs to
advise the client that an event has occurred. This event might be based on a user
action, or it might indicate that a time-consuming operation is finished. In this sit-
uation, the client exposes its own COM interface and passes it to the server.
When the server wants to indicate an event occurred, it simply calls a method in
this interface. To do this, the server must be a connectable object—that is, expose
the IConnectionPoint interface (among several others). The server’s outgoing
interface for a connection point is called a source, and the client’s receiving inter-
face is called a sink. The problem with this process is that the server is now a
client, and its impersonation level is just as important as the client’s. If a mali-
cious client connects to an unprotected server, it can use CoImpersonateClient()
in its sink interface to steal the server’s credentials. Remember, the server needs
to set fairly lax permissions to be vulnerable to this type of attack, as in the fol-
lowing example:
BOOL InitializeCOM(void)
{
    HRESULT rc;

    rc = CoInitializeEx(NULL, COINIT_APARTMENTTHREADED);

    if(FAILED(rc))
         return FALSE;

    rc = CoInitializeSecurity(NULL, -1, NULL, NULL,
              RPC_AUTHN_LEVEL_NONE, RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_IMPERSONATE,
              NULL, 0, NULL);

    if(FAILED(rc))
         Return FALSE;

    return TRUE;
}

    If a server (or a client) for a connectable object initializes COM security as in
this example, impersonation vectors are a definite threat because they might allow
connecting clients to steal credentials. This type of attack is one of the main reasons
for Microsoft’s introduction of COM cloaking and RPC_C_IMP_LEVEL_DELEGATE.

MIDL Revisited
MIDL was introduced in “Microsoft Interface Definition Language” earlier in this
chapter. IDL is primarily intended to express RPC interfaces, but it can also be used
to describe COM interfaces. In fact, the MIDL compiler has language support for
the Object Description Language (ODL), which can be used to represent objects as
well as RPC interfaces. When auditing COM applications, you might see some
COM object interfaces expressed in IDL, so this section reviews some of the main
attributes and keywords for expressing COM objects.
    The most important difference between COM ODL and RPC IDL is the presence
of the object attribute in the IDL header. This keyword indicates that the interface is
a COM object and directs the MIDL compiler to generate a COM proxy and stub, as
opposed to RPC client/server stubs. The other main difference is indicating that the
interface is derived from another interface. Remember that all COM objects are
derived from IUnknown; so you must indicate that in the interface definition.

        Note
        Instead of being derived directly from IUnknown, COM objects can
        be derived from another class. However, the parent class is directly
        or indirectly derived from IUnknown.

    Putting this together, a sample COM interface definition in an IDL file might
look something like this:
import “iunknwn.idl”

[
      object,
      uuid(12345678-1234-1234-1234-123456789012),
]

interface IBankAccountObject : IUnknown
{
      BOOL LoadDetails([in] PUSER_DETAILS userDetails);
      BOOL GetBalance([out] PBALANCE balanceInfo);
      BOOL GetHistory([out] PHISTORY historyInfo);

      ... other methods ...
}

    As you can see, it looks a lot like an RPC interface definition. The most impor-
tant part is locating all the available interface methods and determining what argu-
ments they take. Then you must examine the implementation of each function to
identify any vulnerabilities.
    In addition to defining just the interfaces, objects themselves can also be
expressed. The coclass keyword is used to represent a COM object. The class defi-
nition contains a list of interfaces the object implements. Returning to the previous
example of the bank interface, the class definition would follow the interface defini-
tion and look something like this:
[
    uuid(87654321-4321-4321-4321-210987654321),
    version(1.0),
    helpstring(“Bank Account Class”)
]

coclass CBankAccount
{
    [default] interface IBankAccountObject;
}

    This simple example shows the definition of the COM class CBankAccount. This
object’s CLSID is indicated by the uuid attribute. This class implements only one
interface: IBankAccountObject.

       Note
       The default attribute listed before the interface definition is
       optional and doesn’t need to be there. It simply indicates that
       IBankAccountObject is the default interface for the CBankAccount
       class. Other interface-specific attributes can be used; for more infor-
       mation, read the COM section of the MSDN.

   Reviewing the code for a class exposing multiple interfaces requires examining
each interface separately because the interfaces’ functionality might be exposed to
untrusted (or semitrusted) clients.
   Type library information is also generated by using MIDL. Specifically, the
library keyword can be used to create a .tlb file, like so:
library libname
{

      importlib(“stdole.tlb”);

      interface IMyInterface1;
      coclass CClass;

      ... other stuff you want to appear in the TLB ...
}

     This section doesn’t delve into the syntax for library definitions. When you have
the source code, the type library doesn’t offer much additional information. After
all, you already know the available objects and their interfaces from looking at the
rest of the IDL data.

Active Template Library
The Active Template Library (ATL) is another approach developers can use for
developing COM applications. It allows developers to define interfaces in their
code and automatically takes care of many of the more tedious aspects of imple-
menting COM interfaces. For example, ATL can be used to automatically generate
the IUnknown member functions QueryInterface(), AddRef(), and Release(). It
can also be used to generate code for several other interfaces, such as IClass
Factory.
    ATL is used extensively, so you need to be able to identify COM interfaces in
ATL-generated code. As it turns out, this is easy. All you need to be familiar with is
the COM_MAP macro used to define a COM object; a COM object definition using
COM_MAP looks something like this:

BEGIN_COM_MAP(CObjectName)
      COM_INTERFACE_ENTRY(IMyInterface1)
      COM_INTERFACE_ENTRY(IMyInterface2)
END_COM_MAP()

    Simple, right? You can easily see that the COM object CObjectName is being
declared, and it exposes two interfaces: IMyInterface1 and IMyInterface2. From
there, all you need to do is locate the methods for each interface entry in the COM
MAP. Each COM_INTERFACE_ENTRY() in the COM_MAP is an interface definition from an
IDL file, which is generated by the development environment when ATL wizards
are used. When ATL is used to auto-generate COM objects, you have the IDL data at
your disposal as well.

Auditing DCOM Applications
Now that you’re familiar with the general structure of COM programming and secu-
rity measures, you need to walk through the most effective ways of auditing COM
client and server programs. Auditing COM servers isn’t too different from auditing
RPC servers; you need to address the following questions:
    ■ Are sufficient access controls in place to restrict the interface to authorized
      parties?
    ■ Are the exposed interface functions secure?

    ■ Is impersonation being used properly, or does it pose a risk?

    ■ What launching rights are granted to the server?

    ■ Are there any threading or synchronizations issues that could be exploited?

    You can break down this list of requirements into the following steps:
      1. Check DCOM application security settings programmatically or by using
         the DCOM Configuration utility.
      2. Examine how CoInitializeSecurity() is called (if it’s called) to back up
         your findings from the registry. This step also sheds some light on what sort
         of impersonation defaults are enforced.
      3. Locate the interface routines exposed by the COM server and apply the
         standard vulnerability-auditing methods you’ve learned in this book.
    When determining the security of interface functions, you should look for the
issues described in the following sections.

COM Registration Review
Now that you know how access controls can be applied to COM objects, it should
be evident that determining whether access controls aren’t secure is a two-step
process: examining the activation access controls and examining the call-level
access controls.
     Activation access controls aren’t in the application code; they reside in the reg-
istry. Although you might not have access to the target machines the application
will be installed on, an install procedure should be in place to govern who can acti-
vate the object.
     COM applications are often self-registering. That is, they can perform their own
registration automatically so that manual setup isn’t required. To do this, they
export a pair of functions, DllRegisterServer() and DllUnregisterServer(), in
one of the binary files bundled with the application. The DllRegisterServer()
function contains code to make registration settings. The DllUnregisterServer()
function does the reciprocal—removing all registration established in
DllRegisterServer().

      A COM application providing this interface is installed and removed with the
regsvr32.exe program. When this program starts, it locates the DllRegisterServer()
routine in the specified binary and runs it, thus removing the requirement for
manual registration.

         Note
         ActiveX controls are self-registering COM objects. This just means
         users don’t need to run the regsvr32 application because Internet
         Explorer does so automatically when downloading a new compo-
         nent. ActiveX controls are covered in “ActiveX Security” later in this
         chapter.

     After the application is installed, you can use standard Windows utilities to
inspect security settings. The easiest approach is to use the DCOM Configuration
utility; however, the associated registry keys can be manipulated directly. These keys
are located at HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Classes\AppID\<AppID>.
Table 12-6 lists the MSDN-provided values that affect a server’s DCOM security
parameters.

Table 12-6
COM Registry Values
Named Value                  Description
AccessPermission             Sets an ACL that determines access.
ActivateAtStorage            Configures client to activate on the same system as persistent storage.
AppID                        Identifies the AppID GUID that corresponds to the named executable.
AuthenticationLevel          Sets the authentication level for the AppID, overriding LegacyAuthenti-
                             cationLevel. Available only on Windows NT 4.0 SP4 and later versions.
DllSurrogate                 Specifies that a DLL server is to use a surrogate.exe file. If the path is not
                             specified, the system-provided surrogate is used.
DllSurrogateExecutable       Specifies that a DLL server is to use a custom surrogate.exe file. If the
                             custom file is not specified, the system-provided surrogate is used.
Endpoints                    Configures a COM application to use a specified TCP port number for
                             DCOM communications.
LaunchPermission             Sets an ACL that determines who can launch the application.
LocalService                 Sets the application as a Win32 service.
RemoteServerName             Sets the name of the remote server.
RunAs                        Sets an application to run only as a given user.
ServiceParameters            Sets parameters to be passed to a LocalService on call.
SRPTrustLevel                Sets the trust level of the software restriction policy (SRP). Available only
                             on Windows XP and later versions.

    You have already seen that you can determine the launching identity of a COM
application by checking the RunAs and LocalService keys listed in Table 12-6.
These keys are usually absent, so the default action is taken, which causes the
COM application to run in the context of the launching user. Running in this con-
text roughly equates to a standard local process execution and generally requires
no further inspection. However, further inspection is needed if the COM subsys-
tem allows remote users to launch COM objects, as vulnerabilities in these meth-
ods could result in remote process execution. The remaining options might require
far more inspection, particularly long-lived DCOM applications that run inside
services.

Auditing COM Interfaces
Auditing the actual implementation of COM objects is one of the most critical com-
ponents of auditing a COM-based application. After all, a vulnerability in the imple-
mentation of the functions could allow attackers to undermine all external access
controls and the underlying system’s integrity. The choice of authentication and
impersonation parameters can reduce the impact of attacks. However, all exposed
interfaces still need to be audited for the general classes of vulnerabilities discussed
elsewhere in this book.
COM Source Audits
Auditing the source code makes your review easier because you can read interface
definitions from IDL files or read the ATL definitions. From there, you can refer to
the source code to find the implementation of relevant functions and determine
whether the object exposes any vulnerabilities.
COM Binary Audits
You might be required to perform binary audits of COM applications. The princi-
ples for auditing a COM application (and indeed any application) are the same
whether you have the binary or source code. However, the extra steps in the
binary audit can be a major hurdle. With that in mind, this section gives you a
brief summary of identifying and auditing COM interfaces as they appear in
binary files.
     Say you’re auditing a COM application, and you want to identify which inter-
faces the object exposes, what methods are available in each interface, and what
type of arguments they take. The most useful source of information is type libraries,
if they are available.

         Note
         Type libraries are always available for automation objects because
         the IDispatch interface needs to publish the information in them.

    As mentioned previously, the type library information might be stored in a
separate file. However, most often it’s stored as a resource in the executable or DLL
that implements the object. You can find the location of a type library by consulting
the HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\CLSID\<CLSID>\TypeLib key.

          Note
          The HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\Interface key can also contain a
          TypeLib key.

    This key provides a TypeID GUID value that matches a subkey in HKEY_
CLASSES_ROOT\TypeLib. This key has a version subkey indicating the location
of the type library. If it’s embedded in an executable, you can simply view it with
a PE resource viewer (such as PE Editor at www.heaventools.com). This library
information is especially useful because it gives you GUIDs, structure defini-
tions, methods exposed by interfaces, and even type information for arguments
to those methods.
    After you have this information, you need to determine how to find the methods
to audit in the binary. The first method is by locating entry points. An executable
that implements a COM object must register each class object by using the CoReg-
isterClassObject() function. This requires indicating a CLSID along with a
pointer to the class’s IUnknown interface. By locating instances of CoRegisterClas-
sObject(), you can find the vtable for IUnknown and then read theQueryInter-
face() function to learn about other interfaces the object exposes.
    In fact, the QueryInterface() function exported by an object is always use-
ful because it must return pointers to all its supported interfaces. So another
way to locate functions exported by an object is to find the QueryInterface()
implementation in the COM server to see how it handles requests for different
IIDs. Remember, access to any interface other than IUnknown is done via the
QueryInterface() function, so the implementation always looks something
like this:
HRESULT QueryInterface(REFIID iid, void **ppvObject)
{
      if(iid == IID_IMyInterface1)
      {
           *(IMyInterface1 *)ppvObject = this;
           AddRef();
           return NOERROR;
      }

    *ppvObject = NULL;
    return E_NOINTERFACE;
}

     Because the second argument always points to an interface upon success, you
can find every assignment for this argument and deduce which functions are
exported. Take a look at a practical example. The following disassembly is taken
from C:\Windows\System32\wiaacmgr.exe, which hosts a COM server on a Win-
dows XP machine (CLSID 7EFA65D9-573C-4E46-8CCB-E7FB9E56CD57). The code
is divided into parts so that you can see what’s going on more easily.
     In this first part, the QueryInterface() function is initialized. As you can see,
all that’s done at this point is setting the ppvObject parameter to NULL so that it
doesn’t initially point to any interface:
.text:010054C5 QueryInterface proc near ; CODE XREF:
.text:0100A7F7j
.text:010054C5                       ; DATA XREF:
.text:off_100178Co
.text:010054C5
.text:010054C5 this_ptr             = dword ptr     8
.text:010054C5 riid                 = dword ptr     0Ch
.text:010054C5 ppvObject            = dword ptr     10h
.text:010054C5
.text:010054C5       mov      edi, edi
.text:010054C7       push     ebp
.text:010054C8       mov      ebp, esp
.text:010054CA       mov      edx, [ebp+ppvObject]
.text:010054CD       push     ebx
.text:010054CE       push     esi
.text:010054CF       mov      esi, [ebp+riid]
.text:010054D2       push     edi
.text:010054D3       xor      ebx, ebx
.text:010054D5       push     4
.text:010054D7       pop      ecx
.text:010054D8       mov      edi, offset IID_IUnknown
.text:010054DD       xor      eax, eax
.text:010054DF       mov      [edx], ebx        ; *ppvObject = NULL;

    This next part of the code compares the riid argument against IID_IUnknown. If
the comparison succeeds ppvObject is set to point to the current (this) object. The

jmp instruction at the end jumps to the function epilogue, which returns a success-
ful result:

.text:010054E1       repe cmpsd
.text:010054E3       jnz     short loc_10054F2
                                     ; test for IID_IUnknown
.text:010054E5
.text:010054E5 loc_10054E5:          ; CODE XREF: QueryInterface+3Cj
.text:010054E5       mov     eax, [ebp+this_ptr]
.text:010054E8
.text:010054E8 loc_10054E8:          ; CODE XREF: QueryInterface+5Bj
.text:010054E8       mov     [edx], eax          ; *ppvObject = this;
.text:010054EA       mov     ecx, [eax]
.text:010054EC       push    eax
.text:010054ED       call    dword ptr [ecx+4] ; call AddRef()
.text:010054F0       jmp     short loc_100552A

    Evidently, this object has two interfaces in addition to IUnknown. This next part
of the code compares the riid argument against two more interface IDs. If there’s a
match, the ppvObject parameter is set to the this object pointer and a successful
return happens:

.text:010054F2 loc_10054F2:          ; CODE XREF: QueryInterface+1Ej
.text:010054F2       mov     esi, [ebp+riid]
.text:010054F5       push    4
.text:010054F7       pop     ecx
.text:010054F8       mov     edi, offset IID_Interface1
.text:010054FD       xor     eax, eax
.text:010054FF       repe cmpsd
.text:01005501       jz      short loc_10054E5 ;test IID_Interface1
.text:01005503       mov     esi, [ebp+riid]
.text:01005506       push    4
.text:01005508       pop     ecx
.text:01005509       mov     edi, offset IID_Interface2
.text:0100550E       xor     eax, eax
.text:01005510       repe cmpsd                   ; test IID_Interface2
.text:01005512       jnz     short loc_1005522 ; go to failure
.text:01005514       mov     eax, [ebp+this_ptr]

.text:01005517       lea     ecx, [eax+4]
.text:0100551A       neg     eax
.text:0100551C       sbb     eax, eax
.text:0100551E       and     eax, ecx
.text:01005520       jmp     short loc_10054E8 ; *ppvObject = this;

       Note
       The second interface causes ppvObject to be set to the this pointer
       with 4 added to it.

    If there’s no match, the riid argument is deemed invalid, and the jnz instruc-
tion bolded in the previous code causes a jump to an error epilogue that returns the
error E_NOINTERFACE, as shown in the following code snippet:
.text:01005522 loc_1005522:         ; CODE XREF: QueryInterface+4Dj
.text:01005522       and     dword ptr [edx], 0
.text:01005525       mov     ebx, 80004002h ; E_NOINTERFACE
.text:0100552A
.text:0100552A loc_100552A:         ; CODE XREF: QueryInterface+2Bj
.text:0100552A       pop     edi
.text:0100552B       pop     esi
.text:0100552C       mov     eax, ebx
.text:0100552E       pop     ebx
.text:0100552F       pop     ebp
.text:01005530       retn    0Ch
.text:01005530 QueryInterface       endp

     By finding QueryInterface(), you can figure out what interfaces are available
based on how the ppvObject parameter is set. You don’t even have to read the
QueryInterface() code in many cases. You know that QueryInterface() is part of
the IUnknown interface, and every COM interface must inherit from IUnknown. So
vtable cross references to QueryInterface() are often COM interfaces, allowing you
to focus on finding all cross-references to the QueryInterface() function. In the
preceding code, there are two cross-references to QueryInterface(), which fits with
what you learned from examining the code. Following one of these
cross-references, you see this:
.text:0100178C off_100178C          dd offset QueryInterface ;
➥ DATA XREF: sub_100A6B7+Do

.text:0100178C                                     ; sub_100A9AF+13o
.text:01001790        dd offset sub_1005468
.text:01001794        dd offset sub_1005485
.text:01001798        dd offset sub_1005538
.text:0100179C        dd offset sub_1005582
.text:010017A0        dd offset sub_10055CC
.text:010017A4        dd offset sub_100ACA1

    This code is a table of function pointers, as you expected, for one of the COM
interfaces the object exposes. The two functions under QueryInterface() are
AddRef() (sub_1005468) and Release() (sub_1005485): the other two IUnknown
functions. These three functions are always at the top of every exposed COM inter-
face vtable.
    Similarly, DLL objects need to expose the DllGetClassObject() function. The
responsibility of this function is to provide an interface pointer for an object, given a
CLSID and an IID. Therefore, by reading through this function, you can find what
classes are supported as well as what interface IDs are supported on each object.
Typically, DllGetClassObject() implementations look something like this example
taken from MSDN at http://windowssdk.msdn.microsoft.com/library/en-
us/com/html/42c08149-c251-47f7-a81f-383975d7081c.asp:
HRESULT_export     PASCAL DllGetClassObject
          (REFCLSID rclsid, REFIID riid, LPVOID * ppvObj)
{

      HRESULT hr = E_OUTOFMEMORY;

      *ppvObj = NULL;

      CClassFactory *pClassFactory = new CClassFactory(rclsid);

      if (pClassFactory != NULL)         {
          hr = pClassFactory->QueryInterface(riid, ppvObj);
          pClassFactory->Release();
      }

      return hr;
}

    An object is usually instantiated and then queried for the specified IID. There-
fore, initialization functions are commonly called from DllGetClassObject(),
which sets up vtables containing the COM object’s exposed methods.
    There are certainly other methods for finding object interfaces, although
sometimes they’re less precise. For example, if you know the IID of an interface
you want to find an implementation for, you could simply do a binary search for
some or all of that IID, and then follow cross-references to methods using that
IID. Often a cross-reference points to the QueryInterface() routine where that
IID can be requested.

 Automation Objects and Fuzz Testing
 Automation objects are required to publish type information from their type
 libraries. This means clients can learn about all the callable methods and argu-
 ment types they take just by asking the object for its type information. There-
 fore, by having a client that asks for this information and then using it to
 stress-test each available method, you could quickly find vulnerabilities in the
 application.
 It turns out that a tool exists to do just this. Frederic Bret-Mounet designed
 and developed the COMbust tool, which he spoke about at the Blackhat Brief-
 ings conference in 2003. This tool takes any automation object specified by a
 user and does some basic fuzz testing on any methods it identifies. It’s config-
 urable, so users can tune it to test for specific conditions, and is available at
 www.blackhat.com/html/bh-media-archives/bh-archives-2003.html.

    Another easy way to locate a QueryInterface() implementation without reading
any code is to do a text search on the relevant binary code for the E_NOINTERFACE value
(80004002). Any match for this number is usually a QueryInterface() implementation
returning an error or a client checking for this error when it has called QueryInterface()
on an object. By the context of the match, you can easily tell which it is.

ActiveX Security
An ActiveX control is simply a self-registering COM object deployed inside another
application, such as a Web browser. The “Active” part of the name comes from the
fact that these objects can register themselves, thus simplifying their deployment.
Most ActiveX controls also expose IDispatch interfaces so that they can be instanti-
ated and manipulated easily by scripting languages. Generally, these controls are
hosted in Internet Explorer, although they can be hosted inside any application.
ActiveX is an important Windows technology with serious security implications
explored in the following sections.

          Note
          Changes to Internet Explorer 6 and the upcoming Internet Explorer
          7 do a lot to mitigate the dangers of ActiveX controls. Internet
          Explorer 7 introduces site-based opt-in for controls to prevent a
          malicious site from instantiating installed controls.

ActiveX Code Signing
An ActiveX control is just a bundle of binary code that runs in the context of instanti-
ating user. Because of the potential danger of running native code, Microsoft designed
ActiveX controls to support validation through an Authenticode signature. Develop-
ers can sign controls with their private keys, and users can validate the source of the
unmodified control. This signature doesn’t in any way state that the control is free of
vulnerabilities, and it doesn’t prevent the control from being malicious. It just means
there’s a verifiable paper trail leading back to the developer.

Safe for Scripting and Safe for Initialization
In addition to code signing, ActiveX controls have a few additional parameters to
limit their attack surface when deployed inside Internet Explorer. These parameters
are termed “safe for scripting” and “safe for initialization.” There are two ways to
mark interfaces as safe. The first is performed at installation by modifying the reg-
istry key HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Classes\CLSID\<GUID of con-
trol class>\Implemented Categories\<GUID of category>. The safe for scripting
category GUID is {7DD95801-9882-11CF-9FA9-00AA006C42C4}, and the safe for
initialization category GUID is {7DD95802-9882-11CF-9FA9-00AA006C42C4}.
     The second approach to marking a control as safe requires that the control imple-
ment the IObjectSafety interface, which exposes the GetInterfaceSafetyOptions()
method to the hosting container. The hosting container calls this method to determine
whether a specific interface is marked as safe for scripting or initialization and can
also request that the control be marked as safe by calling the
IObjectSafety.SetInterfaceSafetyOptions() method.
     Any control marked as safe for scripting can be instantiated and manipulated in
Internet Explorer. Microsoft advises marking a control as safe for scripting only if it
must be manipulated from Internet Explorer and doesn’t provide any means for
unauthorized parties to alter the state of the local system or connected systems.
This guidance is given because a safe for scripting control exposes its methods to
any site users view, so attackers can leverage the functionally exposed by a control
to exploit client users. For example, say a scriptable control allows the manipulation
of arbitrary files. This issue might be part of a faulty design or the result of a vulner-
ability in path checking. Regardless, it would present an unacceptable vulnerability
for an ActiveX control because it allows any remote attacker to drastically alter the

victim’s system after connecting to a malicious Web site. When reviewing ActiveX
controls, you need to treat every scriptable method as attack surface and assess
them as you would any other potentially vulnerable code.
    ActiveX controls can also store and retrieve data between instantiations by
using the IPersist interface, which is exposed to controls marked as safe for initial-
ization. Microsoft advises marking a control as safe for initialization only if it must
store persistent data internal to Internet Explorer and it handles this data properly.
A security vulnerability can occur if the object stores sensitive data and exposes it to
an untrusted source or if a control fails to treat persistent data as data originating
from an untrusted source.
    Some people might be a little fuzzy on why a control must be separately marked
as safe for initialization. After all, the control is just a binary, so it can call any Win-
dows API function on its own. This means it can read the registry or file system
without the need for an IPersist interface, so exposing sensitive data is still a con-
cern. However, a control can be initialized with parameters provided by a Web site,
as shown in this HTML fragment that instantiates a control:
<OBJECT ID=”MyControl”
           CLASSID=”CLSID:F2345FA3-E11B-40AE-A86D-32C487C3EE54”
           CODEBASE=”MyControl.CAB”>
     <PARAM NAME=”MyServer” VALUE=”malicious.com” />
</OBJECT>

   This fragment creates an instance of a control and attempts to initialize it
with the MyServer parameter. This parameter is accepted through the
IPersistPropertyBag interface, which inherits from the base IPersist interface.
The control retrieves the parameter with the following code:
STDMETHODIMP MyControl::Load(IPropertyBag *pProps,
           IErrorLog* pErrLog)
{
     _variant_t       myVar;
     int              hr = 0;

     hr = pProps->Read(“MyServer”, &myVar, pErrLog);
     if (hr != 0) return hr;
     strcpy(m_serverName, myVar);

     return hr;
}

     This code is a simple implementation of the IPersistPropertyBag::Load()
method. Internet Explorer calls this method when loading the control, and the con-
trol then retrieves the PARAM values via the IPropertyBag interface. What’s
important here is that you follow the path of these properties and see what they
affect. The _variant_t class in this code has overloaded operators to handle type
conversions, so don’t be distracted by that part. Instead, just note that the bold line
copies the property string into a member variable. Here’s the declaration of that
member variable:
char       m_serverName[512];

     It’s fairly obvious that this code is performing an unbounded string copy into a
fixed-size buffer, so this particular IPersist interface is vulnerable to a straightfor-
ward buffer overflow. This vulnerability might seem obvious, but this exact pattern
has been seen in more than one ActiveX control. The issue is that developers often
don’t consider control instantiation to be an exposure point. You need to pay spe-
cial attention to all IPersist interfaces to see whether they handle input in an
unsafe manner.

Site-Restricted Controls
One of the best ways of limiting a control’s attack surface is to instantiate it only for
a known set of locations. Implementations can limit instantiation based on host-
name, but restrictions can be based on any connection information by implement-
ing the IObjectWithSite interface and the SetSite() method. The WebBrowser
control can then be used to provide detailed connection information. Microsoft pro-
vides the SiteLock template as a starting point for creating a site-restricted control.
     If a control is locked to a particular site, you need to determine how effective that
lock is. There might be issues in the string comparisons that allow you to bypass the
checks, similar to the topics discussed in Chapter 8, “Strings and Metacharacters.”
There might also be Web application vulnerabilities at the hosting site that allow you
to instantiate the control in the context of the site, but with your own parameters and
scripting. Read Chapters 17, “Web Applications,” and 18, “Web Technologies,” for
more information on vulnerabilities that involve this attack vector.

The Kill Bit
Sometimes a vulnerability is identified in a signed control. This control can then be
delivered by a malicious Web site, allowing attackers to exploit a control that otherwise
appears safe. A site-restricted control is less vulnerable to this type of attack; however,
Web application vulnerabilities (such SQL injection and cross-site scripting) might
allow attackers to exploit the underlying vulnerability. For this reason, Microsoft intro-
duced the ActiveX kill bit, which is used to mark a control version as unauthorized.
The kill bit is set by setting the CompatibilityFlags DWORD value to 0x00000400 in

this registry location: HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Internet
Explorer\ActiveX Compatibility\<GUID of control class>.
     This key and value aren’t usually present, so they need to be created by the con-
trol’s installer. Developers often have a new control set this value for all previous ver-
sions, just to prevent earlier versions from being installed. Note whether this value is
set; if it’s not, you might want to look at vulnerabilities in previous control versions.

Threading in ActiveX
Most ActiveX controls are registered for the STA model, so thread synchronization
issues aren’t generally a problem. However, an ActiveX control can be registered as
an MTA. This model is a bad idea from a usability perspective because it can cause
GUI synchronization issues. However, an MTA control might also expose synchro-
nization vulnerabilities.

Reviewing ActiveX Controls
Proprietary ActiveX controls are often frowned on in modern Web application
development. They’ve mostly been replaced with newer technologies that are more
portable and less prone to security issues. However, they are still deployed in many
legacy and corporate intranet sites. As a reviewer, one of your first considerations
should be whether a Web-hosted ActiveX control is necessary and determining the
cost of replacing it.
    If the control is necessary, review it as you would any other binary application.
However, you also need to ensure that the control handles the considerations men-
tioned previously in this section. Here’s a basic checklist:
      1. If you’re reviewing the control as part of a larger system, check that it’s
         signed with a certificate trusted by clients. If the control isn’t signed, look
         for vulnerabilities in the rest of the system that could allow attackers to
         deploy a malicious control.
      2. If the control must be marked safe for scripting, evaluate all exposed
         IDispatch paths closely, including vulnerabilities resulting from the
         intended functionality and implementation vulnerabilities.
      3. If a control must be marked safe for initialization, evaluate all IPersist calls
         closely. Look for any exposure of sensitive data. Also, look for any mishandling
         of persistent data, such as conditions that could result in memory corruption.
      4. Check whether the control is site restricted. If it is, look for vulnerabilities
         in the restriction implementation that could allow it to be instantiated by
         another site. Also, check for any other implementation vulnerabilities that
         could make this interface exploitable. If the control is part of a larger
         system, look for Web application vulnerabilities that could be used to
         circumvent the site lock.

      5. Check to see whether the control sets the kill bit for previous versions. If
         not, you might want to do a cursory analysis for vulnerabilities in earlier ver-
         sions of the control.
      6. If the control uses the MTA model, check for synchronization issues that
         could be exploited by scriptable methods.

Summary
Windows provides a variety of native IPC mechanisms that applications can use to
communicate with each other, whether they exist on the same computer or on dif-
ferent computers sharing a common network. Despite providing a rich security
model, these IPC mechanisms can increase an application’s attack surface, thus
increasing the risk of compromise. You have examined access permissions available
with Windows IPC mechanisms and the implications of programmers using these
access controls in different circumstances. You have also seen that rogue applica-
tions can attack the underlying IPC mechanisms to impersonate or disable legiti-
mate system services. By understanding these vulnerabilities and how they’re
attacked, you should be able to identify, assess, and prevent them.

