                    Chapter 14
                  Network Protocols

“And again, the internet is not something you just dump something on. It’s not a truck. It’s a
series of tubes.”
    U.S. Senator Ted Stevens, Chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee

Introduction
The majority of network-aware computer software leverages the functionality of the TCP/IP
protocol stack through high-level interfaces, such as BSD sockets, or frameworks such as
Distributed Component Object Model (DCOM). Some software, however, has to work with
network data at a lower level—a world populated by segments, frames, packets, fragments,
and checksums. Looking for security vulnerabilities in lower-level network software is chal-
lenging and captivating work. Networking code is a vast topic that can’t be covered adequately
in one chapter. Therefore, this chapter covers the basics, and then offers the authors’ thoughts
and experiences, which should prove useful if you’re charged with a related auditing project.
    This chapter focuses on three of the core Internet protocols: IP, UDP, and TCP.
Throughout the discussion, you learn about security issues that tend to plague software that
implements these protocols. Chapter 15, “Firewalls,” covers firewall technology, which works

closely with these protocols. Finally, Chapter 16, “Network Application Protocols,”
discusses some popular application-layer protocols and security issues that tend to
surface in the code that implements them. Note that the discussion in this chapter is
specific to IP version 4—the current standard for Internet communications. IP version
6, IPv4’s successor, is not covered in this chapter.
     In the course of reviewing certain software, an auditor might have to examine
code that deals with low-level network traffic. This processing could include ana-
lyzing packets or frames taken directly from the network as well as modifying or
fabricating packets and placing them directly on the network. This discussion
focuses on software systems that implement the TCP/IP networking protocols and
on systems that analyze and intercept network traffic, as they tend to be more
security critical devices in a network. Your most common projects involving
TCP/IP protocol implementations will most likely be one of the four following
product types:
      ■ TCP/IP stacks residing on end hosts—The TCP/IP stack is the centerpiece of data
       exchange between two or more hosts on an IP network. Typically located in an
       OS kernel, the IP stack hides details of network state and data delivery from
       user applications. Applications are given a clean and simple interface so that
       they don’t need code to deal with network problems, retransmissions, error
       message processing, and the like.
      ■ Products that provide routing, Network Address Translation (NAT), or load-balancing
       services—Multihomed hosts might be required to route data between their
       interfaces as dictated by a static set of simple routing rules, or a dynamic rule
       set that’s continuously updated through the use of routing protocols. This rout-
       ing functionality is really an extension of the basic IP stack, and most end hosts
       can be configured to act as a router. Naturally, dedicated routing products are
       often much more complicated. In addition to routers, load-balancing products
       are charged with dividing incoming data for a host between a number of end
       hosts, thus enabling requests to a single host to be served in parallel and speed-
       ing up access time to clients for high-volume servers.
      ■ Security products: firewalls and intrusion detection/prevention systems—A number
       of security products are required to analyze packets traversing networks that
       they are protecting. These products make decisions based on attributes of the
       packets or the data in them. Often attackers will attempt to exploit subtle
       flaws caused by differences between how the security product evaluates the
       packets and how the end host evaluates those same packets.
      ■ Network-monitoring products—Several tools passively listen on a network and
       interpret the contents of packets being transmitted. They are often used for
       diagnosing network issues or for administrators to get a better idea of the kind
       of data sent over a network. These tools provide not only packet interpretations,

     but also statistical data based on protocol analysis. They are often required to
     simply interpret packets and optionally log some sort of information, as
     opposed to acting on packets as other products do.
    The codebases for performing packet analysis at this level are generally quite
large, so auditors faced with reviewing these codebases might consider it an
insurmountable task. This chapter has been included to give code reviewers a
primer on some major protocols within a standard TCP/IP suite and to highlight
some of the problem areas where mistakes are most likely to be made. You learn
how to audit several major components of IP stacks and use the knowledge you
gained in Part II, “Software Vulnerabilities,” of this book. Although firewall
technologies aren’t covered in depth until Chapter 15, many of the concepts in
this chapter are essential for understanding how firewalls make policy decisions
and what possible evasion techniques exist for circumventing them.

Internet Protocol
Internet Protocol (IP) is the core network-layer protocol of the TCP/IP protocol suite.
It’s a pervasive protocol, used by innumerable hosts worldwide to deliver data across
the Internet and private networks. It provides an infrastructure so that computers can
locate each other with unique identifiers (IP addresses) and exchange blocks of data
(known as IP datagrams). IP is designed to abstract the physical details of networking
hardware so that communication can happen more or less seamlessly. At the level
immediately below IP, you find protocols targeted to specific networking hardware,
such as Ethernet and token ring. Sitting on top of IP, you find protocols such as TCP
that provide features such as ports, connections, and reliable delivery of data.
     Naturally, any host participating in a TCP/IP based network must be able to
correctly process incoming IP datagrams. The host performs this processing
immediately upon reception of a packet, and makes decisions on how the packet
should be handled—whether that includes passing it to a higher-level protocol
handler in the network stack (such as TCP or UDP), signaling an error because the
packet cannot be processed, or blocking the packet because it fails to meet criteria
of a firewall or other similar data inspection software.
     Because of the placement of IP in the network stack and the role it plays, it is an
attractive strategic target for attackers trying to penetrate a system or network. They
can target errors in processing IP datagrams to exploit devices and hosts, or attempt
to fool security systems (firewalls, IDSs, IPSs) by leveraging some of the unusual
nuances of IP stacks. A large codebase dealing entirely with untrusted user data
received from a remote location is always a prime candidate for code reviewers
because it represents a major attack surface.
     Before you dive into how to audit IP processing code, you should briefly review the
basics of how IP works. As mentioned, the discussion in this chapter is specific to IP

version 4—commonly written as IPv4. Interested readers can get a more comprehensive
analysis from several sources on the subject, particularly RFC 791 (www.ietf.org) and
TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 1 by W. Richard Stevens (Addison-Wesley, 1994).

IP Addressing Primer
Identifying weaknesses in IP processing code is more than just finding low-level
flaws such as integer wraps or buffer overflows; you also must recognize logic
problems with how traffic is processed. This requires a good working knowledge
of how basic routing is performed, so that you can assess how potentially
dangerous packets arrive at a destination, and where they can originate from. As
such, the following paragraphs are dedicated to providing a brief examination of
the IP routing facilities present on a typical host.
     To communicate with other hosts on a network, a machine must have at least one
network interface. A network interface is simply a network device that contains a
unique hardware address and can be used to send and receive data over a network.
A network interface is a software abstraction provided by the OS kernel in that it’s a
virtual device, though it obviously must be associated with a physical network device
if you expect to send data to external nodes. Although it is possible to have several
interfaces associated with a single network hardware device, the most common
configuration for a standard host is to have just one interface per network device.
Having multiple interfaces tied to the same network device is useful in a number of
situations, such as establishing virtual networks over existing connected networks,
or when a single machine needs to have more than one IP address on a network
(perhaps because it’s hosting a virtual machine).
     On an IP network, each connected interface has an IP address, which is a 32-bit
value that uniquely identifies a host on the network that they are connected to. An
IP address can be further broken down into two variable length bitfields—a network
ID and a host ID. The network ID indicates the sub-network (commonly called the
subnet) that the host belongs to, and the host ID uniquely identifies the host on that
particular network.
     Historically, the IP address space was broken down into several classes, and an
IP address’s network ID was determined by which class it belonged to. Classes pre-
date the classless subnetting used today, but they are still relevant in some circum-
stances because certain classes are reserved for special use. The five address
classes, class A through class E, are summarized here:
      ■ Class A—a class A address has the most significant bit of the IP address set to
       0, followed by 7 bits indicating the network ID. Thus, there are 24 bits remain-
       ing for host IDs, allowing for a large number of hosts to exist on the class A
       network (16, 777, 216 to be precise, although, as you see shortly, some IPs are
       reserved for special use).

    ■ Class B—class B IP addresses start with the leading bits “10”, followed by a
       14-bit network ID. This leaves 16 bits for host IDs, making class B’s considerably
       smaller than class A networks (although there can be more class B’s, because
       the network ID is larger).
     ■ Class C—class C IP addresses begin with the leading bits “110” and have 21
       network ID bits following. The host ID is therefore only 8 bits, so they are much
       smaller than class B networks, with only 256 unique IP addresses available on
       each class C.
     ■ Class D—class D IP addresses begin with the leading bits “1110” but have no
       following network ID bits. Class D IP addresses are especially reserved as
       multicast addresses. A multicast address allows a single IP address to refer to
       multiple hosts. You revisit multicast addresses at various stages throughout
       this chapter and Chapter 15.
     ■ Class E—class E addresses begin with the leading bits “1111” and also have
       no following network ID bits. Class E is for experimental use and should not
       be routed.
     The problem with using address classes is that there are only a limited number
of networks available, a number of which are reserved for various special purposes.
Furthermore, the fixed-size IP address classes might not be appropriately sized for
certain networks. For example, if you had 280 nodes on a network, you have just a
few too many for a class C, but are only using up a fraction of a class B. As such,
today’s IP implementations allow for arbitrary sized network IDs. The network ID
for an IP address is determined by the network mask (also known as the subnet
mask, or netmask), which simply indicates which bits of the IP address are reserved
for the network ID. Network masks can be expressed in one of two ways; in net-
mask notation or in classless inter domain routing (CIDR) notation. Netmask
notation involves writing a hosts IP address followed by a bitmask with every
network ID bit set to 1 and every host ID bit set to 0. For example, if you had the IP
address 192.168.2.100 and the first 24 bits were used to specify the network ID, it
would be written as 192.168.2.100/255.255.255.0. With CIDR notation, you express
the netmask by writing the IP address followed by the size in bits of the network ID.
Returning to our previous example of 192.168.2.100 with a 24 bit network ID, it
would be written as 192.168.2.100/24.
     The network ID is used to subclass the entire IP address space into smaller,
more manageable sub-networks. Breaking down networks this way enforces
hierarchy upon the otherwise unstructured address space and eases the job of
routing packets by keeping tables of network ranges rather than tables of individual
nodes, as you will see shortly.
     So, IP networks are subdivided into subnets, which are groups of hosts that
share the same subnet mask and network ID. All hosts in a subnet can talk to each
other through the data link layer. Lower-level protocols such as the Address

Resolution Protocol (ARP) help machines map data-link layer addresses to IP
addresses so that they can figure out how to talk to machines on the same subnet.
ARP is an integral part of the TCP/IP suite, and interested readers are encouraged to
read more about it at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Address_Resolution_Protocol,
or from RFC 826 (www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc0826.txt?number=826).
    A typical IP machine has one active interface—one connection to a network.
Machines that form the routing infrastructure of IP networks have more than one
interface and are responsible for routing packets between their interfaces. These
machines are called gateways or routers.
    If a machine wants to send an IP datagram, it looks at its routing table, which
has a list of simple rules. In general, a host can directly send packets only to another
host in the same subnet. If a computer wants to talk to another computer in the
same subnet, its routing table tells it which interface to send the packet out on. If a
computer wants to talk to a host on another subnet, its routing table tells it which
computer on its subnet is responsible for routing packets to the destination subnet.
Naturally, the process is more complex in large networks, but this description is the
basics of how packets move across the Internet.
    Several special IP addresses are quite important from a security perspective. Say
your IP address is 10.20.30.40, and your network mask is 255.255.255.0. This means
your subnet contains the 256 addresses between 10.20.30.0 and 10.20.30.255.
10.20.30.0 is called the subnet address, and any packet sent to that address is usually
picked up by a subset of the hosts in the network. The address 10.20.30.255 is the
directed subnet broadcast address, and packets destined there are picked up by all
hosts in the subnet. The special address 255.255.255.255 also functions as a subnet
broadcast address for the sender’s local subnet. The security implications of these
addresses are addressed in the discussion of firewall spoofing attacks in Chapter 15.

IP Packet Structures
The basic transmission unit for sending data using IP is the IP packet. An IP packet is a
discrete block of data prepended with a header that contains information necessary for
routing the packet to the appropriate destination. The term IP datagram is often used
interchangeably with IP packet, and they are effectively synonymous. An IP datagram
can be fragmented into smaller pieces and sent to the destination as one or more frag-
ments. These fragmented packets are reassembled at the destination into the original
IP datagram.
    The basic header definition for an IPv4 packet is shown in Figure 14-1.
    The IP packet header defines a small set of data elements (fields) used to help
deliver the packet to its specified destination. The following list describes these fields:
      ■ IP version (4 bits)—This field specifies the IP version of the datagram being
       transmitted. You’re primarily concerned with IP version 4, as it’s the version

                                           Scale is in bits
0                        8                      16                   24              31
           Header
IP version                   Type of service                     Total length
           length
                IP identification                 Flags            Fragment offset

    Time to live (TTL)          Protocol                      Header checksum

                                     Source IP address

                                    Destination IP address

Figure 14-1     IPv4 header diagram

        used on most IP networks. IP version 6, the next version of the IP protocol, has
        been in development for some time and now is supported by most OSs and
        some auxiliary products but is not discussed in this chapter.
      ■ Header length (4 bits)—This field specifies the length of the IP header in 32-bit,
        4-byte words. A standard IP header is 20 bytes long, which gives this field a
        normal value of 5. Variable-length optional data elements can be included at
        the end of the IP header, extending its length to a maximum of 60 bytes
        (making the header length 0x0F).
      ■ Type of service (TOS, 8 bits)—The TOS field defines attributes of the requested
        quality of service. Most modern IP stacks effectively ignore this field.
      ■ Total length (16 bits)—This field defines the size of the datagram being transmitted
        in bytes. It includes the number of bytes in the IP header and the number of
        bytes following the header that constitute the data portion of the packet.
        Therefore, the amount of data an IP packet is delivering can be calculated as its
        header length subtracted from its total length.
      ■ IP identification (16 bits)—This field contains a unique identifier for the data-
        gram. Its primary purpose is to identify a series of IP packets as all being part
        of the same IP datagram. In other words, if an IP datagram is fragmented in
        transit, all the resulting IP fragments have the same IP ID.
      ■ Flags (3 bits)—The flag bits are used for fragmentation processing. There are
        two flags (and one reserved bit). The DF (don’t fragment) flag indicates that
        the packet must not be fragmented. The MF (more fragments) flag indicates
        that more fragments on their way to complete the IP datagram.
      ■ Fragment offset (13 bits)—This field indicates where the data in this IP packet
        belongs in the reassembled IP datagram. It’s specified in 64-bit, 8-byte
        chunks, with a maximum possible value of 65528. This field is explained in
        more detail in “Fragmentation” later in this chapter.

      ■ Time to live (TTL, 8 bits)—This field indicates how many more routers the
        datagram can pass through before it’s discarded and an error is returned to
        the sender. Each intermediate machine that routes an IP packet decrements
        the packet’s TTL. If the TTL reaches 0, the packet is discarded and an ICMP
        error message is sent to the originator. This field is used mostly to ensure that
        packets don’t get caught in routing loops, where they bounce between routers
        in an infinite loop.
      ■ Protocol (8 bits)—This field indicates the protocol of the data the packet is
        delivering. Typically, it specifies a transport-layer protocol (such as UDP or TCP),
        but it can also specify a tunneling protocol, such as IP packets encapsulated
        inside IP (IPIP), or IPv6 over IPv4, or an error or control protocol, such as
        Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP).
      ■ Header checksum (16 bits)—This field is a 16-bit ones complement checksum of
        the IP header (along with any options that are included). It’s used to ensure
        that the packet hasn’t been modified or corrupted in transmission.
      ■ Source IP address (32 bits)—This field indicates the sender of the datagram. This
        information isn’t verified, so it’s possible to forge datagrams to make it look as
        though they come from a different source. The ability to forge datagrams is
        widely considered a major security shortcoming in IP version 4.
      ■ Destination IP address (32 bits)—This field specifies the destination of the
        datagram. IP addresses generally denote a single destination host,
        although some special addresses can be interpreted as broadcast or
        multicast destinations.

Basic IP Header Validation
Before software can safely work with an IP datagram, the fields that make up the
IP header need to be validated to ensure that the packet is legitimate. If IP pro-
cessing code fails to adequately check the fields within an IP header, it will most
likely be exposed to a range of potential problems. The consequences of insuffi-
cient validation depend on where the IP processing code resides in the system;
failures in kernel mode processing or in embedded devices tend to have more
dramatic effects than failures in userland processes. These effects can range from
memory management related problems (such as a crash of the application or
device, or even exploitable memory corruption conditions) to passing packets up
to higher layers in ways that can cause problems with state and, ultimately, sys-
tem integrity. The following sections examine some common points of inquiry.
Is the Received Packet Too Small?
Typically, an IP datagram is passed to the IP stack from a lower-level networking
layer that hands over the data for the packet in a buffer and states how many bytes
of data are in the packet.

   Before this data can be processed as though it’s a valid IP header, you have to
make sure you get at least 20 bytes—the minimum size of a valid IP header. If an
implementation overlooks this check, it’s likely to read memory that isn’t a legiti-
mate part of the packet. This oversight normally wouldn’t lead to a major security
impact unless perhaps the data is read from an unmapped page, generating a
memory access violation.
   In the worst-case scenario, however, the IP processing code neglects to check the
packet size at all, and then uses it in a way that’s vulnerable to numeric overflows. For
example, consider the following packet sniffer. (The author’s name has been omitted
because the example is old and no longer in use.)
void
do_pcap(u_char * udata, const struct pcap_pkthdr * hdr,
       const u_char * pkt)
{
    if (hdr->caplen < ETHER_HDR_LEN)
       return;
    do_ethernet(pkt, hdr->caplen);
}

    This code is a standard pcap callback function. The pkt parameter points to the
packet data, and the hdr->caplen value is the amount of data taken from the network.
The code ensures there’s enough packet data for an Ethernet header, and then calls
this function:
int do_ethernet(const u_char * pkt, int length)
{
    char buffer[PCAP_SNAPLEN];
    struct ether_header *eth = (void*) pkt;
    u_char *ptr; int i;

    if (ntohs(eth->ether_type) != ETHERTYPE_IP)
       return 0;
    memcpy(buffer, pkt + ETHER_HDR_LEN, length - ETHER_HDR_LEN);

    ... code edited for brevity ...

    return do_ip((struct ip*)buffer, length - ETHER_HDR_LEN);
}

   The preceding code copies the Ethernet payload into a buffer and calls do_ip(),
passing that buffer and the length of the payload. Here’s the code for do_ip():
int do_ip(const struct ip * ip, int length)
{
    char buffer[PCAP_SNAPLEN];
    int offset = ip->ip_hl << 2;

    printf(“LAYER_3 -> IPv %d\t”, ip->ip_v);
    printf(“sIP %s\t”, inet_ntoa(ip->ip_src));
    printf(“dIP %s\t”, inet_ntoa(ip->ip_dst));
    printf(“protokols %d\n”, ip->ip_p);

    memcpy(buffer, (void*)ip + offset, length - offset);

    switch(ip->ip_p) {

    The do_ip() function calculates offset, which is the IP header length field
taken from the packet. At this point, it could be almost anything you wanted. The
code then copies length – offset bytes to another local stack buffer. Assume you
make ip_hl the normal value of 5 so that offset is 20. If you have sent only 10 bytes
of Ethernet payload, the memcpy()s count argument is -10, thus resulting in a large
copy into the destination buffer.
    A vulnerability of this nature has only a limited impact, as these types of packets
usually aren’t routable and, therefore, can be sent only on a local network segment
(unless the packet is encapsulated, an issue discussed in Chapter 15, “Firewalls”).

Does the IP Packet Contain Options?
IP packets have a variable-length header that can range between 20 and 60 bytes.
The header size is specified in the first byte of the IP packet by the IP header length
field. IP headers are usually just 20 bytes in length and have no options attached. IP
processing code can’t just assume the header is 20 bytes, however, or it will run into
trouble quickly. For example, many password sniffers used to read data from the
network into the following structure:
struct etherpacket {
      struct ethhdr                   eth;
      struct iphdr                ip;
      struct tcphdr                   tcp;

       char                  data[8192];
       };

    The sniffers would then parse packets by looking at the ip and tcp structures.
However, this processing worked only for the minimum length ip and tcp headers,
both 20 bytes. Packets with any options set in IP or TCP aren’t decoded correctly,
and the sniffer will misinterpret the packet. For example, if the IP header has
options attached, they will mistakenly be interpreted as the next layer protocol
header (in this case, TCP). Therefore, the sniffer will see the packet with totally
different TCP attributes than it really has.

Is the IP Header Length Valid?
Certain values for the IP header length are invalid and might cause problems if
they’re not accounted for correctly. Specifically, the IP header must be at least 20
bytes, so the IP header length must be at least 5 (recall that it’s multiplied by 4 to get
the actual IP header size). Any value less than 5 is invalid. For an example of this
problem, look at an excerpt of code from an older version of the tcpdump utility:
/*
 * print an IP datagram.
 */
void
ip_print(register const u_char *bp, register u_int length)
{
       register const struct ip *ip;
       register u_int hlen, len, off;
       register const u_char *cp;

       ip = (const struct ip *)bp;

... code edited...

       hlen = ip->ip_hl * 4;

... code edited...

            if ((hlen -= sizeof(struct ip)) > 0) {
                 (void)printf(“%soptlen=%d”, sep, hlen);
                 ip_optprint((u_char *)(ip + 1), hlen);
            }

    When ip_print() is called, tcpdump calculates the header length, hlen, by
multiplying ip_hl by 4, but it doesn’t check whether ip_hl is at least 5 to begin
with. Then it checks to make sure (hlen -= sizeof(struct ip)) is higher than 0.
Of course, this check would prevent an underflow if hlen wasn’t an unsigned inte-
ger. However, because hlen is unsigned, the result of this expression is a very large
positive number. As a result, the validation check is passed, and the ip_optprint()
function is given an infinite amount of memory to analyze.

Is the Total Length Field too Large?
After enough data has been read in to obtain the IP header, IP processing code needs
to examine the total length field. This value specifies the length in bytes of the total
IP packet, including the header. The code must verify that enough packet data has
been received from the network to match the total length specified in the IP header.
If there isn’t enough data in the packet to match this length, the program runs the
risk of reading past the received packet contents into adjacent memory locations.

Are All Field Lengths Consistent?
Three different lengths are at play in an IP header: the amount of data received from
the network, the length of the IP header specified in the header length field, and the
length of the total packet specified in the total length field. These fields must be
consistent, and the following relationships must hold:
      IP header length <= data available
      20 <= IP header length <= 60
      IP total length <= data available
      IP header length <= IP total length
    Failure to enforce any of these conditions is likely to have consequences in the
form of memory corruption due to integer wrapping problems. For example, consider
what happens if the header length field is set to an invalid value in relation to the total
length field. The total length field must specify that the packet is at least as many
bytes as the header length field, because it makes no sense to have an IP header that is
larger than the total IP packet length. A good example of a malformed packet is one
with a header length of 60 bytes, but a total length of 20 or fewer bytes. Take a look at
this example:
int process_ip_packet(unsigned char *data)
{
      unsigned int header_length, total_length, data_length;
      struct iphdr *iph;
      ...

     iph = (struct iphdr *)data;

     header_length = ntohs(iph->hl);
     total_length = ntohs(iph->tot_len);

     data_length = total_length – header_length;

     ... validate ip header ...

     switch(iph->protocol){
          case IPPROTO_TCP:
            return process_tcp_packet(data + header_length,
data_length);
               ...

     If the total length is smaller than the header length, the data_length value
underflows and the process_tcp_packet() function thinks the packet’s data length
is huge (around 4GB). Invariably, this error leads to memory corruption or an
attempt to access data out of bounds (probably when performing a TCP checksum,
as the code tries to checksum around 4GB of data).
     Now take a look at a real-world example to see whether you can spot the oversights
in it. This code is from the 1999-era Snort 1.0, which has been edited slightly for brevity:
void DecodeIP(u_char *pkt, const int len)
{
    IPHdr *iph;      /* ip header ptr */
    u_int ip_len; /* length from the start of the ip hdr
        to the pkt end */
    u_int hlen;      /* ip header length */

    /* lay the IP struct over the raw data */
    iph = (IPHdr *) pkt;

    /* do a little validation */
    if(len < sizeof(IPHdr))
    {
        if(pv.verbose_flag)
           fprintf(stderr, “Truncated header! (%d bytes)\n”, len);

          return;
      }

    So far, so good. There are checks in place to ensure that the packet has at least 20
bytes of data from the network before the code proceeds much farther. Next, the code
makes sure the packet has at least as many bytes as are specified in the IP header:
      ip_len = ntohs(iph->ip_len);

      if(len < ip_len)
      {
          if(pv.verbose_flag)
          {
              fprintf(stderr,
                      “Truncated packet!       Header says %d bytes,
                 actually %d bytes\n”,
                      ip_len, len);
              PrintNetData(stdout, pkt, len);
          }
          return;
      }

      The IP header looks valid so far, so IP options are parsed (if present):
      /* set the IP header length */
      hlen = iph->ip_hlen * 4;

      if(hlen > 20)
      {
          DecodeIPOptions( (pkt + 20), hlen - 20);
      }

   Uh-oh! The code hasn’t checked to make sure the packet has enough bytes to
contain hlen and hasn’t checked to see whether the total length is big enough to
contain hlen. The result is that DecodeIPOptions() reads past the end of the packet,
which probably isn’t too catastrophic. Continuing on:
      /* check for fragmented packets */
      ip_len -= hlen;

    pip.frag_off = ntohs(iph->ip_off);

        /* move the packet index to point to the transport
            layer */
        pktidx = pktidx + hlen;

        switch(iph->ip_proto)
        {
             case IPPROTO_TCP:
                              net.proto = IPPROTO_TCP;
                              strncpy(pip.proto, “TCP”, 3);
                              DecodeTCP(pktidx, len-hlen);
                              return;

    This code has several problems, including the following:
    ■ ip_len can be anything, as long as it’s not higher than the amount of data avail-
      able. So it could be less than 20, greater than 20 but less than the header length,
      or greater than the header length but less than the amount of data available.
    ■ In fact, Snort ignores ip_len entirely, instead using the amount of data read
      from the network for its calls to upper-layer functions, such as DecodeTCP().
    ■ If ip_hlen is less than 5 (and, therefore, hlen is less than 20), the packet
      decoding starts reading the TCP header inside the IP header. At least it won’t
      try to decode options.
    ■ If ip_hlen is greater than ip_len and also greater than 20, the code decodes IP
      options that are past the packet’s boundaries. In other words, the
      DecodeIPOptions() function attempts to interpret undefined memory con-
      tents as IP options.
    ■ If ip_hlen is greater than the amount of data available, all the length calculations
      are going to underflow, and the TCP decoder assumes there’s a 4GB TCP packet.

Is the IP Checksum Correct?
The IP checksum is used as a basic mechanism to ensure that the packet header
hasn’t been corrupted en route. When the IP stack receives a new packet, it should
verify that the checksum is correct and discard the packet if the checksum is
erroneous. Any IP processing code that fails to do this verification is interpreting
packets that should be ignored or dropped.
    It’s rare to find code that fails to verify the checksum; however, this error might
surface occasionally in packet-sniffing software. Although accepting a packet
erroneously has a fairly minimal impact in this context, it might prove useful for

attackers trying to evade intrusion detection. Attackers could send a packet that looks
like it closes a connection (such as a TCP packet with the FIN or RST flags set) so that
when the packet sniffer sees it, it stops monitoring the connection. The end host,
however, silently ignores the packet with the invalid checksum. This result is more
interesting in TCP checksums because those packets are routed.

IP Options Processing
IP options are optional variable-length elements that can be added to the end of an
IP header to convey certain information from the sender to the destination (or inter-
mediate routers). Options can modify attributes of the packet, such as how the data-
gram should be routed and whether timestamps should be added. A maximum of
40 bytes of IP options can be appended to an IP header (making the maximum total
IP header size 60 bytes).

        Note
        The header length field is 4 bits and represents the IP header’s
        length in 32-bit words. So the maximum value it can have is 0x0F
        (or 15), which multiplied by 4 gives 60.

    Before you look at what IP options are available, here’s the basic structure of an
IP option:
struct ip_options {
      unsigned char option;
      unsigned char optlen;
      unsigned char data[0];
};

    An IP option is typically composed of a one-byte option type specifying what
the option is, a one-byte length field, and a variable-length data field. All options
have this format (except two, explained shortly in this section).

        Note
        The option byte is actually composed of three fields, as shown:
        struct optbyte {
            unsigned char copied:1;
            unsigned char class:2;
            unsigned char option:5;
        };

         The top bit indicates whether the option is copied into each frag-
         ment (if fragmentation occurs), and the next two bits indicate what
         class the IP option is. RFC 791 (www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc0791.txt?
         number=791) lists these available options:
                           0 - Control
                           1 - Reserved for future use
                           2 - Debugging and measurement
                           3 - Reserved for future use
         IANA gives a complete list of the classes each option belongs to
         (www.iana.org/assignments/ip-parameters). The last five bits indi-
         cate the actual option.
         Most implementations ignore that the option byte has several fields
         and just treat it as just a one-byte option field.

    Given this information, you can begin applying your knowledge from Part II on
variable relationships and type conversions to start locating potential problems.
(The one-byte option length is related to the IP header length and, indeed, the IP
total length.) The following sections cover some typical mistakes that can be made
when dealing with these structures.

Is the Option Length Sign-Extended?
The IP options field is a single byte, and it’s not unusual for code processing IP
options to store that length field in an integer, which is a larger data type. As you
learned in Chapter 6, “C Language Issues,” these assignments cause a promotion of
the smaller type (byte) to the larger type (integer) to store the length value. Further-
more, if the length byte is treated as signed, the assignment is value preserving—in
other words, it’s sign extended. This assignment can lead to memory corruption
(such as large data copies) or incorrect advancement of a pointer cycling through IP
options, which can have varying consequences depending on how the code works.
You see a real-world example of this problem in “TCP Options Processing” later in
this chapter; TCP options have a nearly identical structure to IP options.

Is the Header Big Enough to Contain the IP Option?
An IP option is at least two bytes, except for the “No Operation” (NOP) option and
the “End of Options List” (EOOL, or sometimes just shortened to EOL). Many
options have further requirements for minimum length; a source routing option
needs to be at least three bytes, for example. Sometimes IP option processing code
fails to verify that these minimum length requirements are met, which often leads

to either reading undefined memory contents or possibly memory corruption due
to integer boundary conditions. Consider the following example:
int process_options(unsigned char *options,

      unsigned long length)
{
      unsigned char *ptr;
      int optlen, opttype;

      for(ptr = options; length; length -= optlen, ptr += optlen){
          if(*ptr == IPOPT_NOP){
               optlen = 1;
               continue;
          }

          if(*ptr == IPOPT_EOL)
               break;

          opttype = ptr[0];
          optlen = ptr[1];

          if(optlen > length)
               goto err;

          switch(opttype){
               ... process options ...
          }
      }
}

    This code cycles through options until no more are left to process. There’s a slight
problem, however; no check is done to ensure that at least 2 bytes are left in the buffer
before the opttype and optlen values are populated. An options buffer could be con-
structed such that only one byte is left in the buffer when processing the final option,
and the optlen byte would read out-of-bounds memory. In this situation, doing so prob-
ably wouldn’t be useful (as the length check after the byte is read would ensure that the
loop doesn’t start skipping farther out of bounds). Code like this that processes specific

options, however, can be quite dangerous because some options are modified as they
are processed, and memory corruption might be possible.

Is the Option Length Too Large?
The variable relationship between the IP header length, IP total length, and each IP
option length field specifies that the following must hold true:
    Offset of IP option + IP option length <= IP header length
    Offset of IP option + IP option length <= IP total length
    When reviewing IP options processing, you must ensure that the code guarantees
this relationship. Failure to do so could result in the code processing uninitialized
memory, and cause memory corruption because some IP options require modifying
data within the IP option itself (primarily the timestamp and source routing options).

Does the Option Meet Minimum Size Requirements?
As mentioned, an IP option consists of a one-byte option type and a one-byte option
length followed by some variable-length data. The option length specifies the total
size of the option including the length byte and type byte, so it’s required to hold a
minimum value of two. Code that processes options and doesn’t enforce this mini-
mum value can end up with some unique problems, as shown in the following code:
int process_options(unsigned char *options,
unsigned long length)
{
     unsigned char *ptr;
     int optlen, opttype;

     for(ptr = options; length; length -= optlen, ptr += optlen){
           if(*ptr == IPOPT_NOP){
                 optlen = 1;
                 continue;
           }

           if(*ptr == IPOPT_EOL)
                 break;

           if(length < 2)
                 break;

           opttype = ptr[0];
           optlen = ptr[1];

           if(optlen > length)
                 goto err;

           switch(opttype){
                 ... process options ...
           }
      }
}

    This code correctly ensures that the length in the IP option isn’t larger than the
total amount of IP option bytes specified in the IP header. However, it fails to make
sure it’s at least 2. Supplying a value of 0 for an IP option length causes this code to
enter an infinite loop.
    Additionally, if an IP option length of 1 is given, the next option begins where
the length byte of the current option should be. This error can also have varying
consequences, depending on how the code following the validation failure performs
options processing.

Are IP Option Bits Checked?
The IP option byte is actually composed of a number of bit fields, but most imple-
mentations ignore the separate fields and treat the byte as a single value. So any
implementation that actually parses the IP option byte by masking off the option
bits could expose itself to potential misinterpretations of an option’s meaning. To
understand the problem, take a look at this example:
#define OPTVALUE(x) (x & 0x1F)

int process_options(unsigned char *options, size_t len)
{
      unsigned char *optptr, *optend = options + len;
      unsigned char optbyte, optlen;

      for(optptr = options; optptr < optend; optptr += optlen){
           optbyte = *optptr;

           if(OPTVALUE(optbyte) == EOL)
                 break;

         if(OPTVALUE(optbyte) == NOP){
              optlen = 1;
              continue;
         }

         optlen = optptr[1];

         if(optlen < 2 || optptr + optlen               >= optend)
              goto err;

         switch(OPTVALUE(optbyte)){
              case IPOPT_LSRR:
                   ...
         }
    }
}

    The problem is that even though this code is correctly masking the option
byte to get the lower 5 bits, the other bitfields should also be set a certain way
depending on the option value. In fact, IP options are defined by the Internet
Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) by their option value as well as the other
bitfield values associated with that option, and so ignoring other bitfields is
technically a mistake.

        Note
        Interested readers can view the IANA IP Options List at www.iana.org/
        assignments/ip-parameters.

    To understand why this is a problem, consider a scenario where this code is
in a firewall that is attempting to strip out source routing options (LSRR and
SSRR). The code iterates through each option looking for the LSRR or SSRR
option and then terminates when it sees the EOL option (0x00). However, only
the bottom 5 bits are checked. This contrasts with how end hosts process the
same options—they will also continue processing until encountering what they
think is an EOL option, but end hosts define an EOL as an option with all 8 bits
set to 0. So if the option value 0x80 is present in the packet, the firewall would
interpret it as an EOL option, and the end host just assumes it’s some unknown
option and continues processing more option bytes. The result is that you could
supply an IP option with the option value 0x80 with a valid source routing option
following it, and the firewall wouldn’t catch it.

     Now consider this code in a client host with the same requirements—a firewall
having to strip out source routing options. In this case, the firewall is looking for an
8-bit source routing option, such as 0x89. If the value 0x09 is sent, the firewall treats
it as an unknown option, and the end host sees it as a source route because it has
masked off the top three bits.

Unique Problems
As always, lists of typical errors aren’t exhaustive, as unique implementations can
bring about unique problems. To illustrate, this section presents an example that
was present in the Solaris 8 IP stack.
    The Solaris code for processing IP options for datagrams destined for a local
interface had an interesting problem in the way it calculated the options length. A
code snippet is shown:
#define IP_VERSION 4         /* edited for brevity */
#define IP_SIMPLE_HDR_LENGTH_IN_WORDS 5

uint8_t
ipoptp_first(ipoptp_t *optp, ipha_t *ipha)
      {
      uint32_t totallen; /* total length of all options */

      totallen = ipha->ipha_version_and_hdr_length -
      (uint8_t)((IP_VERSION << 4) +
           IP_SIMPLE_HDR_LENGTH_IN_WORDS);
      totallen <<= 2;
      optp->ipoptp_next = (uint8_t *)(&ipha[1]);
      optp->ipoptp_end = optp->ipoptp_next + totallen;
      optp->ipoptp_flags = 0;
      return (ipoptp_next(optp));
}

    This code treats the first two fields of the IP header as a single field with two
components, which isn’t uncommon, as both fields occupy four bits in the same
byte. However, when the code obtains the IP header length from this byte, it
does so by subtracting the standard IP version value (which is 4, and because it
occupies the high four bits in this byte, 0x40) from the byte, as well as the static
value IP_SIMPLE_HDR_LENGTH_IN_WORDS, defined elsewhere as 5. In essence, the
developer assumes that subtracting the static value 0x45 from the first byte of
the IP header will leave you with the size of the IP options trailing the basic

header. Not masking off the version field is a dangerous practice though; what if
the IP version is 15 (0xF)? The code’s calculation could erroneously conclude that
744 bytes worth of IP options are appended to the IP header! Of course, a sanity
check earlier in the code ensures that the size of the packet received is at least
the size specified in the total length and header length fields. However, this
other sanity check is done differently—it does mask off the header length field
correctly, so this mistake can lead to processing random bytes of kernel memory
(and certain IP options can be used to corrupt kernel memory). Alternatively, set-
ting the IP version to 0 (or any value less than 4), causes the option length calcu-
lation to yield a negative result! This result causes a kernel crash because the IP
checksum is validated before IP options are processed, so the code checksums a
large amount of memory and eventually tries to access a location out of bounds.

        Note
        Actually, an examination of the code shows that an IP version of 0
        causes an underflow but does not result in a large checksum. However,
        the code shown is from an updated version of Solaris. Earlier versions
        performed a very large checksum if the IP version was 0, 1, 2, or 3.
        IP packets with an incorrect version probably aren’t routed. Even if
        they are, they wouldn’t make it through some earlier processing code
        in the Solaris IP stack. However, Solaris by default processes IP
        packets encapsulated in IP packets if the inner IP packet has the same
        source and destination as the outer IP packet. In this case, the inner
        packet is delivered locally, and the version is never verified on the
        inner IP packet. Again, earlier versions of Solaris were vulnerable to
        this attack but sanity checks are now performed on the version of
        encapsulated IP packets.

Source Routing
 IP is a connectionless protocol—datagrams can be routed to a destination in any way
that intermediate routing devices see fit. The source routing options give the sender
some control over the path a packet takes. There are two kinds of options: loose source
and record route (LSRR) and strict source and record route (SSRR). Both contain a list
of IP addresses the packet should travel through on its way to the destination.
     The SSRR option provides the exact list of routers the packet should traverse
when it makes its way from the source to the destination. These routers have to be
directly connected to each other, and the path can’t omit any steps. This option is
fairly impractical because of the maximum size of the IP header; a packet could
specify only nine steps in a path, which isn’t many.

     The LSRR option, however, simply lists the routers the packet should pass through
on its way to the destination. These routers don’t have to be directly connected, and the
packet can pass through other routers as it follows the path outlined in the option. This
option is more flexible because it allows the intermediate routers to figure out the path
to the each subsequent hop on the list.

Processing
Both source routing options contain the list of IP addresses and a pointer byte,
which specifies the offset in the option where the next intermediate hop is. Here’s
how source routing options work:
      1. The destination IP address of the IP header is set to be the first intermediate
         hop.
      2. When that destination is reached, the next intermediate hop is taken out of
         the IP option and copied over the destination address, and the pointer byte
         is advanced to point to the next hop in the option
      3. Step 2 is repeated until the final destination is reached.
     The pointer byte is related to the option length (and to the IP header length and
total length) because it’s supposed to point inside the option, not before or after.
When auditing code that processes source routes, you should ensure that the
pointer byte is within the specified bounds, especially because during processing,
an IP option often modifies bytes the pointer is pointing at. Also, like the IP option
length, the pointer is a single-byte field, which means type conversions such as the
following could be performed on it:
char *optionbytes;
int offset;

offset = optionbytes[2];

    Code auditors need to be aware of possible sign extensions that could cause the
offset integer to take on a negative value and have the offset point into a previous
option, the IP header itself, or before it somewhere in memory. Such an invalid
access can have serious consequences, including memory corruption, unexpected
packet rerouting, or invalid memory access.
    Additionally, it is quite easy for developers to forget to adequately validate the
length of routing options when constructing code designed to handle them, which
can lead to accessing memory out of bounds. This error is especially significant for
source routing options because the offset byte is often modified during options
processing, when it’s updated to point to the next element in the list.

    To give you an idea of some of the options processing bugs that have
occurred in real-world applications in the past, consider this. Several years ago, a
contumacious researcher working at NAI named Anthony Osborne discovered a
vulnerability in the Windows IP stack related to an invalid source routing pointer.
Windows hosts with multiple interfaces are normally configured to reject source
routed packets. It turned out, however, that setting the pointer past the option
allowed the source route to be processed. With a carefully crafted packet, an
attacker could leverage multihomed Windows systems to participate in source
routing attacks on firewalls. (Details of this bug are available at www.securityfo-
cus.com/bid/646/info.) You will see in Chapter 15 that source routing is especially
significant for attacking firewalls, primarily because source routed packets have
one of their most basic attributes altered at each IP address in the option list—the
destination address.

Fragmentation
As you have seen, IP datagrams can have a maximum size of 64KB. (The total
length field is 16 bits, so the maximum size it can specify is 65535 bytes.) In prac-
tice, however, physical interfaces attached to routers and endpoints often impose
much more limited size restrictions because they can send only fairly small
frames across the network. This size restriction is dictated by what type of physi-
cal interface is sending the frame. The consequence of physical interface size
restrictions is that IP datagrams can be generated for transmissions that are too
large to be sent across the physical network, or IP datagrams can arrive on one
interface of a router that are too large to pass across to another interface. To help
deal with this problem, the IP protocol allows fragmenting large datagrams into
smaller pieces so that they can be sent across any medium, regardless of its max-
imum transmission unit (MTU). This mechanism is called IP fragmentation.
     Fragmenting an IP datagram involves dividing a large datagram into smaller
chunks (fragments) that are suitable for transmission. Each fragment contains a
payload that constitutes some portion of the original datagram, and all fragments
are transmitted separately. They are then combined (reassembled) at the destina-
tion host to re-create the original datagram. In addition to the sending host
fragmenting a datagram, any intermediate routing hop can fragment a datagram
(or fragment a fragment of a datagram) to be able to send it on to the destination
host. No intermediate hops perform reassembly, however; that task is left up to
the destination host.

         Note
         Actually, arbitrary routers that IP packets are traversing are unable to
         perform reassembly because IP packets aren’t required to arrive at a
         destination via the same route. Therefore, there’s no guarantee that
         each fragment will pass through a certain router. The exception, of
         course, is when fragments arrive at the network the destination host is
         a part of, where it’s quite common to have firewalls and IPSs or IDSs
         perform a virtual reassembly of the received fragments to ensure that
         someone isn’t using fragmentation to try to sneak illegal traffic
         through the firewall.

Basic IP Fragment Processing
Fragmenting an IP packet is fairly straightforward. You split the data in a large IP
packet into several smaller fragments. Each fragment is sent in a separate IP packet
with its own IP header. This fragment looks the same as the original IP header,
except for a few variables that tell the end host how to reassemble the fragment. The
end host can tell which incoming fragments belong to the same original datagram
because they all share the same IP ID (among other attributes).
     Specifically, each fragment for a datagram has the following fields in common: IP
ID, source IP address, destination IP address, and IP protocol. A few fields are used to
track how to put the fragments back together. First, if the MF (“more fragments”) flag
in the fragment offset field is set, the end host should expect more fragments to arrive
for the datagram that have data beyond the end of the current fragment. To put it
another way, if a received fragment has data starting at offset 128 from the original
datagram and finishing at offset 256 and the MF bit is set for the fragment, then
another fragment should arrive containing data at an offset of 256 or higher. The last
fragment doesn’t have the MF flag set, which tells the end host the fragment represents
the end of the original IP datagram.
     Each fragment sets the fragment offset field to indicate where in the reassem-
bled datagram the data from this fragment should appear. The offset field is multi-
plied by 8 to find out where in the completed datagram this fragment’s
payload should appear. So if the offset field is set to 1, the payload should appear 8
bytes into the completed datagram when it’s reassembled. If the offset field is 2, the
payload appears 16 bytes into the completed datagram, and so on.
     Finally, the total length field in the IP header is changed to represent the frag-
ment’s length. The end host determines the real total length of the original datagram
by waiting until it’s seen all the fragments and pieced them all together.
     To better understand where fragmentation might be used, consider the case where
a router needs to fragment an IP datagram to send it over one of the networks it’s part
of, because the datagram is larger than the outgoing interface’s MTU. The datagram is

3,500 bytes and the outgoing interface’s MTU is 1,500 bytes, so the maximum amount
of data that can be transmitted in each packet is 1,480 bytes (because the IP header is a
minimum of 20 bytes). This datagram is split up into four smaller IP fragments, and
they are sent over the network separately, as shown in Figure 14-2.

                                   Original oversized datagram
                                        Total length: 3,500

      IP offset: 0          IP offset: 1,000           IP offset: 2,000      IP offset: 3,000
       MF is set                MF is set                  MF is set            MF is set
  Total length: 1,000      Total length: 1,000        Total length: 1,000   Total length: 500

Figure 14-2     IP fragmentation

    If all the fragments arrive at the destination IP address, the end host reassem-
bles them into the original datagram. If any fragment doesn’t make it, the whole
datagram is discarded, and the source host is free to try to send the datagram
again .

Pathological Fragment Sets
A normal set of fragments generally looks like Figure 14-2. All fragments except
for the final one have the MF flag set. The IP offsets are laid out contiguously so
that every value from 0 to the end of the final fragment is assigned data. A few
subtle attacks can be performed against IP fragment reassembly code by deviat-
ing from the expected layout. The following sections describe these attacks.

Data Beyond the End of the Final Fragment
The final fragment of a datagram queue has a nonzero offset, and the MF bit is clear.
This fragment is supposed to contain data located at the end of the datagram, so it
should have the highest IP offset of all the fragments.
    Attackers could send fragments in an order that puts the final fragment in the
middle or beginning of the set of fragments. If the reassembly code takes certain
shortcuts in calculating the datagram’s total length, this reordering can lead to
incomplete sets of fragments being reassembled in ways advantageous to the
attackers. Consider the following reassembly code:
/*         Add a fragment to the queue

      Returns:

           0: added successfully, queue incomplete
           1: added successfully, queue complete
*/

int fragment_add(struct fragment_chain *chain,
      struct packet *pkt)
{
      struct iphdr *iph = pkt->ip_header;
      int offset, end, length;

      offset = ntohs(iph->frag_offset) * 8;
      end = offset + ntohs(iph->tot_len) – iph->hl << 2;

      length = add_to_chain(chain, pkt->data, offset, end);

      chain->datalength += length;

      if(!(iph->flags & IP_MF))          /* Final Fragment –
                                            MF bit clear */
          return chain->datalength == end;

      return 0;
}

    For this example, assume that the add_to_chain() function returns the
amount of data that was added to the queue, not including overlapped sections
(discussed in “Overlapping Fragments” later in this chapter). When a final frag-
ment is received, its end (offset + length) is compared with the total amount of
bytes received for the datagram. If the final fragment is received last, these num-
bers should be equal, and the reassembly code knows it has completed reassembly
of this datagram. To see how this code is intended to function, look at this valid
normal set of fragments. Say you send this fragment first:
Offset: 0 | MF: Set | Len: 16

    The data is added to the chain, and chain->datalength is incremented to 16.
MF is set, indicating more fragments, so the function returns 0 to indicate that
reassembly isn’t finished. Say you send this fragment next:
Offset: 16 | MF: Set | Len: 16

    This data is added to the chain, and chain->datalength is incremented to 16.
Again, reassembly isn’t complete because there are more fragments to come. Now
say you send the final fragment:
Offset: 32 | MF: Clear | Len: 16

    When the preceding code processes this fragment, it calculates an offset of 32, an
end of 48, and a length of 16. chain->datalength is incremented to 48, which is equal
to end. It’s the final fragment because IP_MF is clear, and chain-> datalength is equal
to end. The IP stack knows it has finished reassembly, so it returns a 1. Figure 14-3
shows the set of fragments.

     IP offset: 0            IP offset: 16             IP offset: 32
      MF is set                MF is set                MF is clear
   Total length: 16         Total length: 16          Total length: 16

Figure 14-3     IP fragmentation reassembly

    Now walk through a malicious set of fragments. This is the first fragment:
Offset: 32 | MF: Set | Len: 16

    The data is added to the chain, and chain->datalength is incremented to 16.
MF is set, indicating there are more fragments. Next, the final fragment is sent but
placed before the first fragment:
Offset: 16 | MF: Clear | Len: 16

   The data is added to the chain, and chain->datalength is incremented to 32.
MF is clear, indicating it’s the last fragment, and end is 32, which is equivalent to
chain->datalength. Therefore, the IP stack believes that reassembly is complete,
even though no data for offsets 0 to 16 has been sent in the set of fragments. The
malicious set of fragments looks like Figure 14-4.

      IP offset: 0            IP offset: 32
      MF is clear               MF is set
    Total length: 16         Total length: 16

Figure 14-4     Malicious IP fragments

    The result of this reassembly depends on the implementation of the rest of the
IP stack. Some consequences could include the following:

      ■ Including uninitialized kernel memory in the reassembled packet

      ■ Interpreting protocol headers incorrectly (because the fragment containing
        the next protocol header is missing)
      ■ Integer miscalculations based on attributes of the fragments that lead to
        memory corruption or reading uninitialized kernel memory
    Most important, any firewall or IDS/IPS this fragment chain traversed would
interpret the fragments completely differently and make incorrect decisions
about whether to allow or deny it (unless these devices had the same bug).

Multiple Final Fragments
Another mistake fragmentation reassembly applications make is that they don’t
deal with multiple final fragments correctly. Applications often assume that only
one fragment of a fragment queue appears with the MF bit clear. This assump-
tion can lead to broken logic for deciding when a fragment queue is complete and
can be passed up to the next layer (usually TCP or UDP). Usually, the result of a
bug like this is a fragment queue being deemed complete when it has gaps from
the datagram that still haven’t arrived. The advantage this type of bug gives an
attacker depends on the application. For OS protocol stacks, being able to assem-
ble a datagram with holes in it is quite useful to attackers because any firewall
or IDS performing virtual reassembly interprets the datagram differently to the
end host.
    For example, an IP datagram containing a TCP segment is fragmented and sent to
a host through a firewall. Imagine that a bug exists whereby it can be marked as being
complete when it’s missing data at offset 0 (the beginning of the TCP header). With
this knowledge, attackers could send fragments that exploit the bug as well as a trail-
ing bogus fragment at offset 0. This bogus fragment which can be set with different
TCP ports to pass a firewall’s rule set. Because the firewall in front of the end host
evaluates whether the fragment set is allowed based on the 0-offset fragment, it will
make a policy decision based on the one part of the fragment queue that the destina-
tion host is going to completely ignore. As a resut, an unauthorized connection or
block of data could be sent through the firewall. If the application containing a
reassembly bug is a firewall or other security product instead of a host OS IP stack,
the implications can be much worse, as this bug allows attackers to bypass firewall
rules to reach any destination host that the firewall is supposed to protect (depending
on the constraints of the vulnerability).

Overlapping Fragments
As you know, each IP fragment provides a portion of a complete datagram, but
how to handle overlapping fragments hasn’t been mentioned yet. The IP specifi-
cation vaguely says that fragments can contain overlapping data ranges, which in

retrospect, was probably a bad move. Figure 14-5 shows an example of
overlapping fragments.

            IP offset: 0
             MF is set
          Total length: 24

                                       IP offset: 16
                                         MF is set
                                      Total length: 32

                                               IP offset: 32
                                                 MF is set
                                              Total length: 8

                                                      IP offset: 24      IP offset: 56
                                                        MF is set         MF is clear
                                                     Total length: 32   Total length: 8

Figure 14-5   Overlapping fragments

    So are overlapping fragments a potential security issue? Absolutely! They add a
degree of complexity to the requirements that might not seem important at first, but
they have actually led to dozens of security vulnerabilities. Two main problems
come into play when dealing with overlapping fragments, which are:
    ■ Implementation flaws in fragment queue maintenance, leading to crashes or
      potentially memory corruption
    ■ Ambiguity about which data should be honored

     As discussed in Chapter 7, “Program Building Blocks,” a lot of simple errors
based on managing lists are quite relevant to IP fragmentation because lists are used
in nearly all IP implementations to track fragments for a datagram. In Chapter 7,
you saw a famous example of a vulnerability (dubbed “teardrop”) that existed in a
number of host IP stacks. The basis of this vulnerability was a logic error in which
two fragments are sent. The first provides some arbitrary part of the datagram, and
the second provides data at the same offset as the first (or at some offset partway
through the data that was provided in the first one), but finishing before the end of
the first one (that is, the second datagram was completely encompassed by the
first). This error leads to a size calculation error that results in attempting to access
memory out of bounds.
     The IP RFC (RFC 791) isn’t much help in understanding how to deal with
data overlaps. It gives a sample algorithm for handling reassembly and indicates
that if two or more overlapping fragments contain the same data, the algorithm
uses the “more recently arrived data.” However, it doesn’t specify which data an

IP stack should favor: data received in the original fragment or data supplied in
successive fragments. So software vendors have implemented the algorithm in
different ways.
    Consequently, if a firewall or IDS/IPS interprets the data stream differently
from the destination host, this difference opens the potential to sneak data past a
security device that should detect or block it. This is especially critical when the
data being overlapped includes protocol headers because they might affect
whether a packet filter or firewall decides to block or forward the packet. To help
you understand this problem, here’s a quick outline of the key differences in
major fragmentation implementations. Figure 14-6 shows a nuance of the BSD
reassembly code.

                IP offset: 0
                 MF is set
              Total length: 24
                  “GET”
                                                                            IP offset: 32
                                                                              MF is set
                                                                           Total length: 8
                                                                           “XXXXXXXX”

                                                           IP offset: 24
                                                             MF is set
                                                          Total length: 16
                                                       “/cgi-bin/phf\r\n\r\n”
                                                          IP offset: 24
                                                           MF is clear
                                                         Total length: 16
                                                     “XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX”

Figure 14-6    BSD overlap semantics

      Table 14-1 shows the results of reassembling the packet set in Figure 14-6.

Table 14-1
BSD Overlap Semantics Result
OS                Result
BSD               GET /cgi-bin/phf
Linux             GET XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Windows           GET /cgi-binXXXXXXXXXXXX
Solaris           GET /cgi-binXXXXXXXXXXXX

    BSD ostensibly honors data it receives first, but this isn’t what happens in
practice. When BSD receives a new fragment, it left-trims the beginning of the
fragment to honor previously received data, but after doing that, it accepts all the

data from the new fragment. Windows and Solaris appear to honor the
chronologically first data properly, but this isn’t quite what occurs behind the
scenes. Linux behaves similarly to BSD, but it honors a new fragment in favor of
an old one if the new fragment has the same offset as the old one. Figure 14-7
shows a set of packets that isolate the Linux behavior.

                IP offset: 0
                 MF is set
              Total length: 24
                  “GET”

                                                           IP offset: 24
                                                             MF is set
                                                          Total length: 16
                                                      “XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX”

                                                             IP offset: 24
                                                              MF is clear
                                                            Total length: 16
                                                         “/cgi-bin/phf\r\n\r\n”

Figure 14-7    Linux overlap semantics

    Table 14-2 shows the results of the Linux reassembly code. It performs similarly
to BSD reassembly algorithms, except it honors the data in a new fragment at the
same offset as a previously received one.

Table 14-2
Linux Overlap Semantics Result
OS                Result
BSD               GET XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Linux             GET /cgi-bin/phf
Windows           GET XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Solaris           GET XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

    Figure 14-8 shows one more test case that isolates Windows behavior.
    Table 14-3 shows that most implementations actually discard a fragment
that’s completely subsumed by a following fragment because they attempt to pre-
serve old data by adjusting the beginning and end of fragments as they come in.
As you can see, because there’s some variation in reassembly algorithms, any
device doing virtual reassembly interprets overlapped data segments the same
way as a destination host in some situations but not in others.

                                                             IP offset: 32
                                                               MF is set
                                                            Total length: 8
                                                            “XXXXXXXX”

                                                              IP offset: 24
                                                               MF is clear
                                                            Total length: 16
                                                    “/cgi-bin/phfHTTP/1.0\r\n\r\n”

                        IP offset: 24
                          MF is set
                       Total length: 16
                     “GET XXXXXXXX”

Figure 14-8   Windows overlap semantics

Table 14-3
Windows Overlap Semantics Result
OS               Result
BSD              GET XXXXXXXX/phf HTTP/1.0
Linux            GET XXXXXXXX/phf HTTP/1.0
Windows          GET /cgi-bin/phf HTTP/1.0
Solaris          GET /cgi-binXXXXXXXXP/1.0

          Note
          You might think that because of this discrepancy, devices doing
          reassembly for security analysis are guaranteed to not work cor-
          rectly when dealing with different kinds of hosts, but this isn’t
          necessarily the case. Some implementations emulate the protocol
          stack of the OS for which they’re reassembling traffic. Others
          might authoritatively rewrite packets into an unambiguous set of
          fragments or simply reassemble the datagram. Others might
          reject fragment queues containing any sort of overlap, which is
          usually a sign of foul play. This is exactly what Checkpoint
          Firewall-1’s virtual reassembly layer does.

Idiosyncrasies
There are many subtle differences in how implementations handle the corner
cases of fragmentation reassembly. For example, some hosts require every frag-
ment except the last to be a multiple of 8 bytes. Some hosts accept 0-length
fragments and queue them, and some don’t. You’ve seen that hosts handle over-
lapping of fragmentation in different ways, and you could come up with creative
test cases that just about every implementation reassembles slightly differently.

                                   User Datagram Protocol

Another big point of variation is the choice of timeouts and the design of data
structures necessary to temporarily hold on to fragments until they are collected
and ready to be reassembled.
    These small differences add up to potential vulnerabilities when there’s a
security device between the attacker and the end host. Say you have an IDS
watching the network for signs of attack. An attacker could send a strange set of
fragments that the IDS sees as innocuous, but the end host reassembles them into
a real attack. As you discover in Chapter 15, the same kind of ambiguity can come
into play when attacking firewalls, although the attacks are less straightforward.

User Datagram Protocol
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is a connectionless transport-layer protocol that rests
on top of IP. As you can probably tell from the header shown in Figure 14-9, it’s
intended to be a lightweight protocol. It adds the abstraction of ports, which allows
multiple clients and servers to multiplex data using the same client-server IP address
pair, and adds optional checksums for UDP data to verify that a packet hasn’t been
corrupted en route. Beyond that, it provides none of the services that TCP does, such
as flow control and reliable delivery. UDP is typically used for protocols that require
low latency but can tolerate losses. The most popular use of UDP is for Domain
Name System (DNS), which provides name resolution for the Internet.

                             Scale is in bits
0                  8              16                  24           31

               Source port                      Destination port

                 Length                           Checksum

Figure 14-9   UDP header

    The following list describes the header fields in a UDP packet:
    ■ Source port (16 bits)—This field is the client source port. The source port,
      destination port, source IP address, and destination IP address combine to
      uniquely identify a connection.

         Note
         UDP is really a connectionless protocol and each UDP record is
         unassociated from any other previously sent records at the transport
         layer. However, many IP processing applications (such as firewalls)
         need to associate UDP packets with each other in order to make
         accurate policy decisions.

      ■ Destination port (16 bits)—This field is the port the packet is destined for. It’s
        combined with the source port, source IP address, and destination IP address
        to uniquely identify a connection.
      ■ Checksum (16 bits)—This field is a checksum of the UDP header and all data con-
        tained in the UDP datagram. Several other fields are combined to calculate the
        checksum, including the source and destination IP addresses from the IP header.
        This field can optionally be set to the special value 0 to indicate that a checksum
        hasn’t been calculated.
      ■ Length (16 bits)—This field is the length of the UDP header and data.

Basic UDP Header Validation
The UDP header is fairly straightforward, but there’s still room for processing code
to misstep, as described in the following sections.

Is the UDP Length Field Correct?
The length field specifies the length of the UDP header and the data in the data-
gram. You’ve seen situations in which processing code ignores this field and instead
honors lengths coming from the IP header or device driver. If the length field is too
large, it could lead to numeric overflow or underflow situations. Likewise, the mini-
mum value for the UDP length field is 8 bytes. If the field is below 8 bytes and it’s
honored, a numeric underflow situation could occur. A length of 8 bytes means
there’s no UDP data in the packet.

Is the UDP Checksum Correct?
The UDP checksum is optional. If it’s set to zero, the checksum is not calculated.
However, if it’s set and the checksum is incorrect, end hosts likely disregard the
packet. Any system attempting to interpret UDP packets should be aware of these
possible outcomes.

UDP Issues
UDP can be spoofed easily, unlike TCP, where establishing a connection with a forged
source IP address is much harder. UDP data can also be sent over broadcast and mul-
ticast addresses that aren’t appropriate for TCP data. The bottom line is that sensitive
code shouldn’t rely on source IP addresses for purposes of authentication with UDP.
Firewalls and packet filters can find UDP particularly troublesome for this reason.

Transmission Control Protocol
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is a transport-layer protocol that sits on top of IP.
It’s a mechanism for ensuring reliable and accurate delivery of data from one host to the

other, based on the concept of connections. A connection is a bidirectional
communication channel between an application on one host and an application on
another host. Connections are established and closed by exchanging special TCP packets.
    The endpoints see the TCP data traversing the connection as streams: ordered
sequences of contiguous 8-bit bytes of data. The TCP stack is responsible for breaking
this data up into packet-sized pieces, known as segments. It’s also responsible for
making sure the data is transferred successfully. The data sent by a TCP endpoint is
acknowledged when it’s received. If a TCP endpoint doesn’t receive an acknowledge-
ment for a chunk of data, it retransmits that data after a certain time interval.
    TCP endpoints keep a sliding window of expected data, so they temporarily
store segments that aren’t the immediate next piece of data but closely follow the
expected segment. This window allows TCP to handle out-of-order data segments
and handle lost or corrupted segments more efficiently. TCP also uses checksums
to ensure data integrity.
    Auditing TCP code can be a daunting task, as the internals of TCP are quite
complex. This section starts with the basic structure of TCP packet headers and the
general design of the protocol, and then gives you a few examples that should illustrate
where things can go wrong. The TCP header structure is shown in Figure 14-10.

                                      Scale is in bits
0                       8                  16                      24         31

                Source port                               Destination port

                                  Sequence number

                              Acknowledgement number

    Data
             Reserved         Flags                               Window
    offset

                 Checksum                                   Urgent pointer

Figure 14-10   TCP header

     The following list describes the fields in more detail:
     ■ Source port (16 bits)—This field indicates the TCP source port. It is used in con-
       junction with the destination port, source IP address, and destination IP
       address to uniquely identify a connection.
     ■ Destination port (16 bits)—This field is the port the packet is destined for. This
       field combined with the source port, source IP address, and destination IP
       address to uniquely identify a connection.

      ■ Sequence number (32 bits)—This field identifies where in the stream the data in
        this packet belongs, starting at the first byte in the segment. The sequence
        number is randomly seeded during connection establishment, and then incre-
        mented by the amount of data sent in each packet.
      ■ Acknowledgement number (32 bits)—This field contains the sequence number
        the endpoint expects to receive from its peer. It’s the sequence number of the
        last byte of data received from the remote host plus one. It indicates to the
        remote peer which data has been received successfully so that data lost en
        route is noticed and retransmitted.
      ■ Data offset (4 bits)—This field indicates the size of the TCP header. Like IP, a
        TCP header can contain a series of options after the basic header, and so a
        similar header size field exists within the TCP header to account for these
        options. Its value is 5 if there are no options specified.
      ■ Reserved (4 bits)—This field is not used.

      ■ Flags (8 bits)—Several flags can be set in TCP connections to indicate information
        about the TCP packet: whether it’s high priority, whether to ignore certain fields
        in the TCP header, and whether the sender wants to change the connection state.
      ■ Window (16 bits)—This field indicates the size of the window, which is an indi-
        cator of how many bytes the host accepts from its peer. It’s resized
        dynamically as the buffer fills up and empties and is used for flow control.
        This size is specific to the connection that the TCP packet is associated with.
      ■ Checksum (16 bits)—This field is a checksum of the TCP header and all data con-
        tained in the TCP segment. Several other fields are combined to calculate the
        checksum, including the source and destination IP addresses from the IP header.
      ■ Urgent pointer (16 bits)—This field is used to indicate the location of urgent
        data, if any (discussed in “URG Pointer Processing”).
   Interested readers should familiarize themselves with TCP by reading the
RFC 793, as well as Stevens’s discussion on TCP in TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 1
(Addison-Wesley, 1994).

Basic TCP Header Validation
Naturally, every field in the TCP header has properties that have some relevance in
terms of security. To start, a few basic attributes of the TCP packet, explained in the
following sections, should be verified before the packet is processed further. Failure
to do so adequately can lead to serious security consequences, with problems rang-
ing from memory corruption to security policy violation.

Is the TCP Data Offset Field Too Large?
The TCP header contains a field indicating its length, which is known as the data
offset field. As with IP header validation, this field has an invariant relationship
with the packet size:
     TCP header length <= data available
     20 <= TCP header length <=60
    The TCP processing code must ensure that there’s enough data in the packet to
hold the header. Failure to do so could result in processing uninitialized memory
and potentially even integer-related vulnerabilities, when calculations such as this
are performed:
data_size = packet_size – tcp_header_size;

    If the tcp_header_size variable hasn’t been validated sufficiently, underflowing
the data_size variable might be possible. This will invariably result in out-of-bounds
memory accesses or possibly even memory corruption later during processing, most
likely when validating the checksum or dealing with TCP options.

Is the TCP Header Length Too Small?
The minimum size of a TCP header is 20 bytes, making certain values for the TCP
data offset field too small. As with IP headers, if code analyzing TCP packets fails to
ensure that the header length is at least 5 (again, it’s multiplied by four to get the
header’s actual size in bytes), length calculations can result in integer underflows.

Is the TCP Checksum Correct?
The TCP stack must verify the checksum in the TCP header to ensure that the
packet is valid. This check is particularly important for software that monitors net-
work traffic. If an application is trying to determine how TCP packets are processed
on an end host, it must be sure validate the checksum. If it fails to do so, it can eas-
ily be desynchronized in its processing and become hopelessly confused. This is a
classic technique for evading IDSs.

TCP Options Processing
TCP packets can contain a variable number of options after the basic header, just
like IP packets. However, IP options are rarely used in practice, whereas TCP
options are used extensively. TCP options are structured similarly to IP options;
they are composed of an option byte, a length byte, and a variable-length data field.
The structure is as follows:
struct tcp_option {
      unsigned char option;

      unsigned char optlen;
      char data[0];
};

    When auditing code that processes TCP options, you can look for the same
types of problems you did for IP options. The following sections briefly recap the
potential issues from the discussion of IP options processing:

Is the Option Length Field Sign Extended?
Sign extension of the option length byte can be dangerous and lead to memory
corruption or neverending process loops. For example, two Polish researchers named
Adam Osuchowski and Tomasz Dubinski discovered a signed vulnerability in process-
ing TCP options was present in the 2.6 Netfilter implementation of the iptables TCP
option matching rule in the Linux 2.6 kernel (documented at www.netfilter.org/
security/2004-06-30-2.6-tcpoption.html). The following is an excerpt of that code:
char opt[60 - sizeof(struct tcphdr)];

...
      for (i = 0; i < optlen; ) {
           if (opt[i] == option) return !invert;
           if (opt[i] < 2) i++;
           else i += opt[i+1]?:1;
      }

      An integer promotion occurs when adding the option length (which is of type
char) to the integer i. The option length is sign-extended, and a negative length
decrements i rather than incrementing it in each iteration of the loop. A specially
crafted packet can, therefore, cause this loop to continue executing indefinitely
(incrementing i by a certain amount of bytes and then decrementing it by the same
amount of bytes).

Are Enough Bytes Left for the Current Option?
As with IP options, certain TCP options are fixed length, and certain options are
variable length. One potential attack is specifying a fixed-length option near the
end of the option space so that the TCP/IP stack erroneously reads kernel memory
past the end of the packet contents.

Is the Option Length Too Large or Too Small?
The option length has an invariant relationship with the size of the TCP header and
the total size of the packet. The TCP stack must ensure that the option length, when

added to the offset into the header where the option appears, isn’t larger than the
total size of the TCP header (and, of course, the total size of the packet).

TCP Connections
Before two hosts can communicate over TCP, they must establish a connection. TCP
connections are uniquely defined by source IP address, destination IP address, TCP
source port, and TCP destination port.
    For example, a connection from a Web browser on your desktop to Slashdot’s
Web server would have a source IP of something like 24.1.20.30, and a high,
ephemeral source port such as 46023. It would have a destination IP address of
66.35.250.151, and a destination port of 80 the well-known port for HTTP. There
can only be one TCP connection with those ports and IP addresses at any one
time. If you connected to the same Web server with another browser
simultaneously, the second connection would be distinguished from the first by
having a different source port.

States
Each endpoint maintains several pieces of information about each connection it’s
tracking, which it stores in a data structure known as the transmission control block
(TCB). One of the most important pieces of information is the overall connection
state. A TCP connection has 11 possible states:
    ■ LISTEN—When a process running on an end host wants to receive incoming
      TCP connections, it creates a new connection and binds it to a particular port.
      While the server waits for incoming TCP connections, that connection is in
      the LISTEN state.
    ■ SYN_SENT—A client enters this state when it has sent an initial SYN packet to a
      server requesting a connection.
    ■ SYN_RCVD—A server enters this state when it has received an initial SYN packet
      from a client wanting to connect.
    ■ ESTABLISHED—Clients and servers both enter this state after the initial TCP
      handshake has been completed and remain in this state until the connection
      is torn down.
    ■ FIN_WAIT_1—A host enters this state if it’s in an ESTABLISHED state and closes
      its side of the connection by sending a FIN packet.
    ■ FIN_WAIT_2—A host enters this state if it’s in FIN_WAIT_1 and receives an ACK
      packet from the participating server but not a FIN packet.
    ■ CLOSING—A host enters this state if it’s in FIN_WAIT_1 and receives a FIN
      packet from the participating host.
    ■ TIME_WAIT—A host enters this state if it’s in FIN_WAIT_2 when it receives a FIN

        packet from the participating host or receives an ACK packet when it’s in
        CLOSING state.
      ■ CLOSE_WAIT—A host enters this state if it’s in ESTABLISHED state and receives a
        FIN packet from the participating host.
      ■ LAST_ACK—A host enters this state if it’s in CLOSE_WAIT state after it has sent a
        FIN packet to the participating host.
      ■ CLOSED—A host enters this state if it’s in LAST_ACK state and receives an ACK,
        or after a timeout occurs when a host is in TIME_WAIT state (that timeout
        period is defined as the maximum segment life of a TCP packet multiplied by
        two). This state is a theoretical one; when a host enters CLOSED state, an imple-
        mentation cleans up the connection and removes it from the active connection
        structures it maintains.
    These states are explained in more detail in RFC 793 (www.ietf.org/rfc/
rfc0793.txt?number=793).
    State transitions generally occur when TCP packets are received that have certain
flags set or when the local application dealing with the connection forces a change
(such as closing the connection). If the application layer initiates a state change, the
TCP/IP stack typically notifies the other endpoint of the state change.

Flags
Six TCP flags are used to convey information from one host to the other:
      ■ SYN—The synchronize flag is used exclusively for connection establishment.
      Both sides of a connection must have this flag set in the initial packet of a TCP
      connection.
   ■ ACK—The acknowledge flag indicates that this packet is acknowledging it has
      received some data from the other host participating in the connection. If this
      flag is set, the acknowledgement number in the TCP header is significant and
      needs to be verified or processed.
   ■ RST—The reset flag indicates some sort of unrecoverable problem has
      occurred in a connection, and the connection should be abandoned.
   ■ URG—The urgent flag indicates urgent data to be processed (discussed in
      more detail in “URG Pointer Processing” later in this chapter).
   ■ FIN—The FIN flag indicates that the issuer wants to close the connection.

   ■ PSH—The push flag indicates that data in this packet is high-priority and
      should be delivered to the application as quickly as possible. This flag is
      largely ignored in modern implementations.
   Of the six flags, three are used to cause state changes (SYN, RST, and FIN) and
appear only when establishing or tearing down a connection. (RST can occur at any
time, but the result is an immediate termination of the connection.)

Establishing a Connection
Establishing a connection is a three-part process, commonly referred to as the
three-way handshake. An integral part of the three-way handshake is exchanging
initial sequence numbers, covered in “TCP Spoofing” later in this chapter. For now,
just focus on the state transitions. Table 14-4 describes the process of setting up a
connection and summarizes the states the connection goes through.

Table 14-4
Connection Establishment
Action                                                              Client State    Server State
The server listens on a port for a new connection.                  N/A             LISTEN
The client sends a SYN packet to the server’s open port.            SYN_SENT        LISTEN
The server receives the packet and enters the SYN_RCVD state.       SYN_SENT        SYN_RCVD
The server transmits a SYN-ACK packet, acknowledging the            SYN_SENT        SYN_RCVD
client’s SYN and providing a SYN of its own.
The client receives the SYN-ACK and transmits an ACK packet,        ESTABLISHED     SYN_RCVD
acknowledging the server’s SYN.
The server receives the ACK packet, and the connection is fully     ESTABLISHED     ESTABLISHED
established.

Closing a Connection
Connections are bidirectional, and either direction of traffic can be shut down
independently. Normally, connections are shut down by the exchange of FIN packets.
Table 14-5 describes the process.
Table 14-5
Connection Close
Action                                                              Client State   Server State
The client sends a FIN-ACK packet, indicating it wants to close     FIN_WAIT_1     ESTABLISHED
its half of the connection. The client enters the FIN_WAIT_1 state.
The server receives the packet and acknowledges it.                 FIN_WAIT_1     CLOSE_WAIT
The client receives the acknowledgement of its FIN.                 FIN_WAIT_2     CLOSE_WAIT
The server now elects to close its side of the connection and       FIN_WAIT_2     LAST_ACK
sends a FIN packet.
The client receives the server’s FIN and acknowledges it.           TIME_WAIT      LAST_ACK
The server receives the acknowledgement.                            TIME_WAIT      CLOSED
The client tears down the TCB after waiting enough time for the     CLOSED         N/A
server to receive the acknowledgement.

   Note that connection termination isn’t always this straightforward. If one host
sends a packet with the FIN flag set, it’s indicating a termination of the sending

channel of the established TCP stream, but the hosts receiving channel remains
open. Upon receipt of a FIN, a host can send more data across the connection before
sending a FIN packet of its own.

Resetting a Connection
Resetting a connection occurs when some sort of unrecoverable error has occurred
during the course of connection establishment or data exchange. Resetting the
connection simply involves a host sending a packet with the RST flag set. RSTs are
used mainly in these situations:
      ■ Someone sends a SYN to establish a connection with a server, but the server
        port isn’t open (that is, no server is listening on the specified port).
      ■ A TCP packet arrives at a host without the SYN flag set, and no valid connec-
        tion can be found to deliver this packet to.

TCP Streams
TCP is a stream-oriented protocol, meaning that data is treated as an uninterrupted
stream (as opposed to a record-based protocol, such as UDP). Streams are tracked
internally by using sequence numbers, with each sequence number corresponding
to one byte of data. The TCP header has two sequence number fields: sequence
number and acknowledgement number. The sequence number indicates where in
the data stream the data in the packet belongs. The acknowledgement number indi-
cates how much of the remote stream has been received successfully and accounted
for. This field is updated every time the host sees new data from the remote host. If
some data is lost during transmission, the acknowledgement number isn’t updated.
Eventually, the peer notices it hasn’t received an acknowledgement on the data it
sent and retransmits the missing data.
     Each TCP endpoint maintains a sliding window, which determines which
sequence numbers it allows from its peer. This window mechanism allows data to
be saved when it’s delivered out of order or if certain segments are corrupted or
dropped. It also determines how much data the host accepts before having a chance
to pass the data up to the application layer. For example, say a host is expecting the
next sequence number to be 0x10000. If the host has a window of 0x1000, it accepts
segments between 0x10000 and 0x11000. “Future” data is saved and used as soon as
holes are filled when the missing data is received.
     Both sequence numbers are seeded randomly at the beginning of a new con-
nection and then exchanged in the three-way handshake. The starting sequence
number is called the initial sequence number (ISN). Here’s a brief example of a
three-way handshake and a simple data exchange. First, the client picks a random
initial sequence number and sends it to the server. Figure 14-11 shows that the
client has picked 0xabcd.

                     SYN
                  Seq: 0xabcd

  Client                                                         Server
Figure 14-11   Transmit 1

    The server also picks a random initial sequence number, 0x4567, which it sets in
the SYN-ACK packet. The SYN-ACK packet acknowledges the ISN sent by the
client by setting 0xabce in the acknowledgment number field. If you recall, that
field indicates the sequence number of the next expected byte of data. SYN and
SYN-ACK packets consume one sequence number, so the next data you’re expect-
ing to receive should begin at sequence number 0xabce (see Figure 14-12).

                                           SYN ACK
                                          Seq: 0x4567
                                          Seq: 0xabce

  Client                                                         Server
Figure 14-12   Receive 1

    The client completes the handshake by acknowledging the server’s ISN. Note that
the sequence number has been incremented by one to 0xabce because the SYN
packet consumed the sequence number 0xabcd. Likewise, the client in this
connection indicates that the next sequence number it expects to receive from the
server is 0x4568 because 0x4567 was used by the SYN-ACK packet (see Figure 14-13).

                      ACK
                   Seq: 0xabce
                   Ack: 0x4568

 Client                                                          Server
Figure 14-13   Transmit 2

   Now the client wants to send two bytes of data, the characters HI. The sequence
number is the same, as the client hasn’t sent any data yet. The acknowledgement
number is also the same because no data has been received yet (see Figure 14-14).

                       ACK
                    Seq: 0xabce
                    Ack: 0x4568
                         HI

 Client                                                          Server
Figure 14-14   Transmit 3

    The server wants to acknowledge receipt of the data and transmit two bytes of
data: the characters OK. So the sequence number for the server is 0x4568, as you
expect, and the acknowledgement number is now set to 0xabd0. This number is
used because sequence number 0xabce is the character H and sequence number
0xabcf is the character I (see Figure 14-15).

                                            ACK
                                         Seq: 0x4568
                                         Ack: 0xabd0
                                             OK

 Client                                                          Server
Figure 14-15   Receive 2

    The client doesn’t have any new data to send, but it wants to acknowledge
receipt of the OK data (see Figure 14-16).

                      ACK
                   Seq: 0xabd0
                   Ack: 0x456a

 Client                                                          Server
Figure 14-16   Transmit 3

TCP Spoofing
Sending TCP packets with arbitrary source addresses and content is fairly
straightforward—typically only a few lines of C code with a library such as
libdnet or libnet. There are a few reasons attackers would want to send these
type of TCP packets:
      ■ Attackers might want to fabricate a new connection purporting to be from one
       host to another. Plenty of software has access control policies based on the source

      IP address. The canonical example is something like rsh, which can be configured
      to honor trust relationships between hosts based on the source IP address.
    ■ If attackers know about a connection that’s underway, they might want to
      insert data into that connection. For example, they could insert malicious shell
      commands into a victim’s TELNET session after the victim has logged in.
      Another attack is modifying a file as a user downloads it to insert Trojan code.
    ■ Attackers might want to terminate an ongoing connection, which can be useful in
      attacking distributed systems and performing various denial-of-service attacks.
    TCP’s main line of defense against these attacks is verifying sequence numbers
of incoming packets. The following sections examine these attacks in more detail
and how sequence numbers come into play in each scenario.

Connection Fabrication
Say you want to spoof an entire TCP connection from one host to another. You know
there’s a trust relationship between two servers running the remote shell service. If
you can spoof a rsh connection from one server to the other, you can issue commands
and take over the target machine. First, you would spoof a SYN packet from server A
to server B. You can pick a sequence number out of thin air as your initial sequence
number (see Figure 14-17).

                      SYN
                   Seq: 0x8888

Server A                                                         Server B
Figure 14-17   Transmit 1

   Server B is going to respond to server A with a SYN-ACK containing a randomly
chosen initial sequence number represented by BBBB in Figure 14-18.

                                         SYN ACK
                                        Seq: BBBB
                                        Ack: 0x8889

Server A                                                         Server B
Figure 14-18   Receive 1

   To complete the three-way handshake and initialize the connection, you need to
spoof a third acknowledgement packet (see Figure 14-19).

                        ACK
                    Seq: 0x8889
                    Ack: BBBB+1

Server A                                                         Server B
Figure 14-19   Transmit 2

    The first major obstacle is that you need to see the SYN-ACK packet going from
server B to server A to observe the sequence number server B chose. Without that
sequence number, you can’t acknowledge the SYN-ACK packet and complete the
three-way handshake.
    Naturally, if you’re on the same network so that you can sniff server B’s packets,
you won’t have any problems learning the correct sequence number. If you aren’t on
the same network, and you can’t hack the routing infrastructure to see the packet,
you need to guess! This method is called blind connection spoofing (described in
the next section).
    The second obstacle to this attack is that the SYN-ACK packet can potentially
reach server A, and server A isn’t expecting it. Server A likely generates a RST in
response to the SYN-ACK, which messes up your spoofed connection. There are a
few ways to work around this problem, so consider it a nonissue for the purposes of
this discussion.
Blind Connection Spoofing
If attackers can’t see the SYN-ACK packet the victim server generates, they have to
guess the initial sequence number the victim server chose. Historically, guessing
was quite simple, as many operating systems used simple incremental algorithms to
choose their ISNs.
     A common practice was to keep a global ISN variable and increment it by a
fixed value with every new connection. To exploit this practice, attackers could con-
nect to the victim server and observe its choice of ISN. With some simple math,
they could calculate the next ISN to be used, perform the spoofing attack, and
know the correct acknowledgement number to spoof.
     Most operating systems moved to randomly generated ISNs to mitigate the threat
of blind TCP spoofing. The security of much of TCP depends on the unpredictability of
the ISN, so it’s important that their ISN generation code really does produce random
sequence numbers. Straightforward linear congruent pseudo-random number genera-
tors (PRNGs) doesn’t cut it, as an attacker can sample several ISNs to reverse the
internal state of the random number algorithm.

    Back in 2000, Pascal Bouchareine of the Hacker Emergency Response Team
(HERT) published an advisory about FreeBSD’s ISN generation, which used the
kernel random() function: a linear congruent PRNG. After sampling four ISNs, an
attacker can reconstruct the PRNGs internal state and generate the same sequence
numbers as the target host.

         An Attack on Randomness
         There have been a couple of interesting discoveries related to the
         randomness of TCP sequence-numbering algorithms. Of particu-
         lar note is a research paper made available by Michael Zalewski at
         www.bindview.com/Support/RAZOR/Papers/2001/tcpseq.cfm,
         which discusses the relative strengths of random number
         algorithms some contemporary operating systems use. Although
         the versions tested are somewhat dated, the paper gives you a
         good idea how operating systems measure up against each other.
         (Additionally, even though some versions aren’t so current, a lot
         of the ISN algorithms probably haven’t changed a great deal.) The
         paper goes on to discuss PRNG strengths in other network
         components (such as DNS IDs and session cookies).

ISN Vulnerability
Stealth and S. Krahmer, members of a hacker group named TESO discovered a sub-
tle blind spoofing bug in the Linux kernel, in the 2.2 branch of code. The following
code was used to generate a random ISN:
__u32 secure_tcp_sequence_number(__u32 saddr, __u32 daddr,
                    __u16 sport, __u16 dport)
{
    static __u32        rekey_time = 0;
    static __u32        count = 0;
    static __u32        secret[12];
    struct timeval         tv;
    __u32           seq;

    /*
     * Pick a random secret every REKEY_INTERVAL seconds.
     */
    do_gettimeofday(&tv);         /* We need the usecs below... */

      if (!rekey_time || (tv.tv_sec - rekey_time)
           > REKEY_INTERVAL) {
           rekey_time = tv.tv_sec;
           /* First three words are overwritten below. */
           get_random_bytes(&secret+3, sizeof(secret)-12);
           count = (tv.tv_sec/REKEY_INTERVAL) << HASH_BITS;
      }

      secret[0]=saddr;
      secret[1]=daddr;
      secret[2]=(sport << 16) + dport;

      seq = (halfMD4Transform(secret+8, secret) &
               ((1<<HASH_BITS)-1)) + count;

      seq += tv.tv_usec + tv.tv_sec*1000000;

      return seq;
}

     In the call to get_random_bytes(), the intent is to write random data over the
last nine bytes of the secret array. However, the code actually writes the data at the
wrong place in the stack, and the majority of the secret key is left always contain-
ing the value zero! This happens because the expression &secret is a pointer to an
array with 12 elements. From the discussion on pointer arithmetic in Chapter 6,
remember that an integer added to a pointer type is multiplied by the size of the
base data type, so &secret+3 is the address 36 elements past the start of secret.
The author intended to use &secret[3], which correctly indexes the third element
in the secret array.
     The impact of this oversight was that the sequence numbers were very close to
each other if the source IP address was the only variable, allowing the TESO
researchers to craft an ISN-guessing attack.

          Auditing Tip
          Examine the TCP sequence number algorithm to see how unpre-
          dictable it is. Make sure some sort of cryptographic random number
          generator is used. Try to determine whether any part of the key
          space can be guessed deductively, which limits the range of possible

         correct sequence numbers. Random numbers based on system state
         (such as system time) might not be secure, as this information could
         be procured from a remote source in a number of ways.

Connection Tampering
If attackers want to spoof TCP packets to manipulate existing connections, they
need to provide a sequence number that’s within the currently accepted window.
If attackers are located on the network and can sniff packets belonging to the
connection they are trying to manipulate, finding this number is obviously quite
simple. From this position, attackers can easily inject data or tear down a
connection. In more subtle attacks, they could hijack and resynchronize an exist-
ing TCP connection.
     However, if attackers can’t see the packets belonging to the target connection,
finding the sequence number is again more difficult. They need to guess a sequence
number that’s within the currently accepted window to have their spoofed TCP
packets honored.

Blind Reset Attacks
In certain situations, attackers might want to remotely terminate a connection
between two hosts on outside networks. Certain protocols and applications can
fall into behavior that’s not secure or could be exploited if their TCP connections
are torn out from under them. For example, there have been attacks against
Internet Relay Chat (IRC) based on temporarily severing links between distrib-
uted servers to steal privileges to chat channels. Kids’ games aside, a researcher
named Paul Watson published an attack with a bit more gravity. The bullet point
of his presentation was that resetting Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) TCP con-
nections maliciously can lead to considerable disruption of routing between ISPs
(archives of the presentation are available at www.packetstormsecurity.org/
papers/protocols/SlippingInTheWindow_v1.0.doc).
     Attackers attempting to spoof a RST packet have a few things working in their
favor. First, the RST packet just needs to be in the current window to be honored,
which reduces the search for sequence numbers. Second, the RST packet is processed
immediately if it’s anywhere within the window, which removes any potential issues
with stream reassembly or having to wait for a sequence number to be reached.
     Attackers need to know the source IP, source port, destination IP, destination
port, a sequence number within the window—and that’s about it. If the connection
used a window size of 16KB, an attacker needs to send about 262,143 packets. Paul
Watson was able to terminate connections by brute-forcing the sequence number at
T1 speeds in roughly 10 seconds.

    It’s worth noting that many old operating systems, especially older UNIX
systems, don’t even check that the sequence number in the RST packet is within
the window, making reset attacks extremely easy. In addition, the reset-inducing
packet can be a SYN instead of a RST, as a SYN in the window causes an existing
connection to be reset.

Blind Data Injection Attacks
A blind data injection attack is a slight superset of the blind reset attack. The
attacker needs to provide an acknowledgement number as well as a sequence num-
ber. However, the verification of acknowledgement numbers is lax enough that only
two guesses are usually needed for each sequence number trial.
    The full details of this attack and the blind reset attacks are outlined in the excel-
lent draft IETF document Improving TCP’s Robustness to Blind In-Window Attacks by R.
Stewart and M. Dalal (www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-tcpm-tcpsecure-05.txt).

TCP Segment Fragmentation Spoofing
Michael Zalewski pointed out an interesting potential blind spoofing attack in a
post to the full-disclosure mailing list (archived at archives.neohapsis.com/archives/
fulldisclosure/2003-q4/3488.html). If attackers know that a TCP segment is frag-
mented as it traverses from one endpoint to another, they can spoof an IP fragment
for the data section of the packet. This spoofing allows them to inject data into the
TCP connection without having to guess a valid sequence number. Attackers need
to come up with a mechanism to fix the TCP checksum, but that should prove well
within the realm of possibility.

TCP Processing
So far, you’ve examined a few security issues in TCP code. The following sections
describe some interesting corner cases and nuances in TCP processing to give you
ideas where to look for potential vulnerabilities.

TCP State Processing
TCP stacks implement a complicated state machine that’s highly malleable by
outside actors. Studying this code can reveal subtle behaviors that might be
useful to attackers. For example, operating systems have different reactions to
unusual combinations of TCP flags. These reactions can lead to security-critical
behaviors, which you examine in Chapter 15’s discussion of firewalls and SYN-
FIN packets. You can also find many corner cases in TCP processing. For exam-
ple, some operating systems allow data in the initial SYN packet, and some allow
data segments without the ACK flag set. The following section has an example of
a vulnerability that shows the kind of creativity you should apply to your
inspection of TCP code.

Linux Blind Spoofing Vulnerability
Noted researcher, Anthony Osborne, discovered a subtle and fascinating bug in the
Linux TCP stack related to connection state tracking (documented at www.ciac.org/
ciac/bulletins/j-035.shtml). There were actually three vulnerabilities that he was able to
weave into an attack for blindly spoofing TCP traffic from an arbitrary source. To
follow this vulnerability, take a look at a simplified version of the tcp_rcv() function in
the Linux kernel.
int tcp_rcv()
{
...
      if(sk->state!=TCP_ESTABLISHED)
      {
            if(sk->state==TCP_LISTEN)
            {
                  seq = secure_tcp_sequence_number(saddr, daddr,
                                    skb->h.th->dest,
                                    skb->h.th->source);
                  tcp_conn_request(sk, skb, daddr, saddr, opt,
                      dev, seq);

                  return 0;
            }
            ... /* various other processing */
      }

      /*
       *        We are now in normal data flow (see the step list
       *        in the RFC) Note most of these are inline now.
       *        I’ll inline the lot when I have time to test it
       *        hard and look at what gcc outputs
       */

      if (!tcp_sequence(sk, skb->seq, skb->end_seq-th->syn))
            die(); /* bad tcp sequence number */

      if(th->rst)
            return tcp_reset(sk,skb);

      if(th->ack && !tcp_ack(sk,th,skb->ack_seq,len))
            die(); /* bad tcp acknowledgement number */

      /* Process the encapsulated data */

      if(tcp_data(skb,sk, saddr, len))
            kfree_skb(skb, FREE_READ);

}

    If the incoming packet is associated with a socket that isn’t in TCP_ESTABLISHED, it
performs a variety of processing related to connection initiation and teardown.
What’s important to note is that after this processing is performed, the code can fall
through to the normal data-processing code in certain situations. This is usually
innocuous, as control packets such as SYN and RST don’t contain data. Looking at
the preceding code, you can see that any data in the initial SYN packet isn’t
processed, as the server is in the TCP_LISTEN state, and it returns out of the receive
function. However, after the SYN is received and the server is in the SYN_RCVD state,
the code falls through and data is processed on incoming packets. So data in packets
sent after the initial SYN but before the three-way handshake is completed is actually
queued to be delivered to the userland application.
    The attack Osborne conceived was to spoof packets from a trusted peer and
provide data before completion of the three-way handshake. Attackers would first
send a normal SYN packet, spoofed from a trusted peer (see Figure 14-20).

                            SYN
                      Seq: 123456789
                      Source port: 1024
                       Dest port: 513

Trusted client                                                      Trusted server
Figure 14-20     Transmit 1

    Upon receipt of the SYN packet, the server enters the SYN_RCVD state and sends
the SYN-ACK packet to the purported source of the SYN. Attackers can’t see this
packet, but as long as they act quickly enough, their attack isn’t hindered.
    At this point, they know which sequence numbers are valid in the window for
data destined for the victim host, but they don’t know what the acknowledgement

sequence number should be because they didn’t see the SYN-ACK packet. How-
ever, look closely at the previous code from tcp_rcv(). The second nuance that
Osborne leveraged is that if the ACK flag isn’t set in the TCP packet, the Linux
TCP stack doesn’t check the acknowledgement sequence number for validity
before queuing the data! So attackers simply send some data in a packet with a
valid sequence number but with no TCP flags set (see Figure 14-21).

                      Seq: 1234567890
                      Source port: 1024
                       Dest port: 513
                          <rlogin>

Trusted client                                                            Trusted server
Figure 14-21     Transmit 2

     Now attackers have data queued in the victim machine’s kernel, ready to be deliv-
ered to the userland rlogind process as soon as the three-way handshake is completed.
Normally, this handshake can’t be completed without knowing or guessing the correct
acknowledgement number, but Osborne discovered a third vulnerability that lets
attackers deliver the death blow. Usually, the userland process doesn’t return from the
call to accept() unless the handshake is completed. The following code shows the
logic for this in tcp.c:
static struct sk_buff *tcp_find_established(struct sock *s)
{
      struct sk_buff *p=skb_peek(&s->receive_queue);
      if(p==NULL)
            return NULL;
      do
      {
            if(p->sk->state == TCP_ESTABLISHED ||
                   p->sk->state >= TCP_FIN_WAIT1)
                   return p;
            p=p->next;
      }
      while(p!=(struct sk_buff *)&s->receive_queue);
      return NULL;
}

   Note that the kernel treats states greater than or equal to TCP_FIN_WAIT1 as being
equivalent to ESTABLISHED. The following code handles packets with the FIN bit set:
static int tcp_fin(struct sk_buff *skb, struct sock *sk,

struct tcphdr *th)
{
...
      switch(sk->state)
      {
          case TCP_SYN_RECV:
          case TCP_SYN_SENT:
          case TCP_ESTABLISHED:
                /*
                * move to CLOSE_WAIT, tcp_data() already handled
                * sending the ack.
                */
                tcp_set_state(sk,TCP_CLOSE_WAIT);
                if (th->rst)
                     sk->shutdown = SHUTDOWN_MASK;
                break;

    CLOSE_WAIT is greater than TCP_FIN_WAIT, which means that if attackers simply
send a FIN packet, it moves the connection to the CLOSE_WAIT state, and the user-
land application’s call to accept() returns successfully. The application then has
data available to read on its socket: the data the attackers spoofed! In summary, the
attack involves the three packets shown in Figure 14-22.

Sequence Number Representation
Sequence numbers are 32-bit unsigned integers that have a value between 0 and 2^32-1.
Note that sequence numbers wrap around at 0, and special care must be taken to make
this wrapping work flawlessly. For example, say you have a TCP window starting at
0xfffffff0 with a size of 0x1000. This means data with sequence numbers between
0xfffffff0 and 0xffffffff is within the window, as is data with sequence numbers
between 0x0 and 0xff0. This flexibility is provided by the following macros:
      #define        SEQ_LT(a,b)        ((int)((a)-(b)) < 0)
      #define        SEQ_LEQ(a,b)       ((int)((a)-(b)) <= 0)
      #define        SEQ_GT(a,b)        ((int)((a)-(b)) > 0)
      #define        SEQ_GEQ(a,b)       ((int)((a)-(b)) >= 0)

                            SYN
                      Seq: 123456789
                      Source port: 1024
                       Dest port: 513

Trusted client                                                           Trusted server

                      Seq: 1234567890
                      Source port: 1024
                       Dest port: 513
                          <rlogin>

Trusted client                                                           Trusted server

                            FIN
                      Seq: 1234567810
                      Source port: 1024
                       Dest port: 513

Trusted client                                                           Trusted server
Figure 14-22     Blind spoofing attack

    It’s worth taking a moment to study how these macros work around corner
cases. Basically, they measure the absolute value distance between two sequence
numbers. In general, if you see code operate on sequence numbers without
using a similar type of macro, you should be suspicious. The next section
describes an example.

Snort Reassembly Vulnerability
Bruce Leidl, Juan Pablo Martinez Kuhn, and Alejandro David Weil from CORE
Security Technologies published a remotely exploitable heap overflow in Snort’s
TCP stream reassembly that resulted from improper handling of sequence numbers
(www.coresecurity.com/common/showdoc.php?idxseccion=10&idx=313). To
understand this code, you need a little background on relevant structures used by
Snort to represent TCP connections and incoming TCP packets. The incoming
TCP segment is represented in a StreamPacketData structure, which has the
following prototype:
typedef struct _StreamPacketData
{

      ubi_trNode Node;
      u_int8_t *pkt;
      u_int8_t *payload;
      SnortPktHeader pkth;
      u_int32_t seq_num;
      u_int16_t payload_size;
      u_int16_t pkt_size;
      u_int32_t cksum;
      u_int8_t   chuck;     /* mark the spd for
                               chucking if it’s
                             * been reassembled
                             */
} StreamPacketData;

    The fields relevant for this attack are the sequence number, stored in the seq_num
member, and the size of the segment, stored in payload_size. The Snort stream
reassembly preprocessor has another structure to represent state information about a
current stream:
typedef struct _Stream
{
      ... members cut out for brevity ...

      u_int32_t current_seq; /* current sequence number */
      u_int32_t base_seq;         /* base seq num for this
                            packet set */
      u_int32_t last_ack;         /* last segment ack’d */
      u_int16_t win_size;         /* window size */
      u_int32_t next_seq;         /* next sequence we expect
                                       to see — used on reassemble */

      ... more members here ...

} Stream;

The Stream structure has (among other things) a base_seq member to indicate the
starting sequence number of the part of the TCP stream that is being analyzed, and
a last_ack member to indicate the last acknowledgement number that the peer was
seen to respond with.

    Now, for the vulnerability. The following code is used to copy data from a
TCP packet that has been acknowledged by the peer. All variables are of the
unsigned int type, with the exception of offset, which is an int. Incoming pack-
ets are represented by a StreamPacketData structure (pointed to by spd), and are
associated with a Stream structure (pointed to by s). Coming into this code, the
packet contents are being copied into a 64K reassembly buffer depending on
certain conditions being true. Note that before this code is executed, the reassembly
buffer is guaranteed to be at least as big as the block of data that needs to
be analyzed, which is defined to be the size (s->last_ack – s->base_seq).
    The following code has checks in place to make sure the incoming packet
is within the reassembly window—the sequence number must be in between
s->base_seq and s->last_ack:

    /* don’t reassemble if we’re before the start sequence
     * number or after the last ack’d byte
     */
    if(spd->seq_num < s->base_seq || spd->seq_num > s->last_ack) {
          DEBUG_WRAP(DebugMessage(DEBUG_STREAM,
                   “not reassembling because”
                   “ we’re (%u) before isn(%u) “
                   “ or after last_ack(%u)\n”,
                 spd->seq_num, s->base_seq, s->last_ack););
          return;
}

    Next, a check is again performed to ensure the sequence number is past
base_seq. It also makes sure the sequence number is greater than or equal to the
next expected sequence number in the stream. One final check is done to verify that
the sequence number plus the payload size is less than the last acknowledged
sequence number.
    /* if it’s in bounds... */
    if(spd->seq_num >= s->base_seq &&
          spd->seq_num >= s->next_seq &&
        (spd->seq_num+spd->payload_size) <= s->last_ack)
    {

    If all these checks pass, the data portion of the packet being inspected is added
to the reassembly buffer for later analysis:
          offset = spd->seq_num - s->base_seq;

          s->next_seq = spd->seq_num + spd->payload_size;

          memcpy(buf+offset, spd->payload, spd->payload_size);

   The vulnerability in this code results from the authors using unsigned ints to
hold the sequence numbers. The attack CORE outlined in its advisory consisted of a
sequence of packets that caused the code to run with the following values:
s->base_seq = 0xffff0023
s->next_seq = 0xffff0024
s->last_ack = 0xffffffff
spd->seq_num 0xffffffff
spd->payload_size 0xf00

   If you trace the code with these values, you can see that the following check is
compromised:
        (spd->seq_num+spd->payload_size) <= s->last_ack)

    The seq_num is an unsigned int with the value 0xffffffff, and spd->payload_size
is an unsigned int with the value 0xf00. Adding the two results in a value of 0xeff,
which is considerably lower than last_ack’s value of 0xffffffff. Therefore, memcpy()
ends up copying data past the end of the reassembly buffer so that an attacker can
remotely exploit the process.

Sequence Number Boundary Condition
A nuance of sequence number signed comparisons is worth pointing out. Assume
you use the following macro to compare two sequence numbers:
      #define      SEQ_LT(a,b)        ((int)((a)-(b)) < 0)

     Use of a macro such as this has some interesting behavior when dealing with
cases near to integer boundary conditions, such as the sequence numbers 0 and
0x7fffffff. In this case, SEQ_LT(0, 0x7fffffff) evaluates to (0-0x7fffffff), or
0x80000001. This is less than 0, so the result you find is that the sequence number 0
is less than 0x7fffffff.
     Now compare the sequence numbers 0 and 0x80000000. SEQ_LT(0,0x80000000)
evaluates to (0-0x80000000), or 0x80000000. This is less than 0, so the result you
find is that sequence number 0 is less than 0x80000000.
     Now compare 0 and 0x80000001. SEQ_LT(0,0x80000001) evaluates to
 (0-0x80000001), or 7fffffff. This is greater than 0, so you find that the sequence
number 0 is greater than the sequence number 0x80000001.

    Basically, if two sequence numbers are 2GB away from each other, they lie on the
boundary that tells the arithmetic which sequence number comes first in the stream.
Keep this boundary in mind when auditing code that handles sequence numbers, as
it may create the opportunity for TCP streams to be incorrectly evaluated.

Window Scale Option
The window scale TCP option allows a peer to specify a shift value to apply to the
window size. This option can allow for very large TCP windows. The maximum win-
dow size is 0xFFFF, and the maximum window scale value is 14, which results in a
possible window size of 0x3FFFC000, or roughly 1GB.
    As mentioned, the sequence number comparison boundary is located at the 2GB
point of inflection. The maximum window scale value of 14 is carefully chosen to pre-
vent windows from growing large enough that it’s possible to cross the boundary
when doing normal processing of data within the window. The bottom line is that if
you encounter an implementation that honors a window scale of 15 or higher, chances
are quite good the reassembly code can be exploited in the TCP stack.

URG Pointer Processing
TCP provides a mechanism to send some out-of-band (OOB) data at any point dur-
ing a data exchange. (“Out of band” means ancillary data that isn’t part of the regu-
lar data stream.) The idea is that an application can use this mechanism to signal
some kind of exception with accompanying data the peer can receive and handle
immediately without having to dig through the data stream and generally interrupt
the traffic flow. RFC 793 (www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc0793.txt?number=793) is quoted here:
    The objective of the TCP urgent mechanism is to allow the sending user to
    stimulate the receiving user to accept some urgent data and to permit the
    receiving TCP to indicate to the receiving user when all the currently known
    urgent data has been received by the user.
    The TCP header has a 16-bit urgent pointer, which is ignored unless the URG
flag is set. When the flag is set, the urgent pointer is interpreted as a 16-bit offset
from the sequence number in the TCP packet into the data stream where the urgent
data stops. When auditing urgent pointer processing code, you should consider the
potential mistakes covered in the following sections.

Handling Pointers into Other Packets
The urgent pointer points to an offset in the stream starting from the sequence num-
ber indicated in the packet header. It’s perfectly legal for the urgent pointer to point
to an offset that’s not delivered in the packet where the URG flag is set. That is, the
urgent pointer offset might hold the value 1,000, but the packet is only 500 bytes
long. Code dealing with this situation can encounter two potential problem areas:

      ■ Neglecting to check that the pointer is within the bounds of the current packet—This
        behavior can cause a lot of trouble because the code reads out-of-bounds mem-
        ory and attempts to deliver it to the application using this TCP connection. Worse
        still, after extracting urgent data from the stream, if the code copies over urgent
        data with trailing stream data (effectively removing urgent data from the buffer),
        integer underflow conditions and memory corruption are a likely result.
      ■ Recognizing that the pointer is pointing beyond the end of the packet and trying to
        handle it—This behavior is correct but is easy to get wrong. The problem with
        urgent pointers pointing to future packets is complicated by the fact that sub-
        sequent packets arriving could overlap where urgent data exists in the stream
        or subsequent packets arriving might also have the URG flag set, thus creating
        a series of urgent bytes within close proximity to each other.

Handling 0-Offset Urgent Pointers
The urgent pointer points to the first byte in the stream following the urgent data, so at
least one byte must exist in the stream before the urgent pointer; otherwise, there
would be no urgent data. Therefore, an urgent pointer of 0 is invalid. When reviewing
code that deals with urgent pointers, take the time to check whether an urgent pointer
of 0 is correctly flagged as an error. Many implementations fail to adequately validate
this pointer, and as a result, might save a byte before the beginning of the urgent
pointer or corrupt memory when trying to remove the urgent data from the stream.

Simultaneous Open
There is a lesser-known way of initiating a TCP connection. In a simultaneous open,
both peers send a SYN packet at the same time with mirrored source and destination
ports. Then they both send a SYN-ACK packet, and the connection is established.
    From the perspective of an endpoint, assume you send a SYN from port 12345 to
port 4242. Instead of receiving a SYN-ACK packet, you receive a SYN packet from port
4242 to port 12345. Internally, you transfer from state SYN_SENT to SYN_RCVD and send a
SYN-ACK packet. The peer sends a SYN-ACK packet to you acknowledging your SYN,
at which point you can consider the connection to be established. Keep this initiation
process in mind when auditing TCP code, as it’s likely to be overlooked or omitted.

Summary
IP stacks are complex subsystems that are difficult to understand, let alone find
vulnerabilities in. Reviewers need an in-depth understanding of the variety of proto-
cols that make up the TCP/IP protocol suite and should be aware of corner cases in
these protocols. This chapter has introduced the major players in packet-handling
code for most regular Internet traffic. You have looked at typical problems you’ll find
in each protocol and seen examples from real-world IP-handling code.

