                    Chapter 15
                                  Firewalls

“Firewalls are barriers between ‘us’ and ‘them’ for arbitrary values of ‘them’.”
    Steve Bellovin

Introduction
If you look hard enough, you can find firewalling technology in some surprising places.
Firewalls have been on the market for a long time, and they have evolved to the point
that you find them in myriad permutations. Most corporations and large organizations
use expensive commercial firewalls that run on dedicated server software or network
appliances. You can find firewall code in embedded devices, such as enterprise routers
and inexpensive home networking devices. Several free firewalls are included in differ-
ent operating systems, or you can buy them as part of desktop security suites. The most
recent enterprise trend is that firewalls and network intrusion detection system (NIDS)
technologies are being merged into unified network intrusion prevention system (NIPS)
appliances.

        Note
        You might be thinking that tons of complex and subtle protocol
        parsing and modeling code are precisely the kind of things you don’t
        want in a critical core security device. Rest assured that this is
        merely because you’re a victim of the obsolete perimeter-centric
        vulnerability paradigm. As Obi-Wan Kenobi said, “These are not the
        droids you are looking for.”

    This chapter focuses on the security review of IP firewall code, whether you
encounter it in a Windows desktop application or the code for a Cisco PIX. Luckily,
there are only a handful of basic design and implementation security issues every
TCP/IP-cognizant firewall must tackle, regardless of its form factor. You can’t
become a firewall expert in just one chapter, but you can explore the problem
domain enough that you’ll have a good handle on how to approach a review.
    You start by examining the basic design and technology behind firewalls, and
then focus on specific design and implementation vulnerabilities and problem areas
in core networking protocols. Note that this discussion draws heavily on the
material on IP, TCP, and UDP in Chapter 14, “Network Protocols.”

Overview of Firewalls
The basic purpose of a firewall is to serve as a chokepoint between two sets of
networked computers. Network administrators can define a firewall security policy
that’s enforced on all traffic trying to pass through that chokepoint. This security
policy is typically composed of a set of rules specifying which traffic is allowed and
which traffic is forbidden. For example, a network administrator might have a
policy such as the following:
      1. Host 1.2.3.4 can talk to 5.5.5.5.
      2. The user Jim on the host 1.2.3.10 can talk to 5.5.5.6.
      3. Any host can connect to host 5.5.5.4 over TCP port 80.
      4. Hosts on the 5.5.5.0/24 network can talk to any host.
      5. UDP packets from host 1.2.3.15 source port 53 can go to host 5.5.5.5 port 53.
      6. All other traffic is denied.
    The firewall is responsible for enforcing that policy on traffic traversing it.
Firewalls can be built on different core technologies, just as they can be integrated
into computer networks in different ways. For example, a firewall can be a chunk
of code in an Ethernet card, a chunk of code in a kernel module or a device driver

                                              Overview of Firewalls

on a desktop machine, a device that bridges Ethernet segments on a network, a
device that routes between multiple IP subnets, or a multihomed device that
connects networks with application proxies.

Proxy Versus Packet Filters
There are two basic technical approaches to firewall design, although the line between
them has blurred over the years. A packet-filtering firewall operates on network data
at a fairly low level, similar to how an IP router approaches network data. Each inbound
IP packet is taken off the network and processed by the firewall, which uses a variety of
algorithms to handle it and determine whether it’s valid, invalid, or needs to be set
aside for future processing. Packets permitted by the firewall can be routed to another
interface or handed off to the IP stack of the firewall machine’s OS (see Figure 15-1).

                                               Packet Filter

      Internet                                                                 Internal Network
                                                    Ethernet

Figure 15-1      Packet-filtering data flow

    A proxy firewall uses the full TCP/IP stack of the firewall machine as part of the
processing chain. A TCP connection is actually made from a client to the firewall
host, and a user land application program is responsible for accepting that connec-
tion, validating it against the security policy, and making an outgoing connection to
the end host. This program then sits in a loop and relays data back and forth
between the two connections, potentially validating or modifying attributes of that
data as it goes (see Figure 15-2).

                                      Proxy Application

                                              TCP

                                               IP

     Internet                               Ethernet                  Internal Network

Figure 15-2      Proxy firewall data flow

 Straw Men
 In the early days of firewalls, packet filtering and proxies were two fundamen-
 tally different approaches, and their respective practitioners often engaged in
 extended debate over which technique was best. Although this distinction is
 almost a false dichotomy these days, the trade-offs between the two approaches
 are summarized here.
 Proxy technology is generally considered more secure because it functions at the
 application layer as opposed to functioning more like a bridge or router. Proxy
 technology is singularly well positioned to do analysis, normalization, and intru-
 sion detection on data as it traverses the firewall because it accesses data through
 a socket-style interface, a normalizing focal point that’s easy to work with. Unfor-
 tunately, the application proxies available commercially never really capitalized on
 this architectural advantage by doing any extensive protocol-level analysis.
 Packet filters were considered less secure architecturally because their lower-level
 approach is theoretically prone to vulnerabilities stemming from a lack of contex-
 tual knowledge about network data. However, packet-filtering technology can
 scale extremely well and be installed in nonobtrusive ways because of its compar-
 ative transparency. Both advantages have been realized over time in the market.
 If you measure victory in terms of commercial success, packet-filtering firewalls
 won. However, the distinction between the two has grown more academic
 because both product lines evolved to meet each other in the middle.
 The market arguably chose the packet-filtering approach, so proxy-based firewalls
 haven’t had the same resources put into their evolution. Proxy firewalls adopted
 several features of packet-based firewalls, however. Specifically, proxy firewalls,
 such as NAI’s Gauntlet, can hand a connection over to a packet-filtering-style layer
 3 packet-routing mechanism in the kernel. They can also use kernel extensions to
 make the proxy transparent so that it intercepts connections as they traverse the
 machine, silently brings them up through the network stack, and proxies them.
 In a complementary fashion, packet-filtering firewalls have adopted technologies
 typically associated with proxy-based firewalls. From the outset, many
 packet-filtering firewalls incorporated application proxies for a few key proto-
 cols. Many commercial enterprise firewalls now feature layer 7 inspection, also
 known as “deep-inspection” or “application intelligence.” To do this kind of
 inspection of application layer data, they have to implement enough of a TCP
 stack in the firewall kernel to be able to have a reasonable picture of the TCP
 stream’s contents. In effect, they are simulating the parts of the host machine
 kernel that proxy-based firewalls made implicit use of; however, they probably
 take quite a few shortcuts in doing so (for better or worse).

                                    Overview of Firewalls

Attack Surface
Firewall software has been evolving for more than a decade, and modern firewall
systems can be large and complex distributed networked applications. As firewalls
often represent the front line of an enterprise perimeter, ascertaining the attack
surface of the firewall solution is important. Any code that handles data coming
from potentially untrusted sources is worth review, and on a firewall solution, this
code can range from normal networked socket-based applications to high-speed
kernel-level networking code.
    A firewall solution for a local host machine might not have a large exposed
attack surface—perhaps just the code that handles network packets and evaluates
them against the rule base. An enterprise solution, however, likely exposes services
to external users and the outside world, including virtual private network (VPN)
protocols, authentication servers, networking and encapsulation protocol services,
and internal management interfaces.
    Some notable vulnerabilities have been found in the straightforward
application-layer services that are part of enterprise firewall solutions. For example, the
proxy-based firewall Gauntlet suffered from buffer overflows in at least two exposed
services. Mark Dowd (one of this book’s authors), along with Neel Mehta of the ISS
X-Force, discovered multiple preauthentication vulnerabilities in Firewall-1’s VPN func-
tionality, and Thomas Lopatic, a world-class researcher, found multiple weaknesses in
Firewall-1’s intramodule authentication algorithms (www.monkey.org/~dugsong/
talks/blackhat.pdf). Chances are quite good that more vulnerabilities are waiting to be
discovered in the exposed auxiliary services of commercial firewall solutions.

Proxy Firewalls
Proxy firewalls tend to be composed of fairly straightforward networking code. You
likely already have most of the skills you need to audit proxies, as they are simpler
than a corresponding server or client for a protocol.
    There’s a bit of overlap, in that packet-filtering firewalls commonly include
proxies for some application protocols, such as FTP. Likewise, many proxy-based
firewalls include lower-level components that have some of the desirable properties
of packet-filtering firewalls, such as transparent bidirectional interception of traffic
or fast path routing of approved connections.
    When auditing proxy firewalls you want to focus on the same kinds of issues
you would encounter when auditing network servers. Specifically, numeric issues,
buffer overflows, format strings, and similar implementation-level bugs are likely to
show up in parsers for complex network protocols. In addition, you should focus on
making sure the firewall makes a clear distinction between internal and external
users or tracks authorized users. Any mechanism by which an external user can
leverage a proxy to reach the internal network is obviously a major risk exposure.

     Gauntlet was perhaps the best known proxy-based firewall for enterprise customers.
It had a few security vulnerabilities in the past, which were straightforward implemen-
tation errors in the exposed proxies. One notable issue was a buffer overflow reported
in the smapd/CSMAP daemon, discovered by Jim Stickley of Garrison Technologies
(archived at www.securityfocus.com/bid/3290). Another buffer overflow was disclosed
in Gauntlet in the CyberPatrol add-on software around the same time (archived at
www.securityfocus.com/bid/1234).
     Another example of a proxy firewall vulnerability is an old problem with the
Wingate product. This software was a simple system for sharing a network
connection among multiple computers on a home LAN. It used to have a TELNET
proxy that was exposed to the outside world in the default configuration. Through
this proxy, anonymous attackers could use Wingate machines to bounce their TCP
connections and obscure their true source IP address.

Packet-Filtering Firewalls
Stateless Versus Stateful Design
There are two basic designs for packet-filtering firewalls. The most straightforward
design is a stateless packet filter, which doesn’t keep track of the connections and
network data it acts on. A stateless firewall looks at each packet in isolation and
makes a policy decision based solely on data in that packet. Stateless firewalls can be
configured to provide a reasonable level of security, and they are fairly simple to
implement. Stateless firewalls are often found in routers and simple home networking
devices as well as older software firewalls, such as ipchains.
    Stateful packet filters, on the other hand, keep track of connections and other
information about the network data they process. A stateful firewall typically has one
or more data structures known as state tables, in which it records information about
the network connections it’s monitoring. These firewalls can generally provide a
tighter level of security on a network, although they are more complex in design and
implementation. You find stateful packet filters in many open-source firewall solu-
tions, and they form the basic technology behind many enterprise firewall solutions.

Stateless Firewalls
Stateless firewalls, although straightforward in design, have some fundamental
problems that surface when you use them on real-world networks.

TCP
Stateless firewalls don’t maintain any state information about TCP connections, so
they must use a simple set of rules to filter TCP packets. In general, stateless

firewalls look for packets containing connection initiation requests—packets with
the SYN flag set. In many cases, they apply network policy rules to those SYN pack-
ets and more or less let most other TCP packets go by without blocking them. This
method actually works out well enough in many cases, but it can have some major
security implications.
    Consider a sample configuration of a stateless firewall using the older Linux
ipchains firewall. Say you want to allow yourself to connect out to anywhere but not
allow anyone to connect in to any of your services. The following configuration
should do the trick:
ipchains -A input -p TCP ! -y -j ACCEPT
ipchains -P input DENY

     The first line tells the firewall to allow all inbound TCP packets that don’t have
the SYN flag set (indicated by ! -y). The second line tells the firewall to simply drop
everything else that’s inbound. The code that determines whether the packet passes
the –y test is quite simple, and it’s based on the contents of the tcpsyn variable. The
following code sets the value of tcpsyn based on the packet’s TCP header:
     /* Connection initilisation can only
      * be made when the syn bit is set and
      * neither of the ack or reset is
      * set. */
     if(tcp->syn && !(tcp->ack || tcp->rst))
           tcpsyn=1;

    If the tcpsyn variable is set to 1, the packet passes the -y test and the firewall
treats the packet as a connection initiation packet. Therefore, any packet with the
SYN flag set and the ACK and RST flags cleared is considered a connection packet.

Scanning
There are several techniques for gathering information from a host by sending TCP
packets of varying degrees of sanity. One technique of note is FIN scanning, which
is a method for port scanning documented by Uriel Maimon in Phrack 49, Article 15.
For certain IP stacks, if you send a FIN packet to a closed port, the IP stack sends
back an RST packet. If you send a FIN packet to an open port, the IP stack doesn’t
send anything back. Therefore, you can use FIN packets to scan a machine’s ports
to determine which ones are open and which are closed.
     Because FIN and RST packets are more or less required for TCP’s normal
operation, a stateless firewall often has to let them through. If the firewall doesn’t
perform any outbound filtering, it can be a little more restrictive, but generally it
passes these packets through to allow TCP responses. Therefore, FIN port-scanning

commonly works through a stateless packet filter. Attackers can ascertain even
more information about hosts behind a network, such as the OS type and version,
by sending specially crafted packets.

Ambiguity with TCP SYNs
Stateless firewalls need to enforce rules on TCP connection initiation. This enforc-
ing is normally done via a handshake involving a TCP packet with the SYN flag set,
which is fairly simple to intercept and process. However, certain IP stacks accept
different permutations of the SYN flag when setting up TCP connections, and these
permutations might lead to exposures in stateless packet filters.
      Many TCP/IP stacks initiate a connection if a packet with SYN and FIN set is
sent instead of a straightforward SYN packet. If a stateless packet filter doesn’t
interpret this packet as a connection initiation, it could give attackers an easy way to
bypass the firewall. They can simply modify their traffic to send SYN-FIN instead of
SYN, and the stateless firewall might pass it along unfiltered.
      Paul Starzetz posted an excellent write-up of this problem to the Bugtraq mailing
list (archived at http://archives.neohapsis.com/archives/bugtraq/2002-10/0266.html),
which is summarized briefly in the following list:
      ■ Linux—Accepts any combination of TCP flags when SYN is set and ACK is clear.

      ■ Solaris—SYN-FIN is accepted as equivalent to SYN.

      ■ FreeBSD—Accepts combinations of SYN being set and RST and ACK being
       cleared.
      ■ Windows—Accepts combinations of SYN being set and RST and ACK being
       cleared.
    This vulnerability is rumored to have affected multiple firewalls over the years,
including Cisco IOS and even early versions of Firewall-1. With this in mind, take
another look at the ipchains code for recognizing connection initiation packets:
      /* Connection initilisation can only
       * be made when the syn bit is set and
       * neither of the ack or reset is
       * set. */
      if(tcp->syn && !(tcp->ack || tcp->rst))
           tcpsyn=1;

    You can see that a packet with SYN-FIN set would make it through the firewall.
You can also see that, according to Startez’s analysis, a SYN-FIN packet counts as a
connection initiation packet for Linux hosts, which means someone could get
through the ipchains firewall!

UDP
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) connections are a problem for stateless firewalls. In
TCP, a particular packet represents a connection initiation: the SYN packet. In UDP,
however, there’s no such packet. This issue usually shows up when administrators
try to punch the DNS protocol through the firewall.
     Say you want to make a rule allowing a client computer on an internal network
to talk to a DNS server outside the firewall. You would tell the firewall to allow UDP
packets from that host, with source ports 1024 to 65535 destined to destination host
1.2.3.4 on destination port 53. This rule works fine, but what happens when the
DNS server responds? To allow the response, you need a rule to allow UDP packets
from source port 53 to destination ports 1024 to 65535.
     The problem with allowing those UDP packets is that attackers could talk to
any UDP service on a port between 1024 and 65535, as long as they use a source
port of 53. There are some interesting UDP daemons on those high ports for most
operating systems, with RPC functionality usually being the easiest target. This risk
can be mitigated by host configuration and network design, but it’s a fundamental
limitation in stateless packet filtering technology. Figure 15-3 summarizes a sample
attack of this nature.

                           LAN 1                                     LAN 2

      User                                        Firewall                                  DNS

Allow User:1024-65535 –> DNS:53                    DNS:53 –> User:32775
Allow DNS:53 –> User:1024-65535                        RPC Exploit           Attacker
Figure 15-3   UDP source port 53 attack for stateless firewalls

 Understanding FTP
 File Transfer Protocol (FTP) is a ubiquitous Internet protocol for transferring files
 between machines. It’s an old protocol with some strange characteristics that make it
 particularly troublesome to firewalls. These idiosyncrasies have led to several security
 exposures, but before you dig into them, take a brief look at how FTP works.
 FTP is a fairly straightforward line-based protocol that works over TCP. An FTP
 client makes a connection to port 21 of the FTP server, and this connection is
 known as the control connection. The user issues commands over this TCP con-
 nection, which include tasks such as logging in, listing files, and downloading
                                                                                        continues...

 Understanding FTP Continued
 and uploading files. Things get a little tricky when data is transferred over FTP,
 however. The actual files and directory listings aren’t sent over the control con-
 nection. Instead, they are sent over a separate, new TCP connection known as the
 data connection. There are two main mechanisms for establishing this data
 connection: active FTP and passive FTP.
 In active FTP, the client tells the server where to connect to transfer the data by
 using the PORT command. To see how it works, walk through a simple FTP trans-
 action. Assume the client’s IP address is 1.2.3.4. The code has been formatted for
 readability, with client traffic bolded to differentiate it from the server’s data.
 Also, assume that each line ends in a carriage return/line feed (CLRF).
 220 Welcome to the FTP server!
 USER ftp
 331 Guest login ok, send ident as password.
 PASS bob@neohapsis.com
 230 Guest login ok, access restrictions apply.

 Up to this point, all communication has been over the control connection. Now
 the client wants to retrieve a file via active FTP. The first step is to specify where
 the server should connect:
 PORT 1,2,3,4,128,10
 200 PORT command successful. Consider using PASV.

 This response tells the server that for the next data connection, it should connect
 to the client IP 1.2.3.4 on port 32778 (32778 is 128 * 256 + 10). Now the client
 initiates the transfer:
 RETR file.txt
 150 Opening BINARY mode data connection for file.txt (42 bytes).

 The server then makes a TCP connection to the address and port it was given in
 the PORT command. This TCP connection has a special source port of 20. It
 sends the file’s contents over this connection and then closes it. After the file
 transfer is completed, the server sends a transfer complete message over the
 control channel:
 226 Transfer complete.
 You can see that active FTP requires the server to be able to connect back to the
 client, which can be a problem in networks that use firewalls or network address
 translation (NAT). The passive model is a little easier to firewall, which is why it’s
 usually enabled.

 Now take a look at how the user would transfer a file using passive FTP. Instead
 of sending a PORT command, the client issues a PASV command. The server
 then tells the client where to connect for the data connection:
 PASV
 227 Entering Passive Mode (50,100,200,80,220,120)
 The server is telling the client where to connect to perform the next data transfer.
 The server’s IP address is 50.100.200.80, and the port that accepts the data con-
 nection is 56440 (220 * 256 + 120). The client then makes the TCP connection
 before sending this command on the control channel:
 RETR file.txt
 150 Opening ASCII mode data connection for directory listing.
 The server sends the file over the data connection, and then sends the following
 message over the control channel when it’s finished:
 226 Transfer complete.
 And there you have the nuts and bolts of FTP!

FTP
As you learned in the sidebar, “Understanding FTP,” FTP presents a problem for most
firewalls. This section focuses on an aspect of FTP that leads to a problem in stateless
firewalls. Say you want to let your users use FTP to connect to machines on the Inter-
net. You can do this easily with a stateless firewall by allowing outbound port 21 TCP
connections. However, if users are using active FTP, they can initiate data transfers by
telling the FTP server to connect to a port on their computer (via the PORT command).
Then you see a TCP connection coming from source port 20 to your client host on a
high port. A stateless firewall generally isn’t going to allow arbitrary connections from
the outside to the inside, which breaks active FTP (not passive FTP). It’s possible to
work around this problem by allowing connections with source port 20. However,
allowing these connections causes a major security flaw because TCP connections with
a source port of 20 are allowed through the firewall. Figure 15-4 demonstrates how this
issue can be exploited to attack an XServer running on destination port 6000.

                        LAN 1                                     LAN 2

      User                                  Firewall                            DNS

Allow User:1024-65535 –> LAN 2:21         ATTACKER: 20 –> User: 6000
Allow LAN 2:20 –> User:1024-65535              XServer Exploit       Attacker
Figure 15-4   TCP source port 20 attack for stateless firewalls

Fragmentation
A stateless firewall can’t keep track of fragments, so it has to deny them categori-
cally or apply a simple set of rules to process them as they come in. Typically, these
firewalls approach this by allowing any fragment that doesn’t have upper-layer
header information to go through. IP fragmentation was covered in Chapter 14,
“Network Protocols,” but you should look out for the following points:
      ■ Fragments with low IP offsets (1 or 2) should be dropped, as they contain
       pieces of information, such as TCP flags, that the firewall needs to examine.
      ■ Fragments with 0-offset should contain enough information to have a full
        protocol header; otherwise, they should be dropped. Again, the firewall needs to
        see the full header at once to make a decision, and a short packet can’t be
        evaluated safely.
      ■ Fragments with high offsets can generally be permitted to pass.

    A few classic attacks against packet-filtering firewalls, described in the following
sections, are based on overlapped fragments. New implementations of packet filters
are often vulnerable to these classic attacks, so inspect them carefully.

Are Fragmented Packets Handled?
The most straightforward attack is to simply fragment a packet so that the upper-
layer (TCP or UDP) protocol header is split across multiple packets. Granted, only a
firewall from the 1980s would be fooled by this method, but it sets the stage for
more topical attacks. Figure 15-5 shows what the malicious packets would look like.
A vulnerable firewall would allow both fragments through but be unable to check
them because both are incomplete.

          IP offset: 0                      IP offset: 8             IP offset: 16
           MF is set                         MF is set                MF is clear
         Total length: 8                   Total length: 8          Total length: 50

 First 8 bytes of TCP header          Second 8 bytes of TCP    Last 4 bytes of TCP header
                                             header                   and TCP data

Figure 15-5   Straightforward fragment attack

How Are Offset 1 Fragments Handled?
This classic fragmentation attack involves rewriting TCP flags against a stateless
packet filter. Figure 15-6 shows how this attack would unfold. It works by first send-
ing a fragment that the firewall accepts, such as a lone FIN or RST TCP packet, to an
otherwise filtered port. The second fragment has an offset of 1 and is passed by the

firewall. Depending on the host’s reassembly algorithm, the target machine actually
honors the new data from the second fragment and changes the flags in the TCP
header from FIN to SYN. In this way, the attacker has initiated a connection to an
otherwise filtered port.

                              IP offset: 0                              IP offset: 24
                               MF is set                                 MF is clear
                            Total length: 24                           Total length: 8

       TCP header for RST packet to port 139 on the target host      End of TCP packet

                           IP offset: 8
                            MF is set
                          Total length: 8

                          Rewrite flags:
                        SYN instead of RST

Figure 15-6   TCP flags rewrite fragment attack

How Are Multiple 0-Offset Fragments Handled?
Thomas Lopatic and John McDonald (one of this book’s authors) came up with a similar
fragmentation attack that worked against ipchains and Cisco IOS 11 routers, to a limited
extent (archived at http://archives.neohapsis.com/archives/bugtraq/1999-q3/
0236.html). This technique involves sending multiple 0-offset fragments. Essentially, an
IP fragment with a 0-offset is sent to a firewall; the fragment contains a TCP or UDP
header that matches an allow rule in the firewall’s rule set. This fragment is followed by
another 0-offset fragment that’s much smaller, and it rewrites a few bytes of the TCP or
UDP port fields. When these fragments are reassembled on the other side, a port that
shouldn’t be accessible can be reached. Figure 15-7 shows how this attack works. This
advisory eventually spawned the creation of RFC 3128, describing the attack.

                              IP offset: 0                              IP offset: 24
                               MF is set                                 MF is clear
                            Total length: 24                           Total length: 8

        TCP header for SYN packet to port 80 on the target host      End of TCP packet

       IP offset: 0
        MF is set
      Total length: 4

      Rewrite Ports:
     22 instead of 80

Figure 15-7   TCP ports rewrite fragment attack

    The following is an excerpt of code from an old version of the ipchains stateless
firewall. Review it with the points about fragments in mind:
      offset = ntohs(ip->frag_off) & IP_OFFSET;

      /*
       *        Don’t allow a fragment of TCP 8 bytes in. Nobody
       *        normal causes this. Its a cracker trying to break
       *        in by doing a flag overwrite to pass the direction
       *        checks.
       */

      if (offset == 1 && ip->protocol == IPPROTO_TCP)             {
            if (!testing && net_ratelimit()) {
                 printk(“Suspect TCP fragment.\n”);
                 dump_packet(ip,rif,NULL,NULL,0,0);
            }
            return FW_BLOCK;
      }

     First, you can see that the firewall blocks IP fragments with an offset of 1 for
TCP data. This is a good thing, and it prevents the TCP flags rewriting attack.
     Now look at the following block of code. You can see that if the firewall is
looking at the first fragment (an IP offset of 0), it tries to determine how much data
it needs to see to make a decision about the packet. For TCP, it wants to see at least
16 bytes of TCP data.
      /* If we can’t investigate ports, treat as fragment.
       * It’s a trucated whole packet, or a truncated first
       * fragment, or a TCP first fragment of length 8-15,
       * in which case the above rule stops reassembly.
       */
      if (offset == 0) {
            unsigned int size_req;
            switch (ip->protocol) {
            case IPPROTO_TCP:
                 /* Don’t care about things past flags word */

                                  Simple Stateful Firewalls

              size_req = 16;
              break;

          case IPPROTO_UDP:
          case IPPROTO_ICMP:
              size_req = 8;
              break;

          default:
              size_req = 0;
          }
          offset = (ntohs(ip->tot_len) < (ip->ihl<<2)+size_req);
      }

     If offset is 0, indicating it’s a header fragment, the firewall proceeds to do a
minimum size check on the packet. If there’s enough data for a complete protocol
header, offset is set to 0. If there isn’t enough data, offset is set to 1. This means if
you send a fragment with a 0-offset and a super-short length, it’s treated as a non-
first fragment and passed through the firewall!

Simple Stateful Firewalls
Stateful firewalls maintain data structures in memory that are used to track connec-
tions. This data structure is usually known as the state table. Multiple state tables
could be used to track different types of connections, or all state data might be
stored in a single table.
    When a stateful firewall receives a packet, it first checks the state table to see
whether that packet belongs to an existing connection. If it does, the packet is
accepted and passed along to its destination. Otherwise, the packet is compared
against the rule base. If the rule base specifies that the packet is allowed, the packet
might end up creating a new entry in the state table.

TCP
Stateful firewalls can tackle TCP connections with more precision than their state-
less brethren. For example, if a stateful firewall has a basic rule similar to “Allow
TCP connections to port 80 on the Web server,” it allows only one type of TCP
packet through to the Web server: a SYN packet. After the firewall receives this

SYN packet, an entry is made in the state table. Then the appropriate SYN-ACK
packet is allowed in the other direction, and subsequent valid ACK, PUSH, FIN, and
RST packets are allowed through. Everything else is dropped. This method solves
the issue of unnecessary packets getting through the firewall, which was the prop-
erty of stateless firewalls that allowed FIN scanning to work. Stateful firewalls still
need to be careful about odd connection initiation packets, however, such as
SYN-FIN and SYN-RST.
     Some firewalls create state entries without seeing a connection initiation; if they
see a data packet matching the rule set, they treat the packet as if it belongs to a
connection that was started before the firewall was last booted, and they permit it.
It’s important to make sure SYN packets can’t be matched with an existing connec-
tion in this fashion, however. This behavior can also expose the firewall to spoofing
attacks with TCP, as an attacker doesn’t have to get past a three-way handshake to
get data parsed by the firewall.
     Attackers can attempt to disable firewalls by attacking the state table via brute
force. If they can cause state table entries to be added from outside the network, they
can often fill up the state table and cause failures to occur. Lance Spitzer discovered a
way to do this to Checkpoint FW-1 and published an interesting analysis of the
problem, available at www.spitzer.net/fwtable.html.

UDP
UDP connections are a little easier to handle, as entries can be placed in the state
table to specifically allow responses. One common shortcut firewalls take, however,
is to allow responses from any UDP source port. So if a firewall sees a UDP packet
go from host 1.2.3.4 on source port 53 to host 2.3.4.5 on destination port 53, and the
rule base allows that packet, an entry is added in the state table. This entry, how-
ever, might allow a UDP packet with any source port from 2.3.4.5 to 1.2.3.4 and
destination port 53. Problems with allowing this UDP packet are discussed in
“Spoofing Attacks” later in this chapter.

Directionality
It’s important to review a stateful firewall’s notion of directionality. A firewall that
doesn’t correctly check the “direction” of a TCP connection can lead to security
issues. For example, say an attacker makes a connection from source port 21 to a
Web server on port 80. If the firewall can be tricked into interpreting the Web
server’s response as data in an FTP control connection, it’s probable that bad things
can be done to that firewall. One interesting nuance of TCP is the simultaneous
connection, in which two SYN packets are sent in an interleaved fashion.

                                 Simple Stateful Firewalls

Fragmentation
Stateful firewalls can track fragmentation more tightly than stateless firewalls can.
One approach some firewalls take is to set up a fragment state entry for a fragment
after they see a protocol header for that datagram. Subsequent fragments match
the state table and are permitted to pass through the firewall. Another approach is
virtual reassembly, which CheckPoint uses. With this approach, the firewall stores
every fragment, and after all fragments have arrived and are verified to be safe, the
collection of fragments is forwarded on to the end host.
    Thomas Lopatic found a subtle vulnerability in the state-handling code for IP
Filter’s fragmentation state table. When IP Filter identified a fragmented TCP
header, it analyzed the header, and then cached a decision in a fragment state
table. Any subsequent fragments matching that cached decision were passed
through the firewall. Lopatic observed that after a decision was cached, an
attacker could resend a fragmented TCP header, with different port information,
and it would pass through the firewall! This way, an attacker could talk to TCP
services that IP Filter should have blocked.
    To top it off, Lopatic discovered that this attack could be performed even if
fragments were explicitly blocked in the rule set. If an attacker first sent a normal
TCP packet that matched the rule base, an entry in the normal state table was
created. Subsequent fragmented packets would match that entry in the state table,
and the rule base would never even be consulted. His advisory is available at
http://cert. uni-stuttgart.de/archive/bugtraq/2001/04/msg00121.html.

Fooling Virtual Reassembly
There’s a technique that’s useful when brainstorming attacks against stateful fire-
wall fragmentation reassembly. This technique was originally devised by Thomas
Lopatic, John McDonald, and Dug Song, and Lopatic was the first to apply it against
Firewall-1. Mark Dowd was later able to apply it in another attack against a stateful
firewall.
    Say you’ve found a nuance in an end host IP stack that you want to be able to
trigger, but you need to send overlapping fragments through a modern firewall. It’s
likely this firewall doesn’t allow overlapping fragments as part of its security policy,
so you need to use a few tricks.
    What you do is send two (or more) sets of fragments containing similar charac-
teristics and have both been accepted by the firewall or IDS. However, you construct
them so that the end host discards some packets from each set, and multiple frag-
ment chains merge to become one. This method can be used to stage an attack using
an end-target BSD IP stack by leveraging the type of service (TOS) field; you can
send two chains of fragments that both look legal enough, but you can change the
value of the TOS byte in packets you want grouped together. Figure 15-8 shows an
example of this exploitation scenario.

      Packet A                                   Packet D
       (TOS = 0)                                  (TOS = 2)

      Packet B                                   Packet E
       (TOS = 1)                                  (TOS = 0)

      Packet C                                   Packet F
       (TOS = 0)                                  (TOS = 3)

      Fragment                                   Fragment
       Chain 1             Reassembled            Chain 2
                            Fragment

                             Packet A
                                            Packets A, E, and
                                            C all have a TOS
                                            byte value of 0,
                             Packet E       whereas packets
                                            B, D, and F do not,
                                            and so are discarded.

                             Packet C

Figure 15-8        Fragmentation attack targeted at BSD IP stack by using the TOS byte

    In this example, you can conveniently choose for the end host to eliminate
packets B, D, and F, creating a single datagram composed of packets A, E, and C.
When attempting to bypass a device performing virtual reassembly, attacks such
as this one can also be performed if the device fails to validate other elements of
the IP header properly. If the device fails to do so, basic header validation of IP
packets from the end host might allow discarding selected fragments to perform
attacks similar to those in the previous example. The following sections describe a
few things that a device performing virtual defragmentation might neglect to
check thoroughly.

IP TTL Field
The time-to-live (TTL) field is used to determine a packet’s lifetime on the internet by
specifying the maximum number of hops the packet should traverse before being dis-
carded. Say you send two sets of fragment queues, as in the previous example, but the
fragments you want to eliminate have the TTL value of 1 or 0 when they reach the fire-
wall. (You need to determine how many hops away the firewall is, but this information

                                Stateful Inspection Firewalls

could be brute-forced or discovered in another way.) If the device performing virtual
reassembly doesn’t notice that some packets are about to expire, it might be possible to
mount an attack in which some fragments are due to expire before (or as) they reach
the destination and, therefore, are never received by the end host.
IP Options
You might be able to specify certain illegal options that cause the end host to
discard certain fragments. Options with illegal lengths and the like probably can’t
be routed to the end host, but you might be able to take advantage of specific IP
options that aren’t processed by intermediate routing hops—maybe timestamps
with invalid pointers or something similar. Additionally, record route and time-
stamp options might be susceptible to overflow, and if you work it out so that the
option overflows just as it reaches the destination host, you might be able to have
the fragments discarded. Thomas Lopatic described using this method to exploit a
hole in CheckPoint Firewall-1’s virtual reassembly layer, which is described in detail
at http://seclists.org/lists/bugtraq/2000/Dec/0306.html.
Zero-Length Fragments
A zero-length fragment is a packet that doesn’t contain any data—it’s just an IP
header. How can this fragment be useful in launching attacks? Suppose a firewall is
performing virtual reassembly and allows only complete fragment queues through.
If the firewall honors it, you can send a zero-length final fragment with the MF bit
cleared to complete a set of fragments. Most OS stacks silently discard zero-length
fragments without processing them, so the end host still has an incomplete queue.
Then you can send another set of fragments with the same IP ID to add more data
onto (or overwrite) the incomplete queue at the end host.

Stateful Inspection Firewalls
Stateful inspection is a term CheckPoint coined to describe Firewall-1, but it has
been assimilated into the general language as a way of describing a certain class of
firewalls. It’s the process of looking inside actual protocol data to enhance the fire-
wall’s functionality. It refers to peeking into layer 4, such as TCP and UDP data, and
pulling out or modifying key snippets of application-layer data.
    Why is stateful inspection necessary? Certain protocols are somewhat unwieldy
to a firewall, particularly those that transmit information such as IP addresses and
ports. For example, say you’re talking to an FTP server in a corporation’s demilita-
rized zone (DMZ). The exchange might look like this:
220 FTP server ready.
USER ftp
331 Guest login ok, send your e-mail address as password.

PASS jm@neohapsis.com
230 Welcome to jim’s FTP server
PASV
227 Entering Passive Mode (10,0,0,1,90,210)
RETR test.txt

     You’ve logged in to the FTP server and told it you want to make a passive mode
connection. The server responded and told you to connect to it on IP address
10.0.0.1 and port 23250 (remember, 90 * 256 + 210). The firewall needs to solve two
problems now. First, the IP address the FTP server gave you is an internal IP address
and can’t be reached from the Internet. Normally the firewall uses NAT so that the
FTP server can be reached through an external IP, but the actual data inside the
packet needs to be translated with NAT as well.
     Figure 15-9 shows what goes wrong with the FTP session. The client machine,
on the left, initiates an FTP connection, which the firewall permits. The FTP server
tells the client to connect to it at 10.0.0.1 and port 23250. When the client does this,
it ends up trying to connect to a machine that can’t be reached or the wrong
machine in its internal network.

                                                                          2. FTP connection is
                                                                          allowed.
                                                                          NAT 5.6.7.8 to 10.0.0.1
 1. Let’s download a file
 from 5.6.7.8                                                                                                    3. The client wants PASV.
                                                                                                                 Tell it 10.0.0.1: 23250
                                         TCP 5.6.7.8:21                           TCP 10.0.0.1:21

                            Computer                                                                FTP Server
                                                               Firewall                              10.0.0.1
 4. He said to connect to              TCP 10.0.0.1
 10.0.0.1 That’s odd!

Figure 15-9          Active FTP failure caused by NAT

    So the firewall needs to look inside the FTP control channel and use NAT on IP
addresses when appropriate. However, more processing still needs to occur for FTP
to work correctly. In Figure 15-10, the connection proceeds much the same as before.
    However, the firewall sees the directive to connect to the 10.0.0.1 address and
rewrites it in place with the 5.6.7.8 address. The client computer knows to connect to
the correct IP address. However, when the computer attempts this connection, you
encounter the next obstacle. The firewall most likely doesn’t allow the connection to
the high TCP port, as it’s a considerable security risk to allow these connections. To
handle this correctly, the firewall must watch within the FTP session for the PASV
response and temporarily open a hole in the firewall for the connection from the client.

                                                  Stateful Inspection Firewalls

                                                                        2. FTP connection is
                                                                        allowed.
                                                                        NAT 5.6.7.8 to 10.0.0.1
 1. Let’s download a file
 from 5.6.7.8                                                                                                      3. The client wants PASV.
                                         TCP 5.6.7.8:21
                                                                                                                   Tell it 10.0.0.1: 23250
                                                                                TCP 10.0.0.1:21

                                         TCP 5.6.8:23250

                              Computer                     Firewall                                   FTP Server
                                                                           4. Let’s NAT 10.0.0.1 to    10.0.0.1
                                                                           5.6.7.8
5. Let’s connect to 5.6.7.8

                                                6. Connection to port
                                                23250 is forbidden!

Figure 15-10           Active FTP failure caused by filtered data port

Layering Issues
It’s important to note that stateful inspection involves packet-oriented
firewalls looking inside UDP and TCP packets for application-layer data. These
firewalls aren’t doing full TCP/UDP processing, so there’s plenty of room for
mistakes because they “peek” at a layer they don’t quite understand.
     FTP is a great case study for this kind of problem. Look at a class of problems
related to stateful inspection of FTP. They were discovered by Thomas Lopatic and
John McDonald and independently by Mikael Olsson of EnterNet Sweden AB.
     What would a typical stateful inspection firewall do to detect a PASV command? It
looks in each TCP segment traversing the firewall for a packet containing this string:
227 Entering Passive Mode (x,x,x,x,y,y)

    After the firewall sees that string, it pulls out the IP address and port, translates
it with NAT, rewrites it if necessary, checks it, and then opens a temporary hole. So
you can see what this process looks like, review the following code from an old
version of iptables:
        iph = skb->nh.iph;
        th = (struct tcphdr *)&(((char *)iph)[iph->ihl*4]);
        data = (char *)&th[1];
        data_limit = skb->h.raw + skb->len;

        while (data < data_limit && *data != ‘ ‘)
                 ++data;
        while (data < data_limit && *data == ‘ ‘)
                 ++data;
        data += 22;
        if (data >= data_limit || *data != ‘(‘)
                 return 0;

      p1 = simple_strtoul(data+1, &data, 10);
      if (data >= data_limit || *data != ‘,’)
            return 0;
      p2 = simple_strtoul(data+1, &data, 10);
      if (data >= data_limit || *data != ‘,’)
            return 0;
      p3 = simple_strtoul(data+1, &data, 10);
      if (data >= data_limit || *data != ‘,’)
            return 0;
      p4 = simple_strtoul(data+1, &data, 10);
      if (data >= data_limit || *data != ‘,’)
            return 0;
      p5 = simple_strtoul(data+1, &data, 10);
      if (data >= data_limit || *data != ‘,’)
            return 0;
      p6 = simple_strtoul(data+1, &data, 10);
      if (data >= data_limit || *data != ‘)’)
            return 0;

      to = (p1<<24) | (p2<<16) | (p3<<8) | p4;
      port = (p5<<8) | p6;

      /*
       * Now update or create a masquerade entry for it
       */
    IP_MASQ_DEBUG(1-debug, “PASV response %lX:%X %X:%X detected\n”,
ntohl(ms->saddr), 0, to, port);

    You can see that iptables uses a straightforward method of peeking into a TCP
packet to look for the response string. Note that if the response is split across multi-
ple segments or parts of the string are dropped or retransmitted, this method
wouldn’t work at all.
    It’s worse than unreliable, however; it can actually be exploited. Consider what
the firewall would think of the following FTP session:
220 FTP server ready.
USER 227 Entering Passive Mode (10,0,0,1,90,210)
331 Password require for 227 Entering Passive Mode (10,0,0,1,90,210).

                                Stateful Inspection Firewalls

    If the 227 string is in the right place in a TCP packet, the firewall could easily be
fooled into opening ports for an attacker. There are a few ways to pull off this
attack. The most straightforward way is to change the maximum segment size
of the TCP connection to an unusually small value. This can be done easily by
setting the maximum transmission unit (MTU) on the interface to the small value. If
the attacker does things right, he can create the following flow of TCP traffic (each
line represents a different TCP packet):

Server packet 1: 220 FTP server ready.\r\n
Client packet 1: USER AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA227 Entering Passive
Client packet 2: Mode (10,0,0,1,90,210)\r\n
Server packet 3: 331 Password required for AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
Server packet 4: 227 Entering Passive Mode (10,0,0,1,90,210).\r\n

    You can see in this data flow that the TCP segment is split so that it looks
like the 227 response is a legitimate response from the server, instead of being part
of the error message. When the firewall sees this line in its own packet, it assumes
the server needs to open an incoming port for a data connection.
    Some firewalls sought to remedy this problem by ensuring that each packet
ended in a CRLF. The attack shown in the preceding code doesn’t work because
the 331 response packet doesn’t contain the requisite CRLF. One way around this is
to create a file with a filename of 227 ... remotely in a writeable directory. Then
you can enter STAT -1 in the control connection and get a directory listing, which
could conceivably have CRLFs in the right place.
    However, there’s a more universal technique if you can write some low-level
networking code. This technique a little more involved, but it can be implemented
using libdnet and libpcap in a few hours. Basically, you need to acknowledge only
part of the FTP server’s response so that its TCP stack times out and retransmits the
227 string in its own packet. This way, both packets end in a CRLF. The flow of data
would look like this:

220 FTP server ready.\r\n
USER 227 Entering Passive Mode (10,0,0,1,90,210)\r\n
331 Password require for 227 Entering Passive Mode
➥(10,0,0,1,90,210).\r\n

    The client would acknowledge the TCP data right up to the 227 string in the
server’s response. Then the client has to wait a little while for the server to time out
and retransmit the unacknowledged data. The server retransmits the data in a
packet that should trick the firewall into opening up a port:
227 Entering Passive Mode (10,0,0,1,90,210).\r\n

Spoofing Attacks
Spoofing attacks can be a powerful technique for circumventing firewalls, and they
haven’t been adequately covered in security literature. Spoofing refers to the
process of making a packet appear to come from a machine other than its actual
source. Typically, attackers create packets from scratch, specifying the source and
destination of their choosing, and place the packets out on the network to be
routed.
     You have already seen a variety of TCP spoofing attacks in Chapter 14. These
attacks seek to tamper with an existing connection or fabricate a new connection to
take advantage of trust relationships. Manipulating firewalls is in many ways
simpler than manipulating TCP connections. The mere presence of certain packets
on the network is often enough to get firewalls to update their internal state tables.
Furthermore, firewalls that do stateful inspection often analyze data in packets even
if those packets aren’t completely valid with respect to sequence numbers and
windows. The following sections describe some specific packets that can be useful
in spoofing attacks.
     If you’re reviewing firewall code, you need to be aware of how it implements
spoofing protection. Often, aspects of this protection are under the user’s opera-
tional control, but it’s important to make sure the protection is solid when it’s used
in the default or recommended fashion. Even small oversights can lead to security
vulnerabilities, and because there hasn’t been much published analysis of spoofing
attacks, most administrators don’t appreciate the importance of configuring spoof-
ing protection correctly.

Spoofing from a Distance
Spoofing attacks are at their most powerful when the attacker can do malicious
things to both the source and destination IP addresses. Modifying source addresses
is often possible, as strict egress filtering on the Internet is inconsistent at best.
Destination addresses, on the other hand, are used to route packets to their even-
tual destinations. Generally, if you want the packet to get to your victim, you can’t
muck with the destination IP. The “Spoofing Destinations to Create State” section
later in this chapter covers a few ways to work around this restriction to get some
malicious destination addresses into play. For now, however, assume the attacker
has to give a valid destination IP address.

Spoofing from an External Trusted Source
Firewalls make spoofing-related decisions based on which interface the packet
comes from. If a spoofed packet and a genuine packet come in over the same
network interface, the firewall can’t tell them apart.

                                           Spoofing Attacks

    Usually, this is a problem when the firewall is set up to trust specific hosts
on the Internet. Because all packets from the Internet come in over the same
interface, the firewall can’t tell where they came from originally. If an attacker
spoofs a packet with the source IP of the trusted host, the firewall assumes it came
from that host. The attacker doesn’t see the response to the packet because it’s
routed to the trusted host, but this may or may not matter.
    Figure 15-11 shows a vulnerable situation. The firewall has a rule set that allows
the trusted server at the colocation environment to talk to the file server. An
attacker could send packets that get delivered through the firewall to the file server
by spoofing them from the trusted server.

                           Internet                           DMZ

Attacker                                                            DNS Server
                                            Firewall

                            Colo                 Internal
                                                 Network

      Trusted Server                                                File Server
Figure 15-11   Spoofing from an external trusted source

Spoofing from an Internal Trusted Source
If spoofing protection is broken, an attacker might be able to spoof packets from a pro-
tected network. For example, in Figure 15-12, the file server is not accessible from the
Internet, but the DNS server on the DMZ can talk to it. An attacker could try spoofing
a packet from the DNS server to the file server. This packet comes in over the Internet
interface instead of the DMZ interface, which should cause the firewall to discard it.

                           Internet                           DMZ

 Attacker                                                           DNS Server
                                            Firewall

                                                 Internal
                    DNS:53 –> File:53            Network

                                                                    File Server
Figure 15-12   Spoofing from an internal trusted source

    However, if the firewall believes the packet came from the DNS server, the
attacker can take advantage of any rules that trust the DNS server or its network.
With this kind of attack, the attacker wouldn’t see the responses or be able to set up
TCP connections, so the ideal packets to send are UDP packets that perform some
nefarious action, perhaps involving a DNS server, a Simple Network Management
Protocol (SNMP) server, or the Remote Procedure Call (RPC) service.

Spoofing for a Response
You can use spoofing to try to get hosts to respond to addresses you couldn’t reach
otherwise. This technique is similar to the previous one; however, the goal is to have
the response to the spoofed packet perform a nefarious action. This technique can be
particularly interesting if a special source IP address is used.
    For example, say an attacker spoofs a UDP request from the IP address
255.255.255.255 to an accessible service in a DMZ. If the UDP service responds,
that response is broadcast to every host in the DMZ network. IP addresses 224.0.0.1
and 127.0.0.1 can be used to get a response to go to the local machine, as shown in
Figure 15-13.

                              Internet                                 DMZ

Attacker                                                                        DNS Server
                                                      Firewall
                1                                                                     2
                 127.0.0.1:1234 -> DNS:53                                    DNS:53 –> DNS:1234
Figure 15-13   Spoofing to elicit a response

Spoofing for a State Entry
You can also use spoofing to try to get special entries added to the firewall state
table for later abuse, as shown in Figure 15-14.

                           Internet                              DMZ

Attacker                                                                DNS Server
                                           Firewall

                    DNS:1024 –> File:21         Internal
                    “PORT 1,1,1,1,10,10”        Network

                                                                        File Server
Figure 15-14   Spoofing for state table manipulation

                                            Spoofing Attacks

     Say the firewall’s stateful inspection is loose, and it uses a lone ACK TCP segment
to create a state table entry for an ongoing TCP connection. This can be done to allow
for nondisruptive firewall reboots. What if an attacker spoofs a single TCP packet from
the DNS server to the file server on the intranet, and the packet contains this string:
PORT 1,1,1,1,10,10\r\n

    A stateful firewall with improper spoofing protection would see this packet as
the DNS server performing an FTP session to the file server. If the rule set allows
this communication, the firewall would parse the packet’s data and determine that
an FTP data connection is about to happen. The firewall would open a temporary
hole for the file server to connect back to the DNS server. The attacker could then
spoof a different packet going to a port that the firewall’s rule set normally blocks.

Spoofing Up Close
Spoofing attacks become far more potent when an attacker is sitting on the same
network as one of the firewall interfaces. For example, what if you hacked the DNS
server in the DMZ in Figure 15-15? From this vantage point, you can perform a
number of attacks that allow you to extend this compromise.

                           Internet                            DMZ

 Attacker                                                              DNS Server
                                             Firewall
                                                                     (Compromised)

                                                  Internal
                                                  Network

                                                                       File Server
Figure 15-15   Spoofing within the same segment

    First and foremost, you can now attack other hosts in the DMZ directly, with-
out going through a firewall. This attack is obviously useful, and it doesn’t require
any spoofing.

Spoofing from a Network Peer to Exploit the Rule Base
You’ve seen how firewalls make spoofing-related decisions based on which interface
the packet comes from. Because you’re now on the same network segment as other
protected machines, you can spoof packets from any of them with impunity. The fire-
wall sees packets coming in from the correct interface and believes they are genuine.

    The first way you can use this technique is to try to take advantage of any rules
trusting any hosts in the DMZ. Because you can effectively impersonate those hosts
by using networking tricks of the trade, you should be able to access any resources
the hosts can.
    For example, say a Web server in the DMZ talks to a database server in the
internal network. If you can’t compromise the Web server, you can still use the DNS
server to spoof packets from the Web server that reach the database server. You can
use various tricks to intercept the responses coming back as well.

Spoofing from a Network Peer to Create State
The other advantage you gain from being able to spoof packets from hosts on the
network is the ability to manipulate the firewall’s state table. You can create state
table entries that open external network access to other hosts on the network
segment. This method doesn’t give you access to anything you don’t already have
from the DNS server, but it could be useful in a real-world attack for running an
exploit from a particular host or opening a command shell through a firewall.
    For example, if you want to let a machine on the Internet talk to a Web server on
the DMZ, you could create a fake DNS or FTP connection for the firewall’s benefit.
The connection would appear to originate from the Web server, and the destination
would be your attack machine on the Internet. If the firewall’s rule base allows the
spoofed connection, the firewall creates state table entries you can use. Typically,
your attack machine can “respond” to the spoofed traffic in some way as the fire-
wall, and your response is actually legitimate network traffic.

Spoofing Destinations to Create State
You can send packets directly to the firewall interface via the local network’s data
link layer, and these packets can contain any destination IP address you want. If
the firewall is your default router, most of the packets you send will go through
the firewall anyway. If not, you can make it happen with a little creative use of the
routing table.
    Routing through the firewall allows for a class of attacks that share a similar
form. The goal is to spoof packets that match the rule base and cause entries to be
added to the firewall’s state tables. The actual attack comes later, and it uses those
state table entries to make it through the firewall.
    One effective way to accomplish this attack is to spoof packets from the target
machine to you. If they get past the spoofing filter and the rule set, the state table
entries that are created are likely to be useful. For example, what if you control the
DNS server and want to talk to UDP port 5678 on the file server, but the firewall is
blocking you? To circumvent the block, you need to get a state table entry in the fire-
wall that allows you to reach that port. What you do is spoof a packet from source
port 5678 on the file server to destination port 53 on the DNS server. The firewall

                                     Spoofing Attacks

has an opportunity to reject this packet if spoofing protection is functioning.
Assuming your packet gets past the spoofing check, the rule base simply sees a
DNS request from the file server to the DNS server, which is allowed. The firewall
creates a state table entry indicating a UDP “connection” from file server:5678 to
DNS server:53. Usually, this entry means the firewall expects and will allow a
response, which should come from the DNS server on source port 53 and go to the
file server on destination port 5678.
     This state table entry enables you to attack the file server directly from the DNS
server. You send the UDP attack packet from source port 53 to the vulnerable serv-
ice on the file server at port 5678. Obviously, port 5678 isn’t likely to be exploitable
in the real world, but you have a basic mechanism for opening any UDP port. In
practice, it’s usually even easier, as UDP state tracking, at least in Firewall-1, is
forgiving about a response packet’s destination port.
     For TCP, you can spoof TCP segments purporting to be part of an FTP con-
nection; these segments contain PORT and PASV strings. The firewall parses these
strings and opens temporary holes for TCP connections. This method is a more
limited form of the attack because of restrictions on data connection ports and
directionality, but attackers can usually work around these restrictions.

Special Addresses
You can perform variations of the previous destination-spoofing attack by using
special IP addresses in certain cases. For example, if you spoof a packet from the
source IP 224.0.0.1 to yourself, you create a state table entry that enables you send
packets to the multicast address. These packets, after they’re accepted by the fire-
wall, are actually passed to the firewall host’s IP stack. This attack pattern can be
used to attack services running on the firewall host.

Spooky Action at a Distance
In the analysis of spoofing packets from the compromised DMZ host, you saw that
having control of the destination IP address could be quite useful when staging a
spoofing attack. In that example, your location on the physical network allowed you
to send packets directly to the firewall interface by using the data link layer. You
could choose arbitrary destination IP addresses because you were hand-delivering
the packet directly to the firewall’s network card at a lower level.
    Normally, choosing arbitrary destination IP addresses isn’t possible when
you’re attacking a firewall over the Internet because those addresses are used for
routing. If you want the packet to reach a particular firewall, it must have a destina-
tion IP address that gets it routed through the firewall. For a firewall on the Inter-
net, the destination address is typically a small set of public addresses, none of
which allows you to do much when spoofing.

    To launch destination IP attacks, what you need is the ability to route arbitrary
packets through the firewall. Two possibilities are available to you: IP source rout-
ing and encapsulation via tunneling protocols.

Source Routing
Source routing was designed to do exactly what you need. You can specify the rout-
ing path by using a loose source route so that your packet ends up at the firewall
with any destination IP address you like. Unfortunately, source-routing attacks
rarely work in practice because usually they are blocked. Every security device that
sees a source-routed IP packet typically drops it, and routers are often configured to
drop them as well.

Encapsulation
If you can encapsulate packets in a tunneling protocol and have them decapsulated
by the firewall or a machine on the same network as the firewall, you’re in an
advantageous position, akin to being on the same physical network.
     Firewall-1 used to support decapsulation of a simple tunneling protocol, IP proto-
col 94. This decapsulation was always on, and it happened before any processing of
the rules or state table. Thomas Lopatic, Dug Song, and John McDonald were able to
leverage this decapsulation, in concert with spoofing attacks and common rule base
settings, to perform many of the aforementioned attacks against Firewall-1.
     This area could definitely use more research. There’s no shortage of tunneling
protocols that are likely to be implemented on firewalls: IPsec, various VPN protocols,
tunneling protocols related to IPv6, tunneling protocols for mobile users, and so forth.

Summary
This chapter has given you some exposure to the kinds of security issues that can
affect firewall systems. You’ve seen how attacks against firewalls typically involve
tricking the firewall into violating its rule-base or facilitating an attacker in
impersonating another system. These types of attacks are particularly significant
when you consider that firewalls are devices charged with protecting the borders of
almost every network.
    From an auditing perspective, firewalls provide a unique and very worthwhile
project. Reviewing firewall software can be particularly interesting, as it requires a
creative use of networking protocols, and there’s a heavy focus on design and logic
review. It’s also an area that’s currently lacking in extensive investigation, so it’s a
good place for a vulnerability researcher to cover new ground.

