
                                5. Basic values and data
     This section covers
       • Understanding the abstract state machine
       • Working with types and values
       • Initializing variables
       • Using named constants
       • Binary representations of types

We will now change our focus from “how things are to be done” (statements and ex-
pressions) to the things on which C programs operate: valuesC and dataC . A concrete
program at an instance in time has to represent values. Humans have a similar strategy:
nowadays, we use a decimal presentation to write numbers on paper using the Hindu-
Arabic numeral system. But we have other systems to write numbers: for example,
Roman numerals (i, ii, iii, iv, and so on) or textual notation. To know that the word
twelve denotes the value 12 is a nontrivial step and reminds us that European languages
denote numbers not only in decimal but also in other systems. English and German mix
with base 12, French with bases 16 and 20. For non-native French speakers like myself,
it may be difficult to spontaneously associate quatre vingt quinze (four times twenty and
fifteen) with the value 95.
     Similarly, representations of values on a computer can vary “culturally” from ar-
chitecture to architecture or are determined by the type the programmer gave to the
value. Therefore, we should try to reason primarily about values and not about repre-
sentations if we want to write portable code.
     If you already have some experience in C and in manipulating bytes and bits, you
will need to make an effort to actively “forget” your knowledge for most of this section.
Thinking about concrete representations of values on your computer will inhibit you
more than it helps you.

 Takeaway 5 #1 C programs primarily reason about values and not about their representa-
             tion.

     The representation that a particular value has should, in most cases, not be your
concern. The compiler is there to organize the translation back and forth between
values and representations.
     In this section, we will see how the different parts of this translation are supposed to
work. The ideal world in which you will usually “argue” in your program is C’s abstract
state machine (section 5.1). It gives a vision of the execution of your program, which
is mostly independent of the platform on which the program runs. The components
of the state of this machine, the objects, all have a fixed interpretation (their type) and a
value that varies in time. C’s basic types are described in subsection 5.2, followed by
descriptions of how we can express specific values for such basic types (subsection 5.3),
how types are assembled in expressions (subsection 5.4), how we can ensure that our
objects initially have the desired values (subsection 5.5), how we can give names to
recurrent values (subsection 5.6), and how such values are represented in the abstract
state machine (subsection 5.7).
     5.1. The abstract state machine. A C program can be seen as a sort of machine
that manipulates values: the particular values that variables of the program have at a
given time and intermediate values that are the result of computed expressions. Let us
consider a basic example:

    double x = 5.0;
    double y = 3.0;
    ...
    x = (x * 1.5) - y;
    printf("x is \%g\n", x);

Here we have two variables, x and y, that have initial values 5.0 and 3.0, respectively.
The third line computes some expressions: the subexpression
    x

that evaluates x and provides the value 5.0
    (5.0 * 1.5)

that results in the value 7.5
    y

that evaluates y and provides the value 3.0
    7.5 - 3.0

that results in 4.5;
    x = 4.5

that changes the value of x to 4.5
    x

that evaluates x again but now provides the value 4.5 and
    printf("x is \%g\n", 4.5)

that outputs a text line to the terminal.
     Not all operations and their resulting values are observable from within your pro-
gram. They are observable only if they are stored in addressable memory or written to
an output device. In the example, to a certain extent, the printf statement “observes”
what was done on the previous line by evaluating the variable x and then writing a string
representation of that value to the terminal. But the other subexpressions and their re-
sults (such as the multiplication and subtraction) are not observable as such, since we
never define a variable that is supposed to hold these values.
     Your C compiler is allowed to shortcut any of the steps during a process called
optimizationC only if it ensures the realization of the end results. Here, in our toy
example, there are basically two possibilities. The first is that variable x is not used
later in the program, and its acquired value is only relevant for our printf statement.
In that case, the only effect of our code snippet is the output to the terminal, and the
compiler may well (and will!) replace the whole snippet with the equivalent
    printf("x is 4.5\n");

That is, it will do all the computations at compile time, and the executable that is pro-
duced will just print a fixed string. All the remaining code and even the definitions of
the variables disappear.
    The other possibility is that x might be used later. Then a decent compiler would
either do something like

     double x = 4.5;
     printf("x is 4.5\n");

or maybe
     printf("x is 4.5\n");
     double x = 4.5;

because to use x at a later point, it is not relevant whether the assignment took place
before or after the printf.
     For an optimization to be valid, it is only important that a C compiler produces
an executable that reproduces the observable statesC . Observable states consist of the
contents of some variables (and similar entities that we will see later) and the output as
they evolve during the execution of the program. This whole mechanism of change is
called the abstract state machineC .
     To explain the abstract state machine, we first have to look into the concepts of
a value (what state are we in), the type (what this state represents), and the representa-
tion (how state is distinguished). As the term abstract suggests, C’s mechanism allows
different platforms to realize the abstract state machine of a given program differently
according to their needs and capacities. This permissiveness is one of the keys to C’s
potential for optimization.
     5.1.1. Values. A value in C is an abstract entity that usually exists beyond your pro-
gram, the particular implementation of that program, and the representation of the
value during a particular run of the program. As an example, the value and concept
of 0 should and will always have the same effects on all C platforms: adding that value
to another value x will again be x, and evaluating a value 0 in a control expression will
always trigger the false branch of the control statement.
     So far, most of our examples of values have been some kind of numbers. This is
not an accident; it relates to one of the major concepts of C.

 Takeaway 5.1.1 #1 All values are numbers or translate to numbers.

     This property really concerns all values a C program is about, whether these are
the characters or text we print, truth values, measures that we take, or relations that we
investigate. Think of these numbers as mathematical entities that are independent of
your program and its concrete realization.
     The data of a program execution consists of all the assembled values of all objects
at a given moment. The state of the program execution is determined by
        • The executable
        • The current point of execution
        • The data
        • Outside intervention, such as the IO from the user
If we abstract from the last point, an executable that runs with the same data from the
same point of execution must give the same result. But since C programs should be
portable between systems, we want more than that. We don’t want the result of a com-
putation to depend on the executable (which is platform specific) but ideally to depend
only on the program specification itself. An important step to achieve this platform
independence is the concept of typesC .
    5.1.2. Types. A type is an additional property that C associates with values. Up
to now, we have seen several such types, most prominently size_t, but also double
and bool.

 Takeaway 5.1.2 #1 All values have a type that is statically determined.

 Takeaway 5.1.2 #2 Possible operations on a value are determined by its type.

 Takeaway 5.1.2 #3 A value’s type determines the results of all operations.

     5.1.3. Binary representation and the abstract state machine. Unfortunately, the variety
of computer platforms is not such that the C standard can completely impose the results
of the operations on a given type. Things not completely specified as such by the stan-
dard include, for example, the precision to which a double floating-point operation
is performed (floating-point representation).10 C only imposes properties on represen-
tations such that the results of operations can be deduced a priori from two different
sources:
        • The values of the operands
        • Some characteristic values that describe the particular platform
For example, the operations on the type size_t can be entirely determined when
inspecting the value of SIZE_WIDTH in addition to the operands.11 We call the model
to represent values of a given type on a given platform the binary representationC of
the type.

 Takeaway 5.1.3 #1 A type’s binary representation determines the results of all operations.

    Generally, all information we need to determine that model is within reach of any
C program. The C library headers provide the necessary information through named
values (such as SIZE_MAX), operators, and function calls.

 Takeaway 5.1.3 #2 A type’s binary representation is observable.

     This binary representation is still a model and thus an abstract representation in the
sense that it doesn’t completely determine how values are stored in the memory of a
computer or on a disk or other persistent storage device. That representation is the
object representation. In contrast to the binary representation, the object representation
is usually not of much concern to us as long as we don’t want to hack together values of
objects in main memory or have to communicate between computers that have different
platform models. Much later, in section 12.1, we will see that we can even observe the
object representation, if such an object is stored in memory and we know its address.
     As a consequence, all computation is fixed through the values, types, and their
binary representations that are specified in the program. The program text describes
an abstract state machineC that regulates how the program switches from one state to
the next. These transitions are determined by value, type, and binary representation
only.

 Takeaway 5.1.3 #3 (as-if)           Programs execute as if following the abstract state machine.

     5.1.4. Optimization. How a concrete executable manages to follow the description
of the abstract state machine is left to the discretion of the compiler creators. Most
modern C compilers produce code that doesn’t follow the exact code prescription: they
cheat wherever they can and only respect the observable states of the abstract state ma-
chine. For example, a sequence of additions with constant values such as
    10Other international standards are more restrictive about these representations. For example, the POSIX
standard enforces a particular sign representation, and ISO/IEC/IEEE 60559 [2011] normalizes floating-
point representations.
    11Prior to C23, this value was not available. We needed the value of SIZE_MAX (see previous discussion).
This value can be deduced from SIZE_WIDTH. Similarly, by knowing that the sign representation now is
fixed to 2’s complement, the minimal and maximal values can be deduced for all integer types.

     x += 5;
     /* Do something else without x in the meantime. */
     x += 7;

may in many cases be done as if it were specified as either
     /* Do something without x. */
     x += 12;

or
     x += 12;
     /* Do something without x. */

The compiler may perform such changes to the execution order as long as there will
be no observable difference in the result: for example, as long as we don’t print the
intermediate value of x and as long as we don’t use that intermediate value in another
computation.
     But such an optimization can also be forbidden because the compiler can’t prove
that a certain operation will not force program termination. In our example, much
depends on the type of x. If the current value of x could be close to the upper limit
of the type, the innocent-looking operation x += 7 may produce an overflow. Such
overflows are handled differently according to the type. As we have seen, overflow of an
unsigned type is not a problem, and the result of the condensed operation will always
be consistent with the two separate ones. For other types, such as signed integer types
(signed) and floating-point types (double), an overflow may raise an exception and
terminate the program. In that case, the optimization cannot be performed.
     As we have already mentioned, this allowed slackness between program description
and abstract state machine is a very valuable feature, commonly referred to as optimiza-
tion. Combined with the relative simplicity of its language description, this is actually
one of the main features that allows C to outperform other programming languages
that have a lot more knobs and whistles. An important consequence of this discussion
can be summarized in the following takeaway.

 Takeaway 5.1.4 #1 Type determines optimization opportunities.
     5.2. Basic types. C has a series of basic types and means of constructing derived
typesC from them that we will describe later, in section 6.
     Mainly for historical reasons, the system of basic types is a bit complicated, and
the syntax to specify such types is not completely straightforward. There is a first level
of specification that is done entirely with keywords of the language, such as signed,
int, and double. This first level is mainly organized according to C internals. On top
of that is a second level of specification that comes through header files, and we have
already seen examples: size_t and bool. This second level is organized by type
semantics, specifying what properties a particular type brings to the programmer.
     We will start with the first-level specification of such types. As we discussed earlier
(takeaway 5.1.1 #1), all basic values in C are numbers, but there are different kinds
of numbers. As a principal distinction, we have two different classes of numbers, each
with two subclasses each: unsigned integersC , signed integersC , real floating-point
numbersC , and complex floating-point numbersC . Each of these four classes contains
several types. They differ according to their precisionC , which determines the valid
range of values that are allowed for a particular type.12 Table 5.1 contains an overview
of the 18 base types.
   12The term precision is used here in a restricted sense as the C standard defines it. It is different from the
accuracy of a floating-point computation.

Table 5.1. Base types according to the four main type classes. Types
        with a gray background don’t allow for arithmetic; they are promoted
        before doing arithmetic. Type char is special since it can be unsigned
        or signed, depending on the platform. All types in this table are con-
        sidered to be distinct types, even if they have the same class and pre-
        cision.

             Class                Systematic name      Other name     Rank
                                  bool                 _Bool             0
                                  unsigned char                          1
                                  unsigned short                         2
                     Unsigned
                                  unsigned int         unsigned          3
                                  unsigned long                          4
                                  unsigned long long                     5
 Integers
                     [Un]signed   char                                   1
                                  signed char                            1
                                  signed short         short             2
                     Signed       signed int           signed or int     3
                                  signed long          long              4
                                  signed long long     long long         5
                                  float
                     Real         double
                                  long double
 Floating point
                                  float _Complex       float complex
                     Complex      double _Complex      double complex
                                  long double _Complex long double complex

     As you can see from the table, there are six types that we can’t use directly for
arithmetic, the narrow typesC . They are promotedC to one of the wider types before
they are considered in an arithmetic expression. Nowadays, on any realistic platform,
this promotion will be a signed int of the same value as the narrow type, regardless
of whether the narrow type was signed.

 Takeaway 5.2 #1 Before arithmetic, narrow integers are promoted to signed int.

     Observe that among the narrow integer types, we have two prominent members:
char and bool. The first is C’s type that handles printable characters for text, and the
second holds truth values, false and true. As we said earlier, for C, even these are
just some sort of numbers. The 12 remaining, unpromoted types split nicely into the
four classes.

 Takeaway 5.2 #2 Each of the four classes of base types has three distinct unpromoted types.

     Contrary to what many people believe, the C standard doesn’t prescribe the preci-
sion of these 12 types: it only constrains them. They depend on a lot of factors that are
implementation definedC .
     One of the things the standard does prescribe is that the possible ranges of values
for the signed types must include each other according to their rank:

                      signed char short int long long long

But this inclusion does not need to be strict. For example, on many platforms, the set of
values of int and long are the same, although the types are considered to be different.
An analogous inclusion holds for the six unsigned types:

             unsigned         unsigned                        unsigned         unsigned
     bool                                      unsigned
             char             short                           long             long long

But remember that for any arithmetic or comparison, the narrow unsigned types are
promoted to signed int and not to unsigned int, as this diagram might suggest.
    The comparison of the ranges of signed and unsigned types is more difficult. Ob-
viously, an unsigned type can never include the negative values of a signed type. For
the non-negative values, we have the following inclusion of the values of types with
corresponding rank:

            Non-negative signed values Unsigned values

That is, for a given rank, the non-negative values of the signed type fit into the unsigned
type. On any modern platform you encounter, this inclusion is strict: the unsigned type
has values that do not fit into the signed type. For example, a common pair of maximal
values is 231 − 1 = 2,147,483,647 for signed int and 232 − 1 = 4,294,967,295 for
unsigned int.
     Because the interrelationship between integer types depends on the platform, choos-
ing the “best” type for a given purpose in a portable way can be a tedious task. Luck-
ily, we can get some help from the compiler implementation, which provides us with
typedefs such as size_t that represent certain features.

 Takeaway 5.2 #3 Use size_t for sizes, cardinalities, or ordinal numbers.

    Remember that unsigned types are the most convenient because they are the only
types that have an arithmetic that is defined consistently with mathematical properties:
the modulo operation. They can’t raise signals on overflow and can be optimized best.
They are described in more detail in subsection 5.7.1.

 Takeaway 5.2 #4 Use unsigned for small quantities that can’t be negative.

     If your program needs values that may be either positive or negative but do not
include fractions, use a signed type (see subsection 5.7.5).

 Takeaway 5.2 #5 Use signed for small quantities that bear a sign.

 Takeaway 5.2 #6 Use ptrdiff_t for large differences that bear a sign.

     If you want to do fractional computation with a value such as 0.5 or 3.771’89E+89,
use floating-point types (see subsection 5.7.8).

 Takeaway 5.2 #7 Use double for floating-point calculations.

 Takeaway 5.2 #8 Use double complex for complex calculations.

Table 5.2. Some semantic arithmetic types for specialized use cases

      Type            Header           Context of definition      Meaning
      size_t          <stddef.h>                                  Type for “sizes” and cardi-
                                                                  nalities
      ptrdiff_t       <stddef.h>                                  Type for size differences
      uintmax_t       <stdint.h>                                  Unsigned integer type of
                                                                  preprocessor
      intmax_t        <stdint.h>                                  Signed integer type of pre-
                                                                  processor
      time_t          <time.h>         time(0),                   Calendar time in seconds
                                       difftime(t1, t0)           since epoch
      clock_t         <time.h>         clock()                    Processor time

          The C standard defines a lot of other types, among them other arithmetic types that
     model special use cases. Table 5.2 list some of them. The second pair represents the
     type in which the preprocessor does any of its arithmetic or comparison. Prior to C23
     these were the types of maximal width that the compiler supported, but this constraint
     has been relaxed; under certain circumstances, there may be extended integer types that
     are wider (see section 5.7.6).
          The two types time_t and clock_t are used to handle times. They are semantic
     types because the precision of the time computation can be different from platform to
     platform. The way to have a time in seconds that can be used in arithmetic is the
     function difftime: it computes the difference of two timestamps. clock_t values
     present the platform’s model of processor clock cycles, so the unit of time is usually
     much less than a second; CLOCKS_PER_SEC can be used to convert such values to
     seconds.

         5.3. Specifying values. We have already seen several ways in which numerical
     constants (literalsC ) can be specified:
       123 Decimal integer literalC —The most natural choice for most of us.
       077 Octal integer literalC .—This is specified by a sequence of digits, the first
           being 0 and the following between 0 and 7. For example, 077 has the value
           63. This type of specification merely has historical value and is rarely used
           nowadays. Only one octal literal is commonly used: 0 itself.
    0xFFFF Hexadecimal integer literalC —This is specified by starting with 0x followed
           by a sequence of digits between 0, . . . , 9 and a . . . f. For example, 0xbeaf
           has the value 48,815. The a .. f and x can also be written in capitals,
           0XBEAF.
    0b1010 Binary integer literalC —This is specified by starting with 0b followed by
           a sequence of 0 or 1 digits. For example, 0b1010 has the value 10. The
           leading 0b may also be written as 0B instead. Binary literals were introduced
           in C23.
   1.7E-13 Decimal floating-point literalsC —These literals are quite familiar as the
           version with a decimal point. But there is also the “scientific” notation with
           an exponent. In the general form, mEe is interpreted as m · 10e .
0x1.7aP-13 Hexadecimal floating-point literalsC —These are usually used to describe
           floating-point values in a form that makes it easy to specify values that have
           exact representations. The general form 0XhPe is interpreted as h · 2e . Here,
           h is specified as a hexadecimal fraction. The exponent e is still specified as a
           decimal number.

    ’a’ Integer character literalC —These are characters put between ’ apostrophes,
        such as ’a’ or ’?’. These have values that are only implicitly fixed by the C
        standard. For example, ’a’ corresponds to the integer code for the character
        a of the Latin alphabet.
             Among character literals, the \ character has a special meaning. For ex-
        ample, we already have seen ’\\n’ for the newline character.
"hello" String literalsC —They specify text, such as that needed for the printf and
        puts functions. Again, the \ character is special, as with character literals.13
  All literals except the last are numerical constants: they specify numbers.14 String lit-
  erals are an exception and can be used to specify text that is known at compile time.
  Integrating larger text into our code could be tedious, if we weren’t allowed to split string
  literals into chunks:
    puts("first line\n"
         "another line\n"
         "first and "
         "second part of the third line");

   Takeaway 5.3 #1 Consecutive string literals are concatenated.

  The rules for numbers are a little bit more complicated.

   Takeaway 5.3 #2 Numerical literals are never negative.

       That is, if we write something like -34 or -1.5E-23, the leading sign is not con-
  sidered part of the number but is the negation operator applied to the number that comes
  after it. We will see shortly where this is important. Bizarre as this may sound, the mi-
  nus sign in the exponent is considered to be part of a floating-point literal.
       We have already seen (takeaway 5.1.2 #1) that all literals must have not only a
  value but also a type. Don’t mix up the fact that a literal has a positive value with its
  type, which can be signed.

   Takeaway 5.3 #3 Decimal integer literals are signed.

      This is an important feature: we’d probably expect the expression -1 to be a signed,
  negative value.
      To determine the exact type for integer literals, we always have a first fit rule.

   Takeaway 5.3 #4 A decimal integer literal has the first of the three signed types that fits.

       This rule can have surprising effects. Suppose that on a platform, the minimal
  signed value is −215 = −32′ 768 and the maximum value is 215 − 1 = 32′ 767. The
  literal 32′ 768 then doesn’t fit into signed and is thus signed long. As a conse-
  quence, the expression -32’768 has type signed long. Thus the minimal value of
  the type signed on such a platform cannot be written as a literal.[Exs 15]

   Takeaway 5.3 #5 The same value can have different types.
       13If used in the context of the printf function, another character also becomes “special”: the % character.
  If you want to print a literal % with printf, you have to duplicate it.
      14You may have observed that complex numbers are not included in this list. We will see how to specify

  them in subsection 5.3.1.
[Exs 15]Show that if the minimal and maximal values for signed long long have similar properties, the
  smallest integer value for the platform can’t be written as a combination of one literal with a minus sign.

       Deducing the type of a binary, octal, or hexadecimal literal is a bit more com-
  plicated. These can also be of an unsigned type if the value doesn’t fit for a signed
  type. In the earlier example, the hexadecimal literal 0x7FFF has the value 32,767
  and thus is type signed. Other than for the decimal literal, the literal 0x8000 (value
  32′ 768 written in hexadecimal) then is an unsigned, and expression -0x8000 again
  is unsigned.[Exs 16]

   Takeaway 5.3 #6 Don’t use binary, octal, or hexadecimal literals for negative values.
       As a consequence, there is only one choice left for negative values.

   Takeaway 5.3 #7 Use decimal literals for negative values.

Table 5.3. Examples for literals and their types, under the supposi-
            tion that signed and unsigned have the commonly used represen-
            tation with 32 bits

                  Literal x              Value        Type                     Value of −x
         2’147’483’647          +2,147,483,647        signed              −2,147,483,647
         2’147’483’648          +2,147,483,648        signed long         −2,147,483,648
         4’294’967’295          +4,294,967,295        signed long         −4,294,967,295
           0x7FFF’FFFF          +2,147,483,647        signed              −2,147,483,647
           0x8000’0000          +2,147,483,648        unsigned            +2,147,483,648
           0xFFFF’FFFF          +4,294,967,295        unsigned                          +1
                     1                      +1        signed                            −1
                    1U                      +1        unsigned            +4,294,967,295

       A common error is to try to assign a hexadecimal literal to a signed with the
  expectation that it will represent a negative value. Consider a declaration such as int x
  = 0xFFFF’FFFF. This is done under the assumption that the hexadecimal value has
  the same binary representation as the signed value −1. On most architectures with 32-bit
  signed, this will be true (but not on all of them). However, then nothing guarantees
  that the effective value +4,294,967,295 is converted to the value −1. Table 5.3 has
  some examples of interesting literals, their values, and their types.
       So a possible prefix (0, 0b or 0x) not only specifies the base in which an integer
  literal is read, but indirectly may also have an influence for the deduced type. This
  deduced type can be changed by a suffix that is appended to the literal.

Table 5.4. Suffixes for integer literals and their types

                       Suffix        Type
                       l or L        At least long
                       ll or LL      long long
                       wb or WB      _BitInt(N ) for sufficiently large N
                       u or U        Force unsigned

      For example, 1U has value 1 and type unsigned, 1L is signed long, and 1ULL
  has the same value 1 but type unsigned long long.[Exs 17] Note that we are rep-
  resenting C literals such as 1ULL in typewriter font and distinguish them from their
  mathematical value 1, which is in normal font.
[Exs 16]Show that if the maximum unsigned is 216 − 1, then -0x8000 has value 32,768, too.
[Exs 17]Show that the expressions -1U, -1UL, and -1ULL have the maximum values and type as the three
  non-promoted unsigned types, respectively.

          So with suffixes, integer literals can be forced to have a type with minimal rank.
     For a decimal integer literal, if there is one l or L the type is long if the value fits and
     long long otherwise. If there are two (ll or LL), the type is fixed to long long. For
     prefixed integer literals (0, 0b, or 0x), these suffixes still may be unsigned long or
     unsigned long long, depending on the value. To force an unsigned type, we can
     add u or U to the suffix.
          The suffix wb or WB that was introduced in C23 forces the literal to have a specific
     bit-precise type. With a possible combination of u or U, it is the only suffix that can
     guarantee a type of a specific signedness regardless of the base. We will see these types
     a bit later in section 5.7.7.
          Remember that value 0 is important. It is so important that it has a lot of equivalent
     spellings: 0, 0x0, and ’\0’ are all the same value, a 0 of type signed int. Zero
     has no decimal integer spelling: 0.0 is a decimal spelling for the value 0 but is seen as
     a floating-point value with type double.

      Takeaway 5.3 #8 Different literals can have the same value.

         For integers, this rule looks almost trivial, but for floating-point literals, it is less ob-
     vious. Floating-point values are only an approximation of the value they present literally
     because binary digits of the fractional part may be truncated or rounded.

      Takeaway 5.3 #9 The effective value of a decimal floating-point literal may be different from
                   its literal value.

          For example, on my machine, the literal 0.2 has the value
                                   0.200,000,000,000,000,011,1
     As a consequence, the literals 0.2 and 0.200’000’000’000’000’011’1 have the
     same value.
          Hexadecimal floating-point literals were designed to correspond better with the
     binary representations of floating-point values. In fact, on most modern architectures,
     such a literal (that does not have too many digits) will exactly correspond to the lit-
     eral value. Unfortunately, these beasts are almost unreadable for mere humans. For
     example, consider the two literals
                  0x1.9999’9AP-3 and 0xC.CCCC’CCCC’CCCC’CCDP-6.
     They correspond to
             1.600,000,023,84 ∗ 2−3 and 12.800,000,000,000,000,000,2 ∗ 2−6 ;
     thus, expressed as decimal floating points, their values are approximatively
                   0.200,000,002,98 and 0.200,000,000,000,000,000,003.
     So the two literals have values that are very close to each other, whereas their represen-
     tation as hexadecimal floating-point literals seems to put them far apart.
           Finally, floating-point literals can be followed by the letter f or F to denote a float
     or by l or L to denote a long double. Otherwise, they are of type double. Be aware
     that different types of literals generally lead to different values for the same literal. Here
     is a typical example:

                    float                        double                             long double
Literal              0.2F                           0.2                                    0.2L
Value     0x1.9999’9AP-3F        0x1.9999’9999’9999AP-3             0xC.CCCC’CCCC’CCCC’CCDP-6L

      Takeaway 5.3 #A Literals have value, type, and binary representations.

                   5.3.1. Complex constants. Complex types are not necessarily supported by all C
              platforms. This fact can be checked by inspecting __STDC_NO_COMPLEX__. To
<complex.h>   have full support of complex types, the header <complex.h> should be included. If
<tgmath.h>    you use <tgmath.h> for numerical functions, this is already done implicitly.
                   Unfortunately, C provides no literals to specify literals of a complex type. It only
              has several macros18 that may ease the manipulation of these types.
                   The first possibility to specify complex values is the macro CMPLX, which comprises
              two floating-point values, the real and imaginary parts, in one complex value. For ex-
              ample, CMPLX(0.5, 0.5) is a double complex value with the real and imaginary
              part of one-half. Analogously, there are CMPLXF for float complex and CMPLXL
              for long double complex.
                   Another, more convenient, possibility is provided by the macro I, which repre-
              sents a constant value of type float complex such that I*I has the value −1. One-
              character macro names in uppercase are often used in programs for numbers that are
              fixed for the whole program. By itself, it is not a brilliant idea (the supply of one-
              character names is limited), and you should definitely leave I alone.

               Takeaway 5.3.1 #1 I is reserved for the imaginary unit.
                   I can be used to specify constants of complex types similar to the usual mathemat-
              ical notation. For example, 0.5 + 0.5*I would be of type double complex and
              0.5F + 0.5F*I of float complex. The compiler implicitly convertsC the result
              to the wider of the types if we mix, for example, float and double literals for real
              and imaginary parts. Another way to encode complex constants is by using complex
              literals. These are floating point literals with an extra i, for example 0.5i or 0.5IF.
              Although widely supported nowadays, unfortunately, this form of literals is not (yet)
              standardized, so you may not rely on it.

              Challenge 5 (complex numbers) . Can you extend the derivative (Challenge 2) to the complex
              domain: that is, functions that receive and return double complex values?

                   5.4. Implicit conversions. As we have seen in the examples, the type of an operand
              has an influence on the type of an operator expression, such as -1 or -1U. Whereas
              the first is a signed int, the second is an unsigned int. The latter might be par-
              ticularly surprising for beginners because an unsigned int has no negative values, so
              the value of -1U is a large positive integer.

               Takeaway 5.4 #1 Unary - and + have the type of their promoted operand.
                  So, these operators are examples where the type usually does not change. In cases
              where they do change, we have to rely on C’s strategy to do implicit conversions: that is, to
              move a value with a specific type to one that has a desired type. Consider the following
              examples, again under the assumption that −2,147,483,648 and 2,147,483,647 are
              the minimal and maximal values of a signed int, respectively:
                  double               a = 1;                     // Harmless; value fits type
                  signed short         b = -1;                    // Harmless; value fits type
                  signed int           c = 0x8000’0000;           // Dangerous; value too big for type

                 18We see what macros are really about in subsection 5.6.3. For now, just take them as names to which
              the compiler has associated some specific property.

       signed int     d = -0x8000’0000;   // Dangerous; value too big for type
       signed int     e = -2’147’483’648; // Harmless; value fits type
       unsigned short g = 0x8000’0000;    // Loses information; has value 0

       Here, the initializations of a and b are harmless. The respective values are well in
  the range of the desired types, so the C compiler can convert them silently.
       The next two conversions for c and d are problematic. As we have seen, 0x8000’0000
  is of type unsigned int and does not fit into a signed int. So c receives a value
  that is implementation-defined, and we have to know what our platform has decided to
  do in such cases. It could just reuse the bit pattern of the value on the right or termi-
  nate the program. As for all implementation-defined features, which solution is chosen
  should be documented by your platform, but be aware that this can change with new
  versions of your compiler or may be switched by compiler arguments.
       For the case of d, the situation is even more complicated. 0x8000’0000 has the
  value 2,147,483,648, and we might expect that -0x8000’0000 is just the negative
  value. But since effectively -0x8000’0000 is again 2,147,483,648, the same problem
  arises as for c.[Exs 19]
       Then, e is harmless again. This is because we used -2’147’483’648, a negated
  decimal literal which has type signed long and whose value effectively is as intended
  (shown earlier). Since this value fits into a signed int, the conversion can be done
  with no problem.
       The last example for g is ambiguous in its consequences. A value that is too large
  for an unsigned type is converted according to the modulus. Here in particular, if we
  assume that the maximum value for unsigned short is 216 − 1, the resulting value
  is 0. Whether or not such a “narrowing” conversion is the desired outcome is often
  difficult to tell.

   Takeaway 5.4 #2 Avoid narrowing conversions.

   Takeaway 5.4 #3 Don’t use narrow types in arithmetic.
       The type rules become even more complicated for operators that have two operands,
  such as addition and multiplication because these then may have different types. Here
  are some examples of operations that involve floating-point types:
   1       + 0.0 // Harmless; double
   1       + I    // Harmless; complex float
   INT_MAX + 0.0F // May lose precision; float
   INT_MAX + I    // May lose precision; complex float
   INT_MAX + 0.0 // Usually harmless; double

  Here, the first two examples are harmless: the value of the integer literal 1 fits well
  into the type double or complex float. In fact, for most such mixed operations,
  whenever the range of one type fits into the range of the other, the result has the type
  of the wider range.
       The next two are problematic because INT_MAX, the maximal value for signed
  int, usually will not fit into a float or complex float. For example, on my ma-
  chine, INT_MAX + 0.0F is the same as INT_MAX + 1.0F. The last line shows that
  for an operation with double, this would work fine on most platforms. Nevertheless,
  on an existing or future platform where int is 64 bit, an analogous problem with the
  precision could occur.
       Because there is no strict inclusion of value ranges for integer types, deducing the
  type of an operation that mixes signed and unsigned values can be nasty:
[Exs 19]Under the assumption that the maximum value for unsigned int is 0xFFFF’FFFF, prove that
  -0x8000’0000 == 0x8000’0000.

  -1   < 0        // True, harmless, same signedness
  -1L < 0         // True, harmless, same signedness
  -1U < 0U        // False, harmless, same signedness
  -1   < 0U       // False, dangerous, mixed signedness
  -1U < 0         // False, dangerous, mixed signedness
  -1L < 0U        // Depends, dangerous, same or mixed signedness
  -1LL < 0UL      // Depends, dangerous, same or mixed signedness

The first three comparisons are harmless because even if they mix operands of different
types, they do not mix signedness. For these cases, since the ranges of possible values
nicely contain each other, C simply converts the other type to the wider one and does
the comparison there.
     The next two cases are unambiguous but perhaps not what a naive programmer
would expect. In fact, for both, all operands are converted to unsigned int. Thus,
both negated values are converted to large unsigned values, and the result of the com-
parison is false.
     The last two comparisons are even more problematic. On platforms where
                                INT_WIDTH < LONG_WIDTH,
0U is converted to 0L, and thus the first result is true. On other platforms with
                                INT_WIDTH == LONG_WIDTH,
-1L is converted to -1U (that is, UINT_MAX), and thus the first comparison is false.
Analogous observations hold for the second comparison of the last two, but be aware
that there is a good chance the outcome of the two is not the same.
     Examples like the last two comparisons can give rise to endless debates in favor of
or against signed or unsigned types, respectively. But they show only one thing: that
the semantics of mixing signed and unsigned operands is not always clear. There are
cases where either possible choice of an implicit conversion is problematic.

 Takeaway 5.4 #4 Avoid operations with operands of different signedness.

 Takeaway 5.4 #5 Use unsigned types whenever you can.

 Takeaway 5.4 #6 Chose your arithmetic types such that implicit conversions are harmless.

     5.5. Initializers. We have seen (subsection 2.3) that the initializer is an important
part of an object definition. Initializers help us guarantee that a program execution is
always in a defined state so that whenever we access an object, it has a well-known value
that determines the state of the abstract machine.

 Takeaway 5.5 #1 All variables should be initialized.

     The only exception to that rule should be made for code that must be highly op-
timized.20 For most code that we are able to write so far, a modern compiler will be
able to trace the origin of a value to its last assignment or its initialization. Superfluous
initializations or assignments will simply be optimized out.
     For scalar types such as integers and floating points, an initializer just contains an
expression that can be converted to that type. We have seen a lot of examples of that.
Optionally, such an initializer expression may be surrounded with {}. Here are some
examples:
   20Since C23, even variable-length arrays (VLA; see subsection 6.1.3) may be initialized by a default
initializer.

  double a = 7.8;
  double b = 2 * a;
  double c = { 7.8 };
  double d = { 0 };

     Initializers for other types must have these {}. For example, array initializers con-
tain initializers for the different elements, each of which is followed by a comma:
  double A[] = { 7.8, };
  double B[3] = { 2 * A[0], 7, 33, };
  double C[] = { [0] = 6, [3] = 1, };

                        [0]
             A     double 7.8

                         [0]                  [1]                  [2]
             B     double 15.6           double 7.0           double 33.0

                        [0]                  [1]                 [2]                  [3]
             C     double 6.0           double 0.0           double 0.0          double 1.0

 As we have seen, if there is no length specification, the array is said to have an incom-
plete typeC . The type is then completed by the initializer to fully specify the length.
Here, A has only one element, whereas C has four. For the first two initializers, the ele-
ment to which the scalar initialization applies is deduced from the position of the scalar
in the list: for example, B[1] is initialized to 7. The form as for C is called designated
initializers. These are by far preferable since they make the code more robust against
small changes in declarations.

 Takeaway 5.5 #2 Use designated initializers for all aggregate data types.

     If you don’t know how to initialize a variable of type T, the default initializerC
                                              T a={ }
will always do.

 Takeaway 5.5 #3 { } is a valid initializer for all objects.

    This feature has only been introduced in C23; before that, we had to use {0}, and
there was a relatively complicated reasoning that made this work. This default initializer
may also be used for variable-length arrays (see subsection 6.1.3), which previously had
no initializer syntax.
    In initializers, we often have to specify values that have a particular meaning for
the program.

    5.6. Named constants. A common issue, even in small programs, is that they use
special values for some purposes that are textually repeated all over. If for one reason
or another this value changes, the program falls apart. Take an artificial setting as an
example where we have arrays of strings,21 on which we would like to perform some
operations:

   21This uses a pointer, type char const const, to refer to strings. We will see later how this particular
                                         *
technique works.

 char const*const bird[3] = {
   "raven",
   "magpie",
   "jay",
 };
 char const*const pronoun[3] = {
   "we",
   "you",
   "they",
 };
 char const*const ordinal[3] = {
   "first",
   "second",
   "third",
 };
 ...
 for (unsigned i = 0; i < 3; ++i)
     printf("Corvid %u is the %s\n", i, bird[i]);
 ...
 for (unsigned i = 0; i < 3; ++i)
     printf("%s plural pronoun is %s\n", ordinal[i], pronoun[i]);

    Here, we use the constant 3 in several places with three different “meanings” that
are not very correlated. For example, an addition to our set of corvids would require
two separate code changes. In a real setting, there might be many more places in the
code that depend on this particular value, and in a large code base, this can be very
tedious to maintain.

 Takeaway 5.6 #1 All constants with a particular meaning must be named.

     It is equally important to distinguish constants that are equal but for which equality
is just a coincidence.

 Takeaway 5.6 #2 All constants with different meanings must be distinguished.

     At the start, C had surprisingly little means to specify named constants, and its
terminology even caused a lot of confusion about which constructs effectively lead
to compile-time constants. So we first have to get the terminology straight (subsec-
tion 5.6.1) before we look into the only proper named constants that C provided until
C23: enumeration constants (subsection 5.6.2). The latter will help us to replace the
different versions of 3 in our example with something more explanatory. A second,
generic mechanism complements this feature with simple text replacement: macros
(subsection 5.6.3). Macros only lead to compile-time constants if their replacements
are composed of literals of base types, as we have seen. Finally we distinguish a concept
of unnamed temporary objects called compound literals (subsection 5.6.4) and C23’s
new constexpr objects that also can serve as proper named or unnamed constants
(subsection 5.6.5).
     5.6.1. Read-only objects. Don’t confuse the term constant, which has a very specific
meaning in C, with objects that can’t be modified. For example, in the previous code,
bird, pronoun, and ordinal are not constants according to our terminology; they
are const-qualified objects. This qualifierC specifies that we don’t have the right to
change this object. For bird, neither the array entries nor the actual strings can be
modified, and your compiler should give you a diagnostic if you try to do so:

 Takeaway 5.6.1 #1 An object of const-qualified type is read-only.

       That doesn’t mean the compiler or run-time system may not perhaps change the
   value of such an object: other parts of the program may see that object without the
   qualification and change it. The fact that you cannot write the summary of your bank
   account directly (but only read it) doesn’t mean it will remain constant over time.
       There is another family of read-only objects that unfortunately are not protected
   by their type from being modified: string literals.

    Takeaway 5.6.1 #2 String literals are read-only.

        If introduced today, the type of string literals would certainly be char const[],
   an array of const-qualified characters. Unfortunately, the const keyword was intro-
   duced to the C language much later than string literals, and therefore it remained as it
   is for backward compatibility.22
        Arrays such as bird also use another technique to handle string literals. They use
   a pointerC type, char const*const, to “refer” to a string literal. A visualization of
   such an array looks like this:
                         [0]                                    [1]                                     [2]
bird         char const*const                       char const*const                        char const*const
        ↓                                       ↓                                       ↓
        "raven"                                 "magpie"                                "jay"
       That is, the string literals themselves are not stored inside the array bird but in
   some other place, and bird only refers to those places. We will see much later, in
   subsections 6.2 and 11, how this mechanism works.
       Since C23, there is another construct indicated by the keyword constexpr, that
   results in read-only objects. But in contrast to objects that are simply const-qualified,
   these are guaranteed to never change, and their value is known at compile time. The
   main difference can be seen in the following example:
          extern double const factor;
          constexpr double 𝜋 = 3.141’592’653’589’793’238’46;

        The declaration of factor only tells us (and the compiler) that somewhere there
   is a double object that we don’t have the right to change. When and where is value is
   determined is unspecified. On the other hand, the value of 𝜋 is given together with the
   declaration and will be stable for the whole compilation of the program. We will see
   constexpr in more detail later.23
        5.6.2. Enumerations. C has a simple mechanism to name small integers as we needed
   them in the example, called enumerationsC :
       enum corvid { magpie, raven, jay, corvid_num, };
       char const*const bird[corvid_num] = {
         [raven] = "raven",
         [magpie] = "magpie",
         [jay]    = "jay",
       };
       ...
       for (unsigned i = 0; i < corvid_num; ++i)
           printf("Corvid %u is the %s\n", i, bird[i]);

       This declares a new integer type enum corvid for which we know four different
   values. As you might have guessed, positional values start from 0 onward, so in our

        22A third class of read-only objects exist: temporary objects. We will see them later, in subsection 13.2.2.
      23Note also that using a non-Latin character such as 𝜋 should be supported on modern platforms. Con-
   sider upgrading to a newer one if your compiler does not support this.

   example we have raven with value 0, magpie with 1, jay with 2, and corvid_num
   with 3. This last 3 is obviously the 3 we are interested in.

    Takeaway 5.6.2 #1 Enumeration constants have either an explicit or a positional value.

                [magpie]                         [raven]                          [jay]
bird      char const*const               char const*const                char const*const
        ↓                             ↓                               ↓
        "magpie"                      "raven"                         "jay"
       Notice that this uses a different order for the array entries than before, and this is
   one of the advantages of the approach with enumerations: we do not have to manually
   track the order we used in the array. The ordering that is fixed in the enumeration type
   does that automatically.
       Now, if we want to add another corvid, we just put it in the list, anywhere before
   corvid_num.

Listing 5.1. An enumeration type and related array of strings
       enum corvid { magpie, raven, jay, chough, corvid_num, };
       char const*const bird[corvid_num] = {
          [chough] = "chough",
          [raven] = "raven",
          [magpie] = "magpie",
          [jay]    = "jay",
       };

        As for most other narrow types, there is not really much interest in declaring vari-
   ables of an enumeration type as given here; for indexing and arithmetic, they would be
   converted to signed or unsigned, anyway. Even the enumeration constants them-
   selves aren’t necessarily of the enumeration type.

    Takeaway 5.6.2 #2 If all enumeration constants of a simple enumeration type fit into signed
                 int, they have that type.

       So for small values, the interest really lies in the constants, not in the newly cre-
   ated type. We can thus name any signed int constant that we need, without even
   providing a tagC for the type name:
        enum { p0 = 1, p1 = 2*p0, p2 = 2*p1, p3 = 2*p2, };

       To define these constants, we can use integer constant expressionsC (ICE). Such
   an ICE provides a compile-time integer value and is much restricted. Not only must its
   value be determinable at compile time (no function call allowed), but also no evaluation
   of an object must participate as an operand to the value:
        signed const      o42 = 42;
        constexpr signed c42 = 42;
        enum {
           b42 = 42,       // Ok: 42 is a literal.
           c52 = o42 + 10, // Error: o42 is an object.
           b52 = b42 + 10, // Ok: b42 is not an object.
           d52 = c42 + 10, // Ok: c42 is a named constant.
        };

        Here, o42 is an object, albeit const-qualified, so the expression for c52 is not an
   “integer constant expression.” With c42, we see that constexpr, in turn, can be used
   freely in such a context.

 Takeaway 5.6.2 #3 An integer constant expression must only evaluate objects that are de-
              clared with constexpr.
     So, principally, an ICE may consist of any operations with integer literals, enumer-
ation constants, constexpr objects, alignof24 and offsetof subexpressions, and
eventually some sizeof subexpressions.25
     Before C23, even if the value was an ICE, to be able to use it to define an enumera-
tion constant, we had to ensure that the value fit into a signed int. This has changed
with C23.

 Takeaway 5.6.2 #4 If enumeration constants do not fit into signed int, if possible, the
              enumeration type is adjusted such that it can store all enumeration constants.

 Takeaway 5.6.2 #5 If enumeration constants do not fit into signed int, the constants
              have the enumeration type.
     Note that it may actually happen that there is no type that can hold all the values
for the constants:
       enum tooLarge { minimus = LLONG_MIN, maximus = ULLONG_MAX, };

     Unless the compiler finds an extended integer type that is wider than signed long
long, this line will likely not compile.
     The fact that enumeration types are adjusted can be convenient when we are not
really interested in the type:
       enum wide { minimal = LONG_MIN, maximal = LONG_MAX, };
       typedef enum wide wide;

Here, it depends on the platform if long is wider than signed, so the underlying type
of wide may be either of them, depending on the circumstances. C23 also introduced
new syntax to force the underlying type to a specific one.
       enum wider : long { minimer = LONG_MIN, maximer = LONG_MAX, };
       typedef enum wider wider;

A colon followed by an integer type indicates the underlying type and also forces that
the enumeration constants have the type of enumeration, even if the values would fit
into signed:
       enum narrow : unsigned char { zero, one, };
       typedef enum narrow narrow;

    The property that an enumeration type is adjusted such that it fits all its constants
could have surprising effects for the users of the type and should probably not be abused.
So it is preferable to specify the underlying integer type explicitly, whenever that is
possible.

 Takeaway 5.6.2 #6 If the enumeration constants potentially do not all fit into signed int,
              specify the underlying integer type of an enumeration type.
    This is particularly important if the underlying type could be a signed or an un-
signed type, as in the following:
       enum large { down = 0, up = 0xFFFF’FFFF, }; // ambigouous, don’t use
       typedef enum large large;

     24Since C23; previously _Alignof.
     25We will handle the latter two concepts in subsections 12.7 and 12.1.

    Here, depending on the width of signed int, the constant 0xFFFF’FFFF could
have any of types signed, unsigned, signed long, unsigned long, signed
long long, or unsigned long long, and thus the underlying integer type could
become any of those. For an occasional reader, it would be better to clearly state the
intent:
    enum eInt : signed int { dInt = 0, uInt = 0xFFFF’FFFF, };
    typedef enum eInt eInt;
    enum eSig : typeof(4’294’967’295) { dSig = 0, uSig = 4’294’967’295, };
    typedef enum eSig eSig;
    enum e32 : uint32_t { d32 = 0, u32 = 0xFFFF’FFFF, };
    typedef enum e32 e32;

     The first definition for eInt would only compile if signed int has a width of
more than 32. The second for eSig uses the typeof feature (which will be introduced
in more detail much later in section 18) to state explicitly that we want the type to be
the one of the decimal constant. That type is always signed. The third for e32 uses the
type definition uint32_t (see following discussion) to indicate that the sought type is
an unsigned type with a width of at least 32.
     5.6.3. Macros. Prior to C23, there was no other mechanism to declare constants in
the strict sense of the C language of other types than signed int. Instead, C proposes
another powerful mechanism that introduces textual replacement of the program code:
macrosC . A macro is introduced by a preprocessorC #define:
 # define M_PI 3.141’592’653’589’793’238’46

     This macro definition has the effect that the identifier M_PI is replaced in the fol-
lowing program code by the double constant. Such a macro definition consists of five
different parts:
      (1) A starting # character that must be the first non-blank character on the line
      (2) The keyword define
      (3) An identifier that is to be declared, here M_PI
      (4) The replacement text, here 3.141’592’653’589’793’238’46
      (5) A terminating newline character
With this trick, we can declare textual replacement for constants of unsigned, size_t,
and double. In fact, the implementation-imposed bound of size_t, SIZE_MAX, is
defined, as well as many of the other system features we have already seen:
                        EXIT_SUCCESS, not_eq, complex . . .
Here, in this book, such C standard macros are generally printed in dark red.
     The spelling of these examples from the C standard is not representative for the
conventions that are generally used in a large majority of software projects. Most of
them have quite restrictive rules such that macros visually stick out from their sur-
roundings.

 Takeaway 5.6.3 #1 Macro names are in all caps.

    Only deviate from that rule if you have good reasons, in particular not before you
reach level 3.
    5.6.4. Compound literals. For types that don’t have literals that describe their con-
stants, things get even more complicated. For macros, we have to use compound literalsC
on the replacement side. Such a compound literal has the form
    (T){ INIT }

That is, a type in parentheses, followed by an initializer. Here’s an example:

 # define CORVID_NAME /**/                 \
 (char const*const[corvid_num]){           \
   [chough] = "chough",                    \
   [raven] = "raven",                      \
   [magpie] = "magpie",                    \
   [jay] = "jay",                          \
 }

With that, we could leave out the bird array and rewrite our for loop:
 for (unsigned i = 0; i < corvid_num; ++i)
     printf("Corvid %u is the %s\n", i, CORVID_NAME[i]);

    Whereas compound literals in macro definitions can help us declare something that
behaves similarly to a constant of a chosen type, it isn’t a constant in the sense that we
have previously discussed.

 Takeaway 5.6.4 #1 A compound literal defines an object.

     Overall, this form of macro has some pitfalls:
       • Compound literals, as introduced so far, aren’t suitable for ICE.
       • For our purpose here, to declare named constants, the type T should be
         const-qualifiedC . This ensures that the optimizer has a bit more slack to
         generate good binary code for such a macro replacement.
       • There must be at least one space character between the macro name and the
         () of the compound literal, here indicated by the /**/ comment. Other-
         wise, this would be interpreted as the start of a definition of a function-like
         macro. We will see these much later.
       • A backspace character \ at the very end of the line can be used to continue the
         macro definition to the next line.
       • There must be no ; at the end of the macro definition. Remember, it is all
         just text replacement.

 Takeaway 5.6.4 #2 Don’t hide a terminating semicolon inside a macro.

     Also, for readability of macros, please pity the poor occasional reader of your code.

 Takeaway 5.6.4 #3 Right-indent continuation markers for macros to the same column.

     As you can see in the example, this helps to visualize the entire spread of the macro
definition easily.
     5.6.5. The constexpr construct. All these techniques are not very helpful in con-
texts in which, say, we would need named constants for complicated types that are to be
used as an initializer in file scope. Here, an initializer has to be a constant expression.
C23 introduced the constexpr construct, which may be applied to declarations and
also to compound literals. A declaration equivalent to our previously introduced macro
M_PI is the following:
 constexpr double 𝜋 = 3.141’592’653’589’793’238’46;

Using such a constexpr has the advantage that the constant is checked at compile
time where it is declared: a conversion that leads to a change of value is an error. For
example,
 constexpr unsigned 𝜋flat = 3.141’592’653’589’793’238’46; // error

    results in a compiler error because significant digits after the decimal point on the
right are lost when converting to the type unsigned on the left.

 Takeaway 5.6.5 #1 The initializer of a constexpr must fit exactly.

        constexpr can also be used for compound literals:
 # define CORVID_NAMES /**/                     \
 (constexpr char[8][corvid_num]){               \
   [chough] = "chough",                         \
   [raven] = "raven",                           \
   [magpie] = "magpie",                         \
   [jay] = "jay",                               \
 }

      Observe that here we changed to an array of corvid_num arrays of 8 characters
each. Each of these 8 character arrays is initialized with the indicated values and then
is filled with zeros to the end. So, schematically, the compound literal as a whole looks
as follows:
           [magpie]             [raven]                 [jay]             [chough]
        char const[8]       char const[8]           char const[8]      char const[8]

        For example, the first of these array elements, which is itself an array, looks like
this:
             [0]                  [1]                     [2]                   [3]
   char const ’m’           char const ’a’          char const ’g’       char const ’p’       ···
                      [4]                 [5]                   [6]                  [7]
   ···      char const ’i’        char const ’e’          char const 0       char const 0

     For all these characters, by using constexpr, the compiler now knows that they
are not intended to change during execution, and the const qualification is implied.
That knowledge could be used to make our program more efficient, either faster (in
some sense) or by using less space. If the array, hidden behind the macro, is indexed
directly (such as in CORVID_NAMES[raven]), the whole array is not needed. Only
the corresponding string literal (here "raven") could be used directly by the compiler.
Even more, the compiler would be allowed to use the same string literal "raven" for
all the occurrences with index raven, the same for all with magpie, etc.
     5.7. Binary representions. The binary representation of a type is a model that de-
scribes the possible values for that type. It is not the same as the in-memory object
representation that describes the more or less physical storage of values of a given type.

 Takeaway 5.7 #1 The same value may have different binary representations.

     5.7.1. Unsigned integers. We have seen that unsigned integer types are those arith-
metic types for which the standard arithmetic operations have a nice, closed mathemat-
ical description, as we have seen in takeaway 4.2.2 #4 they are closed under arithmetic
operations. In mathematical terms, they implement a ring, ℤN , the set of integers mod-
ulo some number N . The values that are representable are 0, . . . , N − 1. The max-
imum value N − 1 completely determines such an unsigned integer type and is made
available through a macro with terminating _MAX in the name. For the basic unsigned
integer types, these are UINT_MAX, ULONG_MAX, and ULLONG_MAX , and they are
provided through <limits.h>. As we have seen, the one for size_t is SIZE_MAX                        <limits.h>
from <stdint.h>.                                                                                    <stdint.h>
     The binary representation for non-negative integer values is always exactly what
the term indicates: such a number is represented by binary digits b0 , b1 , . . . , bp−1 called

Table 5.5. Bounds for scalar types used in this book

 Name              [min, max]                              Where         Typical
 size_t            [0, SIZE_MAX]                           <stdint.h>    [0, 2w − 1], w = 32 or 64
 double            [±DBL_MIN, ±DBL_MAX ]                   <float.h>     [±2 −w−2 , ±2w ], w = 1,024
 signed            [INT_MIN, INT_MAX]                      <limits.h>    [ −2w , 2w − 1], w = 31
 unsigned          [0, UINT_MAX]                           <limits.h>    [0, 2w − 1], w = 32
 bool              [false, true ]                          <stdbool.h>   [0, 1]
 ptrdiff_t         [PTRDIFF_MIN, PTRDIFF_MAX ]             <stdint.h>    [ −2w , 2w − 1], w = 31 or 63
 char              [CHAR_MIN, CHAR_MAX ]                   <limits.h>    [ −128, 127] or [0, 255]
 unsigned char     [0, UCHAR_MAX ]                         <limits.h>    [0, 255]

bitsC . Each of the bits has a value of 0 or 1. The value of such a number is computed
as
                                           p−1
                                           ∑︁
(1)                                              bi 2i .
                                           i=0

      The value p in that binary representation is called the precisionC of the underlying
type, which, for unsigned types, is also the same as the width. For all unsigned types,
these values can be determined from the corresponding macro, such as UINT_WIDTH,
ULONG_WIDTH, and ULLONG_WIDTH . Bit b0 is called the least-significant bitC , LSB,
and bp−1 is the most-significant bitC (MSB).
      Of the bits bi that are 1, the one with minimal index i is called the least-significant
bit setC , and the one with the highest index is the most-significant bit setC . For exam-
ple, for an unsigned type with p = 16, the value 240 would have b4 = 1, b5 = 1, b6 = 1,
and b7 = 1. All other bits of the binary representation are 0, the least-significant bit set
i is b4 , and the most-significant bit set is b7 . From (1) , we see immediately that 2p is the
first value that cannot be represented with the type. Thus, N = 2p and the following
observation holds.

 Takeaway 5.7.1 #1 The maximum value of any integer type is of the form 2p − 1.

     Observe that for this discussion of the representation of non-negative values, we
haven’t argued about the signedness of the type. These rules apply equally to signed
and unsigned types. Only for unsigned types, we are lucky, and what we have said so
far completely suffices to describe such an unsigned type.

 Takeaway 5.7.1 #2 Arithmetic on an unsigned integer type is determined by its precision.

     Finally, table 5.5 shows the bounds of some of the commonly used scalars through-
out this book.
     5.7.2. Bit sets and bitwise operators. This simple binary representation of unsigned
types allows us to use them for another purpose that is not directly related to arithmetic:
as bit sets. A bit set is a different interpretation of an unsigned value, where we assume
that it represents a subset of the base set V = {0, . . . , p − 1} and where we take element
i to be member of the set, if the bit bi is present.
     There are three binary operators that operate on bit sets: |, &, and ^. They
represent the set union A ∪ B, set intersection A ∩ B, and symmetric difference AΔB, re-
spectively. For an example, let us choose A = 240, representing {4, 5, 6, 7}, and
B = 287, the bit set {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 8}; see table 5.6. For the result of these opera-
tions, the total size of the base set, and thus the precision p, is not needed. As for the

Table 5.6. Effects of bitwise operators

   Bit op      Value         Hex          b15 . . . b8 b7 . . . b0    Set op   Set
     V        65,535      0xFFFF       0b11111111’11111111                     {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
                                                                                         11, 12, 13, 14, 15}
      A          240      0x00F0       0b00000000’11110000                     {4, 5, 6, 7}
     ~A       65,295      0xFF0F       0b11111111’00001111            V \A     {0, 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10,
                                                                                         11, 12, 13, 14, 15}
     -A       65,296      0xFF10       0b11111111’00010000                     {4, 8, 9, 10,
                                                                                         11, 12, 13, 14, 15}
     B           287      0x011F       0b00000001’00011111                     {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 8}
    A|B          511      0x01FF       0b00000001’11111111            A∪B      {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}
    A&B           16      0x0010       0b00000000’00010000            A∩B      {4}
    A^B          495      0x01EF       0b00000001’11101111            AΔB      {0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8}

  arithmetic operators, there are corresponding assignment operators &=, |=, and ^=,
  respectively.[Exs 26][Exs 27][Exs 28][Exs 29]
       There is yet another operator that operates on the bits of the value: the complement
  operator ~. The complement ~A would have value 65295 and would correspond to the
  set {0, 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15}. This bit complement always depends on
  the precision p of the type.[Exs 30][Exs 31]
       All of these operators can be written with identifiers: bitor, bitand, xor, or_eq,
  and_eq, xor_eq, and compl if you include header <iso646.h>. A typical usage <iso646.h>
  of bit sets is for flags, variables that control certain settings of a program:
    enum corvid { magpie, raven, jay, chough, corvid_num, };
    #define FLOCK_MAGPIE 1U
    #define FLOCK_RAVEN   2U
    #define FLOCK_JAY     4U
    #define FLOCK_CHOUGH 8U
    #define FLOCK_EMPTY   0U
    #define FLOCK_FULL   15U

    int main(void) {
      unsigned flock = FLOCK_EMPTY;

        ...

        if (something) flock |= FLOCK_JAY;

        ...

        if (flock&FLOCK_CHOUGH)
          do_something_chough_specific(flock);

    }

  Here, the constants for each type of corvid are a power of two, so they have exactly one
  bit set in their binary representation. Membership in a flock can then be handled
  through the operators: |= adds a corvid to flock, and & with one of the constants
  tests whether a particular corvid is present.

[Exs 26]Show that A \ B can be computed by A - (A&B).
 [Exs 27]Show that V   + 1 is 0.
 [Exs 28]Show that A^B is equivalent to (A
                                        - (A&B)) + (B - (A&B)) and A + B - 2*(A&B).
[Exs 29]Show that A|B is equivalent to A
                                       + B - (A&B).
[Exs 30]Show that ~B can be computed by V - B.
 [Exs 31]Show that -B = ~B + 1.

                   Observe the similarity between operators & and && or | and ||. If we see each
              of the bits bi of an unsigned as a truth value, & performs the logical and of all bits of
              its arguments simultaneously. This is a nice analogy that should help you memorize
              the particular spelling of these operators. On the other hand, keep in mind that the
              operators || and && have short-circuit evaluation, so be sure to distinguish them clearly
              from the bit operators.
<stdbit.h>         Since C23, another set of bit operations is provided through the <stdbit.h>
              header. These include the functionality to count the bits with value 1 (the size of a set)
              with stdc_count_ones, to detect whether there is exactly one bit with value 1 (if a
              set is a singleton) with stdc_has_single_bit to provide the bit with the highest
              number that holds the value 1 with stdc_bit_width or to return the singleton set
              with the highest numbered element stdc_bit_floor. Since this header is new with
              C23, your platform might not yet have it. Another new feature is the preprocessor test
              __has_include, which you can use to query whether a header file can be found or
              not:
                   #if !__has_include(<stdbit.h>)
                   # error "this file needs the <stdbit.h> header"
                   #endif

                   5.7.3. Shift operators. The next set of operators builds a bridge between interpreta-
              tion of unsigned values as numbers and as bit sets. A left-shift operation << corresponds
              to the multiplication of the numerical value by the corresponding power of two. For
              example, for A = 240, the set {4, 5, 6, 7}, A << 2 is 240 · 22 = 240 · 4 = 960, which
              represents the set {6, 7, 8, 9}. Resulting bits that don’t fit into the binary representa-
              tion for the type are simply omitted. In our example, A << 9 would correspond to set
              {13, 14, 15, 16} (and value 122880), but since there is no bit 16, the resulting set is
              {13, 14, 15}, value 57344.
                   Thus, for such a shift operation, the precision p is again important. Not only are
              bits that don’t fit dropped, but p also restricts the possible values of the operand on the
              right.

                Takeaway 5.7.3 #1 The second operand of a shift operation must be less than the precision.

                  There is an analogous right-shift operation >> that shifts the binary representation
              toward the less-significant bits. Analogously, this corresponds to an integer division by
              a power of 2. Bits in positions less than or equal to the shift value are omitted from the
              result. Observe that for this operation, the precision of the type isn’t important.[Exs 32]
              There are also corresponding assignment operators <<= and >>=.
                  The primary use of the left-shift operator << is specifying powers of 2. In our
              example, we can now replace the #defines:
                #define FLOCK_MAGPIE (1U << magpie)
                #define FLOCK_RAVEN (1U << raven)
                #define FLOCK_JAY     (1U << jay)
                #define FLOCK_CHOUGH (1U << chough)
                #define FLOCK_EMPTY    0U
                #define FLOCK_FULL   ((1U << corvid_num)-1)

              This makes the example more robust against changes to the enumeration.
                  5.7.4. Boolean values. The Boolean data type in C is also considered an unsigned
              type. Remember that it has only values false and true, corresponding to 0 and 1,

             [Exs 32]Show that the bits that are “lost” in an operation x>>n correspond to the remainder
              x % (1ULL << n).

so there are no negative values. Before C23, the names bool33 as well as the constants
false and true only came through the inclusion of <stdbool.h>. If you have to <stdbool.h>
maintain an old code base or have to ensure backwards compatibility for older systems,
you should still use that include; on systems that don’t need it, it shouldn’t cause any
harm.
     Treating bool as an unsigned type is a stretch of the concept. Assignment to a
variable of that type doesn’t follow the modulus rule of takeaway 4.2.2 #3, but a special
rule for Boolean values (takeaway 3.1 #1).
     You will probably rarely need bool variables. They are only useful if you want
to ensure that the value is always reduced to false or true on assignment. Early
versions of C didn’t have a Boolean type, and unfortunately many experienced C pro-
grammers still don’t use it.
     5.7.5. Signed integers. Signed types are a bit more complicated than unsigned types.
A C implementation has to decide about two points:
        • What happens on arithmetic overflow?
        • How is the sign of a signed type represented?
Signed and unsigned types come in pairs according to their integer rank, with the no-
table two exceptions from table 5.1: char and bool. The binary representation of the
signed type is constrained by the inclusion diagram that we previously saw.
 Takeaway 5.7.5 #1 Positive values are represented independently from signedness.
     Or, stated otherwise, a positive value with a signed type has the same representation
as in the corresponding unsigned type. That is why the maximum value for any integer
type can be expressed so easily (takeaway 5.7.1 #1): signed types also have a precision,
p, that determines the maximum value of the type.
     The next thing the standard prescribes is that signed types have one additional
bit, the sign bitC . If it is 0, we have a positive value; if it is 1, the value is negative.
Historically, there have been different concepts of how such a sign bit can be used to
obtain a negative number, but C23 clarified that such that nowadays only the two’s
complementC is allowed for the sign representationsC .
     Previously, there also had been sign and magnitudeC and ones’ complementC , but
nowadays they only have historical or exotic relevance: for sign and magnitude, the
magnitude is taken as positive values, and the sign bit simply specifies that there is a
minus sign. Ones’ complement takes the corresponding positive value and comple-
ments all bits. Both representations have the disadvantage that two values evaluate to
0: there is a positive and a negative 0. Because there is no active platform that has these
representations, they have now been removed from the C standard; you should only
encounter them in history books or in maliciously intended recruitment tests.
     The two’s complement representation performs exactly the same arithmetic as we
have seen for unsigned types, but the upper half of unsigned values (those with a high-
order bit of 1) is interpreted as being negative. The following two functions are basically
all that is needed to interpret unsigned values as signed values:
  bool is_negative(unsigned a) {
    constexpr unsigned int_max = UINT_MAX/2;
    return a > int_max;
  }
  bool is_signed_less(unsigned a, unsigned b) {
    if (is_negative(a) != is_negative(b)) return a > b;
    else return a < b;
  }

    33Previously, the basic type was called _Bool. For backward compatibility with older sources, that name
is still maintained, but you should not use it in new code.

Table 5.7. Negation for 16-bit unsigned integer types

                                Op      Value            b15   ...  b0
                                 A        240      0b00000000’11110000
                                ~A     65,295      0b11111111’00001111
                                +1          1      0b00000000’00000001
                                -A     65,296      0b11111111’00010000

       Table 5.7 shows an example of how the negative of value 240 can be constructed.
  For unsigned types, -A can be computed as ~A + 1.[Exs 34][Exs 35][Exs 36] Two’s comple-
  ment representation performs exactly the same bit operation for signed types as for
  unsigned types. It only interprets representations that have the high-order bit as being
  negative.
       When done that way, signed integer arithmetic will again behave more or less
  nicely. Unfortunately, there is a pitfall that makes the outcome of signed arithmetic
  difficult to predict: overflow. Where unsigned values are forced to wrap around, the
  behavior of a signed overflow is undefinedC . The following two loops look much the
  same:
       for (unsigned i = 1; i; ++i) do_something();
       for ( signed i = 1; i; ++i) do_something();

        We know what happens for the first loop: the counter is incremented up to UINT_MAX
  and then wraps around to 0. All of this may take some time, but after UINT_MAX-1
  iterations, the loop stops because i will have reached 0.
        For the second loop, everything looks similar. But because here the behavior of
  overflow is undefined, the compiler is allowed to pretend that it will never happen. Since
  it also knows that the value at the start is positive, it may assume that i, as long as the
  program has defined behavior, is never negative or 0. The as-if rule (takeaway 5.1.3 #3)
  allows it to optimize the second loop to
       while (true) do_something();

  That’s right, an infinite loop. The only possibility that the code is valid is that do_something
  has a side effect so the program execution makes progress. Also, it may assume that the
  point after the loop is never reached, either the loop runs continues indefinitively or
  because it will reach an internal state that terminates execution. In section 15.4, we will
  discuss such situations in more detail.

   Takeaway 5.7.5 #2 Once the abstract state machine reaches an undefined state, no further
                assumption about the continuation of the execution can be made.

       Not only that, the compiler is allowed to do what it pleases for the operation itself
  (“Undefined? So, let’s define it”), but it may also assume that it will never reach such a
  state and draw conclusions from that.
       Commonly, a program that has reached an undefined state is referred to as “having”
  or “showing” undefined behaviorC . This wording is a bit unfortunate; in many such
  cases, a program does not “show” any visible signs of weirdness. In the contrary, bad
  things will be going on that you will not even notice for a long time.

   Takeaway 5.7.5 #3 It is your responsibility to avoid undefined behavior of all operations.

[Exs 34]Prove that for unsigned arithmetic, A + ~A is the maximum value.
 [Exs 35]Prove that for unsigned arithmetic, A   + ~A is −1.
 [Exs 36]Prove that for unsigned arithmetic, A   + (~A + 1) == 0.

       What makes things even worse is that on some platforms with some standard com-
  piler options, the execution will just look right. Since the behavior is undefined, on
  such a platform, signed integer arithmetic might turn out to be basically the same as
  unsigned. But changing the platform, the compiler, or some options can change that.
  Suddenly, your program that worked for years crashes out of nowhere.
       In the sequel, we will avoid talking about undefined behavior and generally refer
  to program failure because that is what is important for your program. Such a failure is,
  in general, unreliable (often referred to as byzantine); that is, none of the components
  of the execution are reliable anymore. The possible range of effects includes it going
  unnoticed to doing real harm to your platform or your data. We will dedicate a whole
  section of the book to program failure (section 15).

   Takeaway 5.7.5 #4 If the program state reaches an operation with undefined behavior, the
                execution has failed.

       Basically, what we have discussed up to this section always had well-defined behav-
  ior, so the abstract state machine is always in a well-defined state. Signed arithmetic
  changes this, so as long as you don’t need it, avoid it. We say that a program performs
  a trapC (or just traps) if it is terminated abruptly before its usual end.

   Takeaway 5.7.5 #5 Signed arithmetic may trap badly.

      One of the things that might already overflow for signed types is negation. We have
  seen that INT_MAX has all bits with the exception of the sign bit set to 1. INT_MIN
  then has the “next” representation: the sign bit set to 1 and all other bits set to 0. The
  corresponding value is not -INT_MAX.[Exs 37]

   Takeaway 5.7.5 #6 INT_MIN < -INT_MAX

       Or, stated otherwise, the positive value -INT_MIN is out of bounds since the value
  of the operation is larger than INT_MAX.

   Takeaway 5.7.5 #7 Negation may overflow for signed arithmetic.

      For signed types, bit operations work with the binary representation. The shift
  operations then become really messy. The semantics of what such an operation is for a
  negative value is not clear.

   Takeaway 5.7.5 #8 Use unsigned types for bit operations.

      5.7.6. Fixed-width integer types. The width (and thus the precision) of the integer
  types that we have seen so far can be inspected by using macros from <limits.h>,             <limits.h>
  such as UINT_WIDTH and LONG_WIDTH. The C standard only guarantees a minimal
  width for them. For the unsigned types, these are
                      type                       minimal precision
                      bool                       1
                      unsigned char              8
                      unsigned short             16
                      unsigned                   16
                      unsigned long              32
                      unsigned long long 64

[Exs 37]Show that INT_MIN+INT_MAX is −1.

                    Under usual circumstances, these guarantees should give you enough information;
               but under some technical constraints, such guarantees might not be sufficient, or you
               might want to emphasize a particular precision. This may be the case if you want to
               use an unsigned quantity to represent a bit set of a known maximal size. If you know
               that 32 bits will suffice for your set, depending on your platform, you might want to
               choose unsigned (if it happens to have 32 bits) or unsigned long (if unsigned
               is too narrow) to represent it.
<stdint.h>          The C standard provides names for exact-width integer types in <stdint.h>. As
               the name indicates, they are of an exact prescribed “width,” which for provided unsigned
               types is guaranteed to be the same as their precision.
                Takeaway 5.7.6 #1 If the type uintN _t is provided, it is an unsigned integer type with
                             exactly N bits of width and precision.
                Takeaway 5.7.6 #2 If the type intN _t is provided, it is signed and has a width of exactly
                             N bits and a precision of N − 1.
                      The typedef must be provided if types with the corresponding properties exist.38
                Takeaway 5.7.6 #3 If the types with the required properties exist for a value N , intN _t
                             and uintN _t must be provided.
                    Nowadays, platforms usually provide uint8_t, uint16_t, uint32_t, and
               uint64_t unsigned types and int8_t, int16_t, int32_t, and int64_t signed
               types, with more types being added, such as uint128_t and int128_t. Their pres-
               ence and bounds can be tested with the macros UINT8_WIDTH, . . . , UINT128_WIDTH
               for unsigned types and INT8_WIDTH, . . . , INT128_WIDTH, respectively.[Exs 39]
                    To encode literals of the requested type, there are the macros UINT8_C, . . . ,
               UINT64_C, and INT8_C, . . . , INT128_C, respectively. For example, on platforms
               where uint64_t is unsigned long, INT64_C(1) usually expands to something
               like 1UL.
                Takeaway 5.7.6 #4 For any of the fixed-width types that are provided, width _WIDTH,
                             minimum _MIN (only signed), maximum _MAX, and literals _C macros are
                             provided, too.
                   Since we cannot know the type behind such a fixed-width type, it would be difficult
               to guess the correct format specifier to use for printf and friends. Since C23, the
               "wN " length specifiers can be used for this task, where N is the width of the type:40
                 uint32_t n = 78;
                 int64_t big = (-UINT64_C(1))>>1;    // Same value as INT64_MAX
                 printf("n is %w32u, and big is %w64d\n", n, big);

                    The availability of the width macros (and some other specification tricks) since
               C23 makes it possible that types can be provided that cannot even be fully handled by
               the macro-preprocessor. In particular, most modern desktop computers have hard-
               ware support for 128 bit types, and these can now be exposed to C integer types as
               int128_t and uint128_t. This can be particularly interesting if you have to han-
               dle large bit sets:
                    38Before C23, this was only guaranteed for values 8, 16, 32, and 64. Note that the only types that are
               guaranteed to exist then are uintN _t and intN _t for N that equals CHAR_BITS, even on platforms
               where CHAR_BITS is not 8.
             [Exs 39]If they exist, the values of all these macros are prescribed by the properties of the types. Think of a
               closed formulas in N for these values.
                   40Previously, only macro substitutes were provided by the header <inttypes.h>. For example, for
               N = 64, there are PRIb64, PRId64, PRIi64, PRIo64, PRIu64, PRIx64, and PRIX64, for printf
               formats "%b", "%d", "%i", "%o", "%u", "%x" and "%X", respectively.

    #if ULLONG_WIDTH < UINT128_WIDTH     // don’t use UINT128_MAX
    typedef uint128_t wideType;
    #else
    typedef unsigned long long wideType;
    #endif

The width is guaranteed to be a relatively small number, so it will always be possible to
provide preprocessor conditionals with that.
     5.7.7. Bit-precise integer types. The exact-width integer types that we have seen pre-
viously only exist for a specific number of bits, generally only for powers of two. For
quantities that should fit into a precise number of bits C23 introduced bit-precise inte-
ger types. They are specified with the _BitInt keyword:
    unsigned _BitInt(3) u3 = 7wbu; // values         0, ..., 3, ... ,7
    signed   _BitInt(3) s3 = 3wb; // values -4, ..., 0, ..., 3
             _BitInt(3) s3 = 3wb; // same

     Here we see that these types also have literals, namely number literals that have
suffixes of wb or WB, possibly combined with u or U, in their suffix. These have the
particularity that they have the type with the least width that can represent the value.
For example,
        • 7wbu needs 3 bits to represent the value 7 and is unsigned, so the type is
          unsigned _BitInt(3).
        • 3wb needs 2 bits for the value 3 and reserves 1 bit for the sign, so it has type
          signed _BitInt(3).
        • 3wbu needs 2 bits for the value but doesn’t need a sign bit, so it has type
          signed _BitInt(2).

These types always compute within the maximal width of the operands. For example,
in
    u3 + 1wbu

the first operand has a width of 3 and the second, a width of 1. So, the result of the
operation has type unsigned _BitInt(3), and for our choice of values, the math-
ematical result 8 of the addition wraps around for a final value of 0.
     One possible use for these types is for specific constants that we want to have for a
certain width:
    constexpr unsigned _BitInt(3) max3u = -1;            // 0b111
    constexpr unsigned _BitInt(4) max4u = -1;            // 0b1111
    constexpr unsigned _BitInt(4) high4u= max4u - max3u; // 0b1000
    constexpr   signed _BitInt(4) max4s = max3u;         // 0b0111
    constexpr   signed _BitInt(4) min4s = ~max4s;        // 0b1000

     The types exist for all widths from 1 (for unsigned types) or 2 (for signed types)
up to the value BITINT_MAXWIDTH, defined in <limits.h>; this maximal width is                  <limits.h>
always greater than or equal to the width of unsigned long long, ULLONG_WIDTH.
This allows us to specify all integer literals with exact value and signedness. For exam-
ple, the following monster is a signed integer literal with a precision of 127 bit and thus
of type _BitInt(128):
    0x7FFF’FFFF’FFFF’FFFF’FFFF’FFFF’FFFF’FFFFwb

     So if that type exists (BITINT_MAXWIDTH ≥ 128), it can be used for the initializa-
tion of variables of type int128_t, even if literals for that type itself are not supported.

                     5.7.8. Floating-point data. Whereas integers come near the mathematical concepts
              of ℕ (unsigned) or ℤ (signed), floating-point types are close to ℝ (non-complex) or ℂ
              (complex). The way they differ from these mathematical concepts is twofold. First,
              there is a size restriction on what is presentable. This is similar to what we have seen
<float.h>     for integer types. The include file <float.h>, for example, has constants DBL_MIN
              and DBL_MAX that provide us with the minimal and maximal values for double. But
              be aware that here, DBL_MIN is the smallest number that is strictly greater than 0.0;
              the smallest negative double value is -DBL_MAX.
                     But real numbers (ℝ) have another difficulty when we want to represent them on a
              physical system: they can have an unlimited expansion, such as the value 13 , which has
              an endless repetition of the digit 3 in decimal representation, or the value of 𝜋, which
              is “transcendent” and so has an endless expansion in any representation and doesn’t
              repeat in any way.
                     C and other programming languages deal with these difficulties by cutting off the
              expansion. The position where the expansion is cut is “floating” (thus the name) and
              depends on the magnitude of the number in question.
                     In a view that is a bit simplified, a floating-point value is computed from the fol-
              lowing values:
                           s Sign (±1)
                           e Exponent, an integer
             f1 , . . . , fp values 0 or 1, the mantissa bits
                     For the exponent, we have emin ≤ e ≤ emax . p, the number of bits in the mantissa,
              is called precision. The floating-point value is then given by this formula:
                                                                     p
                                                                    ∑︁
                                                                e
                                                           s·2 ·          fk 2−k .
                                                                    k=1
                   The values p, emin, and emax are type dependent and therefore not represented ex-
              plicitly in each number. They can be obtained through macros such as DBL_MANT_DIG
              (for p, typically 53) DBL_MIN_EXP (emin , −1′ 021), and DBL_MAX_EXP (emax , 1′ 024).
                   If we have, for example, a number that has s = −1, e = −2, f1 = 1, f2 = 0, and
              f3 = 1, its value is
                                                                   1 1 1          1 4 + 1 −5
                     −1 · 2−2 · ( f1 2−1 + f2 2−2 + f3 2−3 ) = −1 · · ( + ) = −1 · ·        =
                                                                   4 2 8          4     8     32
              which corresponds to the decimal value −0.156,25. From that calculation, we see also
              that floating-point values are always representable as a fraction that has some power of
              two in the denominator.[Exs 41]
                   An important thing to keep in mind with such floating-point representations is that
              values can be cut off during intermediate computations.

               Takeaway 5.7.8 #1 Floating-point operations are neither associative, commutative, nor dis-
                            tributive.

                   So, basically, floating points lose all the nice algebraic properties we are used to
              when doing pure math. The problems that arise from that are particularly pronounced
              if we operate with values that have very different orders of magnitude.[Exs 42] For ex-
              ample, adding a very small floating-point value x with an exponent that is less than −p
              to a value y > 1 just returns y again. As a consequence, it is really difficult to assert
              without further investigation whether two computations have the “same” result. Such
            [Exs 41]Show that all representable floating-point values with e > p are multiples of 2e−p .
            [Exs 42]Print
                        the  results of the  following                    expressions:      1.0E-13 + 1.0E-13   and
              (1.0E-13 + (1.0E-13 + 1.0)) - 1.0.

investigations are often cutting-edge research questions, so we cannot expect to be able
to assert equality or inequality. We are only able to tell that the results are “close.”

 Takeaway 5.7.8 #2 Never compare floating-point values for equality.

    The representation of the complex types is straightforward and identical to an ar-
ray of two elements of the corresponding real floating-point type. To access the real
and imaginary part of a complex number, two type generic macros also come with the
header <tgmath.h>: creal and cimag. For any z of one of the three complex                  <tgmath.h>
types, we have that z == creal(z) + cimag(z)*I.43

  43We will learn about such function-like macros in section 8.1.2.

                                    Summary
     • C programs run in an abstract state machine that is mostly independent of the
       specific computer where it is launched.
     • All basic C types are kinds of numbers, but not all of them can be used directly
       for arithmetic.
     • Values have a type and a binary representation.
     • When necessary, types of values are implicitly converted to fit the needs of
       particular places where they are used.
     • Variables must be explicitly initialized before their first use.
     • Integer computations give exact values as long as there is no overflow.
     • Floating-point computations only give approximated results that are cut off
       after a certain number of binary digits.
