
                                          9. Style
      This section covers
        • Writing readable code
        • Formatting code
        • Naming identifiers

     Programs serve a dual-purpose. First, as we have already seen, they serve to give
instructions to the compiler and the final executable. But equally important, they doc-
ument the intended behavior of a system for the people (users, customers, maintainers,
lawyers, and so on) who have to deal with it. Therefore, we have a prime directive.
 Takeaway 9 #1 All C code must be readable.
     The difficulty with that directive is knowing what constitutes “readable.” Not all
experienced C programmers agree, so we will begin by trying to establish a minimal
list of necessities. The first thing we must have in mind when discussing the human
condition is that it is constrained by two major factors: physical ability and cultural
baggage.
 Takeaway 9 #2 Short-term memory and the field of vision are small.
     Torvalds et al. [1996], the coding style for the Linux kernel, is a good example that
insists on that aspect and certainly is worth a detour if you haven’t read it yet. Its main
assumptions are still valid: a programming text has to be represented in a relatively
small “window” (be it a console or a graphical editor) that consists of roughly 30 lines
of 80 columns, making a “surface” of 2,400 characters. Everything that doesn’t fit has
to be memorized. For example, our very first program in listing 1.1 fits into these
constraints.
     By its humorous reference to Kernighan and Ritchie [1978], the Linux coding style
also refers to another fundamental fact.
 Takeaway 9 #3 Coding style is not a question of taste but of culture.
      Ignoring this easily leads to endless and fruitless debates about not much at all.
 Takeaway 9 #4 Each established project constitutes its own cultural space.
     Try to adapt to the habits of the inhabitants. When you create your own project,
you have a bit of freedom to establish your own rules. But be careful if you want others
to adhere to them; you must not deviate too much from the common sense that reigns
in the corresponding community.
    9.1. Formatting. The C language itself is relatively tolerant of formatting issues.
Under normal circumstances, a C compiler will dumbly parse an entire program that is
written on a single line with minimal white space and where all identifiers are composed
of the letter l and the digit 1. The need for code formatting originates in human
incapacity.
 Takeaway 9.1 #1 Choose a consistent strategy for white space and other text formatting.
     Formatting concerns indentation, placement of parentheses and all kinds of brack-
ets ({}, [], and ()), spaces before and after operators, trailing spaces, and multiple
new lines. The human eye and brain are quite peculiar in their habits, and to ensure
that they work properly and efficiently, everything must be in sync.
     In the introduction for level 1, you saw a lot of the coding style rules applied to the
code in this book. Take them as an example of one style; you will most likely encounter
other styles as you go along. Let us recall some of the rules and introduce some others
that have not yet been presented:

        • We use prefix notation for code blocks: that is, an opening { is at the end of
          a line.
        • We bind type modifiers and qualifiers to the left.
        • We bind function () to the left, but () of conditions are separated from their
          keyword (such as if or for) with a space.
        • A ternary expression has spaces around the ? and the :.
        • Punctuation marks (:, ;, and ,) have no space before them but either one
          space or a new line after.
As you see, when written out, these rules can appear quite cumbersome and arbitrary.
They have no value as such; they are visual aids that help you and your collaborators
understand new code in the blink of an eye. They are not meant to be meticulously
typed by you directly, but you should acquire and learn the tools that can help you with
them.

 Takeaway 9.1 #2 Have your text editor automatically format your code correctly.

      I personally use Emacs (https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) for that task (yes, I
am that old). For me, it is ideal since it understands a lot of the structure of a C program
by itself. Your mileage will probably vary, but don’t use a tool in everyday life that
gives you less. Text editors, integrated development environments (IDEs), and code
generators are there for us, not the other way around.
      In bigger projects, you should enforce such a formatting policy for all the code
that circulates and is read by others. Otherwise, it will become difficult to track differ-
ences between versions of programming text. This can be automated by command-line
tools that do the formatting. Here, I have a long-time preference for astyle (artis-
tic style http://sourceforge.net/projects/astyle/). Again, your mileage
may vary; please choose any tool that ensures the task for you.
   9.2. Naming. The limit of such automatic formatting tools is reached when it
comes to naming.

 Takeaway 9.2 #1 Choose a consistent naming policy for all identifiers.

     There are two different aspects to naming: technical restrictions on one hand and
semantic conventions on the other. Unfortunately, they are often mixed up and the
subject of endless ideological debate.
     For C, various technical restrictions apply; they are meant to help you, so take them
seriously. First, we target all identifiers: types (struct or not), struct and union
members, variables, enumerations, macros, functions, function-like macros. There are
so many tangled name spacesC that you have to be careful.
     In particular, the interaction between header files and macro definitions can have
surprising effects. Here is a seemingly innocent example:
 double memory_sum(size_t N, size_t I, double strip[N][I]);

        • N is a capitalized identifier, and thus your collaborator could be tempted to
          define a macro N as a big number.
        • I is used for the root of −1 as soon as someone includes <complex.h>.                <complex.h>
        • The identifier strip might be used by a C implementation for a library
          function or macro.
        • The identifier memory_sum might be used by the C standard for a type name
          in the future.

 Takeaway 9.2 #2 Any identifier that is visible in a header file must be conforming.

                 Here, conforming is a wide field. In C jargon, an identifier is reservedC if its meaning
           is fixed by the C standard, and you may not redefine it otherwise:
                   • Names starting with an underscore and a second underscore or a capital letter
                     are reserved for language extensions and other internal use.
                   • Names starting with an underscore are reserved for file scope identifiers and
                     for enum, struct and union tags.
                   • Macros have all-caps names.
                   • All identifiers that have a predefined meaning are reserved and cannot be used
                     in file scope. This includes a lot of identifiers, such as all functions in the C
                     library, all identifiers starting with str (like our strip, earlier), all identifiers
                     starting with E, all identifiers ending in _t, and many more.

           What makes all of these rules relatively difficult is that you might not detect any violation
           for years, and then, suddenly, on a new client machine, after the introduction of the next
           C standard and compiler or after a simple system upgrade, your code explodes.
                A simple strategy to keep the probability of naming conflicts low is to expose as few
           names as possible.

            Takeaway 9.2 #3 Don’t pollute the global space of identifiers.

                Expose only types and functions as interfaces that are part of the application pro-
           gramming interfaceC (APIC )— that is, those that are supposed to be used by users of
           your code.
                A good strategy for a library used by others or in other projects is to use naming
           prefixes that are unlikely to create conflicts. For example, many functions and types in
           the POSIX thread API are prefixed with pthread_. For my tool box P99, I use the
           prefixes p99_ and P99_ for API interfaces and p00_ and P00_ for internals.
                There are two sorts of names that may interact badly with macros that another
           programmer writes and which you might not think of immediately:
                   • Member names of struct and union
                   • Parameter names in function interfaces

           The first point is the reason why the members in standard structures usually have a
           prefix to their names: struct timespec has tv_sec as a member name because an
           uneducated user might declare a macro sec that would interfere in an unpredictable
<time.h>   way when including <time.h>. For the second point, we saw an example earlier. In
           P99, I would specify such a function something like this:
            double p99_memory_sum(size_t p00_n, size_t p00_i,
                                  double p00_strip[p00_n][p00_i]);

               This problem gets worse when we are also exposing program internals to the public
           view. This happens in two cases:
                   • So-called inline functions, which are functions whose definition (not only
                     declaration) is visible in a header file
                   • Function-like macros

           We will discuss these features much later in sections 16.1 and 17.
              Now that we have clarified the technical points of naming, we will look at the se-
           mantic aspect.

            Takeaway 9.2 #4 Names must be recognizable and quickly distinguishable.

Table 9.1. Some examples of well and badly distinguishable identifiers.

                                                    Recognizable        Distinguishable   Quickly
      lllll1llOll            llllll1l0ll                No                    No           No
      myLineNumber           myLimeNumber               Yes                   Yes          No
      n                      m                          Yes                   Yes          Yes
      ffs                    clz                        No                    Yes          Yes
      lowBit                 highBit                    Yes                   Yes          Yes
      p00Orb                 p00Urb                     No                    Yes          No
      p00_orb                p00_urb                    Yes                   Yes          Yes

          That has two parts: distinguishable and quickly. Compare the identifiers in ta-
    ble 9.1.
          For your personal taste, the answers on the right side of this table may be different.
    This reflects my taste: an implicit context for such names is part of my personal expec-
    tation. The difference between n and m on one side and for ffs and clz on the other
    is an implicit semantic.
          For me, because I have a heavily biased mathematical background, single-letter
    variable names from i to n, such as n and m, are integer variables. These usually occur
    inside a quite restricted scope as loop variables or similar. Having a single-letter identi-
    fier is fine (we always have the declaration in view), and they are quickly distinguished.
          The function names ffs and clz are different because they compete with all
    other three-letter acronyms that could potentially be used for function names. Ac-
    cidentally, here, ffs is shorthand for find first (bit) set, but this is not immediately
    obvious to me. What it means is even less clear: which bit is first, the most signifi-
    cant or the least significant? In C23, which now integrates these functionalities via the
    <stdbit.h> header, more significant names have been chosen, stdc_bit_width <stdbit.h>
    and stdc_trailing_zeros.
          There are several conventions that combine multiple words in one identifier. Among
    the most commonly used are the following:
              • Camel caseC , using internalCapitalsToBreakWords
              • Snake caseC , using internal_underscores_to_break_words
              • Hungarian notationC ,1 which encodes type information in the prefix of the
                identifiers, such as szName, where sz stands for string and zero terminated
    As you might imagine, none of these is ideal. The first two tend to obscure our view:
    they easily clog up a whole precious line of programming text with an unreadable ex-
    pression:

1    return theVerySeldomlyUsedConstant*theVerySeldomlyUsedConstant/
         number_of_elements;

        Hungarian notation, in turn, tends to use obscure abbreviations for types or con-
    cepts, produces unpronounceable identifiers, and completely breaks down if you have
    an API change.
        So, in my opinion, none of these rules or strategies have absolute values. I encour-
    age you to take a pragmatic approach to the question.

     Takeaway 9.2 #5 Naming is a creative act.
       It is not easily subsumed by simple technical rules. Obviously, good naming is
    more important the more widely an identifier is used. So, it is particularly important
       1Invented in Simonyi [1976], the PhD thesis of Simonyi Károly.

for identifiers for which the declaration is generally out of view of the programmer:
global names that constitute the API.

 Takeaway 9.2 #6 File scope identifiers must be comprehensive.

      What constitutes comprehensive here should be derived from the type of the identi-
fier. Type names, constants, variables, and functions generally serve different purposes,
so different strategies apply.

 Takeaway 9.2 #7 A type name identifies a concept.

     Examples of such concepts are time for struct timespec, size for size_t, a
collection of corvidae for enum corvid, person for a data structure that collects data
about people, list for a chained list of items, dictionary for a query data structure, and so
on. If you have difficulty coming up with a concept for a data structure, an enumeration,
or an arithmetic type, you should probably revisit your design.

 Takeaway 9.2 #8 A global constant identifies an artifact.

     That is, a constant stands out for some reason from the other possible constants of
the same type: it has a special meaning. It may have this meaning for some exter-
nal reason beyond our control (M_PI for 𝜋) because the C standard says so (false,
true) because of a restriction of the execution platform (SIZE_MAX), to be factual
(corvid_num), for a reason that is culturally motivated (fortytwo), or as a design
decision.
     Generally, we will see shortly that file scope variables (globals) are much frowned
upon. Nevertheless, they are sometimes unavoidable, so we have to have an idea how
to name them.

 Takeaway 9.2 #9 A global variable identifies state.

     Typical names for such variables are toto_initialized to encode the fact that
library toto has already been initialized, onError for a file scope but internal variable
that is set in a library that must be torn down, and visited_entries for a hash table
that collects shared data.

 Takeaway 9.2 #A A function or functional macro identifies an action.

    Not all, but many, of the functions in the C standard library follow that rule and
use verbs as a component of their names. Here are some examples:
       • A standard function that compares two strings is strcmp.
       • A standard macro that queries for a property is isless
       • A function that accesses a data member could be called toto_getFlag
       • The corresponding one that sets such a member would be toto_setFlag
       • A function that multiples two matrices is matrixMult
     9.3. Internationalization, so to speak. Generally, in the English-speaking world,
the term “internationalization” refers to the ability of a platform or feature to adapt to
other language conventions than English. I put this term into quotes because I think
that it already contains quite an amount of hybris, namely that English would be the
center of the world’s culture and everybody else just spins around it as of secondary
importance.
     Then, the term also goes too short because the features to which it usually refers
are not only to different national cultures or languages; they also concern subcultures
(such as adepts of the invented Klingon language) and specific technical requirements

in specialized contexts, such as mathematical notation, IPA phonetics, and graphical
characters.
     So, let’s first come back to using other languages and scripts in coding. Note that
this question is different (and should be dissociated) from the question of whether a
program supports one or multiple languages for its users. In section 8.7 we have already
seen some features that help adapt a program to the environment in which it is executed.
     Note that English is definitively of high importance in the computer science indus-
try and often serves as a lingua franca. As a German living in France writing an English
book about C, I am confronted with that every day.2
     But outside of my bubble, it may be completely sensible to use different language
conventions for variable and function names and code comments. In particular, pro-
gramming communities in cultures that use scripts that are not based on Latin should
(and do) use other scripts and languages to a large extent. As it had been developed
in English, C has a historical baggage of implicitly forcing that language in coding.
Whenever these things are discussed publicly (for example, on social networks), often
you would hear quite pronounced (perceivably arrogant) opinions on why one would
even think of using another language or, even more qualified, that the person would not
know how to enter a non-English character on their keyboard.
     Luckily, affairs have slowly evolved such that communities now have a real choice
about the language features they want to use. Unicode support (see section 14) is usually
good enough, and C has embraced at least some level of language support, even for
the coding itself. Code as in the following should easily be accepted and maintainable
without difficulties:
 long année = 1990L; // Année de l’écriture de l’œuvre

    If it isn’t, it is not the fault of the person who wrote that code, but it is your environ-
ment, implementation, system, or institution that is to blame. If you are surprised by
such code, you should first question your own compass and your own prejudice before
suggesting a change.

 Takeaway 9.3 #1 The natural language of a project should be chosen to accommodate the
              majority of the participants.

     That is, again, what language to choose depends on a lot of factors. The most
important is that everybody in the project is mostly at ease. In Western societies, that
will often mean that projects use English, but don’t take this as a given just because you
were raised with that assumption.
     The other aspect that should be more focused on is the adequate technical language
that is used for domain-specific problems. As an example domain, consider mathemat-
ics. If you look into usual mathematical texts, you will see a lot of different scripts all
mixed together with a lot of conventions about proper names (for example, 𝜋, ℂ, ℕ, ℚ,
ℝ, and ℤ), classes of symbols (𝛼, 𝛽 , and 𝛾 for angles, 𝛿, and 𝜀 for small quantities, ℵ
for infinities) that all contribute so that somebody from the corresponding community,
such a text is readable with the blink of an eye. There should be no restriction to using
such characters and conventions anywhere in the documentation to describe what the
code does. Modern systems have to be able to use these and work with them smoothly.
     When it comes to using other scripts and mathematical symbols at the core of
the language (namely, as identifiers), things are much more disputed and have been
much more difficult technically in the past. Previous versions of the C standard already
allowed, in principle, the addition of a large panel of characters, but the specification
for the allowed set of identifiers had been not easy to comprehend, and the platforms
   2These are my four main languages. What are yours?

had not exactly been able to ease their integration into your code. The only portable
way to do so has been with a crude syntax such as here:
 long ann\u00E9e = 1990L; // Ann\u00E9e de l’\u00E9criture de l’\u0153uvre

     Here, the aberrations of \u00E9 and \u0153 stand for the characters “é” and
“œ,” respectively. Having to encode them in that way somehow defeats the purpose,
and this has only a clear application as an intermediate format. Tooling was needed
to transform your native encoding before feeding it into the compiler, and not very
surprisingly, nobody used this kind of feature.
     With C23, the tide may have turned. Language support is now more straightly
referring to Unicode, and the rules for allowed identifiers are now clear and refer to a
substandard of Unicode, namely UAX #31 ("Unicode Identifier and Pattern Syntax").
The problem that part of Unicode addresses is the fact that many characters in non-
English languages are composed of different components. For example, the “é” that
we used previously is obtained from a plain Latin “e” with code \u0065) and an acute
accent “´” with code \u0301. So, in general, there are several inputs (here, \u00E9
and \u0065\u0301) that, depending on the context, are perceived as representing
the same character.
     The method from UAX #31 chosen for the C programming language to deal with
kind of ambiguity is called Normalization Form C3 To know to which unique character
sequence a given string (or, here, identifier) maps, it is first decomposed into all the base
characters, accents, and so on, and then it is recomposed. For our example of “é” or
something like the Hangul Syllable Gag “ ” (\uAC01), this is not very interesting. The
resulting character of this procedure is the one with which we started:
      \u00E9 → \u0065\u0301       → \u00E9
      \uAC01 → \u1100\u1161\u11A8 → \uAC01

   It becomes more interesting when several characters have the same decomposition,
namely “Å” (Latin Capital Letter A with Ring Above) and “Å” (Angstrom sign):4
      \u00C5 → \u0041\u030A → \u00C5
      \u21B2 → \u0041\u030A → \u00C5

    Here, the code point \u21B2 is seen as having the same decomposition as the
direct alphabetic composition and the Form C projects it to that code point \u00C5.
    Another ambiguity occurs for signs that are themselves considered letters but based
on Greek letters, such as the Ohm sign5 (\u2126), which stems from Greek capital letter
Omega “Ω” (\u03A9):
      \u03A9 → \u03A9 → \u03A9
      \u2126 → \u03A9 → \u03A9

     On the other hand, technical symbols identified as alphabetic letters but with a
glyph that is clearly distinct from all other alphabetic letters such as “ℜ” and “ℑ” (for
real and imaginary parts of a complex number) map to themselves.

 Takeaway 9.3 #2 Alphabetic letters are only allowed in identifiers if they map to themselves
              for Normalization Form C.

       Such a rule is perhaps not explicit enough, so let’s reformulate it.

      3Choosing the same name “C” for the language and the Normalization Form is just a coincidence.
      4A metric unit named after the Swedish physicist Anders Jonas Ångström (1814–1874).
      5The unit for electrical resistance is named after the German physicist Georg Simon Ohm (1789–1854).

 Takeaway 9.3 #3 Only use alphabetic letters in identifiers if they originate directly from
              natural languages or they are clearly distinctive from all natural languages.

     But be aware that Normalization Form C does not solve all the possible problems.
In particular, glyphs from different languages might be indistinguishable, such as a Greek
capital letter Alpha and Latin capital letter A, which have the same glyph “A.”
     In other positions than the first, identifiers may also contain numbers. You may
use the wide spectrum of Unicode’s Decimal Digit category, but be careful because these
may also have glyphs that are not easily distinguishable. For example, a name a0 (using
mathematical bold digit zero, 0) may look very simlar to a0 (using a usual digit zero 0
character).

 Takeaway 9.3 #4 Only use letters from different scripts or variations of decimal digits in
              identifiers if they are clearly distinctive from one another.

     One feature that is still missed by the rules that C23 introduced is subscript and
superscript numbers. For my taste, it would be nice if we could distinguish variable
names, such as, for example, a1 and a2 . The compilers on my platform already allow
this as an extension, but this might not (yet) be fully portable:

 Takeaway 9.3 #5 Using subscript or superscript letters in identifiers is not portable.

                                     Summary
      • Coding style is a matter of culture. Be tolerant and patient.
      • The choice of a project’s natural language is important and should be con-
        sensual.
      • Code formatting is a matter of visual habits. It should be automatically pro-
        vided by your environment so you and your co-workers can read and write
        code effortlessly.
      • Naming variables, functions, and types is an art and plays a central role in the
        comprehensiveness of your code.
      • Identifiers used for names may be written with non-Latin characters to ex-
        press ideas in the project’s natural language or in the accepted terminology of
        the specific domain.
