
                                   15. Program failure
      This section covers
         • Wrongdoings leading to failure
         • Degradation of the program state
         • Unfortunate incidents
         • Anticipatory error checking
         • Cleanup

C programs can fail in very different ways—silently, sporadically, predictably, or with
pomp and circumstances. Commonly, much emphasis is put on the things that may
happen when a program fails, and attention is withdrawn from the question if a pro-
gram fails and why. This is apparent with the term that is often (even falsely) applied
to such situations: undefined behavior. This term even has an abbreviation in the jargon:
UBC . As the term itself suggests, its focus is on the behavior of the program (or, bet-
ter, the whole system) after an error occurred and not on the reasons that lead to the
error. It’s a bit similar to trying to improve road safety by scaremongering drivers with
fines or prison sentences, instead of promoting regular security checks of cars, requiring
licenses, or educating drivers and passengers about the benefits of wearing a seat belt.
     We will distinguish three different forms of program failure. The first is the specific
actions (wrongdoings) that directly cause a failure (section 15.1). Second, in some sit-
uations, the state of the executions deteriorates step by step, without one specific action
that can or should be blamed for resulting in program failure (section 15.2). Finally, the
most difficult and complicated situations occur when behavior that is valid in isolation
fails in unfortunate combination from distant parts of the program (section 15.3). At
the end, we briefly discuss how program failures may manifest, which is surprisingly
uncorrelated to the form of the failure (section 15.5).
     We will not handle compilation, linkage, or startup failures that, for example, may
lead to invalid executables by linking TU with contradicting declarations (including in-
consistent attributes such as [[noreturn]]) and using incorrect character or string
constants or using invalid function as an atexit handler. These failures may also only
manifest after a seemingly successful startup of a program that did not notice that it was
doomed long before.
     In this chapter, we will continue to draw our examples from a field that is quite
different from computing, but hopefully, it will provide us with enough analogies to
understand the problems: traffic of cars, trains, planes, or rockets. I think that these
provide good examples because the domain is ruled by a similar set of constraints:
         • It is described by a multitude of parameters, including space, velocity, accel-
           eration, energy consumption, and density.
         • It is dynamic. The situation changes from second to second, and what is a
           good action in one moment can be catastrophic in the next.
         • It draws on a limited number of resources, such as available space, fuel or
           electricity, oxygen, time, conductors, cars, and tracks.
         • It has multiple objectives, which may include speed, throughput, comfort,
           safety, and fun.
         • It is ruled by different types of laws, such as physics, penal, societal, and su-
           perstition.

A common aspect of the failures that we handle here is that they manifest during pro-
gram execution and that they may occur in situations where they are not detectable at
compile time. Errors that violate the constraints of the language are, in general, diag-
nosed during compilation and are much less of a worry.

          15.1. Wrongdoings. This first category of program failures is certainly the most
     easy to comprehend. It comprises actions or events (or the lack thereof) that directly
     lead to a failure. In general, if a car veers off a straight alley and hits a tree, we would
     blame the driver and suspect they have done something wrong, such as a mismanipula-
     tion, speeding, drunk driving, or a similar offense. There is also the slight possibility that
     something was wrong with the car or the road, so if there is no obvious other cause, we
     could look into that. But only under rare circumstances should the reporter who writes
     about the accident, Earth’s rotation, or the old oak tree into which the car smashed be
     made responsible for the damages.
          15.1.1. Arithmetic violations. Among the possible wrongdoings of a program dur-
     ing execution, the simplest category is what the C standard calls an exceptional condition,
     which is an operation that uses operands for which no mathematical result is defined.
     The most commonly present are probably
             • Division by zero
             • Modulo by zero
     Here, the operations are not mathematically defined for the numbers that we represent.
     (For floating-point arithmetic, see the following discussion.)
          There are several other operations that are similar but the problems they cause
     are linked to the specific way in which we present numbers as finite sets of bits. For
     example,
             • Negation of INT_MIN or similar negative values
             • If the second operand of a bit-shift operation is negative or is greater or equal
                to the width of the first operand
             • if an attempt is made to bit-shift into the sign bit of a signed integer type
     Historically, platforms have deployed quite different strategies for such illicit opera-
     tions. A very common one is to crash. The best strategy is to avoid them.

      Takeaway 15.1.1 #1 The program execution should only perform arithmetic operations that
                  are mathematically defined within the range of the underlying type.

          Not surprisingly for C, the mathematically defined bit has a special interpretation
     when it comes to floating-point arithmetic. If there is a floating-point value for “infin-
     ity” on the platform, then division by zero is defined (it results in infinity), and any such
     operation is valid. The macro INFINITY in <float.h> (respectively, before C23 in                 <float.h>
     <math.h>) can also be used to test whether infinity is supported:                                <math.h>

              .                                                                         fp_except.c
22    bool const has_inf =
23    #ifdef INFINITY
24      (1.0/0.0 == INFINITY)
25    #else
26      false
27    #endif
28      ;

         The header <fenv.h> (for “floating-point environment”) has several macros that               <fenv.h>
     encode exceptional floating-point conditions such as division by zero:
              .                                                                         fp_except.c
30    int excepts[] = {
31    #ifdef FE_DIVBYZERO
32      FE_DIVBYZERO,
33    #endif

34    #ifdef FE_INEXACT
35       FE_INEXACT,
36    #endif
37    #ifdef FE_INVALID
38       FE_INVALID,
39    #endif
40    #ifdef FE_OVERFLOW
41       FE_OVERFLOW,
42    #endif
43    #ifdef FE_UNDERFLOW
44       FE_UNDERFLOW,
45    #endif
46    };

          As you might guess from the names of these exceptions, not all of them concern
     possible arithmetic violations. We will see some more in the following discussion.
     These constants can be used as bitsets; or-ing them into one integer value can be used
     to manage combinations of these exceptional conditions.
          In our traffic examples, an invalid operation would be driving fast and then step-
     ping violently on the brakes. If you have a not-so-sophisticated car (a platform without
     INFINITY), you will very likely run off the road and hit the tree. If you have a car with
     an anti-lock braking system (ABS) (a platform handling FE_DIVBYZERO), you may
     be lucky and stay on the road. In neither circumstance is speeding and then braking
     violently a good idea.
          The supported floating-point exceptions usually do not result in program failures,
     and the header has interfaces (here, fetestexcept and feclearexcept [floating-
     point environment test clear exception]) that allow you to query or manage such an
     exception:
             .                                                                     fp_except.c
48    void printexcept(void) {
49      char const* name[] = {
50    #ifdef FE_DIVBYZERO
51         "divbyzero",
52    #endif
53    #ifdef FE_INEXACT
54         "inexact",
55    #endif
56    #ifdef FE_INVALID
57         "invalid",
58    #endif
59    #ifdef FE_OVERFLOW
60         "overflow",
61    #endif
62    #ifdef FE_UNDERFLOW
63         "underflow",
64    #endif
65      };
66      int except = fetestexcept(FE_ALL_EXCEPT);
67      if (except) {
68         printf("[");
69         for (unsigned j = 0; except; except &= ~excepts[j], ++j)
70           if (excepts[j] & except)
71             printf("%s ", name[j]);
72         printf("]");
73      }
74    }

75
76    int main (int argc, char* argv[static argc+1]) {
77      printf("division by zero is %sequal to INFINITY\n", has_inf ? "
          " : "un");
78      for (unsigned i = 1; i < argc; i++) {
79        feclearexcept(FE_ALL_EXCEPT);
80        double x = strtod(argv[i], nullptr);
81        printf("%g ", x);
82        printexcept();
83        feclearexcept(FE_ALL_EXCEPT);
84        printf(": %g ", 1.0/x);
85        printexcept();
86        puts("");
87      }
88    }

      Takeaway 15.1.1 #2 The floating-point environment of the platforms determines the floating-
                  point operations that result in program failure.
          So, the portability of numerical programs that use floating-point operations that
     might or might not fail is a real concern and must be carefully handled with feature
     tests.
          Another set of arithmetic operations that might fail are those that operate on pointer
     values. In fact, the naive representation of pointers as integers-in-disguise is not the
     whole story. Because of address space segmentation, addition or comparison of pointer
     values can be much more restricted than those for similar operations on integers. Prob-
     lematic are
             • Address addition or subtraction with an integer that overflows the array bounds;
             • Pointer comparison if not pointing into the same array object
     Here, the operation itself might already be invalid, even if the theoretical result repre-
     sents a valid address.
      Takeaway 15.1.1 #3 Pointer manipulations should always stay within the boundaries of an
                  array object.
          In general, it is much better to express an intent of reading a specific element of an
     array (either accessed directly or via a pointer) by using array indexing A[i] instead
     of explicit arithmetic *(A+i). Modern compilers might capture invalid indices more
     easily then.
      Takeaway 15.1.1 #4 Where possible, use array indexing instead of pointer arithmetic com-
                  bined with dereferencing.
           There is another pointer arithmetic operation—namely, pointer subtraction— that
     depends on the pointers pointing into the same array object. Here, the two pointer
     values can even have different status during the same program run. If they happen
     to be within the same array, they are valid; if the target buffers are later recycled and
     point to different array objects, the same operation with exactly the same values may
     be erroneous.
           Similar to pointer arithmetic, relational operators (<, <=, >=, >) require that both
     operands point into the same array.
           Pointer subtraction also depends on the representation of types. If the result doesn’t
     fit into ptrdiff_t, the operation is erroneous. This could happen on platforms with
     a very restricted integer type for ptrdiff_t (for example, just 16 bits). There, the
     maximum distance between two pointers that is supported is ±32,767 whereas the size
     of objects may be larger.

     15.1.2. Invalid conversions. Invalid conversions occur when a certain value does
not have a good interpretation in a type that is different from the one it had been given
initially. Remember that if the target type is an unsigned type, conversion always works
with the modulus, and so the result is always well defined. For all other target types,
there may be errors, for example,
       • Invalid conversions from one integer type to a signed type—For example converting
         the value UINT_MAX into a signed. The result is implementation-defined:
         some implementations may use the bit pattern of the unsigned value, whereas
         others may stop the execution. So, although this is well-defined individually
         by each implementation, such behavior is not portable, and you should con-
         sider such situations as erroneous.
       • Invalid conversions between floating-point values and integers—For example, a
         floating-point value may be out of the range of a target integer type, or a
         big integer value may have much more precision than a floating-point type
         can handle.
       • Invalid conversions between different floating-point types—Here, precision may
         get lost, or the source value may be out of the value range of the target type.
       • Conversion of a pointer into an integer that exceeds the necessary bits—This can only
         happen for integer types that are narrower than the width of the pointer type.
         If the target type is uintptr_t (and, thus, that type exists), the conversion
         is always defined.
       • Conversion of a pointer to a pointer of a different type—This occurs when the
         source pointer is not properly aligned for the target type.

Again, all these failures occur directly at these operations, regardless of whether the
result value of the conversion is used. On the other hand, if such a conversion is valid,
it does not necessarily mean that the resulting value can be used freely. For example, a
successful pointer to pointer conversion does not indicate that the object to which the
new pointer refers can be accessed through the new pointer value (see the following
discussion).
     15.1.3. Value violations. Another large range of possible program failures caused
by wrong values is calls to functions in the C library. A lot of them have the notion of
       • Invalid values that are not allowed for the call arguments (such as null point-
         ers, numbers that are too large, or zero sizes for allocation functions)
       • Values such that the result of the requested operation is not representable.

Modern compilers and some static analyzer tools may be sophisticated enough to detect
some of these violations. But, in general, you’d have to read the specifications carefully
to detect such situations.
     15.1.4. Type violations. C has a relatively strict type system that makes accessing
objects or functions with the wrong type erroneous in most cases. Such accesses, both
for objects and functions, can only happen when we convert pointers to pointers of
a different type. So, the easiest way to inhibit this kind of failure is to avoid these
operations.

 Takeaway 15.1.4 #1 Don’t convert pointers unless you must.

     We already have seen the rules for accessing objects through a different type (see
section 12.6).
     For calling a C function, the rule is quite simple.

 Takeaway 15.1.4 #2 Always call a function with the prototype with which it is defined.

      One possible way to call a function with a different prototype is to form a function
pointer and then cast the function pointer value to a different type. The effect is a
bit like for a train system that has a certain track width. If you give your locomotive a
specification of a different track width than it has in reality; even carefully inscribing that
lie in the paperwork and the front panel does not change the facts. If the specifications
are relatively close (say, they deviate by some millimeters), you would perhaps be able
to run the locomotive initially for a few meters, just to have it derail at the first curve or
switch.
      The simplest way to avoid that situation is not to use function pointers in the first
place or, if you have to, never to cast the type away.

 Takeaway 15.1.4 #3 Call a function by its name.

     Another possibility is that in different translation units the same function name is
used with different prototypes. In that case, any execution that stumbles upon a call to
this function fails.
     15.1.5. Access violations. Access violations are probably the most common failures
of C programs that directly stem from wrongdoings. The different cases are numerous,
and for most of them, the consequences of erroneous access can be catastrophic. Here,
an analogy for car traffic is a No Entry sign: it is easy to enter a road that is only pro-
tected by such a sign; there is no direct enforcement, but the result of doing so can be
disastrous.
     In C, generally, such access violations are performed through pointers or arrays
because, otherwise, the strict type system would already enforce a diagnosis at com-
pilation time. The following list shows the particular responsibility that programming
with pointers implies:
        • Null pointer dereference
        • Accessing a missing object (for example, through a stale pointer to a local vari-
          able), freed storage, or a system object that changed, such as a locale pointer
        • Modifying and reading the same object from unsequenced subexpressions
        • Out-of-bounds accessing of an element directly after an array58
        • Modifying of an unmutable object (const-qualified object, string literal, tem-
          porary object)
        • Accessing a volatile object from a non-volatile lvalue
        • Accessing an object based on a restrict pointer through an lvalue not
          based on the same pointer
        • Accessing a member of an atomic structure or union
        • Storing from an overlapping object (= operator, scanf, memcpy)
        • Attempting to access an element of a flexible array member with no elements
          (see 13.1.3)
        • Accessing a function without corresponding properties through an attributed
          prototype
        • Issuing a call to longjmp initialized from a function context that is dead
        • Returning from a signal handler for a computational exception
        • Calling free for an already freed pointer

For all these potential cases of access violations, the user code is expected to keep track
of the necessary conditions that allow access or, where possible, add tests that inhibit
access violations.

  58As previously seen, for other positions relative to an array, forming the pointer is already erroneous.

     15.1.6. Value misinterpretation. A value misinterpretation occurs when an object
stores a bit pattern that has no known valid interpretation as the type with which it is
accessed. C23 calls this an indeterminate representation.
     The most important case of interpretation of values going wrong is when there is
not yet one—that is, when the program accesses storage that has not yet been initialized.
The possibilities for this to occur are variables inside a function that are defined with-
out being initialized (see takeaway 5.5 #1) and dynamic allocations that use malloc
instead of calloc. We will discuss these problems in more detail in section 16.
     Another case is object types in which not all possible bit patterns represent a valid
value, called non-value representation,59 There are standard types that, by definition,
have more representation bits than necessary for their value range, including bool,
atomic_flag, and _BitInt(N ) types where N is not a multiple of CHAR_BIT.
For example, bool has only two proper values (false and true) but at least 8 bits.
Setting other bits than the least significant can lead to a misinterpretation of a Boolean
value. In some contexts, it might be convenient for the compiler to test for the all-zero
bit pattern; in other contexts, it may just inspect the least significant bit.
     So, messing around with the representation bytes of a bool object may cause se-
vere damage:

 Takeaway 15.1.6 #1 Don’t store values other than 0 or 1 in a bool object.

      Also, standard types other than those previously listed (such as floating-point types)
may have non-value representations, but nowadays, this is relatively rare. Nevertheless,
it is also good to be cautious.

 Takeaway 15.1.6 #2 Don’t change the representation bytes of objects directly.

     15.1.7. Explicit invalidation. C23 has introduced a new tool to annotate possible
failure, the unreachable macro. An invocation asserts that this control path in any
execution will never be reached. Consider the following function:
 ptrdiff_t ptr_dist(void const* p, void const* q) {
   if (!p || !q) unreachable();
   unsigned char const* P = p;
   unsigned char const* Q = q;
   return P - Q;
 }

     Here the conditional and the invocation of unreachable() indicate that this
function will never be reached with null pointers as parameter values. Unfortunately,
for void pointers, there is currently no way to augment the prototype of the function
with that information, so the user is completely on their own to guarantee that this never
happens.

 Takeaway 15.1.7 #1 Only use unreachable() where you have proof.

    In particular, try to avoid relying on external information for this kind of assess-
ment whenever this is possible. In the previous example, you would be better off using
array parameters with bounds to indicate that none of the pointers may be null and
even help the compiler determine that property at the calling site:
 [[maybe_unused]]
 static inline
 ptrdiff_t ptr_dist_uchar(unsigned char const p[static 1],

  59Before C23, these were called trap representation.

                           unsigned char const q[static 1]) {
    if (!p || !q) unreachable();
    return p - q;
 }
 #define ptr_dist(P, Q)                           \
 ptr_dist_uchar((void const*){ (P), },            \
                 (void const*){ (Q), })

     An invocation of unreachable is different from any other operation that puts the
execution in an undefined state or explicitly ends execution. Other operations (often,
division by zero) may have definitions that are provided by a different entity than the C
standard— for example, the compiler implementation or the operating system or ex-
plicit program termination using exit or abort yet having other prescribed behavior,
such as cleaning up or raising a signal. None of that is equivalent to telling the compiler
that execution will never go here. Compare that to the difference between indicating
that a street is a dead end and there’s no street at all.

 Takeaway 15.1.7 #2 Don’t use other operations than unreachable() to mark a control
             path that will never be taken.

     Also, it is important to notice that not the invocation of unreachable itself is the
wrongdoing here. The real error is the decision that leads to it and not the invocation
itself. The consequences of going down the rabbit hole shouldn’t be blamed on the
rabbit.
     15.2. Program state degradation. Program state degradation is a problem that is
much more difficult to tackle than wrongdoings because it cannot be blamed on one
individual or action; instead, it’s the result of the interplay of several actions. If you
find yourself in a traffic jam, you shouldn’t blame that situation on the driver of the car
in front of you. All cars equally contribute to the degraded situation: there may be just
too many of them for the given road capacity. As seen at some time on a bridge in
Berlin under which there were daily traffic jams, “It isn’t that you are in a traffic jam;
you are the traffic jam.”
     15.2.1. Unbounded recursion. As we have seen in section 7.3, an important example
of program state degradation is recursion. If we do not have a good notion of progress
from one call into the next and do not define the condition for the bottom of the recur-
sion well enough, the execution will crash eventually because the resources for function
calls are exhausted. Always remember takeaway 7.3               #2 to ensure you avoid this
situation.
     15.2.2. Storage exhaustion. The resource that is usually exhausted when there is
unbounded recursion is the capacity of the platform to provide function call contexts.
Usually, this resource is called the stackC because the addition and removal of function
call contexts acts like a stack data structure; a call pushes a new context onto this stack,
and a return pops the current context off. So, unbounded recursion is a special case of
stack overflowC : at some point, the limited resources of the stack is not able to provide
enough space to store the new execution context.
     Another form of stack overflow happens when function contexts are established
that have variable length arrays. Here, since the size of the object dynamically depends
on array bounds, it is difficult to estimate how much storage is available and how fast the
program state may degenerate. Note, though, that this problem only occurs for VLA
themselves, not for other variably modified (VM) types. On the other hand, using
VLA instead of a large constant-length array may reduce the stack usage substantially.
Nevertheless, VLA still have somewhat of a bad reputation in parts of the C community;
consequently, VLA (in contrast to VM types) are still an optional feature in C23, tested
by the macro __STDC_NO_VLA__.

Table 15.1. Scarce execution resources

      Resource                   Reservation        Release             Limits
      call context               va_start           va_end
                                 va_copy
      stream                     fopen              fclose              FOPEN_MAX
                                 tmpfile                                TMP_MAX
      file                       fopen              remove
                                 freopen
      thread context             thrd_create        thrd_join
                                                    thrd_detach
      mutex                      mtx_init           mtx_destroy
      condition variable         cnd_init           cnd_destroy
      thread-specific storage    tss_create         tss_delete

     Whereas the C standard provides no tool to foresee the exhaustion of the stack, the
exhaustion of the other storage system of the C library, usually called the heapC , can be
detected. The standard functions that allocate memory (malloc, calloc, realloc,
aligned_alloc, strdup, and strndup) return a null pointer on failure. Still, such
a failure should not necessarily be blamed on the call itself; there may have previously
been just too many such calls. Still, such a situation is preferable to a silent degradation
of the execution state since it allows shutting down the execution in a controlled way.
     15.2.3. Other scarce resources. In addition to storage, the runtime environment of
a program execution commonly has other scarce resources that may be exhausted (see
table 15.1). Usage of these resources accumulates if none of the functions listed under
“release” are called. Note that the function fopen reserves two different resources: a
stream (to which a pointer is returned) and a file (which is indicated by the first argu-
ment). Most of the functions that reserve the resource also have a failure mode that
makes it possible to detect exhaustion of the resource. Unfortunately, two of them,
va_start and va_copy, do not provide that information.

      15.3. Unfortunate incidents. Whereas wrongdoings and resource exhaustion are
failures that (at least in theory) can be captured locally, unfortunate incidents are caused
by the alignment of distant events in space or time in a way that causes the execution to
fail. Generally, these incidents are rare and difficult to track.
      A good traffic model for this kind of failure is collisions. In a world without traffic
lights or air controllers, two cars or two planes that prospect their trajectory indepen-
dently from each other may collide at a location quite far from the location at which they
planned their trajectory. Because both are not able to look around the corner (or are
within each other’s blind spot), each of them sees the resource as uncongested. When
they approach the danger zone (a crossing), their readjustment might be too slow, and
they might crash into each other.
      15.3.1. Escalating state degradation. One of the most common types of unfortu-
nate incidents actually happens after state degradation. For example, if stack or heap
exhaustion has occurred and the program execution continues, the program state de-
grades in a way that causes the system to react erratically, potentially causing harm even
outside the realm of the current execution.
      This situation is similar to when the indicator light for a brake malfunction of your
car lights up. If you slow down now, you may save the lives not only of yourself and your
fellow passengers but also of innocent bystanders who happen to be in the trajectory of
your car. Be a responsible citizen.

     15.3.2. Collisions and race conditions. When modifying objects, a C program usu-
ally does not have to take care that another part of the program execution simultane-
ously changes that object. The underlying property is sequencing (see section 4.6). It is
important not to ask too much of the compiler.

 Takeaway 15.3.2 #1 Don’t read and modify the same object within the same arithmetic
             expression.

    A typical example is subexpressions with side effects; we already previously listed
them as wrongdoings:
    printf("%lld\n", x++ + x); // Don’t do that!

If this is not detected as a failure, the operation of updating variable x could happen
before, after, or while x is read the second time. For these cases, the value printed may
be twice the initial value, this value plus 1, or some weird value that has the upper and
lower words from different phases of the computation. The problem is that expressions
can be complicated, and the compiler might not be able to detect the unsequenced
access. However, as long as we use an object through its variable name, these failures
are just the result of wrongdoings.
     When dealing with pointers, the situation is more complicated:
    printf("%lld\n", (*p)++ + (*q)); // Are *p and *q different?

By coincidence, such an expression could have p == q, and thus *p and *q would
refer to the same object. So, setting p to a particular value in one corner of the code
and then q at a completely different spot may have a fatal outcome at a third, completely
unrelated point We will provide more details in sections 12.3 and 19.2.
     The previously described situation could still, in principle, be guarded by testing
p == q beforehand, thus avoiding the unsequenced accesses. But there are similar
situations that cannot be tested, so-called race conditions. They can occur when a signal
handler (discussed in section 19.6) and the code it interrupts access the same object.
Here, access to an object a signal handler makes is unsequenced to the rest of the pro-
gram execution. Consequently, such accesses must fulfill special conditions and use
special mechanisms to be valid. Similar problems arise when different threads of exe-
cution access the same object concurrently (section 20).
     15.3.3. Inappropriate library calls and macro invocations. Some functions in the C
library are restricted to specific contexts in which they may be called. For example,
calling signal in a multithreaded program is not allowed. The function that uses
signal might, under some circumstances, be linked to a program that uses threads. If
so, the whole execution might be jeopardized if a signal occurs in a program that uses
threads.
     Another example is the setjmp macro, which we will see in more detail in sec-
tion 19.5; it is only allowed to appear in very specific places within expressions. Whereas
a quality implementation would probably diagnose a placement of a macro invocation
to setjmp that it can’t handle, a less sophisticated implementation might not. So, for
portability, the safest bet is to adhere to the restrictions imposed by the C standard.
     15.3.4. Deadlocks. A deadlock failure occurs when several entities
try to access resources and get trapped in a cyclic chain of dependen-
cies. In the world of road traffic, a roundabout is a perfect example of a
strategy for resolving resource conflicts that can go wrong. It is an ap-
pealing strategy to resolve local resource conflicts: if cars entering the
roundabout have lower priority than cars already inside, any race con-
dition for access to a place within the roundabout is avoided. This is

probably the reason why all over Europe roundabouts are now everywhere: they avoid
resource conflicts (and thus car crashes) at a relatively low cost.
      This strategy works well when there is not too much traffic, but unfortunately, un-
der high congestion, it breaks down completely. As the traffic sign for a roundabout
illustrates, if the roundabout is filled with cars that are proceeding to the subsequent
exit, none of them can move, and no progress is possible. Therefore, roundabouts are
usually not found in highly congested environments such as cities, where crossings with
traffic lights are used instead.
      Fortunately, when programming with C, deadlocks can only appear in a multi-
threaded context (see section 20). Proving that a particular multithreaded program has
no deadlocks is a difficult task that we cannot tackle to a satisfactory extent in the frame
of this book. Nevertheless, we will provide some directions in section 20.7 with a case
analysis of a particular example.
    15.4. Series of unfortunate events. A particularly nasty type of failure is pro-
gram executions that continue endlessly over a finite set of states without making visible
progress.

 Takeaway 15.4 #1 A program execution that loops over a finite set of states with no observ-
             able side effects has failed.
    The situation is a bit like that of a plane circling in the eye of a storm. The im-
mediate situation does not look particularly dangerous. But for the outside world, the
plane may be accounted as being lost. The exact point of the inevitable crash, past or
future, is not very important because we will never see the plane again.
    In section 5.7.5, we have already seen an example of a loop that might not present
enough progress. Let’s look more closely at the possibilities by modifying the previous
example:
      void obscure(unsigned);
      ...
      for (unsigned i = 0; true; i++) {
        obscure(i);
      }
      unreachable();

     Whether such a loop fails depends on the function obscure. With the specifica-
tion as given, a compiler cannot decide whether this loop will lead to systematic failure.
Depending on the value of i, the function could have a visible side effect, for example,
         • Does some IO
         • Changes some global state
         • Calls exit.
So, although this for loop has no obvious termination, it does not indicate systematic
failure. The compiler could only assume that if it had additional information about
the function—for example, if the function were annotated by a [[unsequenced]]
attribute—it then might give some diagnosis. Otherwise, it is the programmer’s re-
sponsibility to ensure that obscure makes progress for at least one value of i. In any
case, the loop can only terminate by exiting the whole execution, and the invocation of
unreachable will never be reached.
     If we change the type of i from unsigned to signed, the loop is not even an
infinite loop anymore:
      for (signed i = 0; true; i++) {
        obscure(i);
      }

    unreachable();

Here, the compiler may assume that for one positive value of i, a program termination
happens; otherwise, for a value of INT_MAX, an arithmetic exception would occur.
      Unbounded recursion may also be a special case of a program that lacks progress.
In fact, for some recursive functions, the compiler may detect that no state has to be
saved per individual call. A call to such a function with unbounded recursion may then
be replaced by a loop that makes no additional allocation. Similar to the loop, a good
compiler could then warn that a recursive call leads to systematic program failure.
      An even more complicated failure type, caused by a series of unfortunate events,
may occur for threaded programs: livelocks. Their effects are similar to the deadlocks
we discussed previously (basically, nothing seems to happen), but the interaction of the
components of a program with a livelock is more complicated. An analogy can be a big
traffic system with detours that form a cyclic pattern. Consider the four crossings on
the corners of a city block with detours as indicated in figure 15.1. While each detour
by itself may seem to be a good idea, the whole set forms a trap.

Figure 15.1. A configuration potentially leading to a livelock

     Any vehicle that reaches one of the crossings will circle the block forever. Even if
there is only one vehicle, at each instance, it will appear as if traffic advances as it should,
but the vehicle will never escape the vortex.
     This is only a very simple example of a livelock. There could be multiple cars
involved, and the detours could send the cars all over the city. Depending on which
order vehicles arrive and how fast they are going, they may even switch order at some
point or go different routes without ever escaping. Such situations are much more
difficult to detect and prevent. The case analysis in section 20.7 will show how to prove
the absence of a livelock for a practical case.
     15.5. Dealing with failures. Failure of a C program can have different indications
or, in some cases, pass completely unnoticed. The easiest way to deal with failures is,
in fact, to avoid them.

 Takeaway 15.5 #1 Ensure all preconditions for an operation that could fail.

      That is, all the failures listed under wrongdoings in (15.1) should not occur during
a normal program execution. The preconditions should be tested, and an alternative
should be executed. Ensuring all preconditions is probably not always easy, but the
general strategy should be as described.
      Similarly, in general, program state degeneration should be detected, but this time,
it is only possible to do that after the fact.

 Takeaway 15.5 #2 The return of operations that might exhaust resources should be checked
             for errors.

    There are, in general, two indicators for such errors: error returns for C library
functions (see section 8.1.3) and a nonzero value of errno. We will see strategies on
how to deal with these in section 15.6.
    Unfortunate incidents are much, much more difficult to handle. By their nature,
they do not have many indicators to detect the situation. Nevertheless, modern systems
have some features that may limit the damage done to the system:
       • Signals are an archaic and arcane mixture of hardware and software features
         that interrupt a program execution at a given point and allow users to provide
         fallback code, which is then executed to save the day (see section 19.6).
       • A trap is similar because it immediately interrupts the flow of the execution.
         In contrast to a signal, execution just ends; whether there is at least some
         cleanup depends a lot on the system.
       • C provides termination functions for program executions—namely exit,
         quick_exit, _Exit, and abort, as we have already seen in section 8.8.
         The cleanup depends on the function and ranges from user-defined cleanup
         functions (for exit and quick_exit) to almost none (for abort).
       • Similarly, threads can be terminated in isolation using thrd_exit. We will
         see that in section 20.6.
       • Last but not least, after byzantine failure execution continues, and the system
         state degrades more and more. There is no possibility to capture the failure.
         Damage to the whole system may be severe, sensitive information may get
         lost, and catastrophic actions in the physical world may be set in motion.

 Takeaway 15.5 #3 Unfortunate events can only be avoided with a careful algorithm design.

          15.6. Error checking and cleanup. C programs can encounter a lot of error con-
     ditions when we test for the preconditions of an operation or a valid outcome of a
     C library call. Errors can be programming errors, bugs in the compiler or OS software,
     hardware errors, resource exhaustion (such as out of memory), or any malicious com-
     bination of these. For a program to be reliable, we have to detect such error conditions
     and deal with them gracefully.
          As a first example, take the following description of a function fprintnumbers,
     which continues the series of functions that we discussed in subsection 14.1. As you can
     see, this function distinguishes four different error conditions, indicated by the return
     of negative constant values. The macros for these values are generally provided by
     the platform in <errno.h>, and all start with the capital letter E. Unfortunately, the          <errno.h>
     C standard imposes only EOF (which is negative) and EDOM, EILSEQ, and ERANGE,
     which are positive.
                                                                                numberline.c

      fprintnumbers:

      print a series of numbers nums on stream, using printf format form, separated by
      sep characters and terminated with a newline character.
      Returns: the number of characters printed to stream, or a negative error value on
      error.
      If len is 0, an empty line is printed and 1 is returned.
      Possible error returns are:
              • EOF (which is negative) if stream was not ready to be written to
              • -EOVERFLOW if more than INT_MAX characters would have to be writ-
                ten, including the case that len is greater than INT_MAX.
              • -EFAULT if stream is a null pointer
              • -EFAULT if numb is a null pointer and len is not zero
              • -ENOMEM if a memory error occurred
      This function leaves errno to the same value as occurred on entry.

        int fprintnumbers(FILE*restrict stream,
                          char const form[restrict static 1],
                          char const sep[restrict static 1],
                          size_t len, size_t numb[restrict len]);

         Other error values may or may not be provided. Therefore, in the initial part of
     our code, we have a sequence of preprocessor statements that give default values for
     those that are missing:
             .                                                        numberline.c
39    #include <errno.h>
40    #ifndef EFAULT
41    # define EFAULT EDOM
42    #endif
43    #ifndef EOVERFLOW
44    # define EOVERFLOW (EFAULT-EOF)
45    # if EOVERFLOW > INT_MAX
46    # error EOVERFLOW constant is too large
47    # endif
48    #endif
49    #ifndef ENOMEM
50    # define ENOMEM (EOVERFLOW+EFAULT-EOF)

Listing 15.1. Print an array of numbers

175    int fprintnumbers(FILE*restrict stream,
176                      char const form[restrict static 1],
177                      char const sep[restrict static 1],
178                      size_t len, size_t nums[restrict len]) {
179      if (!stream)       return -EFAULT;
180      if (len && !nums) return -EFAULT;
181      if (len > INT_MAX) return -EOVERFLOW;
182
183         size_t tot = (len ? len : 1)*strlen(sep);
184         int err = errno;
185         char* buf = nullptr;
186
187         if (len) {
188           /* Count the chars for the numbers. */
189           for (size_t i = 0; i < len; ++i)
190             tot += snprintf(nullptr, 0, form, nums[i]);
191           /* We return int so we have to constrain the max size. */
192           if (tot > INT_MAX) return error_cleanup(EOVERFLOW, err);
193         }
194
195         buf = malloc(tot+1);
196         if (!buf) return error_cleanup(ENOMEM, err);
197
198         sprintnumbers(tot, buf, form, sep, len, nums);
199         /* print whole line in one go */
200         if (fputs(buf, stream) == EOF) tot = EOF;
201         free(buf);
202         return tot;
203    }

51     # if ENOMEM > INT_MAX
52     # error ENOMEM constant is too large
53     # endif
54     #endif

           The idea is that we want to be sure to have distinct values for all of these macros.
      Now the implementation of the function itself looks as in the following listing 15.1.
           Error handling pretty much dominates the coding effort for the whole function.
      The first three lines handle errors that occur on entry to the function and reflect missed
      preconditions or, in the language of Annex K (see subsection 8.1.4), runtime constraint
      violationsC .
           Dynamic run-time errors are a bit more difficult to handle. In particular, some
      functions in the C library may use the pseudo-variable errno to communicate an error
      condition. If we want to capture and repair all errors, we have to avoid any change to
      the global state of the execution, including to errno. This is done by saving the current
      value on entry to the function and restoring it in case of an error with a call to the small
      function error_cleanup
           The core of the function computes the total number of bytes that should be printed
      in a for loop over the input array. In the body of the loop, snprintf with a null
      pointer and a buffer size of 0 are used to compute the size for each number. Then our
      function sprintnumbers from subsection 14.1 is used to produce a big string that is
      printed using fputs.

               .                                                         numberline.c

150    static inline int error_cleanup(int err, int prev) {
151      errno = prev;
152      return -err;
153    }

           Observe that there is no error exit after a successful call to malloc. If an error
      is detected on return from the call to fputs, the information is stored in the variable
      tot, but the call to free is not skipped. So, even if such an output error occurs, no
      allocated memory is left leaking. Here, taking care of a possible IO error was relatively
      simple because the call to fputs occurred close to the call to free.
           The function fprintnumbers_opt requires more care (see listing 15.2). It tries
      to optimize the procedure even further by printing the numbers immediately instead
      of counting the required bytes first. This may encounter more error conditions as we
      go, and we have to take care of them by guaranteeing to issue a call to free at the
      end. The first such condition is that the buffer we initially allocated is too small. If the
      call to realloc to enlarge it fails, we have to retreat carefully. The same is true if we
      encounter the unlikely condition that the total length of the string exceeds INT_MAX.

Listing 15.2. Printing an array of numbers, optimized version
205    int fprintnumbers_opt(FILE*restrict stream,
206                      char const form[restrict static 1],
207                      char const sep[restrict static 1],
208                      size_t len, size_t nums[restrict static len]) {
209      if (!stream)       return -EFAULT;
210      if (len && !nums) return -EFAULT;
211      if (len > INT_MAX) return -EOVERFLOW;
212
213       int err = errno;
214       size_t const seplen = strlen(sep);
215
216       size_t tot = 0;
217       size_t mtot = len*(seplen+10);
218       char* buf = malloc(mtot);
219
220       if (!buf) return error_cleanup(ENOMEM, err);
221
222       for (size_t i = 0; i < len; ++i) {
223         tot += sprintf(&buf[tot], form, nums[i]);
224         ++i;
225         if (i >= len) break;
226         if (tot > mtot-20) {
227           mtot *= 2;
228           char* nbuf = realloc(buf, mtot);
229           if (nbuf) {
230             buf = nbuf;
231           } else {
232             tot = error_cleanup(ENOMEM, err);
233             goto CLEANUP;
234           }
235         }
236         memcpy(&buf[tot], sep, seplen);
237         tot += seplen;

238            if (tot > INT_MAX) {
239              tot = error_cleanup(EOVERFLOW, err);
240              goto CLEANUP;
241            }
242          }
243          buf[tot] = 0;
244
245          /* print whole line in one go */
246          if (fputs(buf, stream) == EOF) tot = EOF;
247         CLEANUP:
248          free(buf);
249          return tot;
250    }

           In both cases, the function uses goto to jump to the cleanup code that then calls
      free. With C, this is a well-established technique that ensures that the cleanup takes
      place and avoids hard-to-read nested if-else conditions. The rules for goto are
      relatively simple.

       Takeaway 15.6 #1 Labels for goto are visible in the entire function that contains them.

       Takeaway 15.6 #2 goto can only jump to a label inside the same function.

       Takeaway 15.6 #3 goto should not jump over variable initializations.

           The use of goto and similar jumps in programming languages has been subject to
      intensive debate, starting from an article by Dijkstra [1968]. You will still find people
      who seriously object to code as it is given here, but let us try to be pragmatic about
      that: code with or without goto can be ugly and hard to follow. The main idea is to
      have the “normal” control flow of the function be mainly undisturbed and to clearly
      mark changes to the control flow that only occur under exceptional circumstances with
      a goto or return. Later, in subsection 19.5, we will see another tool in C that allows
      even more drastic changes to the control flow, setjmp/longjmp, which enables us
      to jump to other positions on the stack of calling functions.
                              SUMMARY                                    261

                             Summary
• Program failure can originate in wrongdoing, program state degradation, or
  an unfortunate incident.
• Possible wrongdoings can be avoided by carefully checking preconditions.
• Calls to C library functions that may lead to state degradation should be
  checked for error returns.
• There is no cure for unfortunate incidents. You must ensure they don’t ap-
  pear by using a careful program design.
• Handling error conditions can lead to complicated case analysis. It can be
  organized by a function-specific code block to which we jump with goto
  statements.
                                          LEVEL 3

                                      Experience

          The alpine chough lives and breeds in the thin air of high altitudes and has
          been seen above 8,000 m in the Himalayas.

     In this level, we go more deeply into details about specific topics. The first, perfor-
mance, is one of the primary reasons C is chosen over other programming languages.
Therefore, section 16 is a mandatory read for all C software designers.
     The second topic is a feature quite specific to C: function-like macros. Because
of their complexity and obvious ugliness, they are much frowned upon by other pro-
gramming communities. Nevertheless, it is important to master them to a certain extent
because they allow us to provide easy-to-use interfaces—for example, for type-generic
programming and more sophisticated parameter checking.
     Sections 19 and 20 then show how the usual assumption of sequential program ex-
ecution can be weakened to allow for asynchronous problem handling (with long jumps
or signal handlers) or the parallel execution of threads. These come with specific prob-
lems related to guaranteeing data consistency, so we conclude with section 21, which
dives more deeply into the handling of atomic data and synchronization in general.

