
                      21. Atomic access and memory consistency
      This section covers
        • Understanding the "happened before" relation
        • C library calls that provide synchronization
        • Maintaining sequential consistency
        • Working with other consistency models

We will complete this level with a description of concepts that form an important part
of the C architecture model and are, therefore, a must for experienced programmers.
This last section will focus on increasing your understanding of how things work, not
necessarily improving your operational skills. Even though we will not go into all the
glorious details,51 things can get a bit bumpy; please remain seated and buckle up.
     If you review the pictures of control flow we have seen throughout the previous
sections, you see that the interaction of different parts of a program execution can get
quite complicated. We have different levels of concurrent access to data:
         • Plain-old straightforward C code is only apparently sequential. Visibility of
           changes is only guaranteed between very specific points of the execution, se-
           quence points, for direct data dependencies and the completion of function
           calls. Modern platforms take more and more advantage of the provided slack
           and perform unsequenced operations intermixed or in parallel in multiple
           execution pipelines.
         • Long jumps and signal handlers are executed sequentially, but the effects of
           stores may get lost along the way.
         • Those accesses to atomic objects we have seen so far warrant visibility of their
           changes everywhere and consistently.
         • Threads run concurrently side by side and jeopardize data consistency if they
           don’t regulate their shared access to data. In addition to access to atomic
           objects, they can also be synchronized through calls to functions, such as
           thrd_join or mtx_lock.
Access to memory is not the only thing a program does. In fact, the abstract state of a
program execution consists of the following:
         • Points of execution (one per thread)
         • Intermediate values (of computed expressions or evaluated objects)
         • Stored values
         • Hidden state
Changes to this state are usually described as
Jumps: Change the point of execution (short jumps, long jumps, and function calls)
Value computation: Changes intermediate values
Side effects: Store values or do IO
Or they can affect hidden state, such as the lock state of a mtx_t object, the initialization
state of a once_flag object, and setting or clearing operations on a atomic_flag
object.
     We summarize all these possible changes to the abstract state with the term effect.

 Takeaway 21 #1 Every evaluation has an effect.

   51We will put aside memory_order_consume consistency and thus the dependency-ordered before
relation.

    This is because any evaluation has the concept of a next such evaluation that will
be performed after it. Even an expression like
    (void)0;

which drops the intermediate value and sets the point of execution to the next statement,
and thus the abstract state changes.
     In a complicated context, it will be difficult to argue about the actual abstract state
of an execution in a given moment. Generally, the entire abstract state of a program’s
execution is not even observable, and in many cases, the concept of an overall abstract
state is not well defined because we don’t know what moment means in this context. In
a multithreaded execution performed on several physical compute cores, there is no
real notion of a reference time between them. So, generally, C does not even make the
assumption that an overall fine-grained notion of time exists between different threads.
     As an analogy, think of two threads, A and B, as events that happen on two different
planets orbiting at different speeds around a star. Times on these planets (threads) are
relative, and synchronization between them takes place only when a signal issued from
one planet (thread) reaches the other. The transmission of the signal takes time by itself,
and when the signal reaches its destination, its source has moved on. So, the mutual
knowledge of the two planets (threads) is always partial.
     21.1. The “happened before” relation. If we want to argue about a program’s
execution (its correctness, its performance, and so on), we need to have enough partial
knowledge about the state of all threads and know how to stitch that partial knowledge
together into a coherent view of the whole.
     Therefore, we will investigate a relation introduced by Lamport [1978]. In C stan-
dard terms, it is the happened before relation between two evaluations, E and F , denoted
by F → E. We observe this is a property between events a posteriori. Fully spelled out,
it would perhaps be better called the knowingly happened before relation instead.
     One part of it consists of evaluations in the same thread that are related by the
already-introduced sequenced before relation:

 Takeaway 21.1 #1 If F is sequenced before E, then F → E.

     To see that, let us revisit listing 20.1 from our input thread. Here, the assignment
to command[0] is sequenced before the switch statement. Therefore, we are sure
that all cases in the switch statement are executed after the assignment or at least that
they will be perceived as happening later. For example, when passing command to the
nested function calls below ungetc, we are sure it will provide the modified value. All
of this can be deduced from C’s grammar.
     Between threads, the ordering of events is provided by synchronization. There are
two types of synchronization: the first is implied by operations on atomics, and the
second, by certain C library calls. Let us first look into the case of atomics. An atomic
object can be used to synchronize two threads if one thread writes a value and another
thread reads the value that was written. Operations on atomics are guaranteed to be
locally consistent.

 Takeaway 21.1 #2 The set of modifications of an atomic object X is performed in an order
             consistent with the sequenced before relation of any thread that deals with X.

    This sequence is called the modification order of X. Consider an atomic variable x,
    _Atomic(unsigned) x = 11;

a thread A that performs the instructions

        Thread B

                                                                             x = 5
                                                              --x;

                                                                               ;
                              11          12             31             30                   5        0
_Atomic(unsigned) x     11

                                                                                     y = x

                                                                                                 0;
                                                 31;
                              ;
                             ++x

                                                                                             x =
                                               x =

                                                                                       ;
       Thread A

Figure 21.1. Two threads that synchronize via an atomic. The cir-
                cles present the modifications of object x. The bars below the threads
                represent information about the state of A, and those above represent
                information about the state of B.

            ++x;
            x = 31;
            ...
            unsigned y = x
            x = 0;

      and a thread B that mingles with the same variable x
            x--;
            x = 5;

           A possible modification order for x is shown in figure 21.1. Here, we have six
      modifications to x: the initialization (value 11), one increment, one decrement, and
      three assignments. The C standard guarantees that each of the two threads, A and B,
      perceives all changes to x in an order consistent with this modification order.
           In the example in figure 21.1, we have only two synchronizations. First, thread
      B synchronizes with A at the end of its --x operation because here it has read (and
      modified) the value 31 that A wrote. The second synchronization occurs when A reads
      the value 5 that B wrote and stores it into y.
           As another example, let us investigate the interplay between the input thread (list-
      ing 20.1) and the account thread (listing 20.2). Both read and modify the field finished
      in different places. For the simplicity of the argument, let us assume that there is no
      other place than in these two functions where finished is modified.
           The two threads will only synchronize via this atomic object if either modifies it—
      that is, writes the value true into it. This can happen under two circumstances:

               • The input thread encounters an end-of-file condition, either when feof(stdin)
                 returns true or if the case EOF is encountered. In both cases, the do loop
                 terminates, and the code after the label FINISH is executed.
               • The account thread detects that the number of permitted repetitions is ex-
                 ceeded and sets finished to true.

      These events are not exclusive, but using an atomic object guarantees that one of the
      two threads will succeed first in writing to finished:

               • If the input thread writes first, the account thread may read the modified
                 value of finished in the evaluations of one of its while loops. This read

          synchronizes; that is, the write event in the input thread is known to have hap-
          pened before such a read. Any modifications the input thread made before
          the write operation is now visible to the account thread.
        • If the account thread writes first, the input thread may read the modified value
          in the while of its do loop. Again, this read synchronizes with the write and
          establishes a “happened before” relation, and all modifications made by the
          account thread are visible to the input thread.
Observe that these synchronizations are oriented: each synchronization between threads
has a “writer” and a “reader” side. We attach two abstract properties to operations on
atomics and to certain C library calls called release semantics (on the writer side), acquire
semantics (for a reader), and acquire-release semantics (for a reader-writer). C library
calls with such synchronization properties will be discussed a bit later.
     All operations on atomics we have seen so far and modify the object are required
to have release semantics, and all that read must have acquire semantics. Later, we will
see other atomic operations that have relaxed properties.

 Takeaway 21.1 #3 An acquire operation E in a thread TE synchronizes with a release op-
             eration F in another thread TF if E reads the value that F has written.
      The idea of the special construction with acquire and release semantics is to force
the visibility of effects across such operations. We say that an effect X is visible at evalu-
ation E if we can consistently replace E with any appropriate read operation or function
call that uses the state affected by X. For example, in figure 21.1, the effects A produces
before its x = 31 operation are symbolized by the bar below the thread. They are
visible to B once B has completed the --x operation.

 Takeaway 21.1 #4 If F synchronizes with E, all effects X that happened before F must be
             visible at all evaluations G that happen after E.
    As we saw in the example, there are atomic operations that can read and write
atomically in one step. These are called read-modify-write operations:
        • Calls to atomic_exchange and atomic_compare_exchange_weak
          for any _Atomic objects
        • Compound assignments or their functional equivalents; increment and decre-
          ment operators for any _Atomic objects of arithmetic type
        • Calls to atomic_flag_test_and_set for atomic_flag
Such an operation can synchronize on the read side with one thread and on the write
side with others. All such read-modify-write operations that we have seen so far have
both acquire and release semantics.
     The happened before relation is the transitive closure of the combination of the
sequenced before and synchronizes-with relations. We say that F knowingly happened
before E, if there are n and E0 = F , E1 , ..., En−1 , En = E such that Ei is sequenced
before Ei+1 or synchronizes with it for all 0 ≤ i < n.

 Takeaway 21.1 #5 We only can conclude that one evaluation happened before another if we
             have a sequenced chain of synchronizations that links them.
     Observe that this happened before relation is a combination of very different con-
cepts. The sequenced before relation can in many places be deduced from syntax, in
particular, if two statements are members of the same basic block. Synchronization is
different: besides the two exceptions of thread startup and end, it is deduced through a
data dependency on a specific object, such as an atomic or a mutex.
     The desired result of all this is that effects in one thread become visible in another.

 Takeaway 21.1 #6 If an evaluation F happened before E, all effects that are known to have
             happened before F are also known to have happened before E.

    21.2. C library calls that provide synchronization. C library functions with syn-
chronizing properties come in pairs: a releasing side and an acquiring side. They are
summarized in table 21.1.

Table 21.1. C library functions that form synchronization pairs

 Release                                         Acquire
 thrd_create(.., f, x)                           Entry to f(x)
 thrd_exit by thread id or return from           Start of tss_t destructors for id
 f
 End of tss_t destructors for id                 thrd_join(id)                   or
                                                 atexit/at_quick_exit handlers
 call_once(&obj, g), first call                  call_once(&obj, h), all subsequent
                                                 calls
 Mutex release                                   Mutex acquisition

     For the first three entries, we know which events synchronize with which; namely,
the synchronization is mainly limited to effects done by thread id. In particular, by
transitivity, thrd_exit or return always synchronize with thrd_join for the cor-
responding thread id.
     These synchronization features of thrd_create and thrd_join allow us to
draw the lines in figure 20.1. Here, we do not know about any timing of events between
the threads we launched, but within main, we know that the order in which we created
the threads and the order in which we joined them is exactly as shown. We also know
that all effects of any of these threads on data objects are visible to main after we join
the last thread: the account thread.
     If we detach our threads and don’t use thrd_join, synchronization can only take
place between the end of a thread and the start of an atexit or at_quick_exit
handler.
     The other library functions are a bit more complicated. For the initialization utility
call_once, the return from the very first call call_once(&obj, g) is special: it
is the only call that effectively makes a call into the callback function g. This first call is
a release operation for all subsequent calls with the same object obj. These all are then
acquire operations on this object. This ensures that all write operations performed
during the call to g() are known to happen before any other call with obj and are
effectively visible in the corresponding thread.
     For our example in subsection 20.2, this means the function errlog_fopen is
executed exactly once, and all other threads that might execute the call_once line
will synchronize with that first call. So when any of the threads return from the call,
they know that the call has been performed (either by themselves or by another thread
that was faster) and that all effects, such as computing the file name and opening the
stream, are visible now. Thus, all threads that executed the call may use errlog and
can be sure it is properly initialized.
     For a mutex, a release operation can be a call to a mutex function, mtx_unlock, or
the entry into the wait functions for condition variables, cnd_wait and cnd_timedwait.
An acquire operation on a mutex is the successful acquisition of the mutex via any of the
three mutex calls (mtx_lock, mtx_trylock, and mtx_timedlock) or the return
from the wait function (cnd_wait or cnd_timedwait).

                                        mtx_lock(&mtx)         life_birth9(L)
     Input thread
                                            Suspended

                                                                                 mtx_unl
                                                                                    ock(&mt
                                                                                      x)
     mtx_t mtx

                                                         tx)
                                                           m
                                                       ck(&
                                                  unlo
                                                mtx_
                       mtx_lock(&mtx)                                 mtx_lock(&mtx)
Accounting thread         Suspended                                      Suspended
                                  life_account(L)                                   life_account(L)

Figure 21.2. Two threads with three critical sections that synchro-
                nize via a mutex. The circles present the modifications of object mtx.

        Takeaway 21.2 #1 Critical sections protected by the same mutex occur sequentially.

           Our input and accounting threads from the example (listings 20.1 and 20.2) access
      the same mutex L->mtx. In the first, it is used to protect the birth of a new set of cells
      if the user types a ’ ’, ’b’, or ’B’. In the second, the entire secondary block of the
      while loop is protected by the mutex.
           Figure 21.2 schematizes a sequence of three critical sections protected by the mu-
      tex. The synchronization between the unlock operations (release) and the return from
      the lock operation (acquire) synchronizes the two threads. This guarantees that the
      changes applied to *L by the account thread in the first call to life_account are
      visible in the input thread when it calls life_birth9. Equally, the second call to
      life_account sees all changes to *L that occur during the call to life_birth9.

        Takeaway 21.2 #2 In a critical section protected by the mutex mut, all effects of previous
                    critical sections protected by mut are visible.

           One of these known effects is always the advancement of the point of execution.
      In particular, on return from mtx_unlock, the execution point is outside the critical
      section, and this effect is known to the next thread that newly acquires the lock.
           The wait functions for condition variables differ from acquire-release semantics;
      in fact, they work exactly the other way around.

        Takeaway 21.2 #3 cnd_wait and cnd_timedwait have release-acquire semantics
                    for the mutex.

          That is, before suspending the calling thread, they perform a release operation and
      then, when returning, an acquire operation. The other peculiarity is that the synchro-
      nization goes through the mutex, not through the condition variable itself.

        Takeaway 21.2 #4 Calls to cnd_signal and cnd_broadcast synchronize via the
                    mutex.

                                                   Idealized sequential time

                                           false         true            false          false       true
                _Atomic(bool) s       0

                            11                12                31               30         5        0
_Atomic(unsigned) x    11

                                      3.           0.4               1288E+7          4.0       .3E-27
       _Atomic(double) y         3.

Figure 21.3.      Sequential consistency for three different atomic ob-
                    jects

               The signaling thread will not necessarily synchronize with the waiting thread if
          it does not place a call to cnd_signal or cnd_broadcast into a critical section
          protected by the same mutex as the waiter. In particular, non-atomic modifications of
          objects that constitute the condition expression may not become visible to a thread woken
          up by a signal if the modification is not protected by the mutex. There is a simple rule
          of thumb to ensure synchronization:

           Takeaway 21.2 #5 Calls to cnd_signal and cnd_broadcast should occur inside a
                       critical section protected by the same mutex as the waiters.

               This is what we saw around line 145 in listing 20.1. Here, the function life_birth
          modifies larger, non-atomic parts of the shared object *L, so we must make sure these
          modifications are properly visible to all other threads that work with *L.
               Line 154 shows a use of cnd_signal that is not protected by the mutex. This
          is only possible here because all data modified in the other switch cases is atomic.
          Thus, other threads that read this data, such as L->frames, can synchronize through
          these atomics and do not rely on acquiring the mutex. Be careful if you use conditional
          variables like that.
               21.3. Sequential consistency. The data consistency for the previously described
          atomic objects, guaranteed by the happened before relation, is called acquire-release con-
          sistency. Whereas the C library calls we have seen always synchronize with that kind
          of consistency, no more and no less, accesses to atomics can be specified with different
          consistency models.
               As you remember, all atomic objects have a modification order that is consistent with
          all sequenced before relations that see these modifications on the same object. Sequential
          consistency has even more requirements than that; see figure 21.3. Figure 21.3 illustrates
          the common timeline of all sequentially consistent operations on top. Even if these
          operations are performed on different processors and the atomic objects are realized in
          different memory banks, the platform has to ensure that all threads perceive all these
          operations as being consistent with this one global linearization.

           Takeaway 21.3 #1 All atomic operations with sequential consistency occur in one global
                       modification order, regardless of the atomic object they are applied to.

              So, sequential consistency is a very strong requirement. Not only that, it enforces
          acquire-release semantics (a causal partial ordering between events), but it extends this
          partial ordering to a total ordering. If you are interested in parallelizing the execution
          of your program, sequential consistency may not be the right choice because it may
          force sequential execution of the atomic accesses.

     The standard provides the following functional interfaces for atomic types. They
should conform to the description given by their name and also perform synchroniza-
tion:
 void atomic_store(A volatile* obj, C des);
 C atomic_load(A volatile* obj);
 C atomic_exchange(A volatile* obj, C des);
 bool atomic_compare_exchange_strong(A volatile* obj, C *expe, C des);
 bool atomic_compare_exchange_weak(A volatile* obj, C *expe, C des);
 C atomic_fetch_add(A volatile* obj, M operand);
 C atomic_fetch_sub(A volatile* obj, M operand);
 C atomic_fetch_and(A volatile* obj, M operand);
 C atomic_fetch_or(A volatile* obj, M operand);
 C atomic_fetch_xor(A volatile* obj, M operand);
 bool atomic_flag_test_and_set(atomic_flag volatile* obj);
 void atomic_flag_clear(atomic_flag volatile* obj);

Here C is any appropriate data type, A is the corresponding atomic type, and M is a type
that is compatible with the arithmetic of C. As the names suggest, for the fetch and
operator interfaces, the call returns the value that *obj had before the modification
of the object. So, these interfaces are not equivalent to the corresponding compound
assignment operator (+=), since that would return the result after the modification.
     All these functional interfaces provide sequential consistency.

 Takeaway 21.3 #2 All operators and functional interfaces on atomics that don’t specify oth-
             erwise have sequential consistency.

     Observe also that the functional interfaces differ from the operator forms because
their arguments are volatile qualified.
     There is another function call for atomic objects that, in contrast to the function
we have seen until now, does not imply synchronization:
 void atomic_init(A volatile* obj, C des);

Its effect is the same as a call to atomic_store or an assignment operation, but con-
current calls from different threads can produce a race. View atomic_init as a cheap
form of assignment.
    21.4. Other consistency models. A different consistency model can be requested
with a complementary set of functional interfaces. For example, an equivalent to the
postfix ++ operator with just acquire-release consistency could be specified with
    _Atomic(unsigned) at = 67;
    ...
    if (atomic_fetch_add_explicit(&at, 1, memory_order_acq_rel)) {
      ...
    }

 Takeaway 21.4 #1 Synchronizing functional interfaces for atomic objects with _explicit
             appended allow us to specify their consistency model.

    These interfaces accept additional arguments in the form of symbolic constants of
type memory_order that specify the memory semantics of the operation:

         • memory_order_seq_cst requests sequential consistency. Using this is
           equivalent to the forms without _explicit.
         • memory_order_acq_rel is for an operation with acquire-release consis-
           tency. Typically, for general atomic types, you’d use it for a read-modify-
           write operation, such as
           atomic_fetch_add or atomic_compare_exchange_weak, or for the
           type atomic_flag with atomic_flag_test_and_set.
         • memory_order_release is for an operation with only release semantics.
           Typically, this would be atomic_store or atomic_flag_clear.
         • memory_order_acquire is for an operation that only has acquire seman-
           tics. Typically, this would be atomic_load.
         • memory_order_consume is for an operation that has a weaker form of
           causal dependency than acquire consistency. Typically, this would also be
           atomic_load.
         • memory_order_relaxed is for an operation that adds no synchronization
           requirements. The only guarantee for such an operation is that it is indivisi-
           ble. A typical use case is a performance counter used by different threads, but
           for which we are only interested in a final accumulated count.
The consistency models can be compared with respect to the restrictions they impose on
the platform. Figure 21.4 shows the implication order of the memory_order models.

                                 memory_order_seq_cst

                                  memory_order_acq_rel

                    memory_order_acquire
                                               memory_order_release
                    memory_order_consume

                                 memory_order_relaxed

Figure 21.4. Hierarchy of consistency models, from least to most constraining

     Whereas memory_order_seq_cst and memory_order_relaxed are admis-
sible for all operations, there are some restrictions for other memory_orders. Oper-
ations that can only occur on one side of a synchronization can only specify an order
for that side:
         • Two operations that only store (atomic_store and atomic_flag_clear)
           may not specify acquire semantics.
         • Three operations that only perform a load and may not specify release or con-
           sume semantics; these are atomic_load (for the single memory_order
           argument) and the weak and strong versions of compare-exchange opera-
           tions in case of failure.
Thus, the latter needs two memory_order arguments for their _explicit form,
such that they can distinguish the requirements for the success and failure cases:

 bool
 atomic_compare_exchange_strong_explicit(A volatile* obj, C *expe, C des,
                                         memory_order success,
                                         memory_order failure);
 bool
 atomic_compare_exchange_weak_explicit(A volatile* obj, C *expe, C des,
                                       memory_order success,
                                       memory_order failure);

Here, the success consistency must be at least as strong as the failure consistency;
see figure 21.4.
     Up to now, we have implicitly assumed that the acquire and release sides of a syn-
chronization are symmetric, but they aren’t. Whereas there is always just one writer
of a modification, there can be several readers. Because moving new data to several
processors or cores is expensive, some platforms allow us to avoid the propagation of
all visible effects that happened before an atomic operation to all threads that read the
new value. C’s consume consistency is designed to map this behavior. We will not go into
the details of this model, and you should use it only when you are certain that some
effects prior to an atomic read will not affect the reading thread.

                                    Summary
      • The "happened before" relation is the only possible way to reason about tim-
        ing between different threads. It is only established through synchronization
        that uses either atomic objects or very specific C library functions.
      • Sequential consistency is the default consistency model for atomics but not
        for other C library functions. It additionally assumes that all corresponding
        synchronization events are totally ordered. This assumption can be expen-
        sive.
      • Explicitly using acquire-release consistency can lead to more efficient code,
        but it needs a careful design to supply the correct arguments to the atomic
        functions with a _explicit suffix.
                               Technical Annex

     If you read this book much after 2024, this technical annex should not concern
you: you should have a development framework at your disposal that implements C23
without fault. If not, you might have some difficulties because one or another feature of
C23 is not yet implemented. The following site tracks the progress of C23 conformance
of several toolchains:
         https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/compiler_support.
     My personal experience with programming in C is almost entirely acquired in the
realm of open source projects and open source compilers (gcc and clang) and on
specific operating systems— namely, POSIX(2024) in its incarnation as glibc/Linux
and musl/Linux. If this is not your setting and you encounter severe problems with the
code in this book, you’ll have to search the web for solutions, as I and the remainder of
this annex will probably not be of much help.

