                                                          Introduction

Let’s address the elephant in the room: why “Blue Fox”?
   This book was originally supposed to contain an overview of the Arm
instruction set, chapters on reverse engineering, and chapters on exploit miti-
gation internals and bypass techniques. The publisher and I soon realized that
covering these topics to a satisfactory extent would make this book about 1,000
pages long. For this reason, we decided to split it into two books: Blue Fox and
Red Fox.
   The Blue Fox edition covers the analyst view; teaching you everything you
need to know to get started in reverse engineering. Without a solid under-
standing of the fundamentals, you can’t move to more advanced topics such as
vulnerability analysis and exploit development. The Red Fox edition will cover
the offensive security view: understanding exploit mitigation internals, bypass
techniques, and common vulnerability patterns.
   As of this writing, the Arm architecture reference manual for the Armv8-­A
architecture (and Armv9-­A extensions) contains 11,952 pages1 and continues
to expand. This reference manual was around 8,000 pages2 long when I started
writing this book two years ago.
   Security researchers who are used to reverse engineering x86/64 binaries but
want to adopt to the new era of Arm-­powered devices are having a hard time
finding digestible resources on the Arm instruction set, especially in the context
of reverse engineering or binary analysis. Arm’s architecture reference manual
can be both overwhelming and discouraging. In this day and age, nobody
has time to read a 12,000-­page deeply technical document, let alone identify

1
    (version I.a.) https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0487/latest
2
    (version F.a.) https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0487/latest

xxii   Introduction

       the most relevant or most commonly used instructions and memorize them.
       The truth is that you don’t need to know every single Arm instruction to be able
       to reverse engineer an Arm binary. Many instructions have very specific use
       cases that you may or may not ever encounter during your analysis.
          The purpose of this book is to make it easier for people to get familiar with the
       Arm instruction set and gain enough knowledge to apply it in their professional
       lives. I spent countless hours dissecting the Arm reference manual and cate-
       gorizing the most common instruction types and their syntax patterns so you
       don’t have to. But this book isn’t a list of the most common Arm instructions.
       It contains explanations you won’t find anywhere else, not even in the Arm
       manual itself. The basic descriptions of a given instruction in the Arm manual
       are rather brief. That is fine for trivial instructions like MOV or ADD. However,
       many common instructions perform complex operations that are difficult to
       understand from their descriptions alone. For this reason, many of the instruc-
       tions you will encounter in this book are accompanied by graphical illustrations
       explaining what is actually happening under the hood.
          If you’re a beginner in reverse engineering, it is important to understand the
       binary’s file format, its sections, how it compiles from source code into machine
       code, and the environment it depends on. Because of limited space and time,
       this book cannot cover every file format and operating system. It instead focuses
       on Linux environments and the ELF file format. The good news is, regardless
       of platform or file format, Arm instructions are Arm instructions. Even if you
       reverse engineer an Arm binary compiled for macOS or Windows, the meaning
       of the instructions themselves remains the same.
          This book begins with an introduction explaining what instructions are and
       where they come from. In the second chapter, you will learn about the ELF file
       format and its sections, along with a basic overview of the compilation process.
       Since binary analysis would be incomplete without understanding the con-
       text they are executed in, the third chapter provides an overview of operating
       system fundamentals.
          With this background knowledge, you are well prepared to delve into the
       Arm architecture in Chapter 4. You can find the most common data processing
       instructions in Chapter 5, followed by an overview of memory access instructions
       in Chapter 6. These instructions are a significant part of the Arm architecture,
       which is also referred to as a Load/Store architecture. Chapters 7 and 8 dis-
       cuss conditional execution and control flow, which are crucial components of
       reverse engineering.
          Chapter 9 is where it starts to get particularly interesting for reverse engineers.
       Knowing the different types of Arm environments is crucial, especially when
       you perform dynamic analysis and need to analyze binaries during execution.
          With the information provided so far, you are already well equipped for your
       next reverse engineering adventure. To get you started, Chapter 10 includes an
                                                                   Introduction     xxiii

overview of the most common static analysis tools, followed by small practical
static analysis examples you can follow step-­by-­step.
   Reverse engineering would be boring without dynamic analysis to observe
how a program behaves during execution. In Chapter 11, you will learn about
the most common dynamic analysis tools as well as examples of useful com-
mands you can use during your analysis. This chapter concludes with two
practical debugging examples: debugging a memory corruption vulnerability
and debugging a process in GDB.
   Reverse engineering is useful for a variety of use cases. You can use your
knowledge of the Arm instruction set and reverse engineering techniques to
expand your skill set into different areas, such as vulnerability analysis or
malware analysis.
   Reverse engineering is an invaluable skill for malware analysts, but they also
need to be familiar with the environment a given malware sample was compiled
for. To get you started in this area, this book includes a chapter on analyzing
arm64 macOS malware (Chapter 12) written by Patrick Wardle, who is also the
author of The Art of Mac Malware.3 Unlike previous chapters, this chapter does
not focus on Arm assembly. Instead, it introduces you to common anti-­analysis
techniques that macOS malware uses to avoid being analyzed. The purpose of
this chapter is to provide an introduction to macOS malware compatible with
Apple Silicon (M1/M2) so that anyone interested in hunting and analyzing
Arm-­based macOS malware can get a head start.
   This book took a little over two years to write. I began writing in March
2020, when the pandemic hit and put us all in quarantine. Two years and a
lot of sweat and tears later, I’m happy to finally see it come to life. Thank you
for putting your faith in me. I hope that this book will serve as a useful guide
as you embark on your reverse engineering journey and that it will make the
process smoother and less intimidating.

3
    https://taomm.org
