                                                              CHAPTER

                                                                   1
                        Introduction to Reverse
                                   Engineering

Introduction to Assembly
If you’re reading this book, you’ve probably already heard about this thing
called the Arm assembly language and know that understanding it is the key to
analyzing binaries that run on Arm. But what is this language, and why does
it exist? After all, programmers usually write code in high-­level languages
such as C/C++, and hardly anyone programs in assembly directly. High-­level
languages are, after all, far more convenient for programmers to program in.
   Unfortunately, these high-­level languages are too complex for processors
to interpret directly. Instead, programmers compile these high-­level programs
down into the binary machine code that the processor can run.
   This machine code is not quite the same as assembly language. If you were
to look at it directly in a text editor, it would look unintelligible. Processors
also don’t run assembly language; they run only machine code. So, why is it so
important in reverse engineering?
   To understand the purpose of assembly, let’s do a quick tour of the history of
computing to see how we got to where we are and how everything connects.

Bits and Bytes
Back in the mists of time when it all started, people decided to create com-
puters and have them perform simple tasks. Computers don’t speak our human

    languages—­they are just electronic devices after all—­and so we needed a way
    to communicate with them electronically. At the lowest level, computers operate
    on electrical signals, and these signals are formed by switching electrical volt-
    ages between one of two levels: on and off.
       The first problem is that we need a way to describe these “ons” and “offs” for
    communication, storage, and simply describing the state of the system. Since
    there are two states, it was only natural to use the binary system for encoding
    these values. Each binary digit (or bit) could be 0 or 1. Although each bit can
    store only the smallest amount of information possible, stringing multiple bits
    together allows representation of much larger numbers. For example, the number
    30,284,334,537 could be represented in just 35 bits as the following:
        11100001101000101100100010111001001

       Already this system allows for encoding large numbers, but now we have
    a new problem: where does one number in memory (or on a magnetic tape)
    end and the next one begin? This is perhaps a strange question to ask modern
    readers, but back when computers were first being designed, this was a serious
    problem. The simplest solution here would be to create fixed-­size groupings
    of bits. Computer scientists, never wanting to miss out on a good naming pun,
    called this group of binary digits or bits a byte.
       So, how many bits should be in a byte? This might seem like a blindingly
    obvious question to our modern ears, since we all know that a modern byte is
    8 bits. But it was not always so.
       Originally, different systems made different choices for how many bits would
    be in their bytes. The predecessor of the 8-­bit byte we know today is the 6-­bit
    Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code (BCDIC) format for representing
    alphanumeric information used in early IBM computers, such as the IBM 1620 in
    1959. Before that, bytes were often 4 bits long, and before that, a byte stood for
    an arbitrary number of bits greater than 1. Only later, with IBM’s 8-­bit Extended
    Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code (EBCDIC), introduced in the 1960s in its
    mainframe computer product line System/360 and which had byte-­addressable
    memory with 8-­bit bytes, did the byte start to standardize around having 8
    bits. This then led to the adoption of the 8-­bit storage size in other widely used
    computer systems, including the Intel 8080 and Motorola 6800.
       The following excerpt is from a book titled Planning a Computer System, pub-
    lished 1962, listing three main reasons for adopting the 8-­bit byte1:
        1. Its full capacity of 256 characters was considered to be sufficient for the great
        majority of applications.

    1
     Planning a Computer System, Project Stretch, McGraw-­Hill Book Company, Inc., 1962.
    (http://archive.computerhistory.org/resources/text/IBM/Stretch/pdfs/
    Buchholz_102636426.pdf)

  2. Within the limits of this capacity, a single character is represented by a single
  byte, so that the length of any particular record is not dependent on the coincidence
  of characters in that record.
  3. 8-­bit bytes are reasonably economical of storage space.
   An 8-­bit byte can hold one of 256 uniquely different values from 00000000 to
11111111. The interpretation of those values, of course, depends on the software
using it. For example, we can store positive numbers in those bytes to represent
a positive number from 0 to 255 inclusive. We can also use the two’s complement
scheme to represent signed numbers from –128 to 127 inclusive.

Character Encoding
Of course, computers didn’t just use bytes for encoding and processing integers.
They would also often store and process human-­readable letters and numbers,
called characters.
   Early character encodings, such as ASCII, had settled on using 7 bits per
byte, but this gave only a limited set of 128 possible characters. This allowed for
encoding English-­language letters and digits, as well as a few symbol charac-
ters and control characters, but could not represent many of the letters used in
other languages. The EBCDIC standard, using its 8-­bit bytes, chose a different
character set entirely, with code pages for “swapping” to different languages.
But ultimately this character set was too cumbersome and inflexible.
   Over time, it became clear that we needed a truly universal character set, sup-
porting all the world’s living languages and special symbols. This culminated in
the creation of the Unicode project in 1987. A few different Unicode encodings
exist, but the dominant encoding used on the Web is UTF-­8. Characters within
the ASCII character -­set are included verbatim in UTF-­8, and “extended char-
acters” can spread out over multiple consecutive bytes.
   Since characters are now encoded as bytes, we can represent characters using
two hexadecimal digits. For example, the characters A, R, and M are normally
encoded with the octets shown in Figure 1.1.

Figure 1.1: Letters A, R, and M and their hexadecimal values

  Each hexadecimal digit can be encoded with a 4-­bit pattern ranging from
0000 to 1111, as shown in Figure 1.2.

Figure 1.2: Hexadecimal ASCII values and their 8-­bit binary equivalents

       Since two hexadecimal values are required to encode an ASCII character, 8 bits
    seemed like the ideal for storing text in most written languages around the world,
    or a multiple of 8 bits for characters that cannot be represented in 8 bits alone.
       Using this pattern, we can more easily interpret the meaning of a long string
    of bits. The following bit pattern encodes the word Arm:
      0100 0001 0101 0010 0100 1101

    Machine Code and Assembly
    One uniquely powerful aspect of computers, as opposed to the mechanical cal-
    culators that predated them, is that they can also encode their logic as data. This
    code can also be stored in memory or on disk and be processed or changed on
    demand. For example, a software update can completely change the operating
    system of a computer without the need to purchase a new machine.
       We’ve already seen how numbers and characters are encoded, but how is
    this logic encoded? This is where the processor architecture and its instruction
    set comes into play.
       If we were to create our own computer processor from scratch, we could design
    our own instruction encoding, mapping binary patterns to machine codes that
    our processor can interpret and respond to, in effect, creating our own “machine
    language.” Since machine codes are meant to “instruct” the circuitry to perform
    an “operation,” these machine codes are also referred to as instruction codes, or,
    more commonly, operation codes (opcodes).
       In practice, most people use existing computer processors and therefore use the
    instruction encodings defined by the processor manufacturer. On Arm, instruction
    encodings have a fixed size and can be either 32-­bit or 16-­bit, depending on
    the instruction set in use by the program. The processor fetches and interprets
    each instruction and runs each in turn to perform the logic of the program. Each
    instruction is a binary pattern, or instruction encoding, which follows specific
    rules defined by the Arm architecture.
       By way of example, let’s assume we’re building a tiny 16-­bit instruction set
    and are defining how each instruction will look. Our first task is to designate
    part of the encoding as specifying exactly what type of instruction is to be run,
    called the opcode. For example, we might set the first 7 bits of the instruction to
    be an opcode and specify the opcodes for addition and subtraction, as shown
    in Table 1.1.

Table 1.1: Addition and Subtraction Opcodes

  OPERATION                                   OPCODE
  Addition                                    0001110
  Subtraction                                 0001111

  Writing machine code by hand is possible but unnecessarily cumbersome.
In practice, we’ll want to write assembly in some human-­readable “assembly
language” that will be converted into its machine code equivalent. To do this,
we should also define the shorthand for the instruction, called the instruction
mnemonic, as shown in Table 1.2.

Table 1.2: Mnemonics

  OPERATION                      OPCODE                    MNEMONIC
  Addition                       0001110                   ADD
  Subtraction                    0001111                   SUB

   Of course, it’s not sufficient to tell a processor to just do an “addition.” We
also need to tell it what two things to add and what to do with the result. For
example, if we write a program that performs “a = b + c,” the values of b and c
need to be stored somewhere before the instruction begins, and the instruction
needs to know where to write the result a to.
   In most processors, and Arm processors in particular, these temporary values
are usually stored in registers, which store a small number of “working” values.
Programs can pull data in from memory (or disk) into registers ready to be
processed and can spill result data back to longer-­term storage after processing.
   The number and naming conventions of registers are architecture-dependent.
As software has become more and more complex, programs must often juggle
larger numbers of values at the same time. Storing and operating on these
values in registers is faster than doing so in memory directly, which means that
registers reduce the number of times a program needs to access memory and
result in faster execution.
   Going back to our earlier example, we were designing a 16-­bit instruction to per-
form an operation that adds a value to a register and writes the result into another
register. Since we use 7 bits for the operation (ADD/SUB) itself, the remaining 9 bits
can be used for encoding the source and the destination registers and a constant
value we want to add or subtract. In this example, we split the remaining bits
evenly and assign the shortcuts and respective machine codes shown in Table 1.3.

Table 1.3: Manually Assigning the Machine Codes

      OPERATION                      MNEMONIC                      MACHINE CODE
      Addition                       ADD                           0001110
      Subtraction                    SUB                           0001111
      Integer value 2                #2                            010
      Operand register               R0                            000
      Destination register           R1                            001

       Instead of generating these machine codes by hand, we could instead write
    a little program that converts the syntax ADD R1, R0, #2 (R1 = R0 + 2) into the
    corresponding machine-­code pattern and hand that machine-­code pattern to
    our example processor. See Table 1.4.

Table 1.4: Programming the Machine Codes

                                                                   HEXADECIMAL
      INSTRUCTION                    BINARY MACHINE CODE           ENCODING
      ADD R1, R0, #2                 0001110 010 000 001           0x1C81
      SUB R1, R0, #2                 0001111 010 000 001           0x1E81

      The bit pattern we constructed represents one of the instruction encodings for
    16-­bit ADD and SUB instructions that are part of the T32 instruction set. In Figure 1.3
    you can see its components and how they are ordered in the instruction encoding.

Figure 1.3: 16-­bit Thumb encoding of ADD and SUB immediate instruction

      Of course, this is just a simplified example. Modern processors provide
    hundreds of possible instructions, often with more complex subencodings. For
    example, Arm defines the load register instruction (with the LDR mnemonic)
    that loads a 32-­bit value from memory into a register, as illustrated in Figure 1.4.
      In this instruction, the “address” to load is specified in register 2 (called R2),
    and the read value is written to register 3 (called R3).

Figure 1.4: LDR instruction loading a value from the address in R2 to register R3

   The syntax of writing brackets around R2 indicates that the value in R2 is to
be interpreted as an address in memory, rather than an ordinary value. In other
words, we do not want to copy the value in R2 into R3, but rather fetch the con-
tents of memory at the address given by R2 and load that value into R3. There are
many reasons for a program to reference a memory location, including calling
a function or loading a value from memory into a register.
   This is, in essence, the difference between machine code and assembly code.
Assembly language is the human-­readable syntax that shows how each encoded
instruction should be interpreted. Machine code, by contrast, is the actual binary
data ingested and processed by the actual processor, with its encoding specified
precisely by the processor designer.

Assembling
Since processors understand only machine code, and not assembly language,
how do we convert between them? To do this we need a program to convert
our handwritten assembly instructions into their machine-­code equivalents.
The programs that perform this task are called assemblers.
   In practice, assemblers are capable not only of understanding and translating
individual instructions into machine code but also of interpreting assembler direc-
tives2 that direct the assembler to do other things, such as switch between data
and code or assemble different instruction sets. Therefore, the terms assembly
language and assembler language are just two ways of looking at the same thing.
The syntax and meaning of individual assembler directives and expressions
depend on the specific assembler.

2
 https://ftp.gnu.org/old-­gnu/Manuals/gas-­2.9.1/html_chapter/as_7
.html

        These directives and expressions are useful shortcuts that can be used in an
     assembly program; however, they are not strictly part of the assembly language
     itself, but rather are directions for how the assembler itself should operate.
        There are different assemblers available on different platforms, such as the
     GNU assembler as, which is also used to assemble the Linux kernel, the ARM
     Toolchain assembler armasm, or the Microsoft assembler with the same name
     (armasm) included in Visual Studio.
        Suppose, by way of example, we want to assemble the following two 16-­bit
     instructions written in a file named myasm.s:
       .section .text
       .global _start
       _start:
       .thumb
           movs r1, #5
           ldr r3, [r2]

       In this program, the first three lines are assembler directives. These tell the
     assembler information about where the data should be assembled (in this case,
     placed in the .text section), define the label of the entry point of our code (in this
     case, called _start) as a global symbol, and finally specify that the instruction
     encoding it should use should be Thumb. The Thumb instruction set (T32) is
     part of the Arm architecture and allows instructions to be 16-­bit wide.
       We can use the GNU assembler, as, to compile this program on a Linux
     operating system machine running on an Arm processor.
       $ as myasm.s -­
                     o myasm.o

     The assembler reads the assembly language program myasm.s and creates an
     object file called myasm.o. This file contains 4 bytes of machine code corresponding
     to our two 2-­byte instructions in hexadecimal.
       05 10 a0 e3 00 30 92 e5

        Another particularly useful feature of assemblers is the concept of a label,
     which references a specific address in memory, such as the address of a branch
     target, function, or global variable.
        Let’s take the assembly program as an example.
       .section .text
       .global _start

       _start:
                 mov r1, #5
                 mov r2, #6
                 b mylabel
       result:
                 mov r0, r4

            b _exit
  mylabel:
            add r4, r1, r2
            b result

  _exit:
            mov r7, #0
            svc #0

   This program starts by filling two registers with values and branches, or jumps,
to the label mylabel to execute the ADD instruction. After the ADD instruction is
executed, the program branches to the result label, executes the move instruction,
and ends with a branch to the _exit label. The assembler will use these labels
to provide hints to the linker that assigns relative memory locations to them.
Figure 1.5 illustrates the program flow.

Figure 1.5: Program flow of an example assembly program

  Labels are not only useful for referencing instructions to jump to but can also
be used to fetch the contents of a memory location. For instance, the following
assembly code snippet uses labels to fetch the contents from a memory location
or jump to different instructions in the code:
  .section .text
  .global _start

  _start:

           mov r1, #5               // 1. fill r1 with value 5
           adr r2, myvalue          // 2. fill r2 with address of mystring
           ldr r3, [r2]             // 3. fill r3 with value at address in r2
           b mylabel                // 4. jump to address of mylabel
       result:
           mov r0, r4               // 7. fill r0 with value in r4
           b _exit                  // 8. Branch to address of _exit
       mylabel:
           add r4, r1, r3           // 5. fill r4 with result of r1 + r3
           b result                 // 6. jump to result

       myvalue:
       .word 2                      // word-­
                                            sized value containing value 2

       The ADR instruction loads the address of variable myvalue into register R2
     and uses an LDR instruction to load the contents of that address into register R3.
     The program then branches to the instruction referenced by the label mylabel,
     executes an ADD instruction, and branches to the instruction referenced by the
     label result, as illustrated in Figure 1.6.

Figure 1.6: Illustration of ADR and LDR instruction logic

  As a slightly more interesting example, the following assembly code prints
Hello World! to the console and then exits. It uses a label to reference the string
hello by putting the relative address of its label mystring into register R1 with
an ADR instruction.
  .section .text
  .global _start

  _start:
      mov r0, #1                   // STDOUT
      adr r1, mystring             // R1 = address of string
      mov r2, #6                   // R2 = size of string
      mov r7, #4                   // R7 = syscall number for 'write()'
      svc #0                       // invoke syscall

  _exit:
      mov r7, #0
      svc #0

  mystring:
  .string "Hello\n"

After assembling and linking this program on a processor that supports the Arm
architecture and the instruction set we use, it prints out Hello when executed.
  $ as myasm2.s -­
                 o myasm2.o
  $ ld myasm2.o -­
                 o myasm2
  $ ./myasm2
  Hello

Modern assemblers are often incorporated into compiler toolchains and are designed
to output files that can be combined into larger executable programs. For this reason,
assembly programs usually don’t just convert assembly instructions directly into
machine code, but rather create an object file, including the assembly instructions,
symbol information, and hints for the compiler’s linker program, which is ultimately
responsible for creating full executable files to be run on modern operating systems.

Cross-­Assemblers
What happens if we run our Arm program on a different processor architecture?
Executing our myasm2 program on an Intel x86-­64 processor will result in an
error telling us that the binary file cannot be executed due to an error in the
executable format.
  user@ubuntu:~$ ./myasm
  bash: ./myasm: cannot execute binary file: Exec format error

        We can’t run our Arm binary on an x64 machine because instructions are
     encoded differently on the two platforms. Even if we want to perform the same
     operation on different architectures, the assembly language and assigned machine
     codes can differ significantly. Let’s say you want to execute an instruction to move
     the decimal number 1 into the first register on three different processor archi-
     tectures. Even though the operation itself is the same, the instruction encoding
     and assembly language depends on the architecture. Take the following three
     general architecture types as an example:

     Armv8-­A: 64-­Bit Instruction Set (AArch64)
        d2 80 00 20        mov       x0, #1           // move value 1 into register r0

     Armv8-­A: 32-­Bit Instruction Set (AArch32)
        e3 a0 00 01        mov       r0, #1           // move value 1 into register r0

     Intel x86-­64 Instruction Set
        b8 01 00 00 00         mov rax, 1            // move value 1 into register rax

       Not only is the syntax different, but also the corresponding machine code bytes
     differ significantly between different instruction sets. This means that machine
     code bytes assembled for the Arm 32-­bit instruction set have an entirely different
     meaning on an architecture with a different instruction set (such as x64 or A64).
       The same is true in reverse. The same sequence of bytes can have significantly
     different interpretations on different processors, for example:

     Armv8-­A: 64-­Bit Instruction Set (AArch64)
        d2 80 00 20          mov      x0, #1        // move value 1 into register x0

     Armv8-­A: 32-­Bit Instruction Set (AArch32)
        d2 80 00 20        addle r0, r0, #32       // add value 32 to r0 if LE = true

        In other words, our assembly program needs to be written in the assembly
     language of the architecture we want it to run on and must be assembled with
     an assembler that supports this instruction set.
        Perhaps counterintuitively, however, it is possible to create Arm binaries
     without using an Arm machine. The assembler itself will need to know about
     the Arm syntax, of course, but if that assembler is itself compiled for x64, then
     running it on an x64 machine will let you create Arm binaries. This is called
     a cross-­assembler and allows you to assemble your code for a different target
     architecture than the one you are currently working on.

 For example, you can download an assembler for AArch32 on an x86-­64
Ubuntu machine and assemble your code from there.
  user@ubuntu:~$ arm-­linux-­gnueabihf-­as myasm.s -­o myasm.o
  user@ubuntu:~$ arm-­linux-­gnueabihf-­ld myasm.o -­o myasm

  Using the Linux command “file,” we can see that we created a 32-­bit ARM
executable file.
  user@ubuntu:~$ file myasm
  myasm: ELF 32-­
                bit LSB executable, ARM, EABI5 version 1 (SYSV),
  statically linked, not stripped

High-­Level Languages
So, why has assembly language not become the dominant programming language
for writing software? One major reason is that assembly language is not portable.
Imagine having to rewrite your entire application codebase for each processor
architecture you want to support! That’s a lot of work. Instead, newer languages
have evolved that abstract such processor-­specific details away, allowing the
same program to be easily compiled for multiple different architectures. These
languages are often called higher-­level languages, in contrast to the low-­level language
of assembly that is closer to the hardware and architecture of a specific computer.
   The term high-­level here is inherently relative. Originally, C and C++ were
considered high-­level languages, and assembly was considered the low-­level
language. Since newer, more abstract languages have emerged, such as Visual
Basic or Python, C/C++ is often referred to as low-­level. Ultimately, it depends
on the perspective and who you ask.
   As with assembly language, processors do not understand high-­level source
code directly. Programmers need to convert their high-­level programs into machine
code using a compiler. As before, we still need to specify which architecture the
binary will run on, and as before we can create Arm-­binaries from non-­Arm
systems by making use of a cross-­compiler.
   The output of a compiler is typically an executable file that can be run on a
given operating system, and it is these binary executable files, rather than the
source code of the program, that are typically distributed to customers. For this
reason, often when we want to analyze a program, all we have is the compiled
executable file itself.
   Unfortunately for reverse engineers, it is usually not possible to reverse the
compilation process back to the original source code. Not only are compilers
hideously complex programs with many layers of iteration and abstraction

     between the original source code and the resulting binary, but also many of
     these steps drop the human-­readable information that makes the program easy
     for programmers to reason about.
       Without the source code of the software we want to analyze, we have broadly
     two options depending on the level of detail our analysis requires: decompiling
     or disassembling the executable file.

     Disassembling
     The process of disassembling a binary includes reconstructing the assembly
     instructions that the binary would run from their machine-­code format into a
     human-­readable assembly language. The most common use cases for disassembly
     include malware analysis, validation of compiler performance and output accu-
     racy, and vulnerability analysis and exploit or proof-­of-­concept development
     against defects in closed-­source software.
        Of these, exploit development is perhaps the most sensitive to needing anal-
     ysis of the actual assembly code. Where vulnerability discovery can often be
     done with techniques such as fuzzing, building exploits from detected crashes
     or discovering why certain areas of code are not being reached by fuzzers often
     requires significant assembly knowledge.
        Here, intimate knowledge of the exact conditions of the vulnerability by
     reading assembly code is critical. The exact choices of how compilers allocate
     variables and data structures are often critical to developing exploits, and it is
     here that in-­depth assembly knowledge truly is required. Often a seemingly
     “unexploitable” vulnerability might, in fact, be exploitable with a bit of crea-
     tivity and hard work invested in truly understanding the inner mechanics of
     how a vulnerable function works.
        Disassembling an executable file can be done in multiple ways, and we will
     look at this in more detail in the second part of this book. But, for now, one of
     the simplest tools to quickly look at the disassembly output of an executable
     file is the Linux tool objdump.3
        Let’s compile and disassemble the following write() program:
         #include <unistd.h>

         int main(void) {

             write(1, "Hello!\n", 7);
         }

        We can compile this code with GCC and specify the -­c option. This option
     tells GCC to create the object file without invoking the linking process, so we

     3
     https://web.mit.edu/gnu/doc/html/binutils_5.html

can then run objdump on just our compiled code without seeing the disassembly
of all the surrounding object files such as a C runtime. The disassembly output
of the main function is as follows:
    user@arm32:~$ gcc -­
                       c hello.c
    user@arm32:~$ objdump -­
                           d hello.o

    Disassembly of section .text:

    00000000 <main>:
       0:b580      push{r7, lr}
       2:af00      addr7, sp, #0
       4:2207      movsr2, #7
       6:4b04      ldrr3, [pc, #16]; (18 <main+0x18>)
       8:447b      addr3, pc
       a:4619      movr1, r3
       c:2001      movsr0, #1
       e:f7ff fffe bl0 <write>
      12:2300      movsr3, #0
      14:4618      movr0, r3
      16:bd80      pop{r7, pc}
      18:0000000c .word0x0000000c

  While Linux utilities like objdump are useful for quickly disassembling small
programs, larger programs require a more convenient solution. Various disas-
semblers exist to make reverse engineering more efficient, ranging from free
open source tools, such as Ghidra,4 to expensive solutions like IDA Pro.5 These
will be discussed in the second part of this book in more detail.

Decompilation
A more recent innovation in reverse engineering is the use of decompilers.
Decompilers go a step further than disassemblers. Where disassemblers simply
show the human-­readable assembly code of the program, decompilers try to
regenerate equivalent C/C++ code from a compiled binary.
   One value of decompilers is that they significantly reduce and simplify the disas-
sembled output by generating pseudocode. This can make it easier to read when
skimming over a function to see at a broad-­strokes level what the program is up to.
   The flipside to this, of course, is that important details can also get lost in the
process. Additionally, since compilers are inherently lossy in their conversion
from source code to executable file, decompilers cannot fully reconstruct the

4
https://ghidra-­sre.org
5
https://hex-­rays.com/ida-­pro

     original source code. Symbol names, local variables, comments, and much of the
     program structure are inherently destroyed by the compilation process. Similarly,
     attempts to automatically name or relabel local variables and parameters can be
     misleading if storage locations are reused by an aggressively optimizing compiler.
        Let’s look at an example C function, compile it with GCC, and then decom-
     pile it with both IDA Pro’s and Ghidra’s decompilers to show what this looks
     like in practice.
        Figure 1.7 shows a function called file_record in the ihex2fw.c6 file from
     the Linux source code repository.

Figure 1.7: Source code of file_record function in the ihex2fw.c source file

       After compiling the C file on an Armv8-­A architecture (without any specific
     compiler options) and loading the executable file into IDA Pro 7.6, Figure 1.8
     shows the pseudocode for the previous function generated by the decompiler.

Figure 1.8: IDA 7.6 decompilation output of the compiled file_record function

     6
      https://gitlab.arm.com/linux-­arm/linux-­dm/-­/blob/
     56299378726d5f2ba8d3c8cbbd13cb280ba45e4f/firmware/ihex2fw.c

   In Figure 1.9 you can see the same function decompiled by Ghidra 10.0.4.
   In both cases we can sort of see the ghost of the original code if we squint hard
enough at it, but the code is vastly less readable and far less intuitive than the
original. In other words, while there are certainly many cases when decompilers
can give us a quick high-­level overview of a program, it is certainly no panacea and
is no substitute for being able to dive in to the assembly code of a given program.

Figure 1.9: Ghidra 10.0.4. decompilation output of the compiled file_record function

   That said, decompilers are constantly evolving and are becoming better at
reconstructing source code, especially for simple functions. Using decompiler
output of functions you want to reverse engineer at a higher level is a useful
aid, but don’t forget to peek into the disassembly output when you are trying
to get a more in-­depth view of what’s going on.
