                                                                CHAPTER

                                                                     4

                              The Arm Architecture

In this chapter you will learn about Arm’s architecture profiles, exception levels,
and the two execution states supported by the Armv8-­A architecture: AArch64
and AArch32.

Architectures and Profiles
Dozens of different processors exist across the Arm ecosystem, each with dif-
ferent features, performance, power consumption, and other characteristics.
To provide consistency across these processors and allow existing compiled
applications to run on new processors when they are released, each processor
in the Arm ecosystem conforms to an architecture and a profile.
   The architecture specifies the supported instruction sets, the available set of
registers, and the different levels of privilege as part of the exception model,
programmer’s model, and memory model of the system. It defines the core
functionality that processors must support, as well as features that they may
optionally support.

       You have probably heard the term micro-­architecture and are wondering about
     the difference between an architecture and a micro-­architecture. When you
     reverse engineer an executable from an Arm-­based device, there are two things
     you need to determine before you start digging through the assembly code.
         ■■   What is the micro-­architecture of the processor?
         ■■   Which architecture does the processor implement?
        The architecture is the behavioral description of a processor and defines compo-
     nents like the instruction set. The micro-­architecture defines how the processor is
     built. This includes the number and sizes of the caches, which features are imple-
     mented, the pipeline layout, and even how the memory system is implemented.
        Processors with different micro-­architectures can implement the same architecture
     and execute the same code. For example, the following processor cores implement
     the Armv8-­A architecture but differ on a micro-­architectural level: Cortex-­A32,
     Cortex-­A35, Cortex-­A72, Cortex-­A65, Cortex-­A78, to name a few. Once you identify
     which micro-­architecture your target device is based on, you can search for the
     technical reference manual to identify the architecture the processor implements
     and look up the micro-­architectural details relevant to your use case.
        Another important distinction is the profile. The name of the processor core
     often already reveals the specific profile, e.g., Cortex-­A72 for the A-­profile,
     Cortex-­R82 for the R-­profile, and so on.
        Within the Arm-­v8 architecture, there are three profiles1: A, R, and M.
         ■■   A: This is the “application” profile (Armv8-­A). Armv8-­A is designed for
              rich operating systems found in devices such as mobile phones, IoT devices,
              laptops, and servers.
         ■■   R: This is the “real-­time” profile (Armv8-­R), which also supports the
              AArch642 and AArch323 execution states. Armv8-­R is designed for hard
              real-­time or safety-­critical systems, such as medical devices, avionics, and
              electronic brakes in vehicles. R-­profile processors run 32-­bit code and
              support a much more limited memory architecture compared to the A-­profile.
         ■■   M: This is the “microcontroller” profile (Armv8-­M).4 Armv8-­M is designed
              for use as a microcontroller in low-­cost deeply embedded systems, such
              as industrial devices and some low-­cost IoT devices. Armv8-­M only runs
              32-­bit programs using the Thumb instruction set.
       Although the A-­R-­M profiles have been around since before the Armv8
     architecture, the new architecture design significantly enhances the use cases

     1
      ARM for Armv8-­A (DDI 0487G.a): A1.2 Architecture Profiles
     2
      ARM Supplement for Armv8-­R (DDI 0600A.c) AArch64
     3
      ARM Supplement for Armv8-­R (DDI 0568A.c) AArch32
     4
      Armv8-­M Architecture Reference Manual (DDI0553B.o)

they were designed for. Take the Armv8-­R architecture, for example. The new Arm
Cortex-­R825 processor core replaces the previous Cortex-­R8, which is a 32-­bit core
used in modern modems, HDD controllers, and SSD controllers and is limited to not
more than 4GB of addressable DRAM. With the new 64-­bit Armv8-­R architecture
and 40 address bits, it is possible to address up to 1TB of DRAM, which is partic-
ularly beneficial for modern high-­capacity SSDs and in-­storage processing for IoT.
This is of course not the only enhancement that the Armv8-­R profile provides. For
a more detailed overview, check out the Armv8-­R reference manual supplement.
   In this book, we will focus on the Armv8 processors based on the A-­profile, which
is the profile of the main CPU in modern devices running a rich OS like Android.
But it is still important to remember that modern smartphones contain all three
processor types. For example, R-­profile processors provide cellular connectivity,
and M-­profile processors are used in camera components, power management,
touchscreen and sensor hubs, Bluetooth, GPS, and the Flash controller. For SIM
or smart cards, an M-­profile processor with additional security features, called
SecureCore, is used.

The Armv8-­A Architecture
Since its release, the Armv8 architecture has been improving significantly and intro-
ducing new extensions and security features, making it more and more suitable for
powerful use cases. As a result, processor companies began developing Arm-­based
server microprocessor architectures to take advantage of the Arm architecture’s
potential to be a power-­efficient, performant, and scalable alternative to processors
like Intel and AMD. This led to more developments in the processor market and
cloud services expanding their portfolio with Arm-­based instances. That said, there
has never been a better time for reverse engineers to familiarize themselves with
the fundamentals of the Armv8-­A architecture and the new A64 instruction set.
   As of January 2021, the latest in-­use architecture version for Arm is Armv8,
along with its extensions up to Armv8.7. In March 2021, Arm introduced its new
Armv9-­A6 architecture, which builds on and is backward compatible with the
Armv8-­A architecture. The new features introduced with the Armv9-­A include
Scalable Vector Extension v2 (SVE2), Transactional Memory Extension (TME),
and Branch Record Buffer Extensions (BRBE).
   The Armv8-­A architecture provides two execution states, the 64-­bit execution
state AArch64 and the 32-­bit execution state AArch32, which will be introduced in
the section “Armv8-­A Execution States” and covered in more detail in the sections
“The AArch64 Execution State” and “The AArch32 Execution State,” respectively.

5
Arm Cortex-­R82 Processor Datasheet
6
Arm A64 ISA Armv9, for Armv9-­A architecture profile (DDI 0602)

     Exception Levels
     The exception level of a program broadly refers to the numbered hierarchy level
     in which execution occurs. The lowest exception level, EL0, typically runs ordi-
     nary user applications. Higher exception levels run more privileged code,7 each
     sitting conceptually “above” and helping to manage the programs operating in
     lower exception levels, as shown in Figure 4.1.8

Figure 4.1: Exception levels illustrated with “secure” state and “non-­secure” state separation
     provided by the TrustZone extension

        Older versions of the architecture, such as the Armv7 architecture, used the
     term privilege levels indicated by levels PL0, PL1, and PL2. The Armv8 architecture
     instead uses the term exception levels, from EL0 to EL3.
        One of the most common usage models for this logical separation of software
     execution privilege is as follows9:
         ■■   EL0 is the least privileged execution mode for a program and is used by
              ordinary user-­mode applications. A program operating at EL0 can perform
              basic computation and access its own memory address space, but it cannot
              directly interact with device peripherals or system memory unless explic-
              itly authorized to do so by software running in a higher exception level.
         ■■   EL1 is typically used by operating system kernels and device drivers,
              such as the Linux kernel.
         ■■   EL2 is typically used by hypervisors that manage one or more guest
              operating systems, such as KVM.
         ■■   EL3 is used by processors that make use of the TrustZone extension and
              supports switching between two security states through the Secure Monitor.

     7
      ARM for Armv8-­A (DDI 0487G.a): D1.1 Exception Levels
     8
      Exception Model, version 1.0 (ARM062-­1010708621-­27): 3. Execution and Security states
     9
      ARM for Armv8-­A (DDI 0487G.a): D1.1.1 Typical Exception level usage

Armv8-­A TrustZone Extension
Sometimes security-­critical operating system code needs to operate on and
securely store sensitive data even in cases where the operating system itself
might be compromised. Examples include verifying the integrity of the operating
system itself, managing user credentials with a fingerprint sensor, and stor-
ing and managing device encryption keys. High-­value assets are not limited
to kernel-­mode components. Digital rights management (DRM) applications,
banking applications, and secure messengers may also want to protect their
code and data from devices that may have malware installed.
   For these application scenarios, the Armv8-­A profile provides support for
the TrustZone extension,10 which is a hardware extension for Arm processors to
enable construction of trusted systems, and divides device hardware and soft-
ware resources into two worlds: the secure world for the security subsystem and
the normal world for everything else, with secure world memory bus accesses
fully segmented away from normal world code and devices. These are also
referred to as secure and nonsecure states.
   In secure state, a processing element (PE), which refers to the behavior of an
abstract machine, can access both secure and nonsecure physical address spaces
and system registers. In nonsecure state, only nonsecure physical address space
and system registers can be accessed by a PE.
   In Armv8-­A processors with the TrustZone extension, each logical processor
core operates as if it had two different “virtual cores,” with one operating inside
TrustZone and the other running outside of it. The normal world core runs
the traditional operating system as before, complete with its rich functionality
and normal applications. In TrustZone terminology, this entire environment is
referred to as the rich execution environment (REE). By contrast, the TrustZone
virtual core hosts and runs a trusted execution environment (TEE) in the secure
world. In practice, TrustZone virtual cores are implemented by fast context
switching performed inside the Secure Monitor at the highest privilege level.
   TrustZone-­protected code and data are isolated from malicious peripherals
and non-­TrustZone code. It can be used to construct a fully featured TEE, com-
prised of a TEE OS running at S-­EL1, trusted drivers (TDs) that securely interact
with peripherals, and even trusted applications (TAs) that run at S-­EL0. TrustZone
also provides for a Secure Monitor that operates at the highest privilege level of
S-­EL3 with full access to the device in all modes, as shown in Figure 4.2. Note
that the exception level for these software components can vary depending on
the TEE OS implementation.

10
 TrustZone for Armv8-­A, Version 1.0 (ARM062-­1010708621-­28)

Figure 4.2: Illustration of exception level components on a TrustZone enabled system

          The S-­EL0. . .S-­EL3 security exception levels are as follows:
          ■■   S-­EL0 runs unprivileged trusted applications11 or trusted services12 within
               the secure world. In some TEE implementations, trusted drivers also run in
               S-­EL0. Like their EL0 counterparts, by default, TAs cannot access the memory
               of other running TAs, access normal programs in EL0, or directly commu-
               nicate with device peripherals. Instead, TAs run inside, and are managed
               by, the TEE-­OS. S-­EL0 applications differ from EL0 ones in that their memory
               can be TrustZone-­secured physical pages, providing their code and data
               with an extra layer of defense against malicious or malfunctioning code
               in the normal world, even at high permission levels such as EL1 or EL2.
          ■■   S-­EL1 is the secure-­world counterpart for EL1 and runs the code for the
               Trusted Execution Environment’s operating system. Depending on the
               TEE implementation, trusted drivers may also run as S-­EL1.
          ■■   S-­EL2 permits virtualization inside the secure world. It is available only
               on Armv8.4-­A and above. S-­EL2 is used by the Secure Partition Manager,
               which can be thought of as a minimal partitioning hypervisor.13 This also
               allows firmware to be decomposed into more privileged and less privileged
               pieces, with a small set of highly trusted drivers running at S-­EL2, and
               less trusted firmware drivers running at S-­EL1.
          ■■   S-­EL3 operates the code for the Secure Monitor, which is the highest priv-
               ilege level for the CPU. The Secure Monitor runs code from the Arm
               Trusted Firmware (ATF) provided by the device manufacturer.14 The
               Secure Monitor is the root of trust for the system and contains the code

     11
       Introduction to Trusted Execution Environments, by GlobalPlatform Inc. May 2018
     12
       TrustZone for Armv8-­A, Version 1.0 (ARM062-­1010708621-­28)
     13
       Whitepaper: Isolation using virtualization in Secure world – Secure world software architec-
     ture on Armv8.4
     14
       “Arm trusted firmware github,” https://github.com/ARM-­software/
     arm-­trusted-­firmware/tree/master/bl31/aarch64, accessed: Dec, 2019.

       that performs context switching between the normal and secure world
       kernels. It also provides basic services to both via the secure monitor call
       (SMC) handler, which can be requested by both normal and secure-­world
       programs running in lower permission levels.

  Note that this section is not meant to be an exhaustive list of features and
customization options of the TrustZone architecture and rather serves as an
introduction and a general overview. Covering this topic comprehensively,
including the attack surface of TEEs, is beyond the scope of this book.

Exception Level Changes
Programs running at a given execution level run continuously at that level
until the processor encounters an “exception.” Exception types can be catego-
rized into two types: synchronous exceptions and asynchronous exceptions.
Synchronous exceptions can occur due to a program fault, such as executing
an invalid instruction or attempting to access a misaligned address in memory.
These exceptions can be also caused by exception-­generating instructions that
target different exception levels and are used to implement system call inter-
faces for less privileged code to request services from a higher privilege level,
as shown in Figure 4.3. These include the supervisor call (SVC), hypervisor call
(HVC), and the secure monitor call (SMC) instructions.

Figure 4.3: Illustration of SVC, HVC, and SMC calls in their respective exception levels

  Asynchronous exceptions can be caused by physical or virtual interrupts and
be left in a pending state. This means these exceptions are not synchronous to
the current instruction stream and are therefore called asynchronous.
  When an exception is taken, the exception vector in a vector table at the target
exception level is called. The exception vector is the address for the exception,
which is specified as an offset relative to the vector base address defined in the

      vector base address register (VBAR)15 associated with the exception level, VBAR_ELn.
      Table 4.1 contains the vector offsets from the vector base address based on the
      EL that the exception is taken from.16

Table 4.1: Vector Offsets from Vector Table Base Address

                                                                               EXCEPTION
           OFFSET               PHYSICAL                VIRTUAL                TAKEN FROM
           0x780                SError                  vSError
           0x700                FIQ                     vFIQ                   Lower EL, where the
           0x680                IRQ                     vIRQ                   EL immediately
                                                                               lower than the
           0x600                Synchronous                                    target level is using
                                                                               AArch32
           0x580                SError                  vSError
           0x500                FIQ                     vFIQ                   Lower EL, where the
           0x480                IRQ                     vIRQ                   EL immediately
                                                                               lower than the
           0x400                Synchronous                                    target level is using
                                                                               AArch64
           0x380                SError                  vSError
           0x300                FIQ                     vFIQ                   Current EL with SP_
                                                                               ELx (x > 0)
           0x280                IRQ                     vIRQ
           0x200                Synchronous
           0x180                SError                  vSError
           0x100                FIQ                     vFIQ                   Current EL with
                                                                               SP_EL0
           0x080                IRQ                     vIRQ
           0x000                Synchronous

         When encountering an exception, the processor suspends the currently exe-
      cuting task and transfers program execution to a registered exception handler
      in a higher exception level. Privileged code can then manually “return” to a
      lower-­privileged program using the “exception return” eret instruction.17 Con-
      text switching between the secure and nonsecure states occurs through hardware
      exception interrupts or the SMC instruction, which causes a secure monitor call
      exception targeting EL3 at the appropriate exception handler.18 SMC calls can

      15
        ARM for Armv8-­A (DDI 0487G.a): G8.2.168: VBAR, Vector Base Address Register
      16
        ARM for Armv8-­A (DDI 0487G.a): D1.10.2 Exception vectors
      17
        Fundamentals of ARMv8-­A: Changing Execution state
      18
        TrustZone for Armv8-­A, version 1.0 (ARM062-­1010708621-­28): 3.7 SMC exceptions

be used to request services from the trusted firmware in EL3 or services hosted
in the TEE. In both cases, the SMC dispatcher in EL3 is called and redirects the
call to the appropriate entry. If the requested service resides in the TEE, the SMC
dispatcher calls an entry in the trusted services handler, as shown in Figure 4.4.
During this transition, the nonsecure bit SRC_EL3.NS is set to 0, indicating that
the exception return is taken to Secure-­EL1. The Secure Monitor saves the non-
secure register state and restores the secure register state before proceeding.19

Figure 4.4: Illustration of an SMC exception entry and return

Armv8-­A Execution States
The Armv8-­A architecture allows processors to be designed to run both 64-­bit
and 32-­bit programs natively. Processors that support this functionality run
64-­bit programs in the AArch64 execution state and run 32-­bit programs in the
AArch32 execution state.20,21 Not all Armv8-­A processors support both execu-
tion states.22 For example, the Cortex-­A32 supports only AArch32, while the
Cortex-­A34 supports only AArch64. Others might support AArch32 at EL0 only,
such as the Cortex-­A77 and Cortex-­A78.
   Programs running in AArch64 always use the A64 instruction set, which con-
sists of 32-­bit wide instructions. These instructions have access to AArch64 pro-
grams, which have access to 64-­bit registers for processing and storing addresses.
   The AArch32 execution state is a new concept introduced in the Armv8
architecture to be compatible with the 32-­b it Armv7-­A instruction set.
Programs operating in the AArch32 state use the two main instruction sets

19
  TrustZone for Armv8-­A, version 1.0 (ARM062-­1010708621-­28): 3.2 Switching between Security
states
20
  ARM Manual for Armv8-­A, DDI 0487G.a: B1 – The AArch64 Application Level Programmers’
Model
21
  ARM Manual for Armv8-­A, DDI 0487G.a: G – The AArch32 System Level Architecture
22
  Arm Cortex-­A Processor Comparison Table, https://developer.arm.com/
ip-­products/processors/cortex-­a

      originally defined for the earlier Armv7 architecture and updated for Armv8-­A
      to support more features and new instructions. This means Armv8-­A processors
      are compatible with and can natively run most programs written for the older
      Armv7-­A architecture.
         In previous versions of the Arm architecture, the two main instruction sets
      were called Arm and Thumb. To avoid confusion with the new 64-­bit Arm
      instruction set, A64, these instruction sets are retrospectively renamed A32 and
      T32.23 As with older generations of Arm processors, the AArch32 architecture
      permits transitions between A32 and T32 via a mechanism called interworking,
      which we will discuss later in the chapter.
         Programs on Armv8-­A always operate in either AArch32 or AArch64, and
      never a mixture of the two. That said, 64-­bit operating systems can run 32-­bit
      programs, and 64-­bit hypervisors can run 32-­bit guest operating systems. Transi-
      tions to AArch32 from AArch64 are permitted only when the processor’s current
      exception level is lowered during an exception return. Transitions from AArch32
      to AArch64 are permitted only when the processor raises the exception level to
      a higher privilege when taking an exception, such as when handling a system
      call, a fault, or an external event from hardware.
         A consequence of this design is that a 64-­bit operating system can run both
      64-­bit and 32-­bit applications, and 64-­bit hypervisors can run both 64-­bit and
      32-­bit guest operating systems, but 32-­bit operating systems and hypervisors
      cannot run 64-­bit programs or operating systems, as shown in Figure 4.5.

Figure 4.5: Example illustration of 32-­bit and 64-­bit applications running on 32-­bit vs. 64-­bit
      hypervisors

      The AArch64 Execution State
      The AArch64 is the 64-­bit execution state of the Armv8 architecture and pro-
      vides a single instruction set: A64. The width of A64 instructions in memory is
      32 bits. Virtual addresses use a 64-­bit format and can be stored in 64-­bit registers,
      which means that instructions in the A64 base instruction set can use 64-­bit wide
      registers for processing.

      23
       ARM Manual for Armv8-­A, DDI 0487G.a: A1.3.2 Armv8 instruction sets

The A64 Instruction Set
The A64 instruction set was designed to improve on the limitations of A32 and
T32 instruction sets by adding new features and providing an energy-­efficient
64-­bit processor. As a result, companies such as Samsung and Qualcomm began
designing Arm-­based 64-­bit processors for the use in mobile devices.
   This section is meant as an overview of the A64 instruction set and how it
differs from previous A32 instruction sets. The specifics of individual instruc-
tions and how they work will be discussed in subsequent chapters.
   The instructions in the A64 instruction set can be divided into the following
main types:
   ■■   Data processing instructions
   ■■   Memory access instructions
   ■■   Control flow instructions
   ■■   System control and other instructions

        ■■   System register access
        ■■   Exception handling
        ■■   Debug and hint instructions
        ■■   NEON instructions
        ■■   Floating-­point instructions
        ■■   Cryptographic instructions
  This book is not meant to be a comprehensive list of all instructions that are
part of the A64 and A32/T32 instruction sets. Instead, the instruction chapters
are meant as an overview of the most common instructions encountered dur-
ing reverse engineering. For this reason, we will focus on three main types of
instructions: data processing, memory access, and control flow instructions.
  Those of you who are already familiar with the A32 and T32 instruction sets
will notice that there are similarities to the A64 instruction set, with 32-­bit wide
instruction encodings and a similar syntax. However, there are many differences
between these instruction sets. These differences include the following:
   ■■   There is access to a larger set of general-­purpose registers, 31 64-­bit reg-
        isters compared to 16 32-­bit registers on A32.
   ■■   The zero register is available only on A64.
   ■■   The program counter (PC) is used implicitly in certain instructions involving
        relative loads and address generation and is not accessible as a named
        register on A64.

           ■■   Access to PC-­relative literal pool offsets is extended to ±1MiB to reduce
                the number of literal pools.
           ■■   There are longer offsets for PC-­relative load/store and address generation
                (±4GiB range), which reduces the need to load/store offsets from a literal
                pool.
           ■■   Multiple register instructions such as LDM, STM, PUSH, and POP have
                been replaced by pairwise register STP and LDP instructions.
           ■■   A64 instructions provide a wider range of options for constants.
           ■■   Pointers in AArch64 are 64-­bit, allowing larger ranges of virtual memory
                to be addressed, and virtual addresses are limited to a maximum of 48-­bit
                (pre Armv8.2-­A) and 52-­bit (since Armv8.2-­A).24
           ■■   The IT block has been deprecated on the A64 instruction set and replaced
                with CSEL and CINC instructions.
           ■■   Rarely used options in shift and rotate instructions have been removed
                to make room for new instructions capable of carrying out more compli-
                cated shift operations.
           ■■   While T32 supports a mix of 16-­bit and 32-­bit instructions, A64 has fixed-­
                length instructions.
           ■■   A64 instructions can operate on 32-­bit or 64-­bit values in 64-­bit general-­
                purpose registers. When a 32-­bit value is addressed, the register name
                starts with W, and for 64-­bit values the register name starts with X.
           ■■   A64 uses the procedure call standard (PCS),25 which passes up to eight
                parameters through registers X0–X7, whereas A32 and T32 allow only
                four arguments to be passed in the register and excess parameters are
                passed from the stack.

      AArch64 Registers
      AArch64 provides 31 general-­purpose registers, each 64 bits wide, named x0. . .x30.
      Each 64-­bit register also has a corresponding 32-­bit form, named w0...w30. Reads
      from a 32-­bit Wn register access the lower 32 bits of the corresponding 64-­bit
      Xn register. For example, reading w5 accesses the least-­significant 32 bits of the

      24
        “Learn the Architecture Memory Management,” version 1.0 (101811_0100_00) https://
      developer.arm.com/documentation/101811/0100/Address-­spaces-­in-­AArch64
      25
        https://github.com/ARM-­software/abi-­aa/blob/master/aapcs64/aapcs64
      .rst

corresponding 64-­bit x5 register. Writing a 32-­bit value to a Wn register implic-
itly zeros the top 32-­bits of the corresponding 64-­bit Xn register,26 as shown in
Figure 4.6.

Figure 4.6: Xn and Wn register width

   Although the general-­purpose registers are equal and interchangeable at the
architectural level, in practice the role of these registers for the purpose of function
calls is defined by the Arm Architecture Procedure Call Standard (AAPCS64).27
     ■■   X0–X7 are used for argument registers to pass parameters and return a
          result.
     ■■   X8 can be used to pass the address location of an indirect result.
     ■■   X9–X15 are caller-­saved temporary registers used to preserve values across
          a call to another function. The affected registers are saved in the stack frame
          of the caller function, allowing the subroutine to modify these registers.
     ■■   X16–X18 are intraprocedure-­call temporary registers that can be used as
          temporary registers for immediate values between subroutine calls.
     ■■   X19–X28 are callee-­saved registers that are saved in the stack frame of the
          called subroutine, allowing the subroutine to modify these registers but
          also requiring it to restore them before returning to the caller.
     ■■   X29 is used as a frame pointer (FP) to keep track of the stack frame.
     ■■   X30 is the link registers (LR) holding the return address of the function.
     In the A64 instruction syntax, 64-­bit integer operations normally use the 64-­bit
Xn registers, but smaller operations can make use of the Wn registers. For example,
if a programmer wants to load just a single byte from memory, the destination
register will be a 32-­bit Wn register, filling the low 8 bits of that register.

26
 ARM Manual for Armv8-­A, DDI 0487G.a: B1.2.1 Registers in the AArch64 state
27
 https://github.com/ARM-­software/abi-­aa/blob/
f52e1ad3f81254497a83578dc102f6aac89e52d0/aapcs64/aapcs64.rst

         AArch64 also defines several architectural predeclared core registers that are
      optimized for a specific purpose and not suitable for general arithmetic. For
      example, the program counter and stack pointer registers are not general-­purpose
      registers and are optimized for their dedicated uses inside a program. Except
      for the link register, x30, these registers are not part of the standard x0–x30
      general-­purpose register set and are referred to using their corresponding name
      in assembly code given in Table 4.2.28

Table 4.2: A64 Special Registers

           REGISTER                      NAME                            REGISTER WIDTH
           PC                            Program counter                 64 bits
           SP                            Current stack pointer           64 bits
           WSP                           Current stack pointer           32 bits
           XZR                           Zero register                   64 bits
           WZR                           Zero register                   32 bits
           LR (x30)                      Link register                   64 bits
           ELR                           Exception link register         64 bits
           PSTATE                        Program state register          64 bits
           SPSR_ELx                      Saved process status            32 bits
                                         register of a given exception
                                         level

        AArch64 does not have an x31 register. Instead, instructions that use register
      arguments reserve the register encoding 31 (i.e., 0b11111) to reference either
      the zero register, the stack pointer register, or some alternative other context-­
      specific meaning.

      The Program Counter
      The program counter register, PC, holds the address of the current instruction.
      Each instruction is conceptually loaded in from the memory location referenced
      by the PC before being executed. Unless the PC is explicitly changed by the normal
      execution of the instruction (e.g., via a branch), the PC automatically advances to
      the next instruction. In Armv8, the PC cannot be accessed directly or specified as
      the destination of load or data processing instructions. The PC can be explicitly
      updated only through exception generations, exception returns, and branches.29

      28
        ARM Compiler armasm User Guide, ARM DUI 0801A (ID031214): Predeclared core register
      names in AArch64
      29
        ARM Manual for Armv8-­A, DDI 0487G.a: B1.2.1 Registers in AArch64 state

     The only ordinary instructions that can read the PC are the following:
     ■■   Branch with link instructions (BL, BLR) that need to read the PC to store a
          return address in the link register (LR)
     ■■   Instructions for PC-­relative address generation, such as ADR and ADRP,
          direct branches, and literal loads

The Stack Pointer
The stack pointer register, SP, keeps track of the stack location for the current
thread and usually points to the logical “top” of the current thread stack. The
stack region is used by programs to efficiently store and access local variable
data for a given function and as general-­purpose “scratch” memory for storing
data such as function return addresses.
   In AArch64, the SP is a special register and cannot be referenced by most
instructions in the same way general-­purpose registers can be used. The
only way to read or write to the SP is through dedicated instruction forms.
For example, an arithmetic ADD or SUBTRACT instruction form can be used to
modify the SP during a function prologue or epilogue. The SP also has a 32-­
bit “view” called WSP, although it is rarely encountered in real-­world reverse
engineering.
   On AArch64, the SP register is designed to support three main use cases,
shown here:
     ■■   Loading and storing data in memory using the SP as a base address
     ■■   Aligning the SP in a function prologue or epilogue through certain arithmetic
          instruction forms
     ■■   Aligning the SP to a quadword (16-­byte) boundary
  The SP register’s value should always be kept to at least a quadword align-
ment; if the SP is used as a base register for loads and stores when it is not 16-­
byte aligned, a stack alignment exception may occur.30
  The processor can use a dedicated 64-­bit stack pointer associated with the
current exception level or the stack pointer associated with EL0. Each exception
level has its own stack pointer: SP_EL0, SP_EL1, SP_EL2, and SP_EL3.

The Zero Register
The zero register is architecturally defined to always hold the value zero. Any
read from the register yields the value 0, and writes to the zero register are
ignored. This register can be accessed either in its 64-­bit register form, XZR, or

30
 ARM Manual for Armv8-­A, DDI 0487G.a: D1.8.2 SP alignment checking

      in its 32-­bit register form, WZR. This register is a deceptively powerful tool in the
      A64 instruction set. Superficially, of course, XZR frees a register for operations
      that would otherwise require a zero to be loaded into a register, such as writing
      the literal value zero to a memory location.
        A32:
        mov r2, #0
        str r2, [r3]

        In A64:
        str wzr, [r3]

         But XZR ’s real power comes from the encoding flexibility it gives the
      A64 instruction set to collapse dozens of distinct instructions into aliases of a
      much smaller set of general-­case instructions that the processor needs to imple-
      ment in silicon. It is also used for instructions whose purpose it is to set condition
      flags and leave the registers involved in that operation unchanged. For example,
      the compare instruction CMP, used to compare two integers, works internally by
      performing a subtraction of two operands and setting the processor’s arithmetic
      flags according to the result, which is then discarded. The existence of XZR in A64
      allows A64 to not need a dedicated CMP instruction; instead, it is implemented
      as an instruction alias for a SUBS instruction form, which performs a subtraction
      and sets the arithmetic flags but discards the result by setting the destination
      register to XZR.
        cmp Xn, #11             ; semantically: compare Xn and the number 11
        subs XZR, Xn, #11       ; equivalent encoded using the SUBS instruction

      The Link Register
      The link register (LR) is a synonym for the general-­purpose x30 register. This
      register can be freely used for ordinary computation; however, its primary
      purpose in AArch64 is for storing return addresses when a function is invoked.
        In A64, functions can be invoked using the branch with link instructions (BL
      or BLR). These instructions set the PC to perform a branch, but also set LR at the
      same time. The PC is set to the first instruction in the function being invoked,
      and the LR is set to the return address where that function will return on com-
      pletion, namely, the address of the instruction immediately after the BL or BLR
      instruction. In A64, when a function is complete, it returns to its caller using the
      RET instruction. This instruction copies the value in x30 back to the PC, allowing
      the function caller to resume where it left off.

The Frame Pointer
The frame pointer (x29 ) is a general-­purpose register defined by the Arm
Architecture Procedure Call Standard (AAPCS).31 This is a general-­purpose
register and can therefore be used for regular computation; however, compilers
will often choose to use the x29 frame pointer to explicitly keep track of stack
frames. These compilers insert instructions at the beginning of a function to
allocate a stack frame, usually via an explicit or implicit subtraction from the
current SP and then set x29 to point to the previous frame pointer on the stack.
Local variable accesses within the function then occur relative to the x29 register
during function execution.
   When x29 is not used for stack frame tracking, the compiler can use x29 as a
completely general-­purpose for arithmetic use, making the program smaller and
improving performance. By contrast, not using frame pointers makes it harder
to unwind the program state when a C++ exception is thrown.32
   The GCC compiler, for example, provides compile-­time options that determine
whether frame pointers will or will not be used by the compiled program. Spec-
ifying the -­fomit-­frame-­pointer command-­line option causes the program to
not use x29 as a frame pointer and use it instead as a general-­purpose register.
Using the -­fno-­omit-­frame-­pointer command-­line option, by contrast, forces
the compiler to always use the x29 register to track stack frames.33

The Platform Register (x18)
In AArch64, the register x18 is a general-­purpose register that can be used for
general-­purpose computation. The AAPCS, however, reserves x18 to be the
platform register, pointing to some platform-­specific data. In Microsoft Windows,
for example, x18 is used in user-­mode programs to point to the current thread
environment block, and in kernel-­mode programs to point to the kernel-­mode
processor control block (KPCR).34 In Linux kernel-­mode x18 is used to point
to the currently executing task structure.35 In user-­mode, Linux does not by
default make special use of the x18 register; however, some compilers may
make use of it for platform-­specific tasks, such as implementing the shadow call
stack exploit mitigation.36
   On systems that do not use this register as a platform-­specific register, the x18
register can be freely used as an ordinary general-­purpose register. The LLVM

31
  Procedure Call Standard for the Arm Architecture, Release 2020Q2
32
  ARM Compiler armclang Reference Guide, Version 6.6 (ARM DUI0774G): 1.16
33
  https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc-­4.9.2/gcc/Optimize-­Options.html
34
  https://docs.microsoft.com/en-­us/cpp/build/
arm64-­windows-­abi-­conventions?view=vs-­2019
35
  https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/9836893
36
  https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ShadowCallStack.html

      compiler, for example, can be directed to reserve the x18 register and not use
      it as a general-­purpose register via the –ffixed-­x18 command parameter.37

      The Intraprocedural Call Registers
      The x16 and x17 registers in AArch64 are general-­purpose registers that can
      be used for ordinary computation within any given function. They take their
      name because the AAPCS allows routines to hold the values in x16 and x17
      between subroutine calls.
         For example, if a program calls a function defined in a shared library, such as
      malloc, this function call may be implemented via a call through the procedure
      linkage table (PLT) to call the malloc implementation inside another module.
      The PLT stub responsible for finding and transferring execution to the malloc
      routine in the other library can use the x16 and x17 registers as intraprocedural
      call registers freely, without having to take care not to corrupt their values.
      LLVM, for example, will compile PLT stubs that make use of x16 and x17 in
      the PLT stubs.38

      SIMD and Floating-­Point Registers
      In addition to the 64-­bit general-­purpose integer registers, AArch64 also supplies
      a series of 32 × 128-­bit vector registers for use in optimized single instruction
      multiple data (SIMD) operations and for performing floating-­point arithmetic.
      These registers are each 128 bits long and named v0 through v31. The interpre-
      tation of what those 128 bits mean varies depending on the instruction.
         In Armv8-­A syntax, the Vn registers are normally accessed via pseudonyms
      describing the number of bits being used in the operation. When operating on
      a 128-­bit, 64-­bit, 32-­bit, 16-­bit, or 8-­bit value, the Vn registers take the names Qn,
      Dn, Sn, Hn, and Bn, respectively, as shown in Figure 4.7.

Figure 4.7: Vn register widths

      37
       https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html
      38
       https://github.com/llvm-­mirror/lld/blob/master/ELF/Arch/AArch64
      .cpp#L218

  Since SIMD and floating-­point instructions are not covered in this book, the
details of the SIMD and FP registers are out of scope.

System Registers
Armv8-­A defines a series of system registers, sometimes called special-­purpose
registers (SPRs), used for monitoring and controlling processor behavior. These
registers do not take part directly in general arithmetic and cannot be used
as the destination or source register of data processing instructions. Instead,
they must be manually read or set using the dedicated special register access
instructions mrs and msr.
   There are hundreds of AArch64 system registers.39 Most system registers
are used only by privileged code in an operating system, hypervisor, or secure
firmware, and they are used to change the state of the system, such as to set
up and manage the state of the MMU, configure and monitor the processor,
or even power-­cycle the machine. Some of these registers are architecturally
defined and found on all Arm processors. Others are implementation defined and
perform micro-­architecture-­specific functionality. The full list of these system
registers is enormous and exceeds the scope of this book, but a small number
of system registers are accessible to normal user-­mode programs and are some-
times encountered when reverse engineering these programs.
   For example, the special registers TPIDR_EL0 and TPIDRRO_EL0 are often seen
when reverse engineering a process. The EL0 suffix on these registers refers to
the minimal exception level from which the register can be accessed and hence
why these registers are sometimes encountered when reverse engineering pro-
grams running at EL0.
   The TPIDR_EL0 and TPIDRRO_EL0 system registers are architecturally defined
as available for the OS and are often used by the OS and system libraries to store
the base address of the thread-­local storage region of memory. Consequently,
when reverse engineering a program that performs thread-­local variable accesses,
we will often see an access to one of these registers. TPIDR_EL0 and TPIDRRO_EL0
differ in that the first can be read and written by user-­mode programs, but the
latter can be read-only by code at EL0 and can be set only from EL1.
   Special registers are read using the MRS instruction and written back using
the MSR instruction. For example, reading and writing TPIDR_EL0 would be
performed as follows:
     mrs x0, TPIDR_EL0   ; Read TPIDR_EL0 value into x0
     msr TPIDR_EL0, x0   ; Write value in x0 to TPIDR_EL0

39
 Arm Architecture Registers Armv8, for Armv8-­A architecture profile (DDI 0595), ARM, 2021

      PSTATE
      In Armv8-­A, PSTATE stores information about the currently running program.40
      PSTATE is not a register as such but rather is a series of components that can be
      accessed independently and that are serialized into the operating-­system-­visible
      SPSR_ELx special register when an exception is raised.
         The following fields are accessible from PSTATE in AArch64:
           ■■   The N, Z, C, and V condition flags (NZCV)
           ■■   The current register width (nRW) flag
           ■■   The stack pointer selection bit (SPSel)
           ■■   The interrupt disable flags (DAIF)
           ■■   The current exception level (EL)
           ■■   The single-­step state bit (SS)
           ■■   The illegal exception return bit (IL)
         Of these, only the NZCV fields are directly accessible to programs running in
      EL0. That said, operating systems will often allow debuggers running in EL0
      to set the SS bit on programs under instrumentation, and the nRW flag is set to
      0 when the current execution state is AArch64.
         The processor state is stored in the SPSR_ELx, which holds the value of PSTATE
      before taking an exception, as shown in Figure 4.8.41

Figure 4.8: PSTATE register components

        The arithmetic condition flags N, Z, C, and V are usually set implicitly during
      many arithmetic and comparison instructions and are implicitly used when
      performing conditional execution.
        The meanings of the flags are as follows:
           ■■ N  : The operation yielded a negative result (i.e., MSB is set).
           ■■ Z  : The operation yielded the result zero.
           ■■ C  : The operation yielded a carry (i.e., the result was truncated).
           ■■ V  : The operation yielded a signed overflow.

      40
        Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8, for Armv8-­A architecture profile: D1.7 Process
      state, PSTATE
      41
        Programmer’s Guide for ARMv8-­A, version 1.0 (ARM DEN0024A): 10.1 Exception handling
      registers

   Although it is unusual to access the N, Z, C, and V flags explicitly, it is possible
to do so via the system register NZCV. The layout of this special register is given
here, along with the syntax for manually reading and manipulating it via the
NZCV special register:

  mrs x0, NZCV                # read NZCV to x0
  orr x0, x0, #(1<<29)        # manually set C
  msr NZCV, x0                # write NZCV back

 The remaining fields and flags of PSTATE cannot be set directly from ordinary user-­
mode code and specify the behavior of the processor when running the program:
   ■■   The current register width (nRW) flag: The current register width (nRW)
        flag tells the processor which execution state the program should run in.
        If the flag holds the value 0, the program will run in the AArch64 execu-
        tion state once resumed. If the flag holds the value 1, the program will
        run in the AArch32 execution state.
   ■■   The exception level (EL) bits: When executing in AArch64, the exception
        level (EL) bits describe the exception level that an exception occurred from.
        For a user-­mode program running in EL0, this field will hold the value 0.
   ■■   The single stepping (SS) flag: The single stepping (SS) flag in PSTATE is
        used by debuggers to single step through a program. To do this, an operating
        system sets the SS flag to 1 inside SPSR_ELx prior to “resuming” the program
        through an exception return. The program will then run a single instruction
        and then immediately issue a single step exception back to the operating
        system. The operating system can then send the program’s updated state
        to an attached debugger.
   ■■   The illegal exception state (IL) flag: The illegal exception state (IL) flag
        in PSTATE is used by the processor to keep track of invalid exception level
        transfers by privileged code. If privileged software performs an invalid
        exception level transfer, perhaps because the PSTATE to be restored from
        SPSR_ELx is invalid, the processor will set the IL flag to 1. The IL flag
        tells the processor to immediately trigger an illegal state exception back
        to a registered exception handler before the next instruction is executed.
   ■■   The DAIF flags: The DAIF flags in PSTATE allow a privileged program to
        selectively mask certain external exceptions. This field is not normally
        accessible to user-­mode programs.
   ■■   The stack pointer select flags: Privileged programs running in EL1 and
        above can seamlessly swap between referencing their own stack pointer
        register and the user-­mode stack pointer, i.e., between SP_ELx and SP_EL0.
        Privileged processes perform this switching behavior by writing to the
        SPSel special register. Programs running in EL0 cannot perform stack-­
        pointer switching, and the SPSel special register is not accessible to pro-
        grams at EL0.

      The AArch32 Execution State
      Armv8-­A supports the execution of 32-­bit programs designed for the earlier
      Armv7 architecture. These programs run in Armv8-­A’s AArch32 execution state.
      Unlike AArch64, AArch32 programs can run in one of two instruction sets: A32
      and T32. They can dynamically switch between the two at runtime via a mech-
      anism called interworking. 32-­bit programs can be scheduled by a privileged
      64-­bit program, such as a 64-­bit operating system or hypervisor, by executing
      an exception level transfer to the lower privileged 32-­bit program after setting
      the corresponding SPSR[4] bit to 1, indicating that the program will run in the
      AArch32 execution state.

      A32 and T32 Instruction Sets
      AArch32 is unusual in that it supports two distinct instruction sets—­A32 and
      T32—­that can be freely changed during program execution. The two sets both
      make use of the same registers and have instructions that operate in broadly
      similar ways, but use different instruction encodings with different constraints
      on which registers, immediate values, and features can be used at a given time.
         Switching between the two instruction sets occurs via a mechanism called
      interworking, which allows programs compiled for A32 to call into libraries
      compiled for T32, or vice versa, with very little overhead.
         The Armv8-­A architecture added new advanced instructions to the A32 and
      T32 instruction sets. These fall into the following categories:
         ■■   Load-­acquire/store release instructions
         ■■   VFP scalar floating-­point instructions
         ■■   Advanced SIMD floating-­point instructions
         ■■   Cryptographic instructions
         ■■   System instructions

      The A32 Instruction Set
      Armv8-­A supports the execution of A32 and T32 instruction sets for 32-­bit
      programs running in AArch32 execution state and is designed to be backward
      compatible with the earlier Armv7 architecture. The Armv8-­A architecture
      introduced new instructions for these instruction sets to align with the newly
      introduced features of A64.
         As with A64, each A32 instruction is uniquely encoded as a 4-­byte sequence.
      The instruction encodes both the type of instruction to be run, such as a store,
      load, mathematical operation, and so on, as well as what registers, offsets, and
      behavior characteristics the instruction should use.

   In A32, most operations in A32 can be configured to set a series of conditional
flags based on the result into CPSR. For example, the instruction ADD will per-
form an addition of two inputs and yield a result, putting that result into a
destination register. The instruction ADDS will perform the same operation, but
also set the N, Z, C, and V flags based on the computed result.

The T32 Instruction Set
To improve instruction density, the Thumb instruction set was introduced in
1994.42 In its original design, Thumb instructions were always encoded in just
16 bits each, half the size of their equivalent A32 instructions. Although this
improved instruction density, it did so at the cost of reducing the amount of
information that can be encoded into each instruction, inevitably reducing the
flexibility of Thumb instructions compared to their A32 counterparts. Moreover,
the reduced size of the Thumb instruction encodings had only 3 bits for registers,
which limited register accesses for many instructions to just the lower 8 registers.
   To mitigate these constraints, Arm introduced Thumb-­243 in the ARM1156
core around 2003 as an extension to the Thumb instruction set. Thumb-­2 adds
32-­bit encodings for many instructions and allows them to be freely intermixed
with 16-­bit Thumb instructions. It also added bit-­field manipulation instructions’
table branches to the instruction set.
   Thumb-­2 also retrofitted conditional instruction execution for Thumb mode
with the If-­Then (IT) instruction group and ITSTATE bits in CPSR.
   With the Armv7-­A, Arm announced the Thumb Execution Environment
(ThumbEE) around 2005. It was also referred to as Jazelle-­RCT and was designed
for dynamically generated code used by just-­in-­time (JIT) compilers. The Jazelle
extension introduced in 2000, Jazelle DBX (Direct Bytecode eXecution) was
designed for accelerating Java bytecode interpreters. ThumbEE was deprecated
in 2011, and support was completely removed in Armv8. The Jazelle instruction
set is largely obsolete, and there is no support for the hardware acceleration of
Java bytecodes in the Armv8 architecture.

Switching Between Instruction Sets
One consequence of the Armv8-­A design is that a single CPU is often able
to run all three instruction sets: the AArch64 instruction set A64 and the two
AArch32 instruction sets A32 and T32. Figure 4.944 shows how the CPU transfers

42
  ARM7TDMI Technical Reference Manual (DDI 0029G), ARM, 1994
43
  ARM Architecture Reference Manual Thumb-­2 Supplement (DDI 0308D), ARM, 2004
44
  ARM Cortex-­A Series, Programmers Guide for ARMv8-­A (ID050815): 5.3 Switching between
the instruction sets

      between these different instruction sets. Note that switching between T32 and
      A32 via interworking can happen directly or via exception returns from code at
      a higher exception level, but switching between AArch32 and AArch64 must
      always occur via exception return from a higher exception level.

Figure 4.9: Abstract view of instruction set state switches

      A64 and A32

      In Armv8-­A, programs always run either in AArch64, and thus use A64, or in
      AArch32, using one or both A32 and T32 instruction sets. Transitions between
      AArch32 and AArch64 are permitted only when the exception level is changed.
         Transitions from AArch64 to AArch32 may occur when the exception level is
      lowered during an exception return. A privileged process manages this transition
      by setting up the SPSR_ELx special register when an AArch32 process thread is
      ready to be executed. The operating system sets bit 4 of SPSR_ELx to 1, which
      indicates to the processor that the lower-­privileged process is running in AArch32,
      and the rest of SPSR_ELx stores the AArch32 program’s CPSR, which is described
      in more detail later in this chapter. When the privileged process performs an
      ERET instruction, the processor then transitions to AArch32, entering either A32
      or T32 depending on the instruction set state in CPSR.
         Transitions back to AArch64 are permitted only when the exception level is
      later raised when taking an exception, such as when handling a system call,
      fault, or external hardware event. These transitions occur automatically when
      an exception is taken back to the privileged A64 process.

      A32 and T32

      Arm processors allow AArch32 programs to freely switch between
      AArch32 instruction sets at runtime in a process called interworking. This allows

programs compiled for the A32 instruction set to dynamically load and run
libraries compiled for Thumb, and vice versa.
   A32 and T32 do not use compatible encodings for their instructions, so the
processor must keep track of which instruction set is currently in use. This is
performed via the J and T bits of CPSR, which together form the instruction set
state, as presented in Table 4.3.

Table 4.3: J and T Bit Instruction Modes for the A32 and T32 States

  J                                T                                  INSTRUCTION MODE
  0                                0                                  Arm (A32) state
  0                                1                                  Thumb (T32) state

  Rather than setting this flag manually by directly interacting with the CPSR,
this flag is set implicitly during interworking branch instructions, such as the
branch-­and-­exchange instructions, as well as most instructions that use the
program counter as a destination register.
  The following instructions can perform an interworking branch:
      ■■   A BX or BLX branch instruction
      ■■   An LDR, LDM, or POP instruction where the PC is a destination register
      ■■   An arithmetic instruction where the PC is set as the destination register,
           so long as the instruction does not also set the condition flags
      ■■   A MOV or MVN instruction where the PC is set as the destination register, so
           long as the instruction does not also set the condition flags
   Interworking branches operate on interworking addresses that encode both
the branch target address and the instruction mode to switch to while taking
the branch. The top 31 bits encode the branch target. The least significant bit
specifies the instruction set to exchange to, and this is copied to CPSR’s T bit,
rather than to the PC .
   By way of example, suppose an interworking branch uses the address 0x1000.
Here, the PC is loaded with the value 0x1000, and the instruction set becomes
A32. By contrast, if the address were 0x1001, the PC would be loaded with the
value 0x1000 and the instruction set becomes T32. Note that the final bit is never
copied to the PC because instructions in both the A32 and T32 instruction sets
are always at least 2-­byte aligned.
   When writing assembly, we can switch to Thumb in just two instructions, by
computing PC + 1 into a register and then performing an interworking branch
to that instruction. This can be a bit confusing, so let’s look at the code and then
see why it works.

      Assembly Source
        _start:
        .code 32                   ; Begin encoding instructions using A32
            add r4, pc, #1
            bx r4                  ; Swap the processor to Thumb mode, and continue:

        .code 16                   ; Now begin encoding instructions using T32
            mov r0, #0
            mov r0, #8

         In this code, we begin by defining the label _start, which is the entry point of
      the program, and then follow with the .code 32 directive that tells the prepro-
      cessor we’re writing A32 instructions. The first actual instruction then performs
      the addition of PC + 1 into the register r4. Counterintuitively, in A32, reading the
      PC register doesn’t read the address of the currently executing instruction, but
      rather obtains that address plus 8. Since A32 instructions are 4 bytes each, this
      means the PC appears to point to the MOV R0, #0 instruction later in the program.
      Adding 1 to this value means we compute that address and set the lowest bit
      of that address to 1, ready for the interworking branch in the next instruction.
         The next instruction is BX r4, which performs an interworking branch to
      the address we just computed. The low bit is 1, so the processor switches
      into Thumb mode. After this instruction has run, the PC now points to the
      MOV R0, #0 instruction and is now executing in Thumb mode.
         The next line, .code 16, is a preprocessor instruction for the assembler. This
      is here to tell the assembler to start emitting Thumb instructions. The inter-
      working branch told the processor to start processing Thumb instructions; the
      .code 16 line just tells the assembler to start emitting Thumb instructions that
      the processor will correctly interpret from that point forward in the assembly file.

      Disassembly Output
        Disassembly of section .text:

        00010054 <_start>:
           10054:    e28f4001         add      r4, pc, #1
           10058:    e12fff14         bx       r4
           1005c:    2000             movs     r0, #0
           1005e:    2008             movs     r0, #8

      AArch32 Registers
      In AArch32, the processor supplies 16 32-­bit general purpose registers (r0. . .r15),
      available for application use. The register r15 always encodes the program
      counter; however, the other registers r0. . .r14 can be freely used for data storage
      and computation.

  Registers r0 through r14 can be used interchangeably in data processing;
however, by convention many of these registers play well-­defined roles and
have aliases that reference these predefined roles. For example, r13 is normally
used as a stack pointer and is thus often written as SP when reading or writing
assembly.
  Table 4.4 has a list of general-­purpose register aliases on AArch32.

Table 4.4: AArch32 Register Aliases

  REGISTER NUMBER                 ALIAS                    PURPOSE
  r11                             FP                       Frame pointer
  r12                             IP                       Intra-­procedural call register
  r13                             SP                       Stack pointer
  r14                             LR                       Link register
  r15                             PC                       Program counter

   General-­and special-­purpose registers also have banked copies that can be
accessed in different processor modes, each of which use physically distinct
storage. These are called banked registers, highlighted with a darker background
in Figure 4.10. This is particularly useful faster context switching in exception
handling and privileged operations to avoid the need to manually save and
restore all register values.
   Here’s the basic idea of how this works in practice: when an exception is
taken, a snapshot of the current processor state from the CPSR is saved to the
SPSR of the processor mode to which the exception is taken. This includes
banking other registers, such as the link register (LR), which contains the return
address for the exception. The processor branches to the appropriate entry in the
exception vector table, which usually contains an instruction that will branch
to the exception handler that deals with the exception. On exception return, the
status register (CPSR) is restored from the banked SPSR, and the PC is updated
with the return address that was previously saved in the banked LR.
   These modes are explained in more detail in the “Mode and Exception Mask
Bits” section of this chapter.

The Program Counter
AArch32’s program counter (PC) is a 32-­bit integer register that stores the location
in memory of the next instruction the processor should execute. For historical
reasons, the PC in AArch32 reads the address of the current instruction plus
8 when executing an A32 instruction and plus 4 when executing a T32 instruction.
In AArch32, many data-­processing instructions can write to the PC and even

      redirect the program flow when overwriting the PC with an address the program
      can branch to. Using the PC as the destination register of an instruction has the
      effect of converting that instruction into a branch-­type instruction. Depending
      on the instruction set state, values written to the PC will be aligned accordingly
      because the PC ignores the least significant bit and treats it as 0.

Figure 4.10: Overview of AArch32 registers in their respective modes

      The Stack Pointer
      The stack pointer (SP, r13) is used by programs to keep a reference to the top
      of the in-­use scratch region of memory used by the current thread, called the
      stack. This register makes it easy to efficiently store and access temporary data on
      the stack, such as local variables, as well as for efficiently storing and restoring
      registers and return addresses at the start and end of a function.

      The Frame Pointer
      The frame pointer (FP, r11) keeps track of the currently live stack frame, used
      by a function to store its local variables. Reading and writing local variables
      can be performed efficiently using FP-­relative loads and stores.

The Link Register
The link register (LR, r14) is used to store the return address for a function. In
both the A32 and T32 instruction sets, a function is invoked using the BL or BLX
instruction. These instructions set the PC to the first instruction in the function
being invoked and implicitly set LR to the return address where that function
will return on completion, namely, the address of the instruction immediately
after the BL or BLX instruction. In A32, when a function is complete, it will often
return to its caller using a BX LR or a similar instruction to copy the return address
from LR back to PC, allowing the function caller to resume where it left off.

The Intraprocedural Call Register (IP, r12)
Within a given function, the intra-­procedural call register (IP, r12) is just like
any other general-­purpose register. It takes its name from the way compilers
and linkers use r12 as a scratch register when implementing intraprocedural
“trampolines.” The most common example of such trampolines is calling a
function in another module via the PLT, but trampolines can also be used when
branching enormous distances that cannot be directly encoded into a BL or BLX
instruction. In these cases, programs instead branch to a trampoline that com-
putes the address of the destination and redirects program flow to it. To do so,
the trampoline needs at least one scratch register, and normally r12 is chosen.
This can have the counterintuitive effect that r12’s value can change after leav-
ing one function, but before arriving at the next, if the function call took place
via an intraprocedural trampoline.

The Current Program Status Register
In AArch32, the current program status register (CPSR) holds various processor
status and control fields. It works similarly to PSTATE in AArch64 and is also
saved to SPSR_ELx whenever an exception is taken.
   Figure 4.11 gives the layout of CPSR, along with the bit index of each field.

Figure 4.11: Abstract overview of CSPR bits and their meaning

   For user-­mode programs in EL0, the fields in CPSR broadly subdivide into two
groups: the application program status register (APSR) that records arithmetic
flags and is directly accessible to programs in EL0, and the execution state reg-
isters that control processor behavior that are managed by the operating system.

      The Application Program Status Register
      As presented in Figure 4.12, the APSR comprises three groups of flags from
      inside CPSR, shown here in brief and then explained in detail in the sections
      that follow:
         ■■   The N , Z , C , and V arithmetic flags, used by ordinary arithmetic and
              comparison-­type instructions
         ■■   The Q saturation flag, used by dedicated saturating arithmetic
              instructions
         ■■   The GE bits used by dedicated parallel addition and subtraction
              instructions

Figure 4.12: The ASPR components of the CSPR

      Directly Accessing the APSR

      During ordinary program execution, it is usually not necessary to directly read
      and write to the APSR’s flags. It is possible, however, and even occasionally
      necessary, such as when using the APSR’s Q bit. The syntax for reading the
      APSR’s N, Z, C, V, Q, and GE bits is as follows:
        mrs Rt, ASPR # Copy from APSR to rN.

         User-­mode programs can also directly write to the ASPR’s NZCVQ and GE bits
      in the APSR. There are three forms, depending on whether the NZCVQ group, the
      GE group, or both groups should be set simultaneously.

        msr ASPR_nzcvq, Rt # Set NZCVQ
        msr ASPR_g, Rt      # Set GE bits
        msr ASPR_nzcvqg, Rt # Set NZCVQ and GE bits

      The NZCV Flags

      More commonly, the NZCV group of flags in APSR is set implicitly when a com-
      putation or comparison-­type instruction executes. The meaning of the flags is
      as follows:
         ■■ N  : The operation yielded a negative result (i.e., MSB is set).
         ■■ Z  : The operation yielded the result zero.

   ■■ C: The operation yielded a carry; that is, the result was truncated.
   ■■ V: The operation yielded a signed overflow.
   In A32 mode, most instructions can be encoded to operate conditionally based
on the state of the APSR’s NZCV flags. The NZCV flags are therefore foundational
to conditional execution.

The Q Flag

The cumulative saturation Q flag is set when executing specialized saturating
arithmetic instructions. These instructions are rarely used in ordinary code but
can occur quite often in digital signal processing applications. The Q flag is set
to 1 whenever integer saturation occurs during one of these instructions. The Q
flag operates as a “sticky flag.” This means that once it has been set to 1, it will
retain that value until it is manually reset to 0.
   Unlike the NZCV flags, instructions cannot be encoded to be directly conditional
on the state of the Q flag; it must be manually retrieved from ASPR. Similarly,
resetting the Q flag must be done by performing a manual write to the ASPR.
These operations can be done as follows:
  ; Read Q flag from APSR
  mrs r0, APSR            ; Set r0 = ASPR
  tst r0, #(1<<27)        ; Test Q flag

  ; Reset Q flag, preserving other flags
  mrs r0, APSR            ; Set r0 = ASPR
  bic r0, r0, #(1<<27)    ; Clear the Q bit
  msr APSR_nzcvq, r0      ; Write NZCVQ bits back

The GE Flags

The four “greater than or equal” (GE) flags in APSR are used by specialized
“parallel add” and “parallel subtract” vector instructions. These instructions
perform vector operations on packed collections of data. The instruction UADD8,
for example, adds two 32-­bit operands as if both were 4 sequential unrelated
bytes and then compacts the four results back into a 32-­bit destination register.
This instruction also sets the 4 GE bits in APSR according to the result of the
addition..
  As with the N, Z, C, V, and Q flags, the GE flags can be read directly from ASPR
using the MRS instruction. One instruction, however, uses the GE flags implicitly:
the select bytes (SEL) instruction, which can perform a partial conditional move
based on the status of the GE flags.

        ; Load r0 and r1 with example values:
        LDR r0, =0x112233ff    ; Set r0 = 0x112233ff
        LDR r1, =0xff112233    ; Set r1 = 0xffaabbcc

        ; Perform a 4 lane, 8-­
                              bit addition using UADD8.
        ; This is computed as follows:
        ; 0x11 + 0xff = 0x110 -­
                               > dst[0]=0x10, GE:0=1
        ; 0x22 + 0xaa = 0xcc -­> dst[1]=0xcc, GE:1=0
        ; 0x33 + 0xbb = 0xee -­> dst[2]=0xee, GE:2=0
        ; 0xff + 0xcc = 0x1cb -­
                               > dst[3]=0xcb, GE:3=1
        ; UADD8 will therefore set r2 = 0x10cceecb,
        ; and GE = 0b1001

        UADD8 r2, r0, r1

        ; We can use the SEL instruction to swap out
        ; the overflowing bytes with a default value,
        ; e.g. to create a clamped 4-­
                                     way 8-­
                                           bit add:

        LDR r3, =0xffffffff

        ; GE[0] is 1, so r0[0] is set ro r3[0] = 0xff
        ; GE[1] is 0, so r0[0] is set to r2[0] = 0xcc
        ; GE[2] is 0, so r0[0] is set to r2[0] = 0xee
        ; GE[3] is 1, so r0[0] is set to r3[0] = 0xff
        ; Therefore this will set r0 = 0xffcceeff

        SEL r0, r3, r2

      The Execution State Registers
      The execution state registers are bit fields of the CPSR that together tell the
      processor how to execute instructions at the program counter. These fields are
      described in the following sections.

      The Instruction Set State Register
      In Figure 4.13 the T and J bits of CPSR together make up the instruction set
      state for the process.
         In Armv8-­A, the J bit is architecturally defined to be 0, so only two modes
      are valid, as presented in Table 4.5.

Figure 4.13: Instruction set state bits of the CPSR

Table 4.5: J and T Bit Instruction Modes for the A32 and T32 States

   J                                T                                 INSTRUCTION MODE
   0                                0                                 Arm (A32) state
   0                                1                                 Thumb (T32) state

  The instruction set state bits are not directly accessible for user-­mode pro-
grams to read and write in the same way that ASPR is. Instead, programs switch
between A32 and T32 instruction sets using interworking branches.
  In previous versions of the Arm architecture, the J bit was used in conjunction
with the T bit for execution of hardware-­accelerated Java bytecodes in the “Jazelle”
mode or entering the T32EE (ThumbEE) instruction set. Both modes are depre-
cated in Armv8-­A, and the J bit is fixed to zero.

The IT Block State Register (ITSTATE)
The PSTATE.IT flags of CPSR (see Figure 4.14) describe the condition codes for
a series of instructions executing inside an IT-­prefixed group of instructions
running inside Thumb (T32) mode. The top three bits of the 8-­bit PSTATE.IT
represent the “base condition” of the IT block. The remaining four bits encode
the length and alternation sequence of up to four instructions that comprise
the PSTATE.IT.

Figure 4.14: IT bit locations in the CSPR

         The original purpose of the IT block was to allow 16-­bit Thumb instructions
      to be conditional. After all, almost all A32 instruction can be conditional, but
      T16 does not have enough bits for condition code in its instruction encodings.
      The IT block allows up to four subsequent instructions inside the block to be
      conditional. In practice, however, the performance of predicated instructions
      turned out to not scale as well in modern designs versus the original intent, and
      so the IT instruction has been partially deprecated in Armv8.

      Endianness state
      Armv8 allows processors to optionally support dynamic runtime endianness-­
      switching for programs running in AArch32. Programs running on those proces-
      sors can then tell the processor to switch between little-­endian and big-­endian
      at runtime, changing the order of data loads and stores.
         The processor tracks the currently selected endianness via the E bit in CPSR,
      as shown in Figure 4.15. A 1 means the program is operating in big-­endian
      mode; 0 means it is running in little-­endian mode.

Figure 4.15: Endianness bit location in the CPSR

         Rather than setting this flag directly in CPSR, programs instead set the
      current endianness of their program using the SETEND instruction, although
      programs running at a higher execution level can also manually set this bit via
      the corresponding saved SPSR for the program. Instruction fetches are always
      little-­endian and ignore this bit.

      Mode and Exception Mask Bits
      The mode bits, PSTATE.M, determine the current execution state, as shown in
Figure 4.16. Of these bits, one is very straightforward. Bit 4 simply determines
      whether the corresponding program will run as 32-­bit or 64-­bit. A 1 in this field
      means the program will run as AArch32, and a 0 means it will run as AArch64.
        The remaining bits in PSTATE.M and the exception masking bits AIF need a bit
      more background to fully understand. To understand these, we need a quick
      recap on CPU exceptions and when they might occur.
        As the CPU progresses through a program, it can occasionally encounter an
      exceptional state where it no longer knows how to continue. This can happen

because it encountered an illegal instruction, because a bad memory read or write
occurred, or because the program issued a service call to software running in a
higher exception level. These events are called synchronous exceptions because
they occur at a specific instruction in the program.

Figure 4.16: Mode bits in the CPSR

   Asynchronous events, by contrast, come from events outside of the CPU in the
form of System Errors (SError), Interrupt Requests (IRQs), and Fast Interrupt
Requests (FIQs). These are normally issued by connected peripheral devices,
such as an Interrupt Request raised by network hardware to notify the operating
system that a network packet has arrived and is ready for immediate processing.
   Under normal circumstances, the CPU responds to these requests by immedi-
ately pausing execution of the currently executing program, raising the exception
level, and transferring control over to a corresponding registered exception handler
that can dispatch the request to the appropriate device driver. These exception
handlers are registered by system software running in a high exception level.
   If that system software is running in AArch32, the remaining PSTATE.M bits
define the exception mode currently in use, and these modes form a strict hier-
archy of priority ordering with respect to external interrupts. For example, a
normal program may encounter an SVC instruction causing the processor to
pause the program and transfer to the AArch32 EL1 operating system in SVC
mode to handle the system call request. If an external IRQ arrives, this system
call will be paused, pending completion of the IRQ routine. This IRQ can then
itself be interrupted by a FIQ interrupt. But FIQs cannot be interrupted by IRQs,
because FIQs are a higher “priority” than IRQs. As each exception returns, the
mode is lowered each time, and the interrupted task resumes. Table 4.6 lists
AArch32 modes and their corresponding representation in PSTATE.M.45

Table 4.6: AArch32 Mode Bit Encodings

     M[4:0]      MODE                PURPOSE
     10000       User mode           Normal execution mode
     10001       FIQ mode            Entered when handling a Fast Interrupt Request
     10010       IRQ mode            Entered when handling a General Interrupt Request

                                                                                      Continues
45
 ARM Manual for Armv8-­A, DDI 0487G.a: G1.9.1 AArch32 state PE mode descriptions

Table 4.6 (continued)

        M[4:0]         MODE              PURPOSE
        10011          SVC mode          Entered on CPU reset in 32-­bit EL1, or when an SVC
                                         instruction is executed
        10110          Monitor           Entered on CPU reset in 32-­bit EL3, or when an SMC
                       mode              instruction is executed
        10111          Abort mode        Exception to handle data or instruction fetch failures
        11010          Hyp mode          Entered on CPU reset in 32-­bit EL2, or when an HYP
                                         instruction is executed
        11011          Undefined         Entered when an undefined instruction is executed
                       mode
        11111          System mode       Privileged mode with same register view as user mode

         As in AArch64, AArch32 also allows operating system software to tempo-
      rarily disable certain external exceptions via the AIF bits inside PSTATE. A 1 in
      the corresponding field means the CPU will respond to the external exception;
      a 0 means that the CPU will delay responding to it until the exception is later
      unmasked by the operating system software.
         ■■ A : Respond to asynchronous aborts
         ■■ I : Respond to external hardware Interrupt Requests (IRQs)
         ■■ F : Respond to external Fast Interrupt Requests (FIQs)
       The exception mask bits shown in Figure 4.17 are set when an exception to
      AArch32 occurs.

Figure 4.17: Exception mask bits in the CPSR
