                                                              CHAPTER

                                                                   7

                           Conditional Execution

This chapter provides an overview of Arm condition flags, how they are set
and used by instructions, and how conditional select and comparison instruc-
tions work.

Conditional Execution Overview
In the previous few chapters, we have seen many Arm instructions used to
process and modify data held in registers, as well as how to load and store
data to and from memory. But data processing is only part of the story of how
modern programs operate. Programs can also perform complex logic, dynami-
cally adapting their behavior in real time based on the data that they encounter.
  Software developers writing code in C and C++ often use high-­level program-
ming constructs such as if statements, while loops, and for statements to specify
how their program should adapt to various data conditions. For example, a
programmer might write code such as the following:
  int main(int argc, char** argv) {
    if(argc >= 2) {
      printf(“Hello %s!\n”, argv[1]);
    }
    return 0;
  }

         In this example, the behavior of the function dynamically changes depending
      on the argc parameter’s value. The condition used by the if statement is a
      Boolean (yes/no) question, in this case asking “is argc >= 2?” The answer to this
      question is determined at runtime, and the statements bracketed by the if state-
      ment will be conditionally executed only if the answer to this question is “yes.”
         Unfortunately for us as reverse engineers, these high-­level programming
      constructs do not exist at the processor level and do not filter down to the com-
      piled code that we have to reverse engineer. Instead, compilers convert these
      high-­level programming constructs into a series of simple processor instructions
      such as CMP, ANDS, and BNE that encode the same logic in a form that the Arm
      processor can efficiently execute. As reverse engineers, we need to do the reverse:
      reading these compiled processor instructions and using them to infer the pro-
      grammers’ original intent. In this chapter, you will learn about condition codes
      and how instructions can make use of them for conditional execution. Branch
      instructions and control flow logic are covered in Chapter 8, “Control Flow.”

      Conditional Codes
      On Arm, most conditional logic statements are split across two or more instructions.
      The first of these is a flag-­setting instruction whose job is to inspect one or more
      values held in registers and sets the processor’s NZCV flags inside PSTATE accord-
      ingly. This is later followed by a conditional instruction whose behavior depends
      on a condition code, which is, in turn, dependent on the state of those NZCV flags.
        Flag-­setting instructions subdivide into two main subcategories:
         ■■   Specialized test and compare instructions, such as CMP, TST, and TEQ. These
              instructions set the NZCV flags based on inspecting one or more values
              held in registers.
         ■■   Data processing instructions that use the S suffix appended to the end of
              their name such as ADDS . These instructions perform their ordinary
              arithmetic operation, but additionally set NZCV based on the result of their
              calculation.
        Conditional instructions also fall into two main categories:
         ■■   Ordinary conditionally executed instructions have a condition code appended
              to the end of their instruction name. These instructions execute if (and only
              if) that condition code is satisfied. Otherwise, the processor ignores the
              instruction and simply moves on to the next. Examples of such instructions
              include ORREQ, MOVNE, and ADDLT, as well as conditional branch instructions
              such as BEQ and BGE that we will cover in more detail in Chapter 8.
         ■■   The A64 instruction set does not support conditional execution for every
              instruction. Instead, it provides dedicated conditional instructions, such

         as CSEL and CCMP. Instead of appending the condition code to the end of
         their name, these instructions take a condition code as an instruction
         parameter. These instructions always execute, but their behavior changes
         depending on whether the condition code is satisfied.

The NZCV Condition Flags
In Chapter 4, “The Arm Architecture,” we saw that Armv8-­A processors store
the process state—­including the NZCV flags—­via the process’ PSTATE structure,
which is an abstraction of process state information. These condition flags are
stored at bits [31:28] of the PSTATE. See Figure 7.1.1

Figure 7.1: Condition flag bits in PSTATE

    The basic meanings of the NZCV arithmetic flags are given here:
    ■■   N: Negative: The N flag specifies that an operation resulted in a negative
         value.
    ■■   Z: Zero: The Z flag specifies that the operation resulted in zero.
    ■■   C: Carry (or Unsigned Overflow): The C flag can hold different meanings
         depending on context. For addition and subtraction type operations, C
         indicates that an unsigned integer overflow occurred. For shift-­type opera-
         tions, C holds the value of the last bit shifted out and discarded by the
         shift operation. C is also sometimes used to convey that an error occurred.
         Here are some examples:
         ■■   The Armv8.5-­RNG instructions RDNR and RNDRRS set C to 1 if the hardware
              random number failed to produce a random number in a reasonable
              period.2
         ■■   Some operating systems set the carry flag to 1 to indicate that a
              requested system call returned an error.3
         ■■   Floating-­point comparisons set C to 1 if one or both inputs are NaN.
    ■■   V: Overflow: The V flag is used by addition and subtraction type instruc-
         tions and indicates that the operation led to a signed integer overflow.

1
 ARM Cortex-­A Series. Programmer’s Guide for ARMv8-­A (ID050815): 4.5.2 PSTATE at AArch32
2
 Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487G.a): C6.1.4 Condition flags and
related instructions
3
 https://opensource.apple.com/source/xnu/xnu-­4570.31.3/libsyscall/
custom/SYS.h.auto.html (See ARM system call interface comment.)

      Signed vs. Unsigned Integer Overflows
      After an addition or subtraction type instruction, the C and V flags indicate that an
      unsigned or signed integer overflow occurred, respectively. Overflow here means
      that the addition or subtraction operation yielded a mathematically “wrong” result.
         But what does overflow actually mean under the hood? How can the processor
      “know” it got the wrong result, and, in any case, if it knows it got it wrong, why
      doesn’t it instead just go back and compute the correct result?
         Understanding what’s going on requires a quick recap on how processors
      perform additions and subtractions internally. Processors perform arithmetic
      in pretty much the same way that we all learn how to add large numbers by
      hand in school. The basic process for long-­addition is this: Starting first with the
      least-­significant input digits (the 1s column), we sum the corresponding input
      digits to produce the next digit of output. If the sum of the digits is a number
      larger than 10, for example, our input digits require us to sum 9+4, and then
      we record and “carry over” the 1 to the next-­most-­significant column, adding
      this 1 into the next digit’s calculation. We continue this process until we run of
      input digits to add at which point the calculation is complete.
         Processors do basically the same thing, except that they operate in binary
      rather than base-­10. Figure 7.2 shows how a 4-­bit processor might, for example,
      add the values 0b1011 (11) and 0b1010 (10).

Figure 7.2: Carry over illustration

         Starting on the right side of Figure 7.2 and working toward the left, each element
      in the chain adds two binary digits from the inputs, taking care to incorporate
      any “carry over” from a previous element in the chain. Each element sums the
      two input digits and the carry-­in value to create the corresponding “digit sum”
      for that column. This provides both the “output bit” for the column and, if the
      sum of the two inputs and carry-­in is 2 or more, also produces a “carry out”
      value that is sent to the next element for incorporation into its digit calculation.

   In our simplified example, the 4-­bit adder creates 4 bits of output (0b0101),
along with a final carry bit (1). Putting these together reveals the correct 5-­bit
result of our addition as 0b10101 (11 + 10 = 21).
   32-­bit and 64-­bit processors follow the same process, just scaled up to handle
more binary digits. A 32-­bit addition takes two 32-­bit inputs and generates 32 bits
of output along with a final “carry” value, outputted by the last (most-­significant)
element in the chain. The output bits of the adder become the arithmetic result of
the addition and are sent to the destination register. The final “carry out” value
is copied to the C flag in NZCV. A carry value of 1 means that the “real” result of
our addition operation was a 33-­bit (or 65-­bit) result that had to be truncated
for the result to fit into the destination register. In other words, C indicates that
an unsigned overflow occurred.
   The logic for detecting signed overflow is a bit more complicated, but is based
on two key observations. First, if the two inputs being added have opposite signs
(i.e., one positive, one negative), then no signed overflow will ever occur. This is
because the magnitude of the result will strictly decrease during the operation.
Second, when the inputs do have the same sign (i.e., are both negative or both
positive), the sign of the result will always match the sign of the inputs except
when a signed overflow causes the sign bit of the result to unexpectedly invert.
   For this reason, we can quickly and reliably determine whether a signed over-
flow took place by looking just at the 1-­bit adder unit in the chain responsible
for computing the sign-­bit during the addition. We can then manually build up
a truth table that fully describes the exact circumstances when a signed overflow
has occurred, as shown in Figure 7.3.

Figure 7.3: Signed overflow illustration with truth table

  Reducing this truth table into its minimal logical form gives us the final result:
By setting V equal to the exclusive OR of (a) the carry-­in and (b), the carry-­out of
this 1-­bit adder will cause V to be set if and only if a signed overflow occurred
during the computation.

      Condition Codes
      To enable conditional execution, Arm defines 16 4-­bit condition codes. These
      condition codes allow an instruction to execute conditionally based on the state
      of the PSTATE’s NZCV flags.
         Table 7.14 lists the condition codes and their meanings.

Table 7.1: Condition Codes

                                   SEMANTIC MEANING
          VALUE       NAME         (INTEGER OPERATIONS)           CONDITION FLAGS
          0000        EQ           Equal                          Z == 1
          0001        NE           Not equal                      Z == 0
          0010        CS           Carry set                      C == 1

                      HS
          0011        CC           Carry clear                    C == 0

                      LO
          0100        MI           Negative                       N == 1
          0101        PL           Positive or zero               N == 0
          0110        VS           Overflow                       V == 1
          0111        VC           No overflow                    V == 0
          1000        HI           Unsigned higher                C == 1 && Z == 0
          1001        LS           Unsigned lower or same         !(C == 1 && Z == 0)
          1010        GE           Signed greater than or equal   N == V
          1011        LT           Signed less than or equal      N != V
          1100        GT           Signed greater than            Z == 0 && N == V
          1101        LE           Signed less than or equal      !(Z == 0 && N == V)
          1110        AL           Always (unconditional)         Any
          1111        NV           Not Valid                      Any

         AL is the always specifier. It is an optional mnemonic extension for A32 instruc-
      tions and indicates that the instruction will always be taken. By convention, the
      AL condition code is always omitted when reading and writing assembly; an
      unconditional addition should be written as ADD, not as ADDAL.

      4
      Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): C1.2.4 Condition code

    The 0b1111 encoding, listed in Table 7.1 as NV, is reserved. In A64 it is explicitly
provided only to provide a valid disassembly of the 0b1111 condition code.5 On
A32, no specific meaning is given to the 0b1111 condition code.6 In both cases
it is not meant to be used when writing assembly code by hand, and it is never
encountered during ordinary reverse engineering.

Conditional Instructions
Conditionally executed instructions are constructed by directly appending a condition
code to the end of the instruction name, such as in the following A32 instruction
examples:
    add r0, r0, r1      ; Ordinary (unconditional) addition of r0 = r0+r1
    addgt r0, r0, r1    ; Perform an addition only if the “GT” condition is met

    ldr r0, [r1]        ; Ordinary (unconditional) fetch from memory
    ldrne r0, [r1]      ; Conditional fetch only if the “NE” condition is met

   The set of instructions that can be made conditional by directly appending
the condition code to the instruction name depends on the instruction set being
used. If the condition code evaluates to True, the instruction is executed.
   In A32, most instructions reserve space in their binary instruction encoding
that can be used to insert a condition code. This approach allows almost all
ordinary instructions to be directly “promoted” into a conditional instruction
by simply appending the condition code to the instruction name.
   T32 takes a radically different approach to conditional execution compared with
A32. In T32, only the branch instructions have space for a condition code, and
therefore only conditional branches such as BNE or BGE can be made conditional
using the method of directly appending a condition code to the name. Other
instructions can be made conditional, but do so via T32’s unique and special-­
purpose IT instruction. IT sets up the processor’s ITSTATE field, enabling up
to four subsequent instructions to be executed based on a condition code or its
negation. The syntax for the IT instruction can be complicated and is discussed
in detail in the next section.
   Programs in A64 take yet a different approach again. As with T32, only branches
can be made directly conditional by directly appending a condition code to the
instruction’s name, and no IT instruction exists to retrofit conditional execution
onto the other instructions. Instead, A64 provides two new groups of instruc-
tions: conditional comparisons and conditional selects that provide powerful and

5
 Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): C1.2.4 Condition code
6
 ARM Cortex-­A Series. Programmer’s Guide for ARMv8-­A (ID050815): 6.2.5 Conditional
Instructions

      flexible primitives that can be used as an alternative to supporting conditional
      execution for other instructions.

      The If-­Then (IT) Instruction in Thumb
      The IT7 instruction stands for If-­Then and is unique to Thumb (see Chapter 4);
      it converts up to four ordinary instructions that follow it into conditionally
      executed instructions based on a condition code (or the logical negation of that
      condition code). The IT instruction and the one to four instructions that it mod-
      ifies together form a conditional IT-­block.8
         In T32 conditional codes are not (with the exception of conditional branches)
      encoded directly into instructions, but rather are stored and handled via the
      processors’ ITSTATE, which is part of PSTATE. See Figure 7.4.

Figure 7.4: ITSTATE bits in PSTATE

         Conceptually, ITSTATE operates like a “queue” of up to four pending condition
      codes. The IT instruction serves only to initialize this state, thereby setting up
      ITSTATE’s queue. As instructions are decoded, each instruction checks ITSTATE
      to see if a condition code is pending. If it is, the instruction “attaches” itself to
      that condition code, becoming conditional and “consuming” the condition code
      in the queue. Once the queue is empty, instructions operate in their default,
      unconditional state.
         The base syntax for the IT instruction is as follows:
          IT <cond>

        Here, cond is the “base condition” that will “attach” to the next instruction. For
      example, we might use this instruction to create an addeq instruction in Thumb:
          it EQ
          addeq r0, r1, r2

      7
       Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): F5.1.56 IT
      8
       Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): F1.2.1 Conditional
      Instructions

   Here, the IT instruction initializes ITSTATE’s condition code queue to contain
just a single EQ entry. The next instruction is encoded as an add instruction, but
picks up the EQ condition from the queue to become an ADDEQ instruction.
   It is important to note in our previous example that although we wrote addeq
out explicitly with a condition code, no such instruction encoding actually exists.
At the binary level, the instruction is an ADD instruction; the EQ condition is
encoded only via IT. For ease of reading assembly, however, most assemblers will
insist that developers write conditions encoded via IT instructions out explicitly,
and most disassemblers and debuggers will automatically propagate condition
codes from an IT instruction on to the instructions that follow for ease of reading.
   As well as making a single instruction conditional, IT can be used to make
up to four subsequent instructions conditional at a time. For each additional
instruction we want to make conditional after the first, we append an extra
letter to the IT instruction name. That way, we can form If-­Then-­Else condi-
tions, where the T refers to the base condition cond, and E refers to the Else
condition in the block. Each instruction inside the IT block must specify the
base condition, and the logical inverse condition for the Else statement based
on the following syntax:
  IT{<x>{<y>{<z>}}}{<q>} <cond>

  The symbols x, y, and z can be set to either T (Then) or E (Else), where T repre-
sents the instruction executed on the base condition (e.g., EQ) and E represents
the instruction executed on the logical inverse (e.g., NE) of the base condition.
Table 7.2 shows condition codes and their inverse.
Table 7.2: Condition Codes and Their Inverse

                                                OPPOSITE
  CONDITION CODE          MEANING               CONDITION        MEANING
  EQ                      Equal                 NE               Not equal
  HS (or CS)              Carry set             LO (or CC)       Carry clear
  MI                      Negative              PL               Positive or zero
  VS                      Signed overflow       VC               No signed overflow
  HI                      Unsigned higher       LS               Unsigned lower or same
  GE                      Signed greater or     LT               Signed less than
                          equal
  GT                      Signed greater than   LE               Signed less than or equal

  Let’s look at an IT instruction that makes two instructions conditional at a
time. In the first group we make two instructions conditional, and both become
conditional on EQ. The instruction name is therefore IT, followed by a T, meaning
“the second instruction also uses the base condition (EQ).”

        .syntax unified
        .thumb

        ; First group:
        itt eq                    ; If-­
                                       Then, followed by a T
        addeq r0, r1, r2          ; Conditional addition if EQ is true
        andeq r0, r0, #0xfff.     ; Conditional AND if EQ is true

        Next let’s look at another example and construct an If-­Then-­Else block where
      two instructions are made conditional, but the second instruction in the group
      uses the negation of our base conditional code, i.e., addne. This is done by append-
      ing an E to the IT instruction name.
        ; Second group:
        ite eq                    ; If-­
                                       Then, followed by an E
        addeq r0, r1, r2          ; Conditional addition if EQ is true
        andne r0, r0, #0xfff.     ; Conditional AND if EQ is not true

         This same basic approach generalizes up to a block of four instructions in total,
      e.g., ITTEE as If-­Then-­Then-­Else-­Else. For example, the ITETE EQ instruction
      makes the first and third instructions of the group conditional on EQ, but the
      second and fourth instructions will use the negation of EQ, i.e., NE.
        cmp r0, r1               ; Instr sets flags
        itete EQ                 ; IT ETE, cond = EQ
        addeq r0, r1, r2         ; use base cond (EQ)
        andne r0, r0, #0xfff     ; E: use negation (NE)
        orreq r0, r0, #0xfff     ; T: use cond (EQ)
        addne r0, r0, #1         ; E: use negation (NE)

         We can therefore interpret this sequence of instructions as logically equivalent
      to the pseudo-­code:
        if(r0 == r1) {
          r0 = (r1 + r2) | 0xfff;
        } else {
          r0 = (r0 & 0xfff) + 1;
        }

      Flag-­Setting Instructions
      In the previous section we have seen how conditional instructions are executed
      based on condition codes that check the condition flags NZCV. But how are these
      condition flags set? In this section we will look at some conditional instructions
      that can set these flags based on the result of their computation.

The Instruction “S” Suffix
Many (but not all) data-­processing instructions can be extended by appending
an S to the instruction name. This instructs the processor to also set the NZCV
flags9 during the computation, alongside its ordinary behavior. For example,
the instruction ADDS operates identically to ADD, except that the NZCV flags will
also be set based on the result.10
   The exact behavior and meaning of how NZCV is updated depends on the
instruction and architecture in use. Figure 7.5 shows all the instructions that can
make use of the S suffix on each architecture, grouped thematically together by
how they interact with NZCV. We will then look at each of these groups in turn.

Figure 7.5: Instructions with S suffix

   The C flag for the “other instructions” group on A32 is almost always set to 0,
with one exception: if the operation implicitly shifts the second operand, then C
will be set to the last bit shifted out by the shift unit while computing the second
operand. This is because most shift instructions in A32 are internally implemented
as aliases of the MOVS instruction using an implicit shift to achieve the shift operation.

The S Suffix on Add and Subtract Instructions
On both A32 and A64, add and subtract type instructions use the S suffix to
update all four NZCV flags as part of the computation.

9
 Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): B.1.2 Registers in AArch64
Execution state
10
  Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): C3.3.1 Arithmetic
(immediate)

        Rather than describing this abstractly, let’s take a look at a concrete example
      using ADDS and along the way see exactly what signed and unsigned overflow
      actually means. In our first example, let’s add 0xffffffff and 1 using ADDS:
        ldr r0, =0xffffffff
        mov r1, #1
        adds r0, r0, r1

        Figure 7.6 shows the behavior of this ADDS instruction and how flags are
      updated. Let’s break it down and see what is happening under the hood.

Figure 7.6: How flags are updated based on ADDS example

         First, the ADDS instruction takes the values in R0 and R1 and adds them to
      compute the result 0. This result is then copied over to the destination register
      of the instruction, R0. Next, since we are using the S suffix, the processor also
      needs to update flags.
         Of the four flags, Z and N are very simple. Our computed result is zero, so
      Z = 1. The result is also not negative (the most significant bit of the result is 0),
      so N = 0.
         The overflow flags C and V are a bit more complicated. To see what values
      these should hold, we look to see if the result is “correct” when interpreting the
      inputs and outputs as signed versus unsigned.
         Let’s look first at the case where the inputs are unsigned. Here, our computed
      result is incorrect: 2147483647+1 does not equal 0. This means our computation
      has encountered an unsigned overflow, so C will be set to 1.
         Next, let’s look at the case where the same inputs are interpreted as signed values.
      Here our computed result turns out to be correct: 0xffffffff means -­1 in two’s
      complement, and since -­1 + 1 equals 0, no signed overflow occurred, so V will be 0.

Example: Signed Overflow

By way of another example, suppose we instead add 0x7fffffff to itself using
the ADDS instruction.
  ldr r0, =0x7fffffff
  ldr r1, =0x7fffffff
  adds r0, r0, r1

  Figure 7.7 shows the full diagram showing ADDS for this input.

Figure 7.7: Signed overflow illustration

   The arithmetic result of this operation is 0xfffffffe, and this value is written
to R0. Since we’re using the S suffix on our ADD instruction, the processor also
needs to update flags.
   As before, Z and N are simple enough. The result is not zero, so Z = 0, and
the sign bit on the result is set, so N = 1. Next, we need to work out the values
for C and V.
   Looking at this instruction with the inputs as unsigned numbers, the operation
yields the correct result: 2147483647 + 2147483647 does equal 4294967294. Since
no unsigned overflow took place, C = 0. By contrast, if the inputs and outputs
are interpreted as signed values, the addition gives an incorrect result. In two’s
complement arithmetic, the value 0xfffffffe means -­2, and since 2147483647
+ 2147483647 does not equal -­2, a signed overflow has taken place, so V = 1.
   Therefore, this instruction will set NZCV as follows:
    ■■ N   = 1, since bit 31 of the result is set.
    ■■ Z   = 0, since the result is not zero.
    ■■ C   = 0, since the result did not trigger an unsigned overflow.
    ■■ V   = 1, since the result did trigger a signed overflow.

      The S Suffix on Logical Shift Instructions
      In A32 (but not A64), the logical shift instructions ASRS, LSLS, LSRS, RORS, and
      RRXS can also use the S suffix.11 Here, Z and N maintain the same basic meaning
      as before, but C and V operate a bit differently. For these instructions, C is set to
      hold the last value shifted out and discarded during the shift operation. The
      value of V is left unchanged.
         Suppose, by way of example, we perform a 32-­bit left-­shift of the value
      0xdc000001 by five bits using an LSLS instruction. This is shown in Figure 7.8.

Figure 7.8: PSTATE flags set based on an LSLS instruction example

         We have already seen in Chapter 5, “Data Processing Instructions,” that LSL
      simply shifts each bit in the input value a fixed number of places to the left. In
      this example, we shift the 32-­bit input left by five places, causing the top five
      bits of the value to “fall off the end” and be discarded. The new bits shifted
      into the bottom five positions are filled with zeros. The arithmetic result of the
      operation is therefore the value 0x80000020.
         For an ordinary LSL this would be the end of the analysis, but since this is LSLS,
      the processor also needs to update NZCV based on the result. In our example,
      these flags are therefore set as follows:
             ■■ N = 1 , since the top bit of the result is 1.
             ■■ Z = 0 , since the overall result is not zero.
             ■■ C = 1 , since the last bit shifted out of the register was 1.
             ■■ V   is left unchanged.

      11
           Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): F1.4.2 Shift Instructions

The S Suffix on Multiply Instructions
In A32 (but not A64), the multiply instructions MULS, MLAS, SMLALS, SMULLS,
UMLALS, and UMULLS can all make use of the S suffix to set flags.12 For these
instructions, Z and N are updated based on the result of the computation, but C
and V are always left unchanged.

The S Suffix on Other Instructions
A few other instructions that do not fall into the earlier categories can also use
the S suffix.
  On A32 these instructions are ANDS, BICS, EORS, MOVS, MVNS, ORNS, and ORRS.
For these instructions, flags are set as follows:
     ■■ Z   is set if the result is zero.
     ■■ N   is set if the result is negative.
     ■■ Cis normally cleared to 0, with the exception of the case where the second
       operand to the instruction makes use of an implicit shift. For those cases,
       C is then set equal to the last bit shifted out during the implicit shift of the
       second operand.
     ■■ V   is left unchanged.
   On A64, only two instructions fall into this category: ANDS and BICS. Here,
flags are always set as follows:
     ■■ Z   is set if the result is zero.
     ■■ N   is set if the result is negative.
     ■■ C   is always cleared to 0.
     ■■ V   is always cleared to 0.

Test and Comparison Instructions
In addition to data processing instructions that use the S suffix, a few instruc-
tions, such as CMP, CMN, TST, and TEQ, can be used to directly inspect data and
set NZCV flags without writing an intermediate result to a register.13
   Table 7.3 gives the meaning of the four basic test and compare instructions,
along with their equivalent arithmetic operations and common semantic meanings.

12
 Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): F1.4.3 Multiply Instructions
13
 Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): F1.4, Table F1-­2

Table 7.3: Test and Comparison Instructions

                                                              USUAL SEMANTIC
        ISA                INSTRUCTION         EQUIVALENT     MEANING
        A32 and A64        CMP A, B            SUBS _, A, B   Compare A against B.
                           CMN A, B            ADDS _, A, B   Compare A against -­B.
                           TST A, B            ANDS _, A, B   Check to see if the bits
                                                              specified by B are set inside A.
        A32 only           TEQ A, B            EORS _, A, B   Check if A exactly equals B.

      Compare (CMP)
      The compare instruction CMP is used to compare two values and see which is
      the larger. Under the hood, CMP performs a subtraction of the two operands,
      setting NZCV according to the result of the subtraction and discarding the result.
      See Figure 7.9.

Figure 7.9: CMP logic with SUBS equivalent

         During reverse engineering, we often encounter CMP instructions helping to
      direct program flow. The most basic case, and the form that we will see in the
      overwhelming majority of instances, is a CMP instruction that simply compares
      two registers to see if they are the same, or which is larger, or to test the value
      in a register against a constant value. These take the following form:
        CMP r0, r1        ; Compare the values in R0 and R1
        CMP w0, #17       ; Compare the value in W0 against 17

        Although these are the most common forms, CMP also provides more com-
      plex forms where the second operand is implicitly transformed via a shift or
      extension operation prior to the comparison. Table 7.4 shows the full syntax
      for the various forms of CMP.

Table 7.4: CMP Instruction Forms

  INSTRUCTION FORM                 SYMBOL MEANINGS
  Instruction set: A32/T32
  CMP Rn, #const                   Compares the first register with a constant
                                   immediate value.
  CMP Rn, Rm                       Compares the first register with the
                                   optionally pre-­shifted second register.
  CMP Rn, Rm, RRX
                                   shift can be one of LSL, LSR, ASR, or ROR.
  CMP Rn, Rm, shift #amt
                                   amt is a number in the range 0..31.
  CMP Rn, Rm, shift Rs             Compares the first register with the shifted
                                   second register.

                                   shift is one of LSL, LSR, ASR, or ROR.

                                   Rs contains the number of bits to shift by in
                                   the direction given by the shift parameter.
  Instruction set: A64
  CMP Wn|WSP, #imm{, shift }       Compares the first register with a constant
                                   immediate value.
  CMP Xn|SP, #imm{, shift }
                                   shift is either LSL #0 or LSL #12.
  CMP Wn|WSP, Wm {, shift #amt }   Compares the first register with a second,
                                   optionally pre-­shifted register.
  CMP Xn|SP, Xm {, shift #amt }
                                   shift can be one of LSL, LSR, or ASR.

                                   amt is a number in the range 0..31 (32-­bit) or
                                   0..63 (64-­bit).
  CMP Wn|WSP, Wm {, extend #amt}   Compares the first register with a second,
                                   optionally pre-­extended and pre-­shifted
  CMP Xn|SP, Xm{, extend #amt}     register.

                                   extend can be one of UXTB, UXTH, UXTW,
                                   UXTX, SXTB, SXTH, SXTW, or SXTX.

                                   amt is the amount to left-­shift the extended
                                   value by.
  CMP WSP, Wm, LSL #n              The preferred disassembly alias of
                                   CMP WSP, Wm, UXTW, #n and CMP
  CMP SP, Xm, LSL #n               SP, Wm, UXTX, #n, respectively.

         Reverse engineering and understanding code that uses CMP instructions
      requires not only looking at the CMP instruction itself, but also scanning forwards
      to see how the NZCV flags are later inspected via a condition code. For example,
      suppose we see the following code snippet while reverse engineering:
        cmp r0, r1
        addne r0, r1, r2

         Here, the CMP instruction itself tells us what is being compared—­in this case
      the values in r0 and r1. But to understand what type of comparison is of interest
      to the program, we have to scan forward for the instruction that will ultimately
      use the computed NZCV flags via a condition code. In this case, the next instruction
      is an ADDNE instruction, which is conditional based on the NE condition code.
      The semantic meaning of our CMP instruction is therefore “is r0 != r1?” If the
      condition is true, the ADDNE instruction is executed, setting r0 = r1 + r2. If the
      condition is false, the ADDNE is skipped.
         As an example to show why we need to look ahead for the condition code,
      suppose instead we encounter this instruction sequence:
        cmp r0, r1
        addlt r0, r1, r2

          Here, the CMP instruction itself is identical, but the logical condition being
      tested is different. Here, the LT condition is used, so our condition is semanti-
      cally asking “is r0 < r1?” If the condition is met, the addition takes place, and
      if it does not, the addition is skipped.

      Compare Negative (CMN)
      The compare negative instruction CMN is virtually identical to the CMP instruction,
      except that the second operand is first negated before the comparison takes place.
      CMN takes all the same syntax forms as CMP and is implemented internally as an
      addition operation to set the NZCV flags, discarding the result. See Figure 7.10.

Figure 7.10: CMN logic with ADDS equivalent

   From the perspective of reverse engineering, CMN is usually encountered only
in circumstances where the compiler cannot use an equivalent CMP. For example,
suppose the programmer writes the following program code:
     int someFunction(int argument) {
       if(argument == -­
                       1) {
         return 0;
       }
       return 1;
     }

   Here, the value of argument will be passed on w0, and the compiler will want
to quickly test this value against -­1. The naïve approach would be to immedi-
ately reach for the instruction CMP w0, #-­   1, but this instruction is illegal: the
constant -­1 is out of range. Instead, a compiler can choose to use CMN w0, #1,
which encodes the same meaning but is a valid instruction available for use.

Test Bits (TST)
The test bits instruction TST performs a bitwise AND of two operands, sets flags
based on the result, and then discards the internally computed result, as shown
in Figure 7.11.

Figure 7.11: TST logic with ANDS equivalent

   The TST instruction is used to check if specific bits of interest are set inside a
given value. This is particularly useful when checking Boolean values packed
inside a “flags” field or to check to see if a given number is aligned to a power
of two by checking whether the low bits of the value are all set to zero.
   Table 7.5 shows the full syntax for the TST instruction.
   TST sets the NZCV flags based on the result of the internal bitwise AND oper-
ation, which, as we saw earlier, sets flags as follows14,15:

     ■■ N   is set if the most significant bit of the result is 1.
     ■■ Z   is set if the result is zero.
14
   Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): C6.2.15 ANDS (shifted
register) (A64)
15
  Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): F5.1.263 TST (register) (A32/T32)

         ■■ C   is usually set to zero, with the exception that on A32 if the second operand
              is implicitly shifted, C will hold the last bit shifted out during the implicit
              shift operation.
         ■■ V   is ignored on A32 and set to 0 on A64.

Table 7.5: TST Instruction Forms

        ISA          INSTRUCTION FORM                    SYMBOL MEANINGS
        A32/T32      TST Rn, #const                      Tests the first register against a
                                                         constant immediate value.
                     TST Rn, Rm                          Tests the first register against the
                                                         optionally pre-­shifted second register.
                     TST Rn, Rm, RRX
                                                         shift can be one of LSL, LSR, ASR, or
                     TST Rn, Rm, shift #amt              ROR.

                                                         amt is a number in the range 0..31.
                     TST Rn, Rm, shift Rs                Tests the first register against the
                                                         shifted second register.

                                                         shift is one of LSL, LSR, ASR, or ROR.

                                                         Rs contains the number of bits to shift by.
        A64          TST Wn, #imm                        Tests the first register against a
                                                         constant immediate value.
                     TST Xn, #imm
                     TST Wn, Wm {, shift #amt }          Tests the first register against the
                                                         second, optionally pre-­shifted register.
                     TST Xn, Xm {, shift #amt }
                                                         shift can be one of LSL, LSR, or ASR.

                                                         amt is a number in the range 0..31 (32-­
                                                         bit) or 0..63 (64-­bit).

        Let’s take a look at a concrete example. Suppose for the purpose of our example
      that r0 currently holds the value 0xffff0010 and we encounter the following code:
        TST r0, #0x10
        MOVNE r0, #-­
                    1

         Mechanistically this instruction sequence works as follows. First, TST performs
      a bitwise AND of the value in r0 with 0x10, resulting in the value 0x10. This
      is not zero, so the Z flag gets set to 0. The next instruction uses the conditional
      code NE, which is satisfied when Z == 0. This means the MOVNE instruction will
      be executed, copying the value -­1 to r0. Figure 7.12 shows this process.

Figure 7.12: Illustration of TST and MOVNE instruction behavior

   Although this mechanistic approach is a perfectly valid way to perform reverse
engineering, there is an easier way. Instead of focusing on what the instructions
do, we can also search for common patterns that give us insight into the under-
lying intent of the instructions. To do this task, we first start by analyzing the
TST instruction and assign semantic meanings to the arguments. When TST is
used with a fixed constant argument, such as in Figure 7.13, that argument is
normally a description of the bits the program is currently interested in. The
second argument is the value we’re inspecting.

Figure 7.13: TST instruction components

   Now that we know the program is “interested” in bit 0x10 of r0, we scan
forward to look for an instruction that makes use of a condition code. Usually
(as here) this is the next instruction, but this is not always the case. In this case,
MOVNE is dependent on the NE conditional. Next, we can look up what NE means
in the context of a TST instruction to understand what the condition code means
in context. See Figure 7.14.

Figure 7.14: NE condition code in the context of TST

        Now we have enough information to piece together the instructions’ logic.
      The program is interested in bit 0x10 of r0. If this bit is set, then the MOVNE
      instruction executes, setting the value -­1 into r0. This means we can finally
      deduce the logic of the two instructions as meaning the following:
           if( bit 0x10 is set inside r0 ) {
             r0 = -­
                   1
           }

      Test Equality (TEQ)
      The test equality instruction TEQ16 is unique to A32 and sets flags according to
      the bitwise exclusive OR operation between two values, discarding the result.
      See Figure 7.15.

Figure 7.15: TEQ instruction logic

           TEQ sets the flags as follows:

           ■■   The N flag is set if the most significant bit of the result is 1.
           ■■   The Z flag is set if the result is zero.

      16
       Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): G5.1.259

     ■■    The C flag is unchanged unless operand2 involves an implicit shift, in which
           case C holds the carry from the shift operation.
     ■■    The V flag is always left unchanged.

     Table 7.6 shows the full syntax for TEQ.

Table 7.6: TST Instruction Forms

     ISA          INSTRUCTION FORM                SYMBOL MEANINGS
     A32/T32      TEQ Rn, #const                  Tests the first register against a constant
                                                  immediate value.
                  TEQ Rn, Rm                      Tests the first register against the
                                                  optionally pre-­shifted second register.
                  TEQ Rn, Rm, RRX
                                                  shift can be one of LSL, LSR, ASR, or
                  TEQ Rn, Rm, shift #amt          ROR.

                                                  amt is a number in the range 0..31.
                  TEQ Rn, Rm, shift Rs            Tests the first register against the shifted
                                                  second register.

                                                  shift is one of LSL, LSR, ASR, or ROR.

                                                  Rs contains the number of bits to shift by.

   When reverse engineering, a TEQ instruction such as TEQ r0, r1 is almost always
followed by an instruction dependent on EQ or NE condition code. EQ is satisfied if
the two values are exactly equal, and NE is satisfied only if they are not. TEQ is often
used interchangeably with CMP for performing exact-­equality tests, but there are a
couple of differences, namely, that TEQ explicitly avoids setting the C or V flags.17
   Although it’s rare to see in practice, TEQ can also be used to quickly tell if two
inputs have the same arithmetic sign, i.e., are both negative or both positive. To
see how this test works, consider the instruction TEQ r0, r1. This instruction
performs the exclusive OR of r0 and r1 together, setting flags based on the tem-
porary result. The N flag will therefore be set to the exclusive OR of the sign bits
of both inputs. This means N holds 0 if both inputs to the operation had the same
sign bit, and 1 otherwise. This can then be subsequently tested using the MI or PO
condition codes.

Conditional Select Instructions
Unlike its A32 and T32 counterparts, most ordinary data processing instructions
in A64 cannot be made directly conditional by simply appending a condition

17
 ARM Compiler toolchain -­Assembler Reference v4.1 (ID080411): 3.4.12 TST and TEQ

      code to the instruction name: instructions such as ADDEQ and MOVEQ do not exist
      in A64. Instead, the introduction of A64 included a group of conditionally exe-
      cuting instructions called the conditional select group.18
          Instructions in the conditional select group are fairly self-­explanatory, each fol-
      lowing a similar basic syntax that specifies a destination register, either one or
      two input registers depending on the instruction, and ending with a condition
      code. Each instruction supports the use of either 32-­bit registers or 64-­bit registers.
          Table 7.7 lists the instructions in the conditional select group and their behavior
      if the condition code is satisfied or not. For brevity, only 64-­bit forms are shown.

Table 7.7: Conditional Select Group Instruction Behavior

                                                                              OPERATION IF
           INSTRUCTION                                    OPERATION IF        COND IS NOT
           NAME               INSTRUCTION SYNTAX          COND IS SATISFIED   SATISFIED
           Conditional        CSEL Xd, Xn, Xm,            Xd = Xn             Xd = Xm
           select             cond
           Conditional        CSINC Xd, Xn, Xm,           Xd = Xn             Xd = Xm + 1
           select             cond
           increment
           Conditional        CSINV Xd, Xn, Xm,           Xd = Xn             Xd = NOT(Xm)
           select inversion   cond
           Conditional        CSNEG Xd, Xn, Xm,           Xd = Xn             Xd = 0 -­Xm
           select negation    cond
           Conditional set    CSET Xd, cond               Xd = 1              Xd = 0
           Conditional set    CSETM Xd, cond              Xd = (all ones)     Xd = 0
           mask
           Conditional        CINC Xd, Xn, cond           Xd = Xn + 1         Xd = Xn
           increment
           Conditional        CINV Xd, Xn, cond           Xd = NOT(Xn)        Xd = Xn
           invert
           Conditional        CNEG Xd, Xn, cond           Xd = 0 -­Xn         Xd = Xn
           negate

        Let’s look at a fully working example of deciphering some code involving a
      CSEL instruction and see how to reverse engineer its semantic meaning:

           CMP w0, w1
           CSEL w0, w1, wzr, EQ

      18
       Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): C3.4.11 Conditional Select

  We start off our disassembly process with the CMP instruction. In Figure 7.16,
we can see that we are performing some kind of comparison between w0 and
w1, but the big question is what type of comparison?

Figure 7.16: Semantic meaning of CMP instruction

  To work out the type of comparison, we need to scan forward to look for
the next condition code that is used. Here, CSEL uses the EQ condition code.
An EQ condition code after a CMP semantically “means” an exact check to see if
A == B, as shown in Figure 7.17.

Figure 7.17: Semantic meaning of EQ after CMP

   Next, we fill in the values of A and B with the parameters used in the CMP
instruction, here w0 and w1, and can then begin decoding the CSEL instruction
itself. See Figure 7.18.

Figure 7.18: CSEL meaning

       The only remaining task is to EQ in this template with the semantic meaning
      we previously deciphered, to get to the final result, as shown in Figure 7.19.

Figure 7.19: Final result of CMP and CSEL instruction

      Conditional Comparison Instructions
      The A64-­specific Conditional Compare19 instruction CCMP and Conditional Compare
      Negative instruction CCMN are used to construct complex Boolean conditions
      chained together with Boolean-­and or Boolean-­or connectors.
         Given how frequently CCMP and CCMN are encountered in reverse engineering,
      and given how complicated they can be to read and write, it is worth spending
      a bit of time trying to understand them in detail.
         The basic syntax for CCMP and CCMN follows the same basic pattern:
           CCMP arg1, arg2, nzcv, cond

      19
       Arm Architecture Reference Manual Armv8 (ARM DDI 0487F.a): C3.4.12 Conditional
      comparison

  Here, arg1 is always a register, and arg2 is either a register of the same size
or a constant number. The nzcv field is a constant number in the range 0...15,
and cond is a condition code, such as EQ or LT.
  The logic for CCMP is deceptively simple at the binary level, but deceptively
hard to understand semantically. The mechanical behavior of CCMP is as follows:
  if(cond) {
      PSTATE.NZCV = CMP(arg1, arg2);
  } else {
      PSTATE.NZCV = nzcv;
  }

   The CCMN instruction uses the same basic syntax and logic as CCMP, but with the
key difference that it performs a CMN instead of a CMP operation if the condition
code is satisfied.
   A good way to see how these instructions work in terms of semantic logic,
i.e., deciphering the programmers’ intent when seeing these instructions, is to
try to work through a couple of examples. We’ll first start by writing a Boolean-­
and conditional and then later see how Boolean-­or conditionals are created.
This will give us the groundwork to begin reverse engineering the semantic
meaning behind these complex instructions when we encounter them during
reverse engineering.

Boolean AND Conditionals Using CCMP
For the sake of example, let’s try to build a conditional branch that will be taken
if (and only if) w0 == w1 && w2 < w3. In our example, let’s assume these values
are all signed 32-­bit integers. Conditional branches are explained in more detail
in Chapter 8.
   The first thing to do is to decompose our Boolean statement into a decision
tree. See Figure 7.20.

Figure 7.20: Decision tree of Boolean statement

         Now that we have a decision tree, we can start translating that decision tree
      into code, starting at the top and working forward. The start of our condition
      is straightforward. We just need to check if w0 == w1, which can be done easily
      via the comparison operation CMP w0, w1. The result of this test can then be
      determined by inspecting the EQ condition code, as shown in Figure 7.21.

Figure 7.21: EQ and NE condition

         The power of the CCMP instruction comes from its ability to handle both sides of
      the decision tree in one go. For the sake of our own sanity, however, we should
      try to build up this instruction in parts, starting first with the left side of the
      decision tree, i.e., the case where w0 == w1.
         Following the left side of the decision tree down, we can see that we now need
      to check to see if w2 < w3. In isolation, such a check could easily be performed by
      a CMP w2, w3 instruction followed by an LT-­conditional instruction. But in this
      case, we need to limit this test to only being taken on the left side of the decision
      tree. To do this, we can simply “promote” this CMP to a CCMP instruction so that we
      can perform a conditional compare. We’re operating on the left side of the decision
      diagram, i.e., when EQ is set, so we want to make EQ the condition code for our
      instruction:
        CCMP w2, w3, nzcv, EQ

        The logic of our two instructions now looks something like Figure 7.22.
        We’ve now completed the left side of the decision tree. The left side will cal-
      culate if w0 == w1 && w2 < w3 for the case where w0 == w1, with the result output
      via the LT condition code.
        Now we need to move onto the right side and to the deceptively complicated
      nzcv field of the CCMP instruction. Mechanistically, nzcv is the value that will be
      set into the processor’s NZCV flags if the EQ condition is not met, but what does
      that actually mean in terms of what value to pick?
        The first thing to do is to work out the output condition code for our instruction.
      Here, the left side outputs its result via LT, so we should make the right side do

the same. Next, we need to remember that in our decision diagram, the right
side should output “always false.” In other words, we want to pick a value for
nzcv such that a later test of LT will always be unsatisfied. That way, after the
CCMP instruction, LT will be taken if and only if w0 == w1 && w2 < w3.

Figure 7.22: Illustration of instruction logic

   So, what value should we choose for nzcv? Earlier in this chapter, we saw
that, at the flags level, LT actually means N!= V. We want this to be unsatisfied,
so we want a value of nzcv so that N == V, such as the value 0 (i.e., N = Z = C =
V = 0). See Figure 7.23.

Figure 7.23: Instruction logic based on LT and GE conditions

  Now that we’ve completed all paths through our decision diagram, a
subsequent LT-­conditional instruction will execute only if w0 == w1 && w2 < w3.

      For example, in the following code, the branch to _label will be taken if and
      only if w0 == w1 && w2 < w3:
        cmp w0, w1                  ; Satisfy EQ if w0 == w1
        ccmp w2, w3, 0, EQ          ; Satisfy LT if w0 == w1 && w2 < w3
        blt _label

         As a sanity check, we can walk through these instructions step-­by-­step to see
      that our logic is correct. First let’s take the case where w0 == w1. Here, the CMP
      instruction will set flags so that the EQ condition on the CCMP is satisfied. CCMP will
      then satisfy LT if w2 < w3. By contrast, if w0!= w1, the CCMP’s EQ condition will not
      be satisfied. Instead, the processor’s NZCV flags will be set to 0, and the later test
      of LT will therefore also not be satisfied. In other words, the LT condition on the
      branch instruction will be met if (and only if) w0 == w1 and w2 < w3, so the sequence
      correctly encodes our logic.

      Boolean OR Conditionals Using CCMP
      As well as creating Boolean-­and connectors, CCMP (and CCMN) can also be used to
      create Boolean-­or connectors.
        Let’s look again at the same example, except this time using a Boolean-­or con-
      nector, i.e., w0 == w1 || w2 < w3. Here the decision tree looks like Figure 7.24.

Figure 7.24: Decision tree using Boolean-­or connector

        We start our process the same way as before. We perform a CMP w0, w1 and
      then EQ will be satisfied if w0 == w1. See Figure 7.25.
        As before, we can perform both sides of the second-­level comparison in one
      go via a CCMP instruction. As with the last time, we first determine how to test
      w2 < w3 in isolation. Here, a CMP w2, w3 followed by testing LT would do the trick.
      Next, we “promote” the CMP to a CCMP to connect it to the rest of the decision tree.

Figure 7.25: CMP decision tree

Figure 7.26: CCMP condition

   For Boolean-­or connectors, we need to be especially careful with the condition
code. Here, the w2 < w3 condition is being tested on the not-­equal branch of the
decision tree, so our CCMP condition is NE, not EQ, as shown in Figure 7.26.
   Finally, we again need to pick a value for nzcv to handle the other side of the
decision tree where w0 == w1. In our original decision tree this branch should
yield the overall result of our conditional as true. Since we are computing the
result of our Boolean statement onto LT, this means we need to pick a value
for nzcv such that LT is satisfied; that is, we should pick a value such that
N!= V. The number 8 satisfies this condition, since 8 = 0b1000, i.e., sets N = 1 and
V = 0. See Figure 7.27.
   Now we have fully completed our Boolean-­or statement. A subsequent LT-­
conditional instruction will run if and only if w0 == w1 || w2 < w3.
  cmp w0, w1                  ; Satisfy NE if w0 != w1
  ccmp w2, w3, 8, NE          ; Satisfy LT if w0 == w1 || w2 < w3
  blt _label

Figure 7.27: CCMP instruction with nzcv value

        As a sanity check, we can walk through the logic of this sequence again to
      check that it is correct. First, let’s take the case where w0!= w1. Here, the CCMP
      instruction’s NE condition is met, and so CCMP compares w2 with w3. LT will then
      be set if w2 < w3 and not set otherwise. By contrast, in the case where w0 == w1,
      CCMP’s NE condition is not met. Instead, CCMP sets NZCV to 8, and the later test of
      the LT condition will automatically succeed. In other words, the branch will be
      taken if w0 == w1 or if w2 < w3 and will not be taken otherwise.
