                          Fore w ord

I first became aware of the quality of Nikolay’s work
in Android security with the release of Android 4.0,
Ice Cream Sandwich. I needed a better explanation of
the new Android backup format; I was struggling to
exploit a vulnerability I had found, because I didn’t
have a full grasp of the new feature and format. His clear, in-depth expla-
nation helped me understand the issue, exploit the vulnerability, and get a
patch into production devices quickly. I have since been a frequent visitor to
his blog, often referring to it when I need a refresher.
     While I was honored to be asked to write this foreword, I honestly didn’t
believe I’d learn much from the book because I’ve been working on Android
security for many years. This belief could not have been more wrong. As
I read and digested new information regarding subjects I thought I knew
thoroughly, my mind whirled with thoughts of what I had missed and what
I could have done better. Why wasn’t a reference like this available when I
first engrossed myself in Android?

                       This book exposes the reader to a wide range of security topics, from
                   Android permissions and sandboxing to the Android SELinux implementa-
                   tion, SEAndroid. It provides excellent explanations of minute details and
                   rarely seen features such as dm-verify. Like me, you’ll walk away from this
                   book with a better understanding of Android security features.
                       Android Security Internals has earned a permanent spot on my office
                   bookshelf.

                   Jon “ jcase” Sawyer
                   CTO, Applied Cybersecurity LLC
                   Port Angeles, WA

xviii   Foreword

              Ac k no w ledg m ent s

I would like to thank everyone at No Starch Press who worked on this book.
Special thanks to Bill Pollock for making my ramblings readable and to
Alison Law for her patience in turning them into an actual book.
    A big thanks to Kenny Root for reviewing all chapters and sharing the
backstories behind some of Android’s security features.
    Thanks to Jorrit “Chainfire” Jongma for maintaining SuperSU, which
has been an invaluable tool for poking at Android’s internals, and for
reviewing my coverage of it in Chapter 13.
    Thanks to Jon “ jcase” Sawyer for continuing to challenge our assump-
tions about Android security and for contributing a foreword to my book.

.
