                      I ntroduction

In a relatively short period of time, Android has
become the world’s most popular mobile platform.
Although originally designed for smartphones, it
now powers tablets, TVs, and wearable devices, and
will soon even be found in cars. Android is being
developed at a breathtaking pace, with an average of two major releases
per year. Each new release brings a better UI, performance improvements,
and a host of new user-facing features which are typically blogged about
and dissected in excruciating detail by Android enthusiasts.
     One aspect of the Android platform that has seen major improvements
over the last few years, but which has received little public attention, is secu-
rity. Over the years, Android has become more resistant to common exploit
techniques (such as buffer overflows), its application isolation (sandboxing)
has been reinforced, and its attack surface has been considerably reduced
by aggressively decreasing the number of system processes that run as root.
In addition to these exploit mitigations, recent versions of Android have
introduced major new security features such as restricted user support,

                      full-disk encryption, hardware-backed credential storage, and support for
                      centralized device management and provisioning. Even more enterprise-
                      oriented features and security improvements such as managed profile
                      support, improved full-disk encryption, and support for biometric authen-
                      tication have been announced for the next Android release (referred to as
                      Android L as I write this).
                           As with any new platform feature, discussing cutting-edge security
                      improvements is exciting, but it’s arguably more important to understand
                      Android’s security architecture from the bottom up because each new secu-
                      rity feature builds upon and integrates with the platform’s core security
                      model. Android’s sandboxing model (in which each application runs as a
                      separate Linux user and has a dedicated data directory) and permission sys-
                      tem (which requires each application to explicitly declare the platform fea-
                      tures it requires) are fairly well understood and documented. However, the
                      internals of other fundamental platform features that have an impact on
                      device security, such as package management and code signing, are largely
                      treated as a black box beyond the security research community.
                           One of the reasons for Android’s popularity is the relative ease with
                      which a device can be “flashed” with a custom build of Android, “rooted” by
                      applying a third-party update package, or otherwise customized. Android
                      enthusiast forums and blogs feature many practical “How to” guides that
                      take users through the steps necessary to unlock a device and apply various
                      customization packages, but they offer very little structured information
                      about how such system updates operate under the hood and what risks they
                      carry.
                           This books aims to fill these gaps by providing an exploration of how
                      Android works by describing its security architecture from the bottom up
                      and delving deep into the implementation of major Android subsystems and
                      components that relate to device and data security. The coverage includes
                      broad topics that affect all applications, such as package and user manage-
                      ment, permissions and device policy, as well as more specific ones such as
                      cryptographic providers, credential storage, and support for secure elements.
                           It’s not uncommon for entire Android subsystems to be replaced or
                      rewritten between releases, but security-related development is conserva-
                      tive by nature, and while the described behavior might be changed or aug-
                      mented across releases, Android’s core security architecture should remain
                      fairly stable in future releases.

     Who This Book Is For
                      This book should be useful to anyone interested in learning more about
                      Android’s security architecture. Both security researchers looking to evalu-
                      ate the security level of Android as a whole or of a specific subsystem and
                      platform developers working on customizing and extending Android will
                      find the high-level description of each security feature and the provided
                      implementation details to be a useful starting point for understanding
                      the underlying platform source code. Application developers can gain a

xxii   Introduction

        deeper understanding of how the platform works, which will enable them
        to write more secure applications and take better advantage of the security-
        related APIs that the platform provides. While some parts of the book are
        accessible to a non-technical audience, the bulk of the discussion is closely
        tied to Android source code or system files, so familiarity with the core con-
        cepts of software development in a Unix environment is useful.

Prerequisites
        The book assumes basic familiarity with Unix-style operating systems, pref-
        erably Linux, and does not explain common concepts such as processes,
        user groups, file permissions, and so on. Linux-specific or recently added
        OS features (such as capability and mount namespaces) are generally intro-
        duced briefly before discussing Android subsystems that use them. Most
        of the presented platform code comes from core Android daemons (usu-
        ally implemented in C or C++) and system services (usually implemented
        in Java), so basic familiarity with at least one of these languages is also
        required. Some code examples feature sequences of Linux system calls, so
        familiarity with Linux system programming can be helpful in understand-
        ing the code, but is not absolutely required. Finally, while the basic struc-
        ture and core components (such as activities and services) of Android apps
        are briefly described in the initial chapters, basic understanding of Android
        development is assumed.

Android Versions
        The description of Android’s architecture and implementation in this book
        (except for several proprietary Google features) is based on source code
        publicly released as part of the Android Open Source Project (AOSP). Most
        of the discussion and code excerpts reference Android 4.4, which is the lat-
        est publicly available version released with source code at the time of this
        writing. The master branch of AOSP is also referenced a few times, because
        commits to master are generally a good indicator of the direction future
        Android releases will take. However, not all changes to the master branch
        are incorporated in public releases as is, so it’s quite possible that future
        releases will change and even remove some of the presented functionality.
             A developer preview version of the next Android release (Android L,
        mentioned earlier) was announced shortly after the draft of this book was
        completed. However, as of this writing, the full source code of Android L is
        not available and its exact public release date is unknown. While the pre-
        view release does include some new security features, such as improvements
        to device encryption, managed profiles, and device management, none of
        these features are final and so are subject to change. That is why this book
        does not discuss any of these new features. Although we could introduce
        some of Android L’s security improvements based on their observed behav-
        ior, without the underlying source code, any discussion about their imple-
        mentation would be incomplete and speculative.

                                                                        Introduction   xxiii

     How Is This Book Organized?
                      This book consists of 13 chapters that are designed to be read in sequence.
                      Each chapter discusses a different aspect or feature of Android security,
                      and subsequent chapters build on the concepts introduced by their pre-
                      decessors. Even if you’re already familiar with Android’s architecture and
                      security model and are looking for details about a specific topic, you should
                      at least skim Chapters 1 through 3 because the topics they cover form the
                      foundation for the rest of the book.

                      •   Chapter 1: Android’s Security Model gives a high-level overview of
                          Android’s architecture and security model.
                      •   Chapter 2: Permissions describes how Android permissions are
                          declared, used, and enforced by the system.
                      •   Chapter 3: Package Management discusses code signing and details
                          how Android’s application installation and management process works.
                      •   Chapter 4: User Management explores Android’s multi-user support
                          and describes how data isolation is implemented on multi-user devices.
                      •   Chapter 5: Cryptographic Providers gives an overview of the Java
                          Cryptography Architecture ( JCA) framework and describes Android’s
                          JCA cryptographic providers.
                      •   Chapter 6: Network Security and PKI introduces the architecture of
                          the Java Secure Socket Extension ( JSSE) framework and delves into its
                          Android implementation.
                      •   Chapter 7: Credential Storage explores Android’s credential store and
                          introduces the APIs it provides to applications that need to store crypto-
                          graphic keys securely.
                      •   Chapter 8: Online Account Management discusses Android’s online
                          account management framework and shows how support for Google
                          accounts is integrated into Android.
                      •   Chapter 9: Enterprise Security presents Android’s device management
                          framework, details how VPN support is implemented, and delves into
                          Android’s support for the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP).
                      •   Chapter 10: Device Security introduces verified boot, disk encryption,
                          and Android’s lockscreen implementation, and shows how secure USB
                          debugging and encrypted device backups are implemented.
                      •   Chapter 11: NFC and Secure Elements gives an overview of Android’s
                          NFC stack, delves into secure element (SE) integration and APIs, and
                          introduces host-based card emulation (HCE).
                      •   Chapter 12: SELinux starts with a brief introduction to SELinux’s archi-
                          tecture and policy language, details the changes made to SELinux in
                          order to integrate it in Android, and gives an overview of Android’s base
                          SELinux policy.

xxiv   Introduction

       •   Chapter 13: System Updates and Root Access discusses how Android’s
           bootloader and recovery OS are used to perform full system updates,
           and details how root access can be obtained on both engineering and
           production Android builds.

Conventions
       Because the main topic of this book is Android’s architecture and implemen-
       tation, it contains multiple code excerpts and file listings, which are exten-
       sively referenced in the sections that follow each listing or code example. A
       few format conventions are used to set those references (which typically
       include multiple OS or programming language constructs) apart from the
       rest of the text.
            Commands; function and variable names; XML attributes; and SQL
       object names are set in monospace (for example: “the id command,” “the
       getCallingUid() method,” “the name attribute,” and so on). The names of files
       and directories, Linux users and groups, processes, and other OS objects
       are set in italic (for example: “the packages.xml file,” “the system user,” “the
       vold daemon,” and so on). String literals are also set in italic (for example:
       “the AndroidOpenSSL provider”). If you use such string literals in a program,
       you typically need to enclose them in double or single quotes (for example:
       Signature.getInstance("SHA1withRSA", "AndroidOpenSSL")).
            Java class names are typically in their unqualified format without the
       package name (for example: “the Binder class”); fully qualified names are
       only used when multiple classes with the same name exist in the discussed
       API or package, or when specifying the containing package is otherwise
       important (for example: “the javax.net.ssl.SSLSocketFactory class”). When
       referenced in the text, function and method names are shown with paren-
       theses, but their parameters are typically omitted for brevity (for example:
       “the getInstance() factory method”). See the relevant reference documenta-
       tion for the full function or method signature.
            Most chapters include diagrams that illustrate the architecture or struc-
       ture of the discussed security subsystem or component. All diagrams follow
       an informal “boxes and arrows” style and do not conform strictly to a par-
       ticular format. That said, most diagrams borrow ideas from UML class and
       deployment diagrams, and boxes typically represent classes or objects, while
       arrows represent dependency or communication paths.

                                                                         Introduction   xxv

.
