                                       3
                   P a c k a ge M a n a ge m ent

       In this chapter, we take an in-depth look at Android
       package management. We begin with a description
       of Android’s package format and code signing imple-
       mentation, and then detail the APK install process.
       Next, we explore Android’s support for encrypted
       APKs and secure application containers, which are used to implement a
       form of DRM for paid applications. Finally, we describe Android’s pack-
       age verification mechanism and its most widely used implementation: the
       Google Play application verification service.

Android Application Package Format
       Android applications are distributed and installed in the form of application
       package (APK) files, which are usually referred to as APK files. APK files are
       container files that include both application code and resources, as well as
       the application manifest file. They can also include a code signature. The

                 APK format is an extension of the Java JAR format,1 which in turn is an exten-
                 sion of the popular ZIP file format. APK files typically have the .apk extension
                 and are associated with the application/vnd.android.package-archive MIME type.
                     Because APK files are simply ZIP files, you can easily examine their con-
                 tents by extracting them with any compression utility that supports the ZIP
                 format. Listing 3-1 shows the contents of a typical APK file after it has been
                 extracted.

                 apk/
                 |-- AndroidManifest.xmlu
                 |-- classes.dexv
                 |-- resources.arscw
                 |-- assets/x
                 |-- lib/y
                 |    |-- armeabi/
                 |    |   `-- libapp.so
                 |    `-- armeabi-v7a/
                 |        `-- libapp.so
                 |-- META-INF/z
                 |    |-- CERT.RSA
                 |    |-- CERT.SF
                 |    `-- MANIFEST.MF
                 `-- res/{
                      |-- anim/
                      |-- color/
                      |-- drawable/
                      |-- layout/
                      |-- menu/
                      |-- raw/
                      `-- xml/

Listing 3-1: Contents of a typical APK file

                      Every APK file includes an AndroidManifest.xml file u which declares the
                 application’s package name, version, components, and other metadata. The
                 classes.dex file v contains the executable code of the application and is in
                 the native DEX format of the Dalvik VM. The resources.arsc w packages all
                 of the application’s compiled resources such as strings and styles. The assets
                 directory x is used to bundle raw asset files with the application, such as
                 fonts or music files.
                      Applications that take advantage of native libraries via JNI contain a lib
                 directory y, with subdirectories for each supported platform architecture.
                 Resources that are directly referenced from Android code, either directly
                 using the android.content.res.Resources class or indirectly via higher-level
                 APIs, are stored in the res directory {, with separate directories for each
                 resource type (animations, images, menu definitions, and so on). Like JAR
                 files, APK files also contain a META-INF directory z, which hosts the pack-
                 age manifest file and code signatures. We’ll describe the contents of this
                 directory in the next section.

                 1. Oracle, JAR File Specification, http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/jar/jar.html

52   Chapter 3

Code Signing
       As we learned in Chapter 2, Android uses APK code signing, in particular
       the APK signing certificate, in order to control which applications can be
       granted permission with the signature protection level. The APK signing
       certificate is also used for various checks during the application installa-
       tion process, so before we get into details about APK installation, we should
       become more familiar with code signing in Android. This section provides
       some details about Java code signing in general and highlights the differ-
       ences with Android’s implementation.
            Let’s start with a few words about code signing in general. Why would
       anyone want to sign code? For the usual reasons: integrity and authenticity.
       Before executing any third-party program, you want to make sure that it
       hasn’t been tampered with (integrity) and that it was actually created by the
       entity that it claims to come from (authenticity). These features are usually
       implemented by a digital signature scheme, which guarantees that only the
       entity owning the signing key can produce a valid code signature.
            The signature verification process verifies both that the code has not
       been tampered with and that the signature was produced with the expected
       key. But one problem that code signing doesn’t solve directly is whether the
       code signer (software publisher) can be trusted. The usual way to estab-
       lish trust is to require that the code signer holds a digital certificate and
       attaches it to the signed code. Verifiers decide whether to trust the certifi-
       cate based on a trust model (such as PKI or web of trust) or on a case-by-
       case basis.
            Another problem that code signing does not even attempt to solve is
       whether the signed code is safe to run. As Flame2 and other code-signed
       malware have demonstrated, even code that appears to have been signed
       by a trusted third party might not be safe.

       Java Code Signing
       Java code signing is performed at the JAR file level. It reuses and extends
       JAR manifest files in order to add a code signature to the JAR archive. The
       main JAR manifest file (MANIFEST.MF) has entries with the filename and
       digest value of each file in the archive. For example, Listing 3-2 shows the
       start of the JAR manifest file of a typical APK file. (We’ll use APKs instead
       of regular JARs for all examples in this section.)

       Manifest-Version: 1.0
       Created-By: 1.0 (Android)

       Name: res/drawable-xhdpi/ic_launcher.png
       SHA1-Digest: K/0Rd/lt0qSlgDD/9DY7aCNlBvU=

       2. Microsoft Corporation, Flame malware collision attack explained, http://blogs.technet.com/b/srd/
       archive/2012/06/06/more-information-about-the-digital-certificates-used-to-sign-the-flame-malware.aspx

                                                                                    Package Management   53

                 Name: res/menu/main.xml
                 SHA1-Digest: kG8WDil9ur0f+F2AxgcSSKDhjn0=

                 Name: ...

Listing 3-2: JAR manifest file excerpt

                 Implementation
                 Java code signing is implemented by adding another manifest file called a
                 signature file (with extension .SF), which contains the data to be signed, and
                 a digital signature over it. The digital signature is called a signature block file
                 and is stored in the archive as a binary file with one of the .RSA, .DSA, or
                 .EC extensions, depending on the signature algorithm used. As shown in
                 Listing 3-3, the signature file is very similar to the manifest.

                 Signature-Version: 1.0
                 SHA1-Digest-Manifest-Main-Attributes: ZKXxNW/3Rg7JA1r0+RlbJIP6IMA=
                 Created-By: 1.7.0_51 (Sun Microsystems Inc.)
                 SHA1-Digest-Manifest: zb0XjEhVBxE0z2ZC+B4OW25WBxo=u

                 Name: res/drawable-xhdpi/ic_launcher.png
                 SHA1-Digest: jTeE2Y5L3uBdQ2g40PB2n72L3dE=v

                 Name: res/menu/main.xml
                 SHA1-Digest: kSQDLtTE07cLhTH/cY54UjbbNBo=w

                 Name: ...

Listing 3-3: JAR signature file excerpt

                      The signature file contains the digest of the whole manifest file (SHA1-
                 Digest-Manifest u), as well as digests for each entry in MANIFEST.MF (v
                 and w). SHA-1 was the default digest algorithm until Java 6, but Java 7 and
                 later can generate file and manifest digests using the SHA-256 and SHA-512
                 hash algorithms, in which case the digest attributes become SHA-256-Digest
                 and SHA-512-Digest, respectively. Since version 4.3, Android supports SHA-256
                 and SHA-512 digests.
                      The digests in the signature file can easily be verified by using the fol-
                 lowing OpenSSL commands, as shown in Listing 3-4.

                 $ openssl sha1 -binary MANIFEST.MF |openssl base64u
                 zb0XjEhVBxE0z2ZC+B4OW25WBxo=
                 $ echo -en "Name: res/drawable-xhdpi/ic_launcher.png\r\nSHA1-Digest: \
                 K/0Rd/lt0qSlgDD/9DY7aCNlBvU=\r\n\r\n"|openssl sha1 -binary |openssl base64v
                 jTeE2Y5L3uBdQ2g40PB2n72L3dE=

Listing 3-4: Verifying JAR signature file digests using OpenSSL

                    The first command u takes the SHA-1 digest of the entire manifest file
                 and encodes it to Base64 to produce the SHA1-Digest-Manifest value. The

54   Chapter 3

                second command v simulates the way the digest of a single manifest entry
                is calculated. It also demonstrates the attribute canonicalization format
                required by the JAR specification.
                     The actual digital signature is in binary PKCS#73 (or more generally,
                CMS 4) format and includes the signature value and signing certificate.
                Signature block files produced using the RSA algorithm are saved with the
                extension .RSA, and those generated with DSA or EC keys are saved with
                .DSA or .EC extensions. Multiple signatures can also be performed, resulting
                in multiple .SF and .RSA/DSA/EC files in the JAR file’s META-INF directory.
                     The CMS format is rather involved, allowing for signing and encryp-
                tion, both with different algorithms and parameters. It’s also extensible via
                custom signed or unsigned attributes. A thorough discussion is beyond the
                scope of this chapter (see RFC 5652 for details about CMS), but as used
                for JAR signing, a CMS structure basically contains the digest algorithm,
                signing certificate, and signature value. The CMS specifications allows for
                including signed data in the SignedData CMS structure (a format variation
                called attached signature), but JAR signatures don’t include it. When the
                signed data is not included in the CMS structure, the signature is called a
                detached signature and verifiers need to have a copy of the original signed
                data in order to verify it. Listing 3-5 shows an RSA signature block file
                parsed into ASN.1, 5 with the certificate details trimmed:

$ openssl asn1parse -i -inform DER -in CERT.RSA
    0:d=0 hl=4 l= 888 cons: SEQUENCE
    4:d=1 hl=2 l=    9 prim: OBJECT             :pkcs7-signedDatau
   15:d=1 hl=4 l= 873 cons: cont [ 0 ]
   19:d=2 hl=4 l= 869 cons:    SEQUENCE
   23:d=3 hl=2 l=    1 prim:    INTEGER           :01v
   26:d=3 hl=2 l= 11 cons:      SET
   28:d=4 hl=2 l=    9 cons:     SEQUENCE
   30:d=5 hl=2 l=    5 prim:      OBJECT            :sha1w
   37:d=5 hl=2 l=    0 prim:      NULL
   39:d=3 hl=2 l= 11 cons:      SEQUENCE
   41:d=4 hl=2 l=    9 prim:     OBJECT            :pkcs7-datax
   52:d=3 hl=4 l= 607 cons:     cont [ 0 ]y
   56:d=4 hl=4 l= 603 cons:      SEQUENCE
   60:d=5 hl=4 l= 452 cons:       SEQUENCE
   64:d=6 hl=2 l=    3 cons:        cont [ 0 ]
   66:d=7 hl=2 l=    1 prim:         INTEGER          :02
   69:d=6 hl=2 l=    1 prim:        INTEGER          :04
   72:d=6 hl=2 l= 13 cons:          SEQUENCE
   74:d=7 hl=2 l=    9 prim:         OBJECT           :sha1WithRSAEncryption
   85:d=7 hl=2 l=    0 prim:         NULL
   87:d=6 hl=2 l= 56 cons:          SEQUENCE

                3. EMC RSA Laboratories, PKCS #7: Cryptographic Message Syntax Standard, http://www.emc.com/
                emc-plus/rsa-labs/standards-initiatives/pkcs-7-cryptographic-message-syntax-standar.htm
                4. Housley, RFC 5652 – Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS), http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5652
                5. Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) is a standard notation that describes rules and
                structures for encoding data in telecommunications and computer networking. It’s used
                extensively in cryptography standards to define the structure of cryptographic objects.

                                                                                          Package Management   55

   89:d=7 hl=2 l= 11 cons:                 SET
   91:d=8 hl=2 l=   9 cons:                 SEQUENCE
   93:d=9 hl=2 l=   3 prim:                  OBJECT            :countryName
   98:d=9 hl=2 l=   2 prim:                  PRINTABLESTRING   :JP
  --snip--
  735:d=5 hl=2 l=   9 cons:              SEQUENCE
  737:d=6 hl=2 l=   5 prim:               OBJECT            :sha1z
  744:d=6 hl=2 l=   0 prim:               NULL
  746:d=5 hl=2 l= 13 cons:               SEQUENCE
  748:d=6 hl=2 l=   9 prim:               OBJECT            :rsaEncryption{
  759:d=6 hl=2 l=   0 prim:               NULL
  761:d=5 hl=3 l= 128 prim:              OCTET STRING      [HEX DUMP]:892744D30DCEDF74933007...|

Listing 3-5: Contents of a JAR file signature block

                         The signature block contains an object identifier u that describes the
                    type of data (ASN.1 object) that follows: SignedData, and the data itself. The
                    included SignedData object contains a version v (1); a set of hash algorithm
                    identifiers used w (only one for a single signer, SHA-1 in this example); the
                    type of data that was signed x (pkcs7-data, which simply means “arbitrary
                    binary data”); the set of signing certificates y; and one or more (one for
                    each signer) SignerInfo structures that encapsulates the signature value (not
                    shown in full in Listing 3-5). SignerInfo contains a version; a SignerIdentifier
                    object, which typically contains the DN of the certificate issuer and the
                    certificate serial number (not shown); the digest algorithm used z (SHA-1,
                    included in w); the digest encryption algorithm used to generate the signa-
                    ture value {; and the encrypted digest (signature value) itself |.
                         The most important elements of the SignedData structure, with regard to
                    JAR and APK signatures, are the set of signing certificates y and the signa-
                    ture value | (or values, when signed by multiple signers).
                         If we extract the contents of a JAR file, we can use the OpenSSL smime
                    command to verify its signature by specifying the signature file as the con-
                    tent or signed data. The smime command prints the signed data and the veri-
                    fication result as shown in Listing 3-6:

$ openssl smime -verify -in CERT.RSA -inform DER -content CERT.SF signing-cert.pem
Signature-Version: 1.0
SHA1-Digest-Manifest-Main-Attributes: ZKXxNW/3Rg7JA1r0+RlbJIP6IMA=
Created-By: 1.7.0_51 (Sun Microsystems Inc.)
SHA1-Digest-Manifest: zb0XjEhVBxE0z2ZC+B4OW25WBxo=

Name: res/drawable-xhdpi/ic_launcher.png
SHA1-Digest: jTeE2Y5L3uBdQ2g40PB2n72L3dE=

--snip--
Verification successful

Listing 3-6: Verifying a JAR file signature block

56   Chapter 3

                   JAR File Signing
                   The official JDK tools for JAR signing and verification are the jarsigner and
                   keytool commands. Since Java 5.0 jarsigner also supports timestamping the
                   signature by a Timestamping Authority (TSA), which can be quite useful
                   when you need to ascertain whether a signature was produced before or
                   after the signing certificate expired. However, this feature is not widely
                   used and is not supported on Android.
                        A JAR file is signed using the jarsigner command by specifying a key-
                   store file (see Chapter 5) together with the alias of the key to use for sign-
                   ing (the first eight characters of the alias become the base name for the
                   signature block file, unless the -sigfile option is specified) and optionally
                   a signature algorithm. See u in Listing 3-7 for an example invocation of
                   jarsigner.

        N ote      Since Java 7, the default algorithm has changed to SHA256withRSA, so you need
                   to specify it explicitly if you want to use SHA-1 for backward compatibility. SHA-256-
                   and SHA-512-based signatures have been supported since Android 4.3.

$ jarsigner -keystore debug.keystore -sigalg SHA1withRSA test.apk androiddebugkeyu
$ jarsigner -keystore debug.keystore -verify -verbose -certs test.apkv
--snip--

smk       965 Sat Mar 08 23:55:34 JST 2014 res/drawable-xxhdpi/ic_launcher.png

      X.509, CN=Android Debug, O=Android, C=US (androiddebugkey)w
      [certificate is valid from 6/18/11 7:31 PM to 6/10/41 7:31 PM]

smk   458072 Sun Mar 09 01:16:18 JST 2013 classes.dex

      X.509, CN=Android Debug, O=Android, C=US (androiddebugkey)x
      [certificate is valid from 6/18/11 7:31 PM to 6/10/41 7:31 PM]

          903 Sun Mar 09 01:16:18 JST 2014 META-INF/MANIFEST.MF
          956 Sun Mar 09 01:16:18 JST 2014 META-INF/CERT.SF
          776 Sun Mar 09 01:16:18 JST 2014 META-INF/CERT.RSA

  s = signature was verified
  m = entry is listed in manifest
  k = at least one certificate was found in keystore
  i = at least one certificate was found in identity scope

jar verified.

Listing 3-7: Signing an APK file and verifying the signature using the jarsigner command

                       The jarsigner tool can use all keystore types supported by the platform,
                   as well as keystores that are not natively supported and that require a dedi-
                   cated JCA provider, such as those backed by a smart card, HSM, or another
                   hardware device. The type of store to be used for signing is specified with

                                                                                      Package Management   57

                 the -storetype option, and the provider name and class with the -providerName
                 and -providerClass options. Newer versions of the Android-specific signapk
                 tool (discussed in “Android Code Signing Tools” on page 60), also sup-
                 port the -providerClass option.

                 JAR File Verification
                 JAR file verification is performed using the jarsigner command by specify-
                 ing the -verify option. The second jarsigner command at v in Listing 3-7
                 first verifies the signature block and signing certificate, ensuring that the
                 signature file has not been tampered with. Next it verifies that each digest
                 in the signature file (CERT.SF ) matches its corresponding section in the
                 manifest file (MANIFEST.MF ). (The number of entries in the signature file
                 does not have to match those in the manifest file. Files can be added to a
                 signed JAR without invalidating its signature: as long as none of the origi-
                 nal files have been changed, verification succeeds.)
                      Finally, jarsigner reads each manifest entry and checks that the file
                 digest matches the actual file contents. If a keystore has been specified
                 with the -keystore option (as in our example), jarsigner also checks to see
                 whether the signing certificate is present in the specified keystore. As of
                 Java 7, there is a new -strict option that enables additional certificate vali-
                 dations, including a time validity check and certificate chain verification.
                 Validation errors are treated as warnings and are reflected in the exit code
                 of the jarsigner command.

                 Viewing or Extracting Signer Information
                 As you can see in Listing 3-7, by default, jarsigner prints certificate details
                 for each entry (w and x) even though they are the same for all entries.
                 A slightly better way to view signer info when using Java 7 is to specify the
                 -verbose:summary or -verbose:grouped options, or alternatively use the keytool
                 command, as shown in Listing 3-8.

                 $ keytool -list -printcert -jarfile test.apk
                 Signer #1:
                 Signature:
                 Owner: CN=Android Debug, O=Android, C=US
                 Issuer: CN=Android Debug, O=Android, C=US
                 Serial number: 4dfc7e9a
                 Valid from: Sat Jun 18 19:31:54 JST 2011 until: Mon Jun 10 19:31:54 JST 2041
                 Certificate fingerprints:
                          MD5: E8:93:6E:43:99:61:C8:37:E1:30:36:14:CF:71:C2:32
                          SHA1: 08:53:74:41:50:26:07:E7:8F:A5:5F:56:4B:11:62:52:06:54:83:BE
                          Signature algorithm name: SHA1withRSA
                          Version: 3

Listing 3-8: Viewing APK signer information using the keytool command

                      Once you have found the signature block filename (by listing the archive
                 contents for example), you can use OpenSSL with the unzip command to eas-
                 ily extract the signing certificate to a file, as shown in Listing 3-9. (If the

58   Chapter 3

                   SignedData structure includes more than one certificate, all certificates will
                   be extracted. In that case, you will need to parse the SignedInfo structure to
                   find the identifier of the actual signing certificate.)

$ unzip -q -c test.apk META-INF/CERT.RSA|openssl pkcs7 -inform DER -print_certs -out cert.pem

Listing 3-9: Extracting the APK signing certificate using the unzip and OpenSSL pkcs7 commands

                   Android Code Signing
                   Because Android code signing is based on Java JAR signing, it uses public
                   key cryptography and X.509 certificates like many code signing schemes,
                   but that’s where the similarities end.
                        In practically all other platforms that use code signing (such as Java
                   ME and Windows Phone), code signing certificates must be issued by a CA
                   that the platform trusts. While there are many CAs that issue code signing
                   certificates, it can prove quite difficult to obtain a certificate that is trusted
                   by all targeted devices. Android solves this problem quite simply: it doesn’t
                   care about the contents or signer of the signing certificate. Thus you do not
                   need to have it issued by a CA, and virtually all code signing certificates used
                   in Android are self-signed. Additionally, you don’t need to assert your iden-
                   tity in any way: you can use pretty much anything as the subject name. (The
                   Google Play Store does have a few checks to weed out some common names,
                   but not the Android OS itself.) Android treats signing certificates as binary
                   blobs, and the fact that they are in X.509 format is merely a consequence of
                   using the JAR format.
                        Android doesn’t validate certificates in the PKI sense (see Chapter 6).
                   In fact, if a certificate is not self-signed, the signing CA’s certificate does not
                   have to be present or trusted; Android will even happily install apps with an
                   expired signing certificate. If you are coming from a traditional PKI back-
                   ground, this may sound like heresy, but keep in mind that Android does
                   not use PKI for code signing, it only uses the same certificate and signature
                   formats.
                        Another difference between Android and “standard” JAR signing is
                   that all APK entries must be signed by the same set of certificates. The JAR
                   file format allows each file to be signed by a different signer and permits
                   unsigned entries. This makes sense in the Java sandboxing and access con-
                   trol mechanism, which was originally designed for applets, because that
                   model defines a code source as a combination of a signer certificate and code
                   origin URL. However, Android assigns signers per-APK (usually only one,
                   but multiple signers are supported) and does not allow different signers for
                   different APK file entries.
                        Android’s code signing model, coupled with the poor interface of the
                   java.util.jar.JarFile class, which is not a good abstraction for the complexi-
                   ties of the underlying CMS signature format, makes it rather difficult to
                   properly verify the signature of APK files. While Android manages to both
                   verify APK integrity and ensure that all APK file entries have been signed by

                                                                                     Package Management   59

                  the same set of certificates by adding additional signing certificate checks
                  to its package parsing routines, it is evident that the JAR file format was not
                  the best choice for Android code signing.

                  Android Code Signing Tools
                  As the examples in the “Java Code Signing” section showed, you can use the
                  regular JDK code signing tools to sign or verify APKs. In addition to these
                  tools, the AOSP build/ directory contains an Android-specific tool called
                  signapk. This tool performs pretty much the same task as jarsigner in signing
                  mode, with a few notable differences. For one, while jarsigner requires that
                  keys be stored in a compatible keystore file, signapk takes a separate signing
                  key (in DER-encoded PKCS#8 format6) and certificate file (in DER-encoded
                  X.509 format) as input. The advantage of the PKCS#8 format, which is the
                  standard key encoding format in Java, is that it includes an explicit algorithm
                  identifier that describes the type of the encoded private key. The encoded
                  private key might include key material, possibly encrypted, or it might con-
                  tain only a reference, such as a key ID, to a key stored in a hardware device.
                       As of Android 4.4, the signapk can only produce signatures with the
                  SHA1withRSA or SHA256withRSA (added to the platform in Android 4.3)
                  mechanisms. As of this writing, the version of signapk found in AOSP’s mas-
                  ter branch has been extended to support ECDSA signatures.
                       While raw private keys in PKCS#8 format are somewhat hard to come
                  by, you can easily generate a test key pair and a self-signed certificate using
                  the make_key script found in development/tools/. If you have existing OpenSSL
                  keys, you’ll have to convert them to PKCS#8 format first, using something
                  like OpenSSL’s pkcs8 command as shown in Listing 3-10:

$ echo "keypwd"|openssl pkcs8 -in mykey.pem -topk8 -outform DER -out mykey.pk8 -passout stdin

Listing 3-10: Converting an OpenSSL key to PKCS#8 format

                     Once you have the needed keys, you can sign an APK using signapk as
                  shown in Listing 3-11.

                  $ java -jar signapk.jar cert.cer key.pk8 test.apk test-signed.apk

Listing 3-11: Signing an APK using the signapk tool

                  OTA File Code Signing
                  Besides its default APK signing mode, the signapk tool also has a “sign whole
                  file” mode that can be enabled with the -w option. When in this mode, in
                  addition to signing each individual JAR entry, the tool generates a signature
                  over the whole archive as well. This mode is not supported by jarsigner and
                  is specific to Android.

                  6. EMC RSA Laboratories, PKCS #8: Private-Key Information Syntax Standard, http://www.emc.com/
                  emc-plus/rsa-labs/standards-initiatives/pkcs-8-private-key-information-syntax-stand.htm

60   Chapter 3

             Why sign the whole archive when each file is already signed? In order
        to support over-the-air (OTA) updates. OTA packages are ZIP files in a for-
        mat similar to JAR files that contain updated files and the scripts to apply
        them. The packages include a META-INF/ directory, manifests, a signature
        block, and a few extra files, including META-INF/com/android/otacert, which
        contains the update signing certificate (in PEM format). Before booting
        into recovery to apply updates, Android verifies the package signature
        and then checks to see if the signing certificate is trusted to sign updates.
        OTA-trusted certificates are separate from the “regular” system trust store
        (see Chapter 6), and reside in a ZIP file that is usually stored as /system/
        etc/security/otacerts.zip. On a production device, this file typically contains
        a single file usually named releasekey.x509.pem. After the device reboots, the
        recovery OS verifies the OTA package signature once again before apply-
        ing it in order to make sure that the OTA file has not been tampered with
        in the meantime.
             If OTA files are like JAR files, and JAR files don’t support whole-file
        signatures, where does the signature go? The Android signapk tool slightly
        abuses the ZIP format by adding a null-terminated string comment in the
        ZIP comment section, followed by the binary signature block and a 6-byte
        final record containing the signature offset and the size of the entire com-
        ment section. Adding the offset record to the end of the file makes it easy to
        verify the package by first reading and verifying the signature block from the
        end of the file, and only reading the rest of the file (which could be in the
        hundreds of megabytes) if the signature checks out.

APK Install Process
        There are a few ways to install Android applications:

        •   Via an application store client (such as the Google Play Store). This is
            how most users install applications.
        •   Directly on the device by opening downloaded app files (if the “Unknown
            sources” option in system settings is enabled). This method is commonly
            referred to as sideloading an app.
        •   From a USB-connected computer with the adb install Android SDK com-
            mand which, in turn invokes the pm command line utility with the install
            parameter. This method is used mostly by application developers.
        •   By directly copying an APK file to one of the system application direc-
            tories using the Android shell. Because application directories are not
            accessible on production builds, this method can only be used on
            devices running an engineering (development) build.

             When an APK file is copied directly to one of the application direc-
        tories it is automatically detected and installed by the package manager,
        which watches these directories for changes. In the case of all other install
        methods, the installer application (whether Google Play Store client, default
        system package install activity, pm command, or other) invokes one of the

                                                                   Package Management   61

                 installPackage() methods of the system package manager, which then copies
                 the APK to one of the application directories and installs it. In the following
                 sections, we’ll explore the main steps of the Android package install process,
                 and discuss some of the more complex installation steps like encrypted con-
                 tainer creation and package verification.
                      Android’s package management functionality is distributed across
                 several system components that interact with each other during package
                 installation, as shown in Figure 3-1. Solid arrows in the figure represent
                 dependencies between components, as well as function calls. Dashed
                 arrows point to files or directories that are monitored for changes by a
                 component, but which are not directly modified by that component.

                    PackageInstaller                  pm
                      system app                   command

                                                                  /dev/socket/installd       installd
                                                    Installer                                daemon

                   PackageManager
                                                                 /dev/socket/vold         vold
                                                 MountService
                                                                                         daemon

                                                MediaContainerService

                                                                            userdata partition
                                                                                  packages.xml
                  system partition                                                packages.list
                         framework/                                                 app-private/
                         app/                   AppDirObserver                      app/
                         priv-app/                                                  app-asec/
                                                                                    app-lib/
                         vendor/app/
                                                                                    dalvik-cache/
                                                                                    data/
                                                                                    media/
                                                                                    user/

Figure 3-1: Package management components

                 Location of Application Packages and Data
                 Recall from Chapter 1 that Android distinguishes between system- and user-
                 installed applications. System applications are found on the read-only system
                 partition (bottom left in Figure 3-1) and cannot be changed or uninstalled
                 on production devices. System applications are therefore considered trusted
                 and are given more privileges, and have some signature checks relaxed. Most
                 system applications are found in the /system/app/ directory, while /system/
                 priv-app/ holds privileged apps that can be granted permission with the

62   Chapter 3

signatureOrSystem protection level (as discussed in Chapter 2). The /system/
vendor/app/ directory hosts vendor-specific applications. User-installed
applications live on the read-write userdata partition (shown at the bottom
right in Figure 3-1) and can be uninstalled or replaced at any time. Most
user-installed applications are installed in the /data/app/ directory.
     Data directories for both system and user-installed applications are cre-
ated on the userdata partition under the /data/data/ directory. The userdata
partition also hosts the optimized DEX files for user-installed applications
(in /data/dalvik-cache/), the system package database (in /data/system/packages
.xml), and other system databases and settings files. (We’ll discuss the rest
of the userdata partition directories shown in Figure 3-1 when we cover the
APK install process.)

Active Components
Having established the roles of the userdata and system partitions, let’s intro-
duce the active components that play a role during package installation.

PackageInstaller System Application
This is the default APK file handler. It
provides a basic GUI for package man-
agement and when passed an APK file
URI with the VIEW or INSTALL_ACTION
intent action, it parses the package
and displays an install confirmation
screen showing the permissions the
application requires (see Figure 2-1
on page 25). Installation using the
PackageInstaller application is only
possible if the user has enabled the
Unknown Sources option in the
device’s security settings (see Fig­
ure 3-2). If Unknown Sources is not
enabled, PackageInstaller will show a
dialog informing the user that installa-
tion of apps obtained from unknown
sources is blocked.
      What is considered an “unknown
source”? While the on-screen hint
defines it as “apps from sources other
than the Play Store,” the actual defini-
tion is a bit more broad. When started,
Figure 3-2: Application install security
PackageInstaller retrieves the UID and        settings
package of the app that requested
APK installation and checks to see
if it is a privileged app (installed in

                                                               Package Management   63

                 /system/priv-app/). If the requesting app is unprivileged, it is considered
                 an unknown source. If the Unknown Sources option is selected and the
                 user okays the install dialog, PackageInstaller calls the PackageManagerService,
                 which performs the actual installation. The PackageInstaller GUI is also
                 shown when upgrading side-loaded packages or uninstalling apps from the
                 Apps screen of System Settings.

                 pm command
                 The pm command (introduced in Chapter 2) provides a command-line
                 interface to some of the functions of the system package manager. It can
                 be used to install or uninstall packages when invoked as pm install or pm
                 uninstall from the Android shell, respectively. Additionally, the Android
                 Debug Bridge (ADB) client provides the adb install/uninstall shortcuts.
                      Unlike the PackageInstaller, pm install does not depend on the Unknown
                 Sources system option and does not display a GUI, and it provides various
                 useful options for testing package installation that cannot be specified
                 via the PackageInstaller GUI. To start the install process, it calls the same
                 PackageManager API as the GUI installer.

                 PackageManagerService
                 The PackageManagerService (PackageManager in Figure 3-1) is the central object
                 in Android’s package management infrastructure. It is responsible for pars-
                 ing APK files, starting the application install, upgrading and uninstalling
                 packages, maintaining the package database, and managing permissions.
                      The PackageManagerService also provides a number of installPackage()
                 methods that can perform package installation with various options. The
                 most general of these is the installPackageWithVerificationAndEncryption(),
                 which allows for the installation of an encrypted APK file, and package
                 verification by a verification agent. (We’ll discuss app encryption and veri-
                 fication later in “Installing Encrypted APKs” on page 76 and “Package
                 Verification” on page 83.)
        NOTE     The android.content.pm.PackageManager Android SDK facade class exposes a subset
                 of the functionality of the PackageManagerService to third-party applications.

                 Installer class
                 While the PackageManagerService is one of the most privileged Android system
                 services, it still runs inside the system server process (with the system UID)
                 and lacks root privileges. However, because creating, deleting, and chang-
                 ing the ownership of application directories requires superuser capabilities,
                 the PackageManagerService delegates those operations to the installd daemon
                 (discussed next). The Installer class connects to the installd daemon through
                 the /dev/socket/installd Unix domain socket and encapsulates the installd
                 command-oriented protocol.

64   Chapter 3

installd Daemon
The installd daemon is a native daemon with elevated privileges that provides
application and user directory management functionality (for multi-user
devices) to the system package manager. It is also used to start the dexopt
command, which generates optimized DEX files for newly installed packages.
     The installd daemon is accessed via the installd local socket, which is only
accessible to processes running as the system UID. The installd daemon does
not execute as root (although it used to do so in earlier Android versions),
but instead takes advantage of the CAP_DAC_OVERRIDE and CAP_CHOWN Linux capa-
        7
bilities in order to be able to set the owner and group UID of the application
directories and files it creates to those of the owning application.

MountService
The MountService is responsible for mounting detachable external storage
such as SD cards, as well as opaque binary blob (OBB) files, which are used as
expansion files for applications. It is also used to kick off device encryption
(see Chapter 10) and to change the encryption password.
     MountService also manages secure containers, which hold applications files
that should not be accessible to non-system applications. Secure containers
are encrypted and used to implement a form of DRM called forward locking
(discussed in “Forward Locking” on page 79 and “Android 4.1 Forward
Locking Implementation” on page 80). Forward locking is used primar-
ily when installing paid applications in order to ensure that their APK files
cannot be easily copied off the device and redistributed.

vold daemon
vold is Android’s volume management daemon. While the MountService
contains most system APIs that deal with volume management, because it
runs as the system user it lacks the privileges required to actually mount and
unmount disk volumes. Those privileged operations are implemented in
the vold daemon, which runs as root.
      vold has a local socket interface which is exposed via the /dev/socket/
vold Unix domain socket that is only accessible to root and members of the
mount group. Because the list of supplementary GIDs of the system_server
process (which hosts MountService) includes mount (GID 1009), MountService
is allowed to access vold’s command socket. Besides mounting and unmount-
ing volumes, vold can also create and format filesystems and manage secure
containers.

MediaContainerService
The MediaContainerService copies APK files to their final install location or to
an encrypted container, and allows the PackageManagerService to access files
on removable storage. APK files obtained from a remote location (either

7. For a discussion of Linux capabilities, see Chapter 39 of Michael Kerrisk’s The Linux
Programming Interface: A Linux and UNIX System Programming Handbook, No Starch Press, 2010.

                                                                     Package Management   65

                 directly or through an application market) are downloaded using Android’s
                 DownloadManager service and the downloaded files are accessed through
                 DownloadManager’s content provider interface. The PackageManager grants tem-
                 porary access to each downloaded APK to the MediaContainerService process.
                 If the APK file is encrypted, MediaContainerService decrypts the file first
                 (as discussed in “Installing an Encrypted APK with Integrity Check” on
                 page 79). If an encrypted container was requested, MediaContainerService
                 delegates encrypted container creation to the MountService and copies the
                 protected part of the APK (both code and assets) into the newly created
                 container. Files that do not need to be protected by a container are copied
                 directly to the filesystem.

                 AppDirObserver
                 An AppDirObserver is a component that monitors an application direc-
                 tory for APK file changes8 and calls the appropriate PackageManagerService
                 method based on the event type. When an APK file is added to the system,
                 AppDirObserver kicks off a package scan which either installs or updates the
                 application. When an APK file is removed, AppDirObserver starts the uninstall
                 process, which removes app directories and the app entry in the system
                 package database.
                      Figure 3-1 shows a single AppDirObserver instance due to space con-
                 straints, but there is a dedicated instance for each watched directory.
                 The directories monitored on the system partition are /system/framework/
                 (which holds the framework resource package framework-res.apk); /system/
                 app/ and /system/priv-app/ (system packages); and the vendor package
                 directory /system/vendor/app/. The directories monitored on the userdata
                 partition are /data/app/ and /data/app-private/ which hosts “old style” (pre-
                 Android 4.1) forward locked APKs and temporary files produced during
                 APK decryption.

                 Installing a Local Package
                 Now that we know what Android components are involved in package installa-
                 tion, we’ll cover the install process, beginning with the simplest case: installing
                 an unencrypted local package without verification and forward locking.

                 Parsing and Verifying the Package
                 Opening a local APK file starts the application/vnd.android.package-archive
                 handler, typically the PackageInstallerActivity from the PackageInstaller system
                 application. PackageInstallerActivity first checks to see if the application that
                 requested the install is trusted (that is, not considered from an “unknown
                 source”). If it is not, and the Settings.Global.INSTALL_NON_MARKET_APPS is false (it

                 8. File monitoring is implemented using Linux’s inotify facility. For more details about inotify,
                 see Chapter 19 of Michael Kerrisk’s The Linux Programming Interface: A Linux and UNIX System
                 Programming Handbook, No Starch Press, 2010.

66   Chapter 3

       is set to true when the Unknown sources checkbox in Figure 3-2 is checked),
       PackageInstaller shows a warning dialog and ends the install process.
             If the installation is allowed, the PackageInstallerActivity parses the APK
       file and collects information from the AndroidManifest.xml file and pack-
       age signature. The integrity of the APK file is verified automatically while
       extracting the signing certificates for each of its entries using the java.util
       .jar.JarFile and related classes. This implementation is necessary because
       the API of the JarFile class lacks any explicit methods to verify the signature
       of the whole file or of a particular entry. (System applications are implicitly
       trusted and only the integrity of the AndroidManifest.xml file is verified when
       parsing their APK files. However, all APK entries are verified for packages
       that are not part of the system image, such as user-installed applications or
       updates for system applications.) The hash value of the AndroidManifest.xml
       file is also calculated as part of APK parsing and passed to subsequent install
       steps, which use it to verify that the APK file was not replaced between the
       time when the user pressed OK in the install dialog and the APK copy pro-
       cess was started.

NOTE   Another noteworthy detail is that while at install time, APK file integrity is verified
       using standard Java library classes, at runtime, the Dalvik virtual machine loads
       APK files using its own native implementation of a ZIP/JAR file parser. Subtle dif-
       ferences in their implementations have been the source of several Android bugs, most
       notably bug #8219321 (commonly known as the Android Master Key) which allows
       a signed APK file to be modified and still considered valid without resigning. A
       StrictJarFile class, which uses the same ZIP file parsing implementation as Dalvik,
       has been added in AOSP’s master branch in order to address this. StrictJarFile
       is used by the system package manager when parsing APK files, ensuring that both
       Dalvik and the package manager parse APK files in the same way. This new unified
       implementation should be incorporated in future Android versions.

       Accepting Permissions and Starting the Install Process
       Once the APK has been parsed, PackageInstallerActivity displays infor-
       mation about the application and the permissions it requires in a dialog
       similar to the one shown in Figure 2-1 (see page 25). If the user OK’s the
       install, PackageInstallerActivity forwards the APK file and its manifest digest,
       along with install metadata such as the referrer URL, the installer package
       name, and originating UID to the InstallAppProgress activity, which starts
       the actual package install process. InstallAppProgress then passes the APK
       URI and install metadata to the installPackageWithVerificationAndEncryption()
       method of the PackageManagerService, starting the install process. It then waits
       for the process to complete and handles any errors.
            The install method first verifies that the caller has the INSTALL_PACKAGES
       permission, which has a protection-level signature and is reserved for system
       applications. On multi-user devices, the method also verifies whether the
       calling user is allowed to install applications. Next, it determines the pre-
       ferred install location, which is either internal or external storage.

                                                                         Package Management   67

                 Copying to the Application Directory
                 If the APK file is not encrypted and no verification is required, the next
                 step is to copy it to the application directory (/data/app/). To copy the file,
                 the PackageManagerService first creates a temporary file in the application
                 directory (with the vmdl prefix and .tmp extension) and then delegates
                 copying to the MediaContainerService. The file is not copied directly because
                 it might need to be decrypted, or an encrypted container created for it if it
                 will be forward locked. Because the MediaContainerServices encapsulates
                 these tasks, the PackageManagerService does not need to be concerned with
                 the underlying implementation.
                      When the APK file is successfully copied, any native libraries it contains
                 are extracted to a dedicated app directory under the system’s native library
                 directory (/data/app-lib/). Next, the temporary APK file and the library direc-
                 tory are renamed to their final names, which are based on the package name,
                 such as com.example.app-1.apk for the APK and /data/app-lib/com.example.app-1
                 for the library directory. Finally, the APK file permissions are set to 0644 and
                 its SELinux context is set (see Chapter 12).

        NOTE     By default, APK files are world-readable and any other application can access them.
                 This facilitates sharing public app resources and allows the development of third-
                 party launchers and other applications that need to show a list of all installed packages.
                 However, those default permissions also allow anyone to extract APK files from a
                 device, which is problematic for paid applications distributed via an application
                 market. APK file forward locking provides a way for APK resources to remain public,
                 while limiting access to code and assets.

                 The Package Scan
                 The next step in the install process is to trigger a package scan by calling
                 the scanPackageLI() method of PackageManagerService. (If the install process
                 stops before scanning the new APK file, it will eventually be picked up by
                 the AppDirObserver instance which monitors the /data/app/ directory and
                 also triggers a package scan.)
                     In the case of a new install, the package manager first creates a new
                 PackageSettings structure that contains the package name, code path, a
                 separate resource path if the package is forward-locked, and a native library
                 path. It then assigns a UID to the new package and stores it in the settings
                 structure. Once the new app has a UID, its data directory can be created.

                 Creating Data Directories
                 Because the PackageManagerService does not have enough privileges to cre-
                 ate and set ownership of app directories, it delegates directory creation
                 to the installd daemon by sending it the install command which takes the
                 package name, UID, GID, and seinfo tag (used by SELinux) as parameters.
                 The installd daemon creates the package data directory (for example,

68   Chapter 3

                    /data/data/com.example.app/ when installing the com.example.app package),
                    shared native library directory (/data/app-lib/com.example.app/), and local
                    library directory (/data/data/com.example.app/lib/). It then sets the package
                    directory permissions to 0751 and creates symbolic links for the app’s native
                    libraries (if any) in the local library directory. Finally, it sets the SELinux
                    context of the package directory and changes its owner to the UID and GID
                    assigned to the app.
                        If the system has more than one user, the next step is to create data
                    directories for each user by sending the mkuserdata command to installd
                    (see Chapter 4). When all the necessary directories are created, control
                    returns to the PackageManagerService, which extracts any native libraries
                    to the application’s native library directory and creates symbolic links in
                    /data/data/com.example.app/lib/.

                    Generating Optimized DEX
                    The next step is to generate optimized DEX for the application’s code.
                    This operation is also delegated to installd by sending it the dexopt com-
                    mand. The installd daemon forks a dexopt process, which creates the opti-
                    mized DEX file in the /data/dalivk-cache/ directory. (The optimization
                    process is also referred to as “sharpening.”)

        NOTE        If the device is using the experimental Android Runtime (ART) introduced in ver-
                    sion 4.4 instead of generating optimized DEX, installd generates native code using
                    the dex2oat command.

                    File and Directory Structure
                    When all of the above processes have completed, the application’s files and
                    directories might look something like Listing 3-12. (Timestamps and file
                    sizes have been omitted.)

-rw-r--r-- system      system ... /data/app/com.example.app-1.apku
-rwxr-xr-x system      system ... /data/app-lib/com.example.app-1/libapp.sov
-rw-r--r-- system      all_a215 ... /data/dalvik-cache/data@app@com.example.app-1.apk@classes.dexw
drwxr-x--x u0_a215     u0_a215 ... /data/data/com.example.appx
drwxrwx--x u0_a215     u0_a215 ... /data/data/com.example.app/databasesy
drwxrwx--x u0_a215     u0_a215 ... /data/data/com.example.app/files
lrwxrwxrwx install     install ... /data/data/com.example.app/lib -> /data/app-lib/com.example.app-1z
drwxrwx--x u0_a215     u0_a215 ... /data/data/com.example.app/shared_prefs

Listing 3-12: Files and directories created after installing an application

                         Here, u is the APK file and v is the extracted native library file. Both
                    files are owned by system and are world readable. The file at w is the opti-
                    mized DEX file for the application’s code. Its owner is set to system and its
                    group is set to the special all_a215 group, which includes all device users

                                                                                   Package Management   69

                   that have installed the app. This allows all users to share the same optimized
                   DEX file, thus avoiding the need to create a copy for each user, which could
                   take up too much disk space on a multi-user device. The application’s data
                   directory x and its subdirectories (such as databases/ y) are owned by the
                   dedicated Linux user created by combining the ID of the device user that
                   installed the application (u0, the sole user on single-user devices) and the
                   app ID (a215) to produce u0_a215. (App data directories are not read-
                   able or writable by other users in accordance with Android’s sandboxing
                   security model. The lib/ directory z is merely a symbolic link to the app’s
                   shared library directory in /data/app-lib/.)

                   Adding the New Package to packages.xml
                   The next step is to add the package to the system package database. A
                   new package entry that looks like Listing 3-13 is generated and added to
                   packages.xml.

<package name="com.google.android.apps.chrometophone"
         codePath="/data/app/com.google.android.apps.chrometophone-2.apk"
         nativeLibraryPath="/data/app-lib/com.google.android.apps.chrometophone-2"
         flags="572996"
         ft="142dfa0e588"
         it="142cbeac305"
         ut="142dfa0e8d7"
         version="16"
         userId="10088"
         installer="com.android.vending">u
    <sigs count="1">
        <cert index="7" key="30820252..." />
    </sigs>v
    <perms>
        <item name="android.permission.USE_CREDENTIALS" />
        <item name="com.google.android.apps.chrometophone.permission.C2D_MESSAGE" />
        <item name="android.permission.GET_ACCOUNTS" />
        <item name="android.permission.INTERNET" />
        <item name="android.permission.WAKE_LOCK" />
        <item name="com.google.android.c2dm.permission.RECEIVE" />
    </perms>w
    <signing-keyset identifier="2" />x
</package>

Listing 3-13: Package database entry for a newly installed application

                        Here, the <sigs> v element holds the DER-encoded values of the pack-
                   age signing certificates (typically only one) in hexadecimal string format, or
                   a reference to the first occurrence of the certificate in the case of multiple
                   apps signed by the same key and certificate. The <perms> w elements holds
                   the permissions granted to the application, as described in Chapter 2.
                        The <signing-keyset> x element is new in Android 4.4 and holds a
                   reference to the signing key set of the application, which contains all pub-
                   lic keys (but not certificates) that have signed files inside the APK. The

70   Chapter 3

PackageManagerService collects and stores signing keys for all applications in a
global <keyset-settings> element, but key sets are not checked or otherwise
used as of Android 4.4.

Package Attributes
The root element <package> u (shown in Listing 3-13) holds the core attri-
butes of each package, such as install location and version. The main pack-
age attributes are listed in Table 3-1. The information in each package
entry can be obtained via the getPackageInfo(String packageName, int flags)
method of the android.content.pm.PackageManager SDK class, which should
return a PackageInfo instance that encapsulates the attributes available in
each packages.xml entry, as well as information about components, permis-
sions, and features defined in the application’s manifest.

Table 3-1: Package Attributes

 Attribute Name         Description
 name                   The package name.
 codePath               Full path to the location of the package.
 resourcePath           Full path to the location of the publicly available parts of the
                        package (primary resource package and manifest). Only set
                        on forward-locked apps.
 nativeLibraryPath      Full path to the directory where native libraries are stored.
 flags                  Flags associated with the application.
 ft                     APK file timestamp (Unix time in milliseconds, as per
                        System.currentTimeMillis()).
 it                     The time at which the app was first installed (Unix time in
                        milliseconds).
 ut                     The time the app was last updated (Unix time in milliseconds).
 version                The version number of the package, as specified by the
                        versionCode attribute in the app manifest.
 userId                 The kernel UID assigned to the application.
 installer              The package name of the application that installed the app.
 sharedUserId           The shared user ID name of the package, as specified by the
                        sharedUserId attribute in the manifest.

Updating Components and Permissions
After creating the packages.xml entry, the PackageManagerService scans all
Android components defined in the new application’s manifests and adds
them to its internal on-memory component registry. Next, any permission
groups and permissions the app declares are scanned and added to the per-
mission registry.

                                                                    Package Management   71

        NOTE     Custom permissions defined by applications are registered using a “first one wins”
                 strategy: if both app A and B define permission P, and A is installed first, A’s permis-
                 sion definition is registered and B’s permission definition is ignored (because P is
                 already registered). This is possible because permission names are not bound to the
                 defining app package in any way, and thus any app can define any permission. This
                 “first one wins” strategy can result in permission protection level downgrade: if A’s
                 permission definition has a lower protection level (for example, normal) than B’s
                 definition (for example, signature), and A is installed first, access to B’s components
                 protected by P will not require callers to be signed with the same key as B. Therefore,
                 when using custom permissions to protect components, be sure to check whether the
                 currently registered permission has the protection level your app expects.9

                     Finally, changes to the package database (the package entry and any
                 new permissions) are saved to disk and the PackageManagerService sends the
                 ACTION_PACKAGE_ADDED to notify other components about the newly added
                 application.

                 Updating a Package
                 The process of updating a package follows most of the same steps as install-
                 ing a package, so we’ll highlight only the differences here.

                 Signature Verification
                 The first step is to check whether the new package has been signed by the
                 same set of signers as the existing one. This rule is referred to as same origin
                 policy, or Trust On First Use (TOFU). This signature check guarantees that the
                 update is produced by the same entity as the original application (assuming
                 that the signing key has not been compromised) and establishes a trust rela-
                 tionship between the update and the existing application. As we shall see in
                 “Updating Non-System Apps” on page 75, the update inherits the data of
                 the original application.

        NOTE     When signing certificates are compared for equality, the certificates are not validated
                 in the PKI sense of the word (time validity, trusted issuer, revocation, and so on are
                 not checked).

                      The certificate equality check is performed by the PackageManagerService
                 .compareSignatrues() method as shown in Listing 3-14.

                 static int compareSignatures(Signature[] s1, Signature[] s2) {
                     if (s1 == null) {
                         return s2 == null
                             ? PackageManager.SIGNATURE_NEITHER_SIGNED
                             : PackageManager.SIGNATURE_FIRST_NOT_SIGNED;
                     }

                 9. See CommonsWare, CWAC-Security, https://github.com/commonsguy/cwac-security, for further
                 discussion and a sample project that shows how to perform the check.

72   Chapter 3

     if (s2 == null) {
         return PackageManager.SIGNATURE_SECOND_NOT_SIGNED;
     }
     HashSet<Signature> set1 = new HashSet<Signature>();
     for (Signature sig : s1) {
         set1.add(sig);
     }
     HashSet<Signature> set2 = new HashSet<Signature>();
     for (Signature sig : s2) {
         set2.add(sig);
     }
     // Make sure s2 contains all signatures in s1.
     if (set1.equals(set2)) {u
         return PackageManager.SIGNATURE_MATCH;
     }
     return PackageManager.SIGNATURE_NO_MATCH;
}

Listing 3-14: Package signature comparison method

      Here, the Signature class serves as an “opaque, immutable representa-
tion of a signature associated with an application package.” 10 In practice, it
is a wrapper for the DER-encoded signing certificate associated with an APK
file. Listing 3-15 shows an excerpt, focusing on its equals() and hashCode()
methods.

public class Signature implements Parcelable {
    private final byte[] mSignature;
    private int mHashCode;
    private boolean mHaveHashCode;
    --snip--
    public Signature(byte[] signature) {
        mSignature = signature.clone();
    }

    public PublicKey getPublicKey() throws CertificateException {
        final CertificateFactory certFactory =
                CertificateFactory.getInstance("X.509");
        final ByteArrayInputStream bais = new ByteArrayInputStream(mSignature);
        final Certificate cert = certFactory.generateCertificate(bais);
        return cert.getPublicKey();
    }

    @Override
    public boolean equals(Object obj) {
        try {
            if (obj != null) {
                Signature other = (Signature)obj;
                return this == other
                    || Arrays.equals(mSignature, other.mSignature);u
            }

10. Google, Android API Reference, “Signature,” https://developer.android.com/reference/android/
content/pm/Signature.html

                                                                          Package Management   73

                          } catch (ClassCastException e) {
                          }
                          return false;
                     }

                     @Override
                     public int hashCode() {
                          if (mHaveHashCode) {
                              return mHashCode;
                          }
                          mHashCode = Arrays.hashCode(mSignature);v
                          mHaveHashCode = true;
                          return mHashCode;
                     }
                 --snip--
                 }

Listing 3-15: Package signature representation

                      As you can see at u, two signature classes are considered equal if the
                 DER-encoding of the underlying X.509 certificates match exactly, and the
                 Signature class hash code is calculated solely based on the encoded certificate
                 v. If the signing certificates do not match, the compareSignatures() methods
                 returns the INSTALL_PARSE_FAILED_INCONSISTENT_CERTIFICATES error code.
                      This binary certificate comparison naturally knows nothing about CAs
                 or expiration dates. One consequence of this is that after an app (identified
                 by a unique package name) is installed, updates need to use the same sign-
                 ing certificates (with the exception of system app updates, as discussed in
                 “Updating System Apps” on page 75).
                      While multiple signatures on Android apps are rare, they do occur. If
                 the original application was signed by more than one signer, any updates
                 need to be signed by the same signers, each using its original signing cer-
                 tificate (enforced by u in Listing 3-14). This means that if a developer’s
                 signing certificate(s) expires or he loses access to his signing key, he cannot
                 update the app and must release a new one instead. This would result in not
                 only losing any existing user base or ratings, but more importantly losing
                 access to the legacy app’s data and settings.
                      The solution to this problem is straightforward, if not ideal: back up
                 your signing key and don’t let your certificate expire. The currently rec-
                 ommended validity period is at least 25 years, and the Google Play Store
                 requires validity until at least October 2033. While technically this only
                 amounts to putting off the problem, proper certificate migration support
                 might eventually be added to the platform.
                      When the package manager establishes that the update has been signed
                 with the same certificate, it proceeds with updating the package. The process
                 is different for system and user-installed apps, as described next.

74   Chapter 3

Updating Non-System Apps
Non-system apps are updated by essentially reinstalling the app while retain-
ing its data directory. The first step is to kill any process of the package being
updated. Next, the package is removed from internal structures and the
package database, which removes all components that the app has registered
as well. Next, the PackageManagerService triggers a package scan by calling
the scanPackageLI() method. The scan proceeds as it would with new installs,
except that it updates the package’s code, resource path, version, and time-
stamp. The package manifest is scanned and any defined components are
registered with the system. Next, permissions for all packages are re-granted
to ensure that they match any definitions in the updated package. Finally, the
updated packaged database is written to disk and a PACKAGE_REPLACED system
broadcast is sent.

Updating System Apps
As with user-installed apps, preinstalled apps (usually found in /system/app/)
can be updated without a full-blown system update, usually via the Google
Play Store or a similar app distribution service. Though because the system
partition is mounted read-only, updates are installed in /data/app/, while
the original app is left intact. In addition to a <package> entry, the updated
app will also have an <updated-package> entry that might look like the example
in Listing 3-16.

<package name="com.google.android.keep"
          codePath="/data/app/com.google.android.keep-1.apk"u
          nativeLibraryPath="/data/app-lib/com.google.android.keep-1"
          flags="4767461"v
          ft="142ee64d980"
          it="14206f3e320"
          ut="142ee64dfcb"
          version="2101"
          userId="10053"w
          installer="com.android.vending">
    <sigs count="1">
         <cert index="2" />
    </sigs>
    <signing-keyset identifier="3" />
    <signing-keyset identifier="34" />
</package>
--snip--
<updated-package name="com.google.android.keep"
                  codePath="/system/app/Keep.apk"
                  nativeLibraryPath="/data/app-lib/Keep"
                  ft="ddc8dee8"
                  it="14206f3e320"
                  ut="ddc8dee8"
                  version="2051"
                  userId="10053">x

                                                              Package Management   75

                     <perms>
                         <item name="android.permission.READ_EXTERNAL_STORAGE" />
                         <item name="android.permission.USE_CREDENTIALS" />
                         <item name="android.permission.WRITE_EXTERNAL_STORAGE" />
                         --snip--
                     </perms>
                 </updated-package>

Listing 3-16: Package database entries for an updated system package

                      The update’s codePath attribute is set to the path of the new APK
                 in /data/app/ u. It inherits the original app’s permissions and UID (w
                 and x) and is marked as an update to a system app by adding the
                 FLAG_UPDATED_SYSTEM_APP (0x80) to its flags attribute v.
                      System apps can be updated directly in the system partition as well, usu-
                 ally as the result of an OTA system update, and in such case the updated
                 system APK is allowed to be signed with a different certificate. The rationale
                 behind this is that if the installer has enough privileges to write to the system
                 partition, it can be trusted to change the signing certificate as well. The
                 UID, and any files and permissions, are retained. The exception is that
                 if the package is part of a shared user (discussed in Chapter 2), the sig-
                 nature cannot be updated, because doing so would affect other apps. In
                 the reverse case, when a new system app is signed by a different certificate
                 than that of the currently installed non-system app (with the same package
                 name), the non-system app will be deleted first.

                 Installing Encrypted APKs
                 Support for installing encrypted APKs was added in Android 4.1 along
                 with support for forward locking using ASEC containers. Both features
                 were announced as app encryption, but we’ll discuss them separately, begin-
                 ning with support for encrypted APK files. But first let’s see how to install
                 encrypted APKs.
                      Encrypted APKs can be installed using the Google Play Store client, or
                 with the pm command from the Android shell, but the system PackageInstaller
                 does not support encrypted APKs. Because we can’t control the Google
                 Play Store installation flow, in order to install an encrypted APK we need
                 to either use the pm command or write our own installer app. We’ll take the
                 easy route and use the pm command.

                 Creating and Installing an Encrypted APK
                 The adb install command both copies the APK file to a temporary file on
                 the device and starts the install process. The command provides a conve-
                 nient wrapper to the adb push and pm install commands. adb install gained
                 three new parameters in Android 4.1 in order to support encrypted APKs
                 (see Listing 3-17).

76   Chapter 3

adb install [-l] [-r] [-s] [--algo <algorithm name> --key <hex-encoded key>
--iv <hex-encoded iv>] <file>

Listing 3-17: adb install command options

    The --algo, --key, and --iv parameters let you specify the encryption
algorithm, key, and initialization vector (IV), respectively. But in order to
use those new parameters, we need to create an encrypted APK first.
    An APK file can be encrypted using the enc OpenSSL commands
as shown in Listing 3-18. Here we use AES in CBC mode with a 128-bit
key, and specify an IV that is the same as the key in order to make things
simpler.

$ openssl enc -aes-128-cbc -K 000102030405060708090A0B0C0D0E0F
-iv 000102030405060708090A0B0C0D0E0F -in my-app.apk -out my-app-enc.apk

Listing 3-18: Encrypting an APK file using OpenSSL

    Next, we install our encrypted APK by passing the encryption algo-
rithm key (in javax.crypto.Cipher transformation string format, which is
discussed in Chapter 5) and IV bytes to the adb install command as shown
in Listing 3-19.

$ adb install --algo 'AES/CBC/PKCS5Padding' \
--key 000102030405060708090A0B0C0D0E0F \
--iv 000102030405060708090A0B0C0D0E0F my-app-enc.apk
        pkg: /data/local/tmp/my-app-enc.apk
Success

Listing 3-19: Installing an encrypted APK using adb install

    As the Success output indicates, the APK installs without errors. The
actual APK file is copied into /data/app/, and comparing its hash with our
encrypted APK reveals that it is in fact a different file. The hash value is
exactly the same as that of the original (unencrypted) APK, so we conclude
that the APK is decrypted at install time using the provided encryption
parameters (algorithm, key, and IV).

Implementation and Encryption Parameters
Let’s see how this is implemented. After it has transferred the APK
to the device, adb install calls the pm Android command-line utility with
the install parameter and the path to the copied APK file. The compo-
nent responsible for installing apps on Android is PackageManagerService
and the pm command is just a convenient frontend for some of its func-
tionality. When started with the install parameter, pm calls the method
installPackageWithVerificationAndEncryption(), converting its options to the
relevant parameters as necessary. Listing 3-20 shows the method’s full
signature.

                                                              Package Management   77

                 public void installPackageWithVerificationAndEncryption(Uri packageURI,
                          IPackageInstallObserver observer, int flags,
                          String installerPackageName,
                          VerificationParams verificationParams,
                          ContainerEncryptionParams encryptionParams) {
                 --snip--
                 }

Listing 3-20: PackageManagerService.installPackageWithVerificationAndEncryption()
                 method signature

                      We discussed most of the method’s parameters in “APK Install
                 Process” earlier, but we have yet to encounter the VerificationParams and
                 ContainerEncryptionParams classes. As the name implies, the VerificationParams
                 class encapsulates a parameter used during package verification, which we will
                 discuss in “Package Verification” on page 83. The ContainerEncryptionParams
                 class holds encryption parameters, including the values passed via the --algo,
                 --key, and --iv options of adb install. Listing 3-21 shows its data members.

                 public class ContainerEncryptionParams implements Parcelable {
                     private final String mEncryptionAlgorithm;
                     private final IvParameterSpec mEncryptionSpec;
                     private final SecretKey mEncryptionKey;
                     private final String mMacAlgorithm;
                     private final AlgorithmParameterSpec mMacSpec;
                     private final SecretKey mMacKey;
                     private final byte[] mMacTag;
                     private final long mAuthenticatedDataStart;
                     private final long mEncryptedDataStart;
                     private final long mDataEnd;
                     --snip--
                 }

Listing 3-21: ContainerEncryptionParams data members

                     The adb install parameters above correspond to the first three fields
                 of the class. While not available through the adb install wrapper, the
                 pm install command also takes the --macalgo, --mackey, and --tag param-
                 eters, which correspond to the mMacAlgorithm, mMacKey, and mMacTag fields of
                 the ContainerEncryptionParams class. In order to use those parameters, we
                 need to calculate the MAC value of the encrypted APK first, which we
                 accomplish with the OpenSSL dgst command as shown in Listing 3-22.

                 $ openssl dgst -hmac 'hmac_key_1' -sha1 -hex my-app-enc.apk
                 HMAC-SHA1(my-app-enc.apk)= 962ecdb4e99551f6c2cf72f641362d657164f55a

Listing 3-22: Calculating the MAC of an encrypted APK

78   Chapter 3

NOTE   The dgst command doesn’t allow you to specify the HMAC key using hexadecimal or
       Base64, so we’re limited to ASCII characters. This may not be a good idea for produc-
       tion use, so consider using a real key and calculating the MAC in some other way (for
       example, using a JCE program).

       Installing an Encrypted APK with Integrity Check
       We can now install an encrypted APK and verify its integrity by opening
       the Android shell using adb shell and executing the command shown in
       Listing 3-23.

       $ pm install -r --algo 'AES/CBC/PKCS5Padding' \
       --key 000102030405060708090A0B0C0D0E0F \
       --iv 000102030405060708090A0B0C0D0E0F \
       --macalgo HmacSHA1 --mackey 686d61635f6b65795f31 \
       --tag 962ecdb4e99551f6c2cf72f641362d657164f55a /sdcard/my-app-enc.apk
               pkg: /sdcard/kr-enc.apk
       Success

Listing 3-23: Installing an encrypted APK with integrity verification using pm install

            The app’s integrity is checked by comparing the specified MAC tag
       with the value calculated based on the actual file contents, the contents are
       decrypted, and the decrypted APK is copied to /data/app/. (To test that MAC
       verification is indeed performed, change the tag value slightly. Doing so
       should result in an install error with error code INSTALL_FAILED_INVALID_APK.)
            As we saw in Listings 3-19 and 3-23, the APK files that are ultimately
       copied to /data/app/ are not encrypted and thus the installation process
       is the same as for unencrypted APKs, except for file decryption and the
       optional integrity verification. Decryption and integrity verification are
       performed transparently by the MediaContainerService while copying the
       APK to the application directory. If a ContainerEncryptionParams instance
       is passed to its copyResource() method, it uses the provided encryption
       parameters to instantiate the JCA classes Cipher and Mac (see Chapter 5)
       that can perform decryption and integrity checking.

NOTE   The MAC tag and encrypted APK can be bundled in a single file, in which case the
       MediaContainerService uses the mAuthenticatedDataStart, mEncryptedDataStart, and
       mDataEnd members to extract the MAC and APK data from the file.

       Forward Locking
       Forward locking appeared around the time ringtones, wallpapers, and
       other digital “goods” started selling on feature phones. Because installed
       APK files are world readable on Android, it’s relatively easy to extract apps
       from even a production device. In an attempt to lock down paid apps (and
       prevent a user from forwarding them to another user) without losing any of
       the OS’s flexibility, early Android versions introduced forward locking (also
       called copy protection).

                                                                             Package Management   79

                      The idea behind forward locking was to split app packages into two
                 parts: a world-readable part that contains resources and the manifest
                 (in /data/app/), and a package that is readable only by the system user and
                 which contains executable code (in /data/app-private/). The code package
                 was protected by filesystem permissions, which made it inaccessible to users
                 on most consumer devices, but it could be extracted from devices with root
                 access, and this early forward locking mechanism was quickly deprecated
                 and replaced with an online application licensing service called Google
                 Play Licensing.
                      The problem with Google Play Licensing was that it shifted app pro-
                 tection implementation from the OS to app developers, and it had mixed
                 results. The forward locking implementation was redesigned in Android 4.1,
                 and now offers the ability to store APKs in an encrypted container that
                 requires a device-specific key to be mounted at runtime. Let’s look at it in a
                 bit more detail.

                 Android 4.1 Forward Locking Implementation
                 While the use of encrypted app containers as a forward locking mechanism
                 was introduced in Android version 4.1, encrypted containers were originally
                 introduced in Android 2.2. At that time (mid-2010), most Android devices
                 came with limited internal storage and relatively large (a few gigabytes)
                 external storage, usually in the form of a microSD card. To make file shar-
                 ing easier, external storage was formatted using the FAT filesystem, which
                 lacks file permissions. As a result, files on the SD card could be read and
                 written by any application.
                      To prevent users from simply copying paid apps from the SD card,
                 Android 2.2 created an encrypted filesystem image file and stored the
                 APK in it when a user opted to move an app to external storage. The sys-
                 tem would then create a mount point for the encrypted image, and mount
                 it using Linux’s device-mapper. Android loaded each app’s files from its
                 mount point at runtime.
                      Android 4.1 built on this idea by making the container use the ext4
                 filesystem, which allows for file permissions. A typical forward-locked app’s
                 mount point now looks like Listing 3-24 (timestamps omitted).

                 # ls -l /mnt/asec/com.example.app-1
                 drwxr-xr-x system   system            lib
                 drwx------ root     root              lost+found
                 -rw-r----- system   u0_a96    1319057 pkg.apk
                 -rw-r--r-- system   system     526091 res.zip

Listing 3-24: Contents of a forward-locked app’s mount point

                      Here, the res.zip holds app resources and the manifest file and is world
                 readable, while the pkg.apk file that holds the full APK is only readable by
                 the system and the app’s dedicated user (u0_a96). The actual app contain-
                 ers are stored in /data/app-asec/ in files with the .asec extension.

80   Chapter 3

Encrypted App Containers
Encrypted app containers are referred to as Android Secure External Caches, or
ASEC containers. ASEC container management (creating, deleting, mount-
ing, and unmounting) is implemented in the system volume daemon (vold),
and the MountService provides an interface to its functionality to framework
services. We can also use the vdc command-line utility to interact with vold in
order to manage forward-locked apps from Android’s shell (see Listing 3-25).

# vdc asec listu
vdc asec list
111 0 com.example.app-1
111 0 org.foo.app-1
200 0 asec operation succeeded

# vdc asec path com.example.app-1v
vdc asec path com.example.app-1
211 0 /mnt/asec/com.example.app-1

# vdc asec unmount org.example.app-1w
200 0 asec operation succeeded

# vdc asec mount com.example.app-1 000102030405060708090a0b0c0d0e0f 1000x
com.example.app-1 000102030405060708090a0b0c0d0e0f 1000
200 0 asec operation succeeded

Listing 3-25: Issuing ASEC management commands with vdc

    Here, the asec list command u lists the namespace IDs of mounted
ASEC containers. Namespace IDs are based on the package name and have
the same format as APK filenames for non-forward-locked applications. All
other commands take a namespace ID as a parameter.
    The asec path command v shows the mount point of the specified ASEC
container, while the asec unmount command unmounts it w. In addition to a
namespace ID, asec mount x requires that you specify the encryption key and
the mount point’s owner UID (1000 is system).
    The ASEC container encryption algorithm and the key length are
unchanged from the original Android 2.2 apps-to-SD implementation: Twofish
with a 128-bit key stored in /data/misc/systemkeys/, as shown in Listing 3-26.

# ls -l /data/misc/systemkeys
-rw------- system   system         16 AppsOnSD.sks
# od -t x1 /data/misc/systemkeys/AppsOnSD.sks
0000000 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0a 0b 0c 0d 0e 0f
0000020

Listing 3-26: ASEC container encryption key location and contents

     Forward locking an application is triggered by specifying the -l option
of pm install or by specifying the INSTALL_FORWARD_LOCK flag when calling one of
PackageManager’s installPackage() methods.

                                                                    Package Management   81

                 Installing Forward-Locked APKs
                 The install process of forward-locked APKs involves two additional steps: cre-
                 ating and mounting the secure container, and extracting the public resource
                 files from the APK file. As with encrypted APKs, those steps are encapsulated
                 by the MediaContainerService and are performed while copying the APK to
                 the application directory. As the MediaContainerService does not have enough
                 privileges to create and mount secure containers, it delegates container man-
                 agement to the vold daemon by calling the appropriate MountService methods
                 (createSecureContainer(), mountSecureContainer(), and so on).

                 Encrypted Apps and Google Play
                 Because installing apps without user interaction, encrypted or otherwise,
                 requires system permissions, only system applications can install applica-
                 tions. Google’s own Play Store Android client takes advantage of both
                 encrypted apps and forward locking. While describing exactly how the
                 Google Play client works would require detailed knowledge of the under­
                 lying protocol (which is not open and is constantly evolving), a casual look
                 into the implementation of a recent Google Play Store client reveals a few
                 useful pieces of information.
                      Google Play servers send quite a bit of metadata about the app you are
                 about to download and install, such as download URL, APK file size, ver-
                 sion code, and refund window. Among these, the EncryptionParams shown
                 in Listing 3-27 looks very similar to the ContainerEncryptionParams shown in
                 Listing 3-21.

                 class AndroidAppDelivery$EncryptionParams {
                   --snip--
                   private String encryptionKey;
                   private String hmacKey;
                   private int version;
                 }

Listing 3-27: EncryptionParams used in the Google Play Store protocol

                      The encryption algorithm and the HMAC algorithm of paid applications
                 downloaded from Google Play are always set to AES/CBC/PKCS5Padding and
                 HMACSHA1, respectively. The IV and the MAC tag are bundled with the
                 encrypted APK in a single blob. After all parameters are read and verified,
                 they are essentially converted to a ContainerEncryptionParams instance, and
                 the app is installed using the PackageManager.installPackageWithVerification()
                 method.
                      The INSTALL_FORWARD_LOCK flag is set when installing a paid app in order
                 to enable forward locking. The OS takes it from here, and the process is
                 as described in the previous two sections: free apps are decrypted and the
                 APKs end up in /data/app/, while an encrypted container in /data/app-asec/
                 is created and mounted under /mnt/asec/<package-name> for paid apps.

82   Chapter 3

            How secure is this in practice? Google Play can now claim that paid
        apps are always transferred and stored in encrypted form, and so can your
        own app distribution channel if you decide to implement it using the app
        encryption facilities that Android provides. The APK file contents have
        to be made available to the OS at some point though, so if you have root
        access to a running Android device, it’s still possible to extract a forward-
        locked APK or the container encryption key.

Package Verification
        Package verification was introduced
        as an official Android feature in ver-
        sion 4.2 as application verification and
        was later backported to all versions
        running Android 2.3 and later and the
        Google Play Store. The infrastructure
        that makes package verification pos-
        sible is built into the OS, but Android
        doesn’t ship with any built-in verifiers.
        The most widely used package veri-
        fication implementation is the one
        built into the Google Play Store client
        and backed by Google’s app analysis
        infrastructure. It’s designed to protect
        Android devices from what Google calls
        “potentially harmful applications”11
        (backdoors, phishing applications, spy-
        ware, and so on), commonly known
        simply as malware.
             When package verification is
        turned on, APKs are scanned by a veri-
        fier prior to installation, and the sys-
        tem shows a warning (see Figure 3-3)          Figure 3-3: Application verification
        or blocks installation if the verifier        warning dialog
        deems the APK potentially harmful.
        Verification is on by default on sup-
        ported devices but requires one-time
        user approval on first use, as it sends application data to Google. Appli­
        cation verification can be toggled via the Verify Apps option on the system
        settings Security screen (see Figure 3-2 on page 25).
             The following sections discuss the Android package verification infra-
        structure and then take a brief look at Google Play’s implementation.

        11. Google, Android Practical Security from the Ground Up, presented at VirusBulletin 2013.
        Retrieved from https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1YDYUrD22Xq12nKkhBfwoJBfw2Q
        -OReMr0BrDfHyfyPw

                                                                                    Package Management   83

                 Android Support for Package Verification
                 As with most things that deal with application management, package veri-
                 fication is implemented in the PackageManagerService, and has been available
                 since Android 4.0 (API level 14). Package verification is performed by one
                 or more verification agents, and has a required verifier and zero or more suf-
                 ficient verifiers. Verification is considered complete when the required veri-
                 fier and at least one of the sufficient verifiers return a positive result. An
                 application can register itself as a required verifier by declaring a broadcast
                 receiver with an intent filter that matches the PACKAGE_NEEDS_VERIFICATION
                 action and the APK file MIME type (application/vnd.android.package-archive),
                 as shown in Listing 3-28.

                 <receiver android:name=".MyPackageVerificationReceiver"
                           android:permission="android.permission.BIND_PACKAGE_VERIFIER">
                     <intent-filter>
                         <action
                              android:name="android.intent.action.PACKAGE_NEEDS_VERIFICATION" />
                         <action android:name="android.intent.action.PACKAGE_VERIFIED" />
                         <data android:mimeType="application/vnd.android.package-archive" />
                     </intent-filter>
                 </receiver>

Listing 3-28: Required verification declaration in AndroidManifest.xml

                      In addition, the declaring application needs to be granted the
                 PACKAGE_VERIFICATION_AGENT permission. As this is a signature permission
                 reserved for system applications (signature|system), only system applica­-
                 tions can become the required verification agent.
                      Applications can register sufficient verifiers by adding a <package-verifier>
                 tag to their manifest and listing the sufficient verifier’s package name and
                 public key in the tag’s attributes, as shown in Listing 3-29.

                 <manifest xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
                         package="com.example.app">
                         <package-verifier android:name="com.example.verifier"
                                           android:publicKey="MIIB..." />
                     <application ...>
                      --snip--
                     </application>
                 </manifest>

Listing 3-29: Sufficient verifier declaration in AndroidManifest.xml

                     When installing a package, the PackageManagerService performs verifica-
                 tion when a required verifier is installed and the Settings.Global.PACKAGE_
                 VERIFIER_ENABLE system setting is set to true. Verification is enabled by adding
                 the APK to a queue of pending installs and sending the ACTION_PACKAGE_NEEDS_
                 VERIFICATION broadcast to registered verifiers.

84   Chapter 3

     The broadcasts contains a unique verification ID, and various metadata
about the package being verified. Verification agents respond by calling the
verifyPendingInstall() method and passing the verification ID and a veri-
fication status. Calling the method requires the PACKAGE_VERIFICATION_AGENT
permission, which guarantees that non-system apps cannot participate
in package verification. Each time the verifyPendingInstall() is called, the
PackageManagerService checks to see whether sufficient verification for the
pending install has been received. If so, it removes the pending install from
the queue, sends the PACKAGE_VERIFIED broadcast, and starts the package instal-
lation process. If the package is rejected by verification agents, or sufficient
verification is not received within the allotted time, installation fails with
the INSTALL_FAILED_VERIFICATION_FAILURE error.

Google Play Implementation
Google’s application verification implementation is built into the Google
Play Store client. The Google Play Store app registers itself as a required
verification agent and if the Verify apps option is turned on, it receives
a broadcast each time an application is about to be installed, whether
through the Google Play Store client itself, the PackgeInstaller application,
or via adb install.
     The implementation is not open source, and few details are publicly
available, but Google’s “Protect against harmful apps” Android help page
states, “When you verify applications, Google receives log information, URLs
related to the app, and general information about the device, such as the
Device ID, version of the operating system, and IP address.”12 We can observe
that, as of this writing, in addition to this information, the Play Store client
sends the APK file’s SHA-256 hash value, file size, the app package name, the
names of its resources along with their SHA-256 hashes, the SHA-256 hashes
of the app’s manifest and classes files, its version code and signing certificates,
as well as some metadata about the installing application and referrer URLs,
if available. Based on that information, Google’s APK analysis algorithms
determine whether the APK is potentially harmful and return a result to the
Play Store client that includes a status code and an error message to display
in case the APK is deemed potentially harmful. In turn, the Play Store client
calls the verifyPendingInstall() method of the PackageManagerService with the
appropriate status code. Application install is accepted or rejected based on
the algorithm described in the previous section.
     In practice (at least on “Google experience” devices), the Google Play
Store verifier is usually the sole verification agent, so whether the package is
installed or rejected depends only on the response of Google’s online verifi-
cation service.

12. Google, Protect against harmful apps, https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/2812853

                                                                          Package Management   85

     Summary
                 Android application packages (APK files) are an extension of the JAR
                 file format and contain resources, code, and a manifest file. APK files are
                 signed using the JAR file code signing format, but require that all files
                 are signed with the same set of certificates. Android uses the code signer
                 certificate to establish the same origin of apps and their updates and to
                 establish trust relationships between apps. APK files are installed by copy-
                 ing them to the /data/app/ directory and creating a dedicated data direc-
                 tory for each application under /data/data/.
                      Android supports encrypted APK files and secure app containers for
                 forward locked apps. Encrypted apps are automatically decrypted before
                 being copied to the application directory. Forward locked apps are split into
                 a resource and manifest part, which is publicly accessible, and a private code
                 and asset part, which is stored in a dedicated encrypted container, directly
                 accessible only by the OS.
                      Android can optionally verify apps before installing them by consulting
                 one or more verification agents. Currently, the most widely used verifica-
                 tion agent is built into the Google Play Store client applications and uses
                 Google’s online app verification service in order to detect potentially harm-
                 ful applications.

86   Chapter 3

