                               6
     N et w or k Security a nd P K I

As discussed in the previous chapter, Android includes
various cryptographic providers that implement most
modern cryptographic primitives: hashing, symmetric
and asymmetric encryption, and message authentica-
tion codes. Those primitives can be combined to
implement secure communication, but even a subtle mistake can result
in serious vulnerabilities, so the preferred way to implement secure com-
munication is to use standard protocols that are designed to protect the
privacy and integrity of data transferred across a network.
     The most widely used secure protocols are Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)
and Transport Layer Security (TLS). Android supports these protocols by
providing an implementation of the standard Java Secure Socket Extension
(JSSE). In this chapter, we’ll briefly discuss the JSSE architecture and then
provide some details about Android’s JSSE implementation. Our description
of Android’s SSL stack is focused on certificate validation and trust anchor
management, which are tightly integrated into the platform and are one of
the biggest differences that set it apart from other JSSE implementations.

        NOTE      While TLS and SSL are technically different protocols, we will usually use the more com-
                  mon term SSL to refer to both, and will only distinguish between SSL and TLS when
                  discussing protocol differences.

     PKI and SSL Overview
                  TLS1 and SSL2 (its predecessor) are secure point-to-point communication
                  protocols designed to provide (optional) authentication, message confi-
                  dentiality, and message integrity between two parties communicating over
                  TCP/IP. They use a combination of symmetric and asymmetric encryption
                  to implement message confidentiality and integrity, and rely heavily on pub-
                  lic key certificates to implement authentication.
                       To start a secure SSL channel, a client contacts a server and sends the
                  SSL protocol version it supports, as well as a list of suggested cipher suites.
                  A cipher suite is a set of algorithms and key sizes used for authentication, key
                  agreement, encryption, and integrity. In order to establish a secure channel,
                  the server and client negotiate a commonly supported cipher suite, and then
                  verify each other’s identity based on their certificates. Finally, the commu-
                  nicating parties agree on a symmetric encryption algorithm and compute
                  a shared symmetric key that is used to encrypt all subsequent communica-
                  tion. Typically, only the server’s identity is verified (server authentication) and
                  not the client’s. The SSL protocol supports verifying client identity as well
                  (client authentication), but it is used much more rarely.

        NOTE      While anonymous (unauthenticated) cipher suites such as TLS_DH_anon_WITH_
                  AES_128_CBC_SHA are defined in SSL specifications, they are vulnerable to man-
                  in-the-middle (MITM) attacks and are typically only employed when SSL is used as
                  part of a more complex protocol that has other means to ensure authentication.

                  Public Key Certificates
                  As mentioned in the previous section, SSL relies on public key certificates
                  to implement authentication. A public key certificate is a construct that
                  binds an identity to a public key. For X.509 certificates, which are used in
                  SSL communication, the “identity” is a set of attributes typically including a
                  common name (CN), organization, and location that form the entity’s dis-
                  tinguished name (DN). Other major attributes of X.509 certificates are the
                  issuer DN, validity period, and a set of extensions, which may be additional
                  entity attributes or pertain to the certificate itself (for example, intended
                  key usage).
                      The binding is formed by applying a digital signature over the entity’s
                  public key and all additional attributes to produce a digital certificate. The

                  1. T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2, August 2008,
                  http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246
                  2. A. Freier, P. Karlton, and P. Kocher, The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Protocol Version 3.0,
                  August 2011, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6101

146   Chapter 6

                   signing key used may be the certified entity’s own private key, in which case
                   the certificate is referred to as self-signed, or it may belong to a trusted third
                   party called a certificate authority (CA).
                        The contents of a typical X.509 server certificate as parsed by the
                   OpenSSL x509 command are shown in Listing 6-1. This particular cer-
                   tificate binds the C=US, ST=California, L=Mountain View, O =Google Inc,
                   CN=*.googlecode.com DN v and a set of alternative DNS names x to the
                   server’s 2048-bit RSA key w and is signed with the private key of the Google
                   Internet Authority G2 CA u.

Certificate:
    Data:
        Version: 3 (0x2)
        Serial Number:
             09:49:24:fd:15:cf:1f:2e
    Signature Algorithm: sha1WithRSAEncryption
        Issuer: C=US, O=Google Inc, CN=Google Internet Authority G2u
        Validity
             Not Before: Oct 9 10:33:36 2013 GMT
             Not After : Oct 9 10:33:36 2014 GMT
        Subject: C=US, ST=California, L=Mountain View, O=Google Inc, CN=*.googlecode.comv
        Subject Public Key Info:
             Public Key Algorithm: rsaEncryption
                 Public-Key: (2048 bit)w
                 Modulus:
                     00:9b:58:02:90:d6:50:03:0a:7c:79:06:99:5b:7a:
                     --snip--
                 Exponent: 65537 (0x10001)
        X509v3 extensions:
             X509v3 Extended Key Usage:
                 TLS Web Server Authentication, TLS Web Client Authentication
             X509v3 Subject Alternative Name:
                 DNS:*.googlecode.com, DNS:*.cloud.google.com, DNS:*.code.google.com,x
                 --snip--
             Authority Information Access:
                 CA Issuers - URI:http://pki.google.com/GIAG2.crt
                 OCSP - URI:http://clients1.google.com/ocsp

            X509v3 Subject Key Identifier:
                65:10:15:1B:C4:26:13:DA:50:3F:84:4E:44:1A:C5:13:B0:98:4F:7B
            X509v3 Basic Constraints: critical
                CA:FALSE
            X509v3 Authority Key Identifier:
                keyid:4A:DD:06:16:1B:BC:F6:68:B5:76:F5:81:B6:BB:62:1A:BA:5A:81:2F
            X509v3 Certificate Policies:
                Policy: 1.3.6.1.4.1.11129.2.5.1
            X509v3 CRL Distribution Points:
                Full Name:
                  URI:http://pki.google.com/GIAG2.crl
    Signature Algorithm: sha1WithRSAEncryption
         3f:38:94:1b:f5:0a:49:e7:6f:9b:7b:90:de:b8:05:f8:41:32:
         --snip--

Listing 6-1: X.509 certificate contents, as parsed by OpenSSL

                                                                             Network Security and PKI    147

                  Direct Trust and Private CAs
                  If an SSL client communicates with a limited number of servers, it can
                  be preconfigured with a set of server certificates that it trusts (called trust
                  anchors), and deciding whether to trust a remote party becomes simply a
                  matter of checking whether its certificate is in that set. This model allows
                  for fine-grained control over whom clients trust, but makes it harder to
                  rotate or upgrade server keys, which requires issuing a new self-signed
                  certificate.
                       This problem can be solved by using a private CA and configuring both
                  clients and servers to use it as the single trust anchor. In this model, SSL
                  parties do not check for a particular entity certificate, but trust any certifi-
                  cate issued by the private CA. This allows for transparent key and certificate
                  upgrades, without the need to upgrade SSL clients and servers as long as
                  the CA certificate is still valid. The downside is that at the same time, this
                  single-CA model creates a single point of failure; if the CA key is compro-
                  mised, whoever has obtained access to it can issue fraudulent certificates
                  that all clients will trust (as we will see later, this is not limited to private
                  CAs). Recovering from this situation requires updating all clients and
                  replacing the CA certificate.
                       Another problem with this model is that it cannot be used for clients
                  that do not know in advance what servers they will need to connect to—
                  usually generic Internet clients such as web browsers, email applications,
                  and messaging or VoIP clients. Such generic clients are typically config-
                  ured with a set of trust anchors that includes well-known issuers, which
                  we call public CAs. While certain guidelines and requirements exist, the
                  process of selecting public CAs to include as default trust anchors varies
                  widely between browsers and OSes. For example, in order to include a CA
                  certificate as a trust anchor in its products, Mozilla requires that the CA has
                  a public Certificate Policy and Certification Practice Statement (CP/CPS) docu-
                  ment, enforces multi-factor authentication for operator accounts, and that
                  the CA certificate does not issue end-entity certificates directly.3 Other ven-
                  dors can have less stringent requirements. Current versions of most OSes
                  and browsers ship with more than 100 CA certificates included as trust
                  anchors.

                  Public Key Infrastructure
                  When certificates are issued by public CAs, some sort of identity verification
                  is performed before issuing the certificate. The verification process varies
                  vastly between CAs and types of certificates issued, ranging from accept-
                  ing automatic email address confirmation (for cheap server certificates) to
                  requiring multiple forms of government-issued ID and company registra-
                  tion documents (for Extended Validation, or EV, certificates).
                       Public CAs depend on multiple people, systems, procedures, and policies
                  in order to perform entity verification and to create, manage, and distribute

                  3. Mozilla, Mozilla CA Certificate Inclusion Policy (Version 2.2), https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/
                  about/governance/policies/security-group/certs/policy/inclusion/

148   Chapter 6

certificates. The set of those parties and systems is referred to as a Public
Key Infrastructure (PKI). PKIs can be infinitely complex, but in the context
of secure communication, and SSL in particular, the most important pieces
are the CA certificates, which act as trust anchors and are used when vali-
dating the identity of communication parties. Therefore, managing trust
anchors will be one of the key points in our discussion of Android’s SSL
and PKI implementation. Figure 6-1 shows a simplified representation of
a typical PKI.

                                     Root CA

              Sign                                        Publish
           certificate                                certificate/CRL

                                       Publish
                                   certificate/CRL
                                                             Certificate/CRL
    Issuing CA
                                                              Repository
                            Request
                           certificate

             Sign                  Registration                                Fetch
           certificate                                                    certificate/CRL
                                    Authority        Verify EE ID

                                 Request
  End Entity 1                  certificate                    End Entity 2
    (Alice)                    and submit                         (Bob)
                               proof of ID

                                        Secure
                                     communication

Figure 6-1: PKI entities

     Here, a person or server that holds a certificate is referred to as an end
entity (EE). To obtain a certificate, an end entity sends a certificate request
to a registration authority (RA). The RA obtains some proof of identity
from the EE and verifies its identity according to the CA’s policy require-
ments. After the RA has established the identity of the EE, it checks that
it matches the contents of the certificate request, and if so, forwards the
request to the issuing CA. An issuing CA signs the EE certificate request
in order to generate EE certificates and maintains revocation informa-
tion (discussed in the next section) about the issued certificates. On the
other hand, a root CA does not sign EE certificates directly but only signs

                                                                    Network Security and PKI    149

                  certificates for issuing CAs and revocation information concerning issuing
                  CAs. A root CA is used very rarely and is usually kept offline in order to
                  increase the security of its keys.
                       For the PKI sketched in Figure 6-1, an EE certificate is associated with
                  two CA certificates: the issuing CA’s certificate, which signed it, and the
                  root CA’s certificate, which signed the issuing CA’s certificate. The three
                  certificates form a certificate chain (also called a certification path). The
                  chain begins with the EE certificate and terminates with the root CA cer-
                  tificate. In order for an EE certificate to be trusted, its certification path
                  needs to lead to a certificate the system trusts implicitly (trust anchor).
                  While intermediate certificates can be used as trust anchors, this role is
                  usually performed by root CA certificates.

                  Certificate Revocation
                  In addition to issuing certificates, CAs can mark a certificate as invalid
                  by revoking it. Revoking involves adding the certificate serial number
                  and a revocation reason to a certificate revocation list (CRL) that the
                  CA signs and periodically publishes. Entities validating a certificate can
                  then check to see if it has been revoked by searching for its serial num-
                  ber (which is unique within a given CA) in the issuing CA’s current CRL.
                  Listing 6-2 shows the contents of a sample CRL file, issued by the Google
                  Internet Authority G2. In this example, certificates with the serial numbers
                  40BF8571DD53E3BB u and 0A9F21196A442E45 v have been revoked.

                  Certificate Revocation List (CRL):
                          Version 2 (0x1)
                      Signature Algorithm: sha1WithRSAEncryption
                          Issuer: /C=US/O=Google Inc/CN=Google Internet Authority G2
                          Last Update: Jan 13 01:00:02 2014 GMT
                          Next Update: Jan 23 01:00:02 2014 GMT
                          CRL extensions:
                              X509v3 Authority Key Identifier:
                                  keyid:4A:DD:06:16:1B:BC:F6:68:B5:76:F5:81:B6:BB:62:1A:BA:5A:81:2F
                              X509v3 CRL Number:
                                  219
                  Revoked Certificates:
                      Serial Number: 40BF8571DD53E3BBu
                          Revocation Date: Sep 10 15:19:22 2013 GMT
                          CRL entry extensions:
                              X509v3 CRL Reason Code:
                                  Affiliation Changed
                  --snip--
                      Serial Number: 0A9F21196A442E45v
                          Revocation Date: Jun 12 17:42:06 2013 GMT
                          CRL entry extensions:
                              X509v3 CRL Reason Code:
                                  Superseded
                      Signature Algorithm: sha1WithRSAEncryption
                           40:f6:05:7d:...

Listing 6-2: CRL file contents

150   Chapter 6

             Revocation status can also be checked without fetching the full list
        of all revoked certificates by using the Online Certificate Status Protocol
        (OCSP).4 CRL and OCSP URIs are often included as extensions in cer-
        tificates so that verifying parties do not need to know their location in
        advance. All public CAs maintain revocation information, but in practice a
        lot of SSL clients either do not check revocation at all or allow connections
        (possibly with a warning) even if the remote party’s certificate is revoked.
        The main reasons for this lenient behavior of SSL clients are the overhead
        associated with fetching current revocation information, and ensuring con-
        nectivity. While delta CRLs (CRLs that only contain the difference, or delta,
        from the previous CRL version) and local caching alleviate the problem to
        some extent, CRLs for major CAs are typically huge and need to be down-
        loaded before an SSL connection is established, which adds user-visible
        latency. OCSP improves this situation but still requires a connection to a
        different server, which again adds latency.
             In either case, revocation information may simply be unavailable, due
        to a network or configuration problem in a CA’s infrastructure. For a major
        CA, a revocation database outage could disable a large number of secure
        sites, which translates directly to financial loss for their operators. Lastly,
        nobody likes connection errors and when faced with a revocation error,
        most users will simply find another, less strict SSL client that simply “works.”

JSSE Introduction
        We’ll briefly introduce the architecture and main components of JSSE here.
        (For complete coverage, see the official JSSE Reference Guide.5)
            The JSSE API lives in the javax.net and javax.net.ssl packages and pro-
        vides classes that represent the following features:

        •    SSL client and server sockets
        •    An engine for producing and consuming SSL streams (SSLEngine)
        •    Factories for creating sockets
        •    A secure socket context class (SSLContext) that creates secure socket
             factories and engines
        •    PKI-based key and trust managers and factories to create them
        •    A class for HTTPS (HTTP over TLS, specified in RFC 2818 6) URL con-
             nections (HttpsURLConnection)

            Just as with JCA cryptographic service providers, a JSSE provider sup-
        plies implementations for the engine classes defined in the API. Those
        implementation classes are responsible for creating the underlying sockets,

        4. S. Santesson et al., X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure Online Certificate Status Protocol -
        OCSP, June 2013, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6960
        5. Oracle, Java™ Secure Socket Extension (JSSE) Reference Guide, http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/
        docs/technotes/guides/security/jsse/JSSERefGuide.html
        6. E. Rescorla, HTTP Over TLS, May 2000, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2818

                                                                                    Network Security and PKI    151

                  and key and trust managers required to establish a connection, but JSSE
                  API users never directly interact with them, only with the respective engine
                  classes. Let’s briefly review the key classes and interfaces in the JSSE API, as
                  well as how they relate to each other.

                  Secure Sockets
                  JSSE supports both stream-based, blocking I/O using sockets and NIO
                  (New I/O) channel-based, nonblocking I/O. The central class for stream-
                  based communication is javax.net.ssl.SSLSocket, which is created either by
                  an SSLSocketFactory or by calling the accept() method of the SSLServerSocket
                  class. In turn, SSLSocketFactory and SSLServerSocketFactory instances are created
                  by calling the appropriate factory methods of the SSLContext class. SSL socket
                  factories encapsulate the details of creating and configuring SSL sockets,
                  including authentication keys, peer certificate validation strategies, and
                  enabled cipher suites. Those details are typically common for all SSL sockets
                  that an application uses and are configured when initializing the applica-
                  tion’s SSLContext. They are then passed to all SSL socket factories created by
                  the shared SSLContext instance. If an SSLContext is not explicitly configured,
                  it uses the system defaults for all SSL parameters.
                       Nonblocking SSL I/O is implemented in the javax.net.ssl.SSLEngine
                  class. This class encapsulates an SSL state machine and operates on byte
                  buffers supplied by its clients. While SSLSocket hides much of the complexity
                  of SSL, in order to offer greater flexibility, SSLEngine leaves I/O and threading
                  to the calling application. Therefore, SSLEngine clients are expected to have
                  some understanding of the SSL protocol. SSLEngine instances are created
                  directly from an SSLContext and inherit its SSL configuration, just like SSL
                  socket factories.

                  Peer Authentication
                  Peer authentication is an integral part of the SSL protocol and relies on
                  the availability of a set of trust anchors and authentication keys. In JSSE,
                  peer authentication configuration is provided with the help of the KeyStore,
                  KeyManagerFactory, and TrustManagerFactory engine classes. A KeyStore repre-
                  sents a storage facility for cryptographic keys and certificates and can be
                  used to store both trust anchors certificates, and end entity keys along with
                  their associated certificates. KeyManagerFactory and TrustManagerFactory create
                  KeyManagers or TrustManagers, respectively, based on a specified authentication
                  algorithm. While implementations based on different authentication strate-
                  gies are possible, in practice SSL uses only a X.509-based PKI (PKIX)7 for
                  authentication, and the only algorithm supported by those factory classes
                  is PKIX (aliased to X.509). An SSLContext can be initialized with a set of

                  7. D. Cooper et al., Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation
                  List (CRL) Profile, May 2008, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280

152   Chapter 6

KeyManager and TrustManager instances by calling the following method. All
parameters are optional, and if null is specified, the system default is used
(see Listing 6-3).

void init(KeyManager[] km, TrustManager[] tm, SecureRandom random);

Listing 6-3: SSLContext initialization method

    A TrustManager determines whether the presented peer authentication
credentials should be trusted. If they are, the connection is established; if
not, the connection is terminated. In the context of PKIX, this translates to
validating the certificate chain of the presented peer certificate based on
the configured trust anchors. This is also reflected in the X509TrustManager
interface JSSE uses (see Listing 6-4):

void checkClientTrusted(X509Certificate[] chain, String authType);
void checkServerTrusted(X509Certificate[] chain, String authType);
X509Certificate[] getAcceptedIssuers();

Listing 6-4: X509TrustManager interface methods

     Certificate chain validation is performed using the system Java
Certification Path API (or CertPath API) implementation, 8 which is
responsible for building and validating certificate chains. While the API
has a somewhat algorithm-independent interface, in practice it’s closely
related to PKIX and implements the chain building and validation algo-
rithms defined in PKIX standards. The default PKIX TrustManagerFactory
implementation can create an X509TrustManager instance that preconfigures
the underlying CertPath API classes with the trust anchors stored in a
KeyStore object.
     The KeyStore object is typically initialized from a system keystore
file referred to as a trust store. When more fine-grained configuration is
required, a CertPathTrustManagerParameters instance that contains detailed
CertPath API parameters can be used to initialize the TrustManagerFactory
as well. When the system X509TrustManager implementation cannot be con-
figured as required using the provided APIs, a custom instance can be
created by implementing the interface directly, possibly delegating base
cases to the default implementation.
     A KeyManager determines which authentication credentials to send to the
remote host. In the context of PKIX, this means selecting the client authenti-
cation certificate to send to an SSL server. The default KeyManagerFactory can
create a KeyManager instance that uses a KeyStore to search for client authen-
tication keys and related certificates. Just as with TrustManagers, the concrete
interfaces, X509KeyManager (shown in Listing 6-5) and X509ExtendedKeyManager

8. Oracle, Java™ PKI Programmer’s Guide, http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/
security/certpath/CertPathProgGuide.html

                                                                      Network Security and PKI    153

                  (which allows for connection-specific key selection), are PKIX-specific and
                  select a client certificate based on the list of trusted issuers that the server
                  has provided. If the default KeyStore -backed implementation is not suffi-
                  ciently flexible, a custom implementation can be provided by extending the
                  abstract X509ExtendedKeyManager class.

                  String chooseClientAlias(String[] keyType, Principal[] issuers, Socket socket);
                  String chooseServerAlias(String keyType, Principal[] issuers, Socket socket);
                  X509Certificate[] getCertificateChain(String alias);
                  String[] getClientAliases(String keyType, Principal[] issuers);
                  PrivateKey getPrivateKey(String alias);
                  String[] getServerAliases(String keyType, Principal[] issuers);

Listing 6-5: X509KeyManager interface

                      In addition to support for “raw” SSL sockets, JSSE also provides
                  support for HTTPS with the HttpsURLConnection class. HttpsURLConnection
                  uses the default SSLSocketFactory to create secure sockets when opening
                  a connection to a web server. If additional SSL configuration such as
                  specifying app-private trust anchors or authentication keys is required,
                  the default SSLSocketFactory can be replaced for all HttpsURLConnection
                  instances by calling the static setDefaultSSLSocketFactory() method.
                  Alternatively, you can configure the socket factory for a particular
                  instance by calling its setSSLSocketFactory() method.

                  Hostname Verification
                  While SSL verifies server identity by checking its certificate, the protocol
                  does not mandate any hostname verification, and when using raw SSL
                  sockets, the certificate subject is not matched against the server host-
                  name. The HTTPS standard does mandate such a check however, and
                  HttpsURLConnection performs one internally. The default hostname verifica-
                  tion algorithm can be overridden by assigning a HostnameVerifier instance
                  to the class or on a per-instance basis. The verify() callback it needs to
                  implement is shown in Listing 6-6. The SSLSession class used in the call-
                  back encapsulates details about the current SSL connection, including
                  selected protocol and cipher suite, local and peer certificate chains, and
                  peer hostname and connection port number.

                  boolean verify(String hostname, SSLSession session);

Listing 6-6: HostnameVerifier hostname verification callback

                      We have discussed the major classes and interfaces that form the JSSE
                  API and introduced how they related to each other. Their relationships can
                  be visualized as shown in Figure 6-2.

154   Chapter 6

              Key Material                                               Trust Anchors

                                      Custom            Custom
           KeyManagerFactory                                       TrustManagerFactory
                                       KMF               TMF

                        KeyManager                               TrustManager

                                           SSLContext                  SecureRandom

            SSLServerSocketFactory           SSLSocketFactory

               SSLServerSocket

                  SSLSocket          I/O        SSLSocket        I/O         SSLEngine

                                                SSLSession

Figure 6-2: JSSE classes and their relationships

Android JSSE Implementation
       Android comes with two JSSE providers: the Java-based HarmonyJSSE and
       the AndroidOpenSSL provider, which is implemented largely in native code
       bridged to the public Java API using JNI. HarmonyJSSE builds on Java sockets
       and JCA classes in order to implement SSL, while AndroidOpenSSL imple-
       ments most of its functionality by using OpenSSL library calls. As discussed
       in Chapter 5, AndroidOpenSSL is the preferred JCA provider in Android,
       and it also provides the default SSLSocketFactory and SSLServerSocketFactory
       implementations that are returned by SSLSocketFactory.getDefault() and
       SSLServerSocketFactory.getDefault(), respectively.

                                                                         Network Security and PKI    155

                       Both JSSE providers are part of the core Java library (found in core.jar
                  and libjavacore.so), and the native part of the AndroidOpenSSL provider
                  is compiled into libjavacrypto.so. HarmonyJSSE provides only SSLv3.0 and
                  TLSv1.0 support, while AndroidOpenSSL supports TLSv1.1 and TLSv1.2
                  as well. While the SSL socket implementation is different, both providers
                  share the same TrustManager and KeyManager code.

        NOTE      The HarmonyJSSE provider is still available in Android 4.4, but it is considered
                  deprecated and is not actively maintained. It may be removed in future Android
                  versions.

                      In addition to current TLS protocol versions, the OpenSSL-based
                  provider supports the Server Name Indication (SNI) TLS extension (defined
                  in RFC 3546 9), which allows SSL clients to specify the intended hostname
                  when connecting to servers hosting multiple virtual hosts. SNI is used by
                  default when establishing a connection using the HttpsURLConnection class
                  in Android 3.0 and later versions (version 2.3 has partial SNI support).
                  However, SNI is not supported when using the Apache HTTP client library
                  bundled with Android (in the org.apache.http package).
                      Before Android 4.2, the HTTP stack in Android’s core Java library,
                  including HttpsURLConnection, was based on Apache Harmony code. In
                  Android 4.2 and later, the original implementation is replaced with
                  Square’s HTTP & SPDY client library, OkHttp.10

                  Certificate Management and Validation
                  Android’s JSSE implementations mostly conform to the JSSE API specifica-
                  tion, but there are some notable differences as well. The biggest one is how
                  Android handles the system trust store. In Java SE JSSE implementations,
                  the system trust store is a single keystore file (typically called cacerts) whose
                  location can be set with the javax.net.ssl.trustStore system property, but
                  Android follows a different strategy. Recent versions of Android also pro-
                  vide modern certificate validation features such as blacklisting and pinning
                  that are not specified in the original JSSE architecture document. We will
                  discuss Android’s trust store implementation and advanced certificate vali-
                  dation features in the next sections.

                  System Trust Stores
                  As discussed in “Peer Authentication” on page 152, JSSE implementa-
                  tions use a trust store to authenticate connection peers. While SSL does
                  support encryption-only, non-authenticated connections, in practice raw
                  SSL clients usually perform server authentication and it is mandatory for
                  HTTPS. When a per-application trust store is not explicitly provided, JSSE

                  9. S. Blake-Wilson et al., Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions, June 2003, http://tools.ietf.org/
                  html/rfc3546
                  10. Square, Inc., OkHttp: An HTTP & SPDY client for Android and Java applications,
                  http://square.github.io/okhttp/

156   Chapter 6

uses the system trust store to perform SSL peer authentication. The system
trust store is especially important for generic Internet clients such as brows-
ers, because they typically do not manage their own trust store on mobile
devices (desktop versions of Mozilla clients do maintain private credential
and certificate stores, but not on Android). Because system trust stores are
central to the security of all applications that use JSSE, we will look into
their implementation in detail.
     Until Android 4.0, the OS trust store was hardwired into the system and
users had no control over it whatsoever. Certificates bundled in the store
were chosen solely by the device manufacturer or carrier. The only way to
make changes was to root your device, repackage the trusted certificates
file, and replace the original one—a procedure that’s obviously not too
practical, and a major obstacle to using Android in enterprise PKIs. In the
wake of the compromise of multiple major CAs, third-party tools that could
change the system-trusted certificates were developed, but using them still
required a rooted phone. Fortunately, Android 4.0 made managing the
trust store much more flexible, and gave the much-needed control over who
to trust to the user.

Android 4.x System Trust Store
Prior to Android 4.0, the system trust store was a single file: /system/etc/
security/cacerts.bks, a Bouncy Castle (one of the cryptographic providers
used in Android; see Chapter 5 for details) native keystore file. It contained
all the CA certificates that Android trusts and was used both by system apps
such as the email client and browser, and third-party apps. Because it resided
on the read-only system partition, it could not be changed even by system
applications.
     Android 4.0 introduced a new, more flexible TrustedCertificateStore
class that allows for maintaining built-in trust anchors and adding new
ones. It still reads system-trusted certificates from /system/etc/security/, but
adds two new, mutable locations to store CA certificates in /data/misc/
keychain/: the cacerts-added/ and cacerts-removed/ directories. Listing 6-7
shows what their contents looks like:

# ls -l /data/misc/keychain
drwxr-xr-x system   system            cacerts-added
drwxr-xr-x system   system            cacerts-removed
-rw-r--r-- system   system         81 pubkey_blacklist.txt
-rw-r--r-- system   system          7 serial_blacklist.txt
# ls -l /data/misc/keychain/cacerts-added
-rw-r--r-- system   system        653 30ef493b.0u
# ls -l /data/misc/keychain/cacerts-removed
-rw-r--r-- system   system       1060 00673b5b.0v

Listing 6-7: Contents of the cacerts-added/ and cacerts-removed/ directories

    Each file in these directories contains one CA certificate. The file
names may look familiar: they are based on the MD5 hashes of the CA
subject names (computed using OpenSSL’s X509_NAME_hash_old() function),

                                                               Network Security and PKI    157

                  as used in mod_ssl and other cryptographic software implemented using
                  OpenSSL. This makes it easy to quickly find certificates without scanning
                  the entire store by directly converting the DN to a filename.
                       Also note the permissions of the
                  directories: 0775 system system guaran-
                  tees that only the system user is able to
                  add or remove certificates, but anyone
                  can read them. As expected, adding
                  trusted CA certificates is implemented
                  by storing the certificate in the cacerts-
                  added/ directory under the appropriate
                  file name. The certificate stored in the
                  30ef493b.0 file (u in Listing 6-7) will
                  also be displayed in the User tab of
                  the Trusted credentials system applica-
                  tion (Settings4Security4Trusted
                  credentials).
                       But how are OS-trusted certificates
                  disabled? Because preinstalled CA cer-
                  tificates are still stored in /system/etc/
                  security/ (which is mounted read-only), a
                  CA is marked as not trusted by placing
                  a copy of its certificate in the cacerts-
                  removed/ directory. Re-enabling is per-
                  formed by simply removing the file. In
                  this particular case, 00673b5b.0 (v in       Figure 6-3: Preinstalled CA certifi-
                  Listing 6-7) is the thawte Primary Root      cate marked as untrusted
                  CA, shown as disabled in the System tab
                  (see Figure 6-3).

                  Using the System Trust Store
                  TrustedCertificateStore is not part of the Android SDK, but it has a wrapper
                  (TrustedCertificateKeyStoreSpi) accessible via the standard JCA KeyStore API
                  that applications can use (see Listing 6-8).

                  KeyStore ks = KeyStore.getInstance("AndroidCAStore");u
                  ks.load(null, null);v
                  Enumeration<String> aliases = ks.aliases();w
                  while (aliases.hasMoreElements()) {
                      String alias = aliases.nextElement();
                      Log.d(TAG, "Certificate alias: " + alias);
                      X09Certificate cert = (X509Certificate) ks.getCertificate(alias);x
                      Log.d(TAG, "Subject DN: " + cert.getSubjectDN().getName());
                      Log.d(TAG, "Issuer DN: " + cert.getIssuerDN().getName());
                  }

Listing 6-8: Listing trusted certificates using AndroidCAStore

158   Chapter 6

            To get a list of the current trusted certificates, we:

       1.   Create a KeyStore instance by specifying AndroidCAStore as the type
            parameter u.
       2.   Call its load() method and pass null for both parameters v.
       3.   Get a list of certificate aliases with the aliases() method w.
       4.   Pass each alias to the getCertificate() method to get the actual certifi-
            cate object x.

            When you examine the output of this code, you’ll notice that certificate
       aliases start with either the user: (for user-installed certificates) or system:
       (for preinstalled ones) prefix, followed by the subject’s hash value.
            The AndroidCAStore KeyStore implementation lets us easily access the
       OS’s trusted certificates, but a real-world application would be more inter-
       ested in whether it should trust a particular server certificate, not what the
       current trust anchors are. Android makes this very easy by integrating the
       TrustedCertificateKeyStoreSpi with its JSSE implementation. The default
       TrustManagerFactory uses it to get a list of trust anchors, and thus automati-
       cally validates server certificates against the system’s currently trusted cer-
       tificates. Higher-level code that uses HttpsURLConnection or HttpClient (both
       built on top of JSSE) should thus work without needing to worry about
       creating and initializing a custom SSLSocketFactory.
            In order to install our own CA certificate (such as one from a pri-
       vate enterprise CA) into the system trust store, we need to convert it
       to DER (binary) format and copy it to the device. On versions prior to
       Android 4.4.1, the certificate file needs to be copied to the root of exter-
       nal storage with a .crt or .cer extension. Android 4.4.1 and later uses the
       storage access framework introduced in Android 4.4 and allow you to
       select a certificate file from any storage backend that the device can
       access, including integrated cloud providers like Google Drive. We can
       then import the certificate using the system Settings app by selecting
       Settings4Personal4Security4 Credential storage4Install from storage.
       A list of available certificate files is displayed and tapping on a filename
       brings up the import dialog, as shown in Figure 6-4.
            The imported certificate will be displayed in the User tab of the Trusted
       credentials screen (see Figure 6-5). You can view certificate details by tap-
       ping the list entry, and remove it by scrolling down to the bottom of the
       details screen and tapping the Remove button.

NOTE   If the certificate is successfully imported, the certificate file in external storage file will
       be deleted on versions prior to Android 4.4.1.

                                                                           Network Security and PKI    159

Figure 6-4: CA certificate import dialog   Figure 6-5: User-imported CA
                                                             certificates

                       Beginning with Android 4.4, the system displays a notification that
                  warns the user that network activity could be monitored if there are any
                  user-installed trusted certificates. SSL connection monitoring can be
                  accomplished by using an intercepting proxy server that returns automati-
                  cally generated certificates for the sites that the user is trying to access.
                  As long as those certificates are issued by a CA that Android trusts (such
                  as the one manually installed in the trust store), most applications would
                  not know the difference between a connection to the original host and
                  the intercepting proxy (unless they are have pinned the target host; see
                  “Certificate Pinning” on page 168 for details). A warning icon is shown
                  in Quick Settings and next to the Security preference entry in the system
                  Settings. When tapped, the notification displays the warning message
                  shown in Figure 6-6.

160   Chapter 6

Figure 6-6: Network monitoring warning
in Android 4.4

System Trust Store APIs
Third-party applications can prompt the user to import a needed cer-
tificate into the system trust store by using the KeyChain API, introduced
in Android 4.0 as well. (We’ll discuss the KeyChain API in Chapter 7.)
Beginning with Android 4.4, device administrator applications can
silently install CA certificates in the system trust store if they hold the
MANAGE_CA_CERTIFICATES system permission. (We’ll introduce device
administration and related APIs in Chapter 9.)
     Once a CA certificate is imported into the system trust store, we can
use it to validate certificates using the JSSE TrustManager API as shown in
Listing 6-9.

// Certificate chain including the end entity (server) certificate
// and any intermediate issuers.
X509Certificate[] chain = { endEntityCert };
TrustManagerFactory tmf = TrustManagerFactory.getInstance("X509");u
tmf.init((KeyStore) null);v

                                                       Network Security and PKI    161

                  TrustManager[] tms = tmf.getTrustManagers();
                  X509TrustManager xtm = (X509TrustManager) tms[0];w
                  Log.d(TAG, "checking chain with " + xtm.getClass().getName());
                  xtm.checkServerTrusted(chain, "RSA");x
                  Log.d(TAG, "chain is valid");

Listing 6-9: Initializing a TrustManager with system trust anchors and validating a certificate

                       To do so, we first get the system PKIX (aliased to X509) TrustManagerFactory
                  (u in Listing 6-9); initialize it using the system trust store by passing null to
                  its init(KeyStore ks) method v; then get the first TrustManager implementation
                  for the specified algorithm (there is usually only one, but do check in produc-
                  tion code) and cast it to the validation algorithm-specific X509TrustManager
                  interface w. Finally, we pass the certificate chain and the key exchange algo-
                  rithm used (RSA, DHE_DSS, and so on) to the checkServerTrusted() method x.
                  If a chain leading to a trusted CA certifi­cate can be built, validation passes
                  and the method returns. If any of the certificates in the chain is expired or
                  invalid, or if the chain does not lead to a system trust anchor, the method
                  will throw a java.security.cert.CertificateException (or one of its subclasses).
                  Connections established with SSLSocket and HttpsURLConnection perform similar
                  validation automatically.
                       This works pretty well, but there is one major problem with this code: it
                  does not check revocation. Android’s default TrustManager explicitly turns off
                  revocation when validating the certificate chain. So even if the certificate
                  had a CRL Distribution Point (CDP) extension, pointing to a valid CRL, or
                  the OCSP responder URI was included in the Authority Information Access
                  (AIA) extension, and the certificate was actually revoked, it would still vali-
                  date in Android. What’s missing here is online revocation checking: the ability
                  to dynamically fetch, cache, and update revocation information as needed,
                  based on information available in certificate extensions.

                  Certificate Blacklisting
                  Instead of using online revocation checks, Android relies on CA and end
                  entity certificate blacklisting, which we will discuss in this section. Certificate
                  blacklisting refers to the explicit blocking of certain certificates by verifiers,
                  regardless of their state in the PKI’s repository. Blacklisting is not part of
                  the original PKI philosophy and is not defined in any of the related stan-
                  dards. So why is it necessary in practice?
                       In a perfect world, a working PKI takes care of issuing, distributing,
                  and revoking certificates as necessary. All that a system needs to verify the
                  identities of previously unknown machines and users are a few trust anchor
                  certificates: any end entity certificates encountered will be issued by one
                  of the trusted CAs, or one of their subordinate issuing CAs (sub-CA). In
                  practice, though, there are a number of issues, mostly related to handling
                  compromised keys. End entity certificates have a relatively short validity
                  period (usually one year), which limits the time a compromised key can be
                  exploited. However, CA certificates have very long validity (20 or more years

162   Chapter 6

is typical) and because CAs are implicitly trusted, a key compromise may
go undetected for quite some time. Recent breaches in top-level CAs have
shown that CA key compromise is not a theoretical problem, and the conse-
quences of a CA breach can be quite far-reaching.

Handling CA Key Compromises
Probably the biggest PKI issue is that revocation of root certificates is not
really supported. Most OSes and browsers come with a preconfigured set of
trusted CA certificates (dozens of them!) and when a CA certificate is com-
promised, there are two main ways to handle it: tell users to remove it from
the trust store, or issue an emergency update that removes the affected cer-
tificate. Expecting users to handle this is obviously unrealistic, so that leaves
the second option.
      Windows modifies OS trust anchors by distributing patches via Windows
Update, and browser vendors simply release a new patch version. However,
even if an update removes a CA certificate from the system trust store, a
user can still install it again, especially when presented with a “do this, or
you can’t access this site” ultimatum.
      To make sure removed trust anchors are not brought back, the hashes
of their public keys are added to a blacklist and the OS or browser rejects
them even if they are in the user trust store. This approach effectively
revokes CA certificates (within the scope of the OS or browser, of course)
and addresses PKI’s inability to handle compromised trust anchors. However,
it is not exactly ideal because even an emergency update takes some time to
prepare, and after it’s released, some users won’t update right away no mat-
ter how often they’re nagged about it. (Fortunately, CA compromises are
relatively rare and widely publicized, so it seems to work well in practice—
for now, at least.) Other approaches have been proposed as well, but most
are not widely used. We discuss some of the proposed solutions in “Radical
Solutions” on page 167.

Handling End Entity Key Compromises
While CA breaches are fairly uncommon, end entity (EE) key compromise
occurs much more often. Whether due to a server breach, stolen laptop,
or a lost smart card, these compromises occur daily. Fortunately, modern
PKI systems are designed with this in mind and CAs can revoke certificates
and publish revocation information in the form of CRLs, or provide online
revocation status using OCSP.
     Unfortunately, this doesn’t work too well in the real world. Revocation
checking generally requires network access to a machine different from the
one we are trying to connect to, and as such has a fairly high failure rate.
To mitigate this, most browsers try to fetch fresh revocation information,
but if that effort fails for some reason, they simply ignore the error (soft-
fail), or at best show some visual indication that revocation information is
not available.

                                                         Network Security and PKI    163

        NOTE      To address this problem, Google Chrome disables online revocation checks11 altogether,
                  and now uses its update mechanism to proactively push revocation information to
                  browsers, without requiring an application update or restart.12 Thus Chrome can
                  have an up-to-date local cache of revocation information, which makes certificate val-
                  idation both faster and more reliable. This is can be considered yet another blacklist
                  (Chrome calls it a CRL set), this time based on information published by each CA.
                  The browser vendor effectively managing revocation data on the user’s behalf is quite
                  novel; not everyone thinks it’s a good idea, but it has worked well so far.

                       An alternative to directly pushing revocation information as part of
                  browser updates is OCSP stapling, formerly known as the TLS Certificate Status
                                     13
                  Request extension. Instead of requiring clients to issue an OCSP request
                  for the server certificate, the relevant response is included (“stapled”) with
                  the SSL handshake via the Certificate Status Request extension response.
                  Because the response is signed by the CA, the client can trust it just as if
                  it had fetched it directly from the CA’s OCSP server. If the server did not
                  include an OCSP response in the SSL handshake, the client is expected to
                  fetch one itself. OCSP stapling is supported by all major HTTP servers, but
                  browser support is still patchy, especially on mobile versions where latency is
                  an issue.

                  Android Certificate Blacklisting
                  As we learned in “Android 4.x System Trust Store” on page 157, Android 4.0
                  added a management UI, as well as an SDK API, that allows for adding and
                  removing trust anchors to the system trust store. This didn’t quite solve PKI’s
                  number one problem, though: aside from the user manually disabling a com-
                  promised trust anchor, an OS update was still required to remove a compro-
                  mised CA certificate. Additionally, because Android does not perform online
                  revocation checks when validating certificate chains, there was no way to
                  detect compromised end entity certificates, even if they have been revoked.
                      To solve this problem, Android 4.1 introduced certificate blacklists that
                  can be modified without requiring an OS update. There are now two sys-
                  tem blacklists:

                  •    A public key hash blacklist (to handle compromised CAs)
                  •    A serial number blacklist (to handle compromised EE certificates)

                       The certificate chain validator component takes those two lists into
                  consideration when verifying websites or user certificates. Let’s look at how
                  this is implemented in a bit more detail.

                  11. Adam Langley, Revocation checking and Chrome’s CRL, Feb 2012, https://www.imperialviolet
                  .org/2012/02/05/crlsets.html
                  12. Online revocation checks can still be enabled by setting the EnableOnlineRevocationChecks
                  option to true (default is false).
                  13. D. Eastlake 3rd, Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions: Extension Definitions, Section 8,
                  January 2011, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6066#section-8

164   Chapter 6

           Android uses a content provider to store OS settings in a system data-
       base. Some of those settings can be modified by third-party apps holding
       the necessary permissions, while some are reserved for the system and can
       only be changed in the system Settings, or by another system application.
       The settings reserved for the system are known as secure settings. Android 4.1
       adds two new secure settings under the following URIs:

       •   content://settings/secure/pubkey_blacklist
       •   content://settings/secure/serial_blacklist

           As the names imply, the first one stores public key hashes of com-
       promised CAs and the second one a list of EE certificate serial numbers.
       Additionally, the system server now starts a CertBlacklister component that
       registers itself as a ContentObserver for the two blacklist URIs. Whenever a new
       value is written to any of the blacklist secure settings, the CertBlacklister is
       notified and writes the value to a file on disk. The files are comprised of a
       comma-delimited list of hex-encoded public key hashes or certificate serial
       numbers. The files are:

       •   Certificate blacklist: /data/misc/keychain/pubkey_blacklist.txt
       •   Serial number blacklist: /data/misc/keychain/serial_blacklist.txt

            Why write the files to disk when they are already available in the set-
       tings database? Because the component that actually uses the blacklists
       is a standard Java CertPath API class that doesn’t know anything about
       Android and its system databases. The certificate path validator class,
       PKIXCertPathValidatorSpi, is part of the Bouncy Castle JCA provider modi-
       fied to handle certificate blacklists, which are an Android-specific feature
       and not defined in the standard CertPath API. The PKIX certificate vali-
       dation algorithm that the class implements is rather complex, but what
       Android 4.1 adds is fairly straightforward:

       •   When verifying an EE (leaf) certificate, check to see if its serial number
           is in the serial number blacklist. If so, return the same error (exception)
           as if the certificate has been revoked.
       •   When verifying a CA certificate, check to see if the hash of its public
           key is in the public key blacklist. If so, return the same error as if the
           certificate has been revoked.

NOTE   Using the unqualified serial number to index blacklisted EE certificates could be a
       problem if two or more certificates from different CAs happen to have the same serial
       number. In this case, blacklisting just one of the certificates will effectively blacklist
       all others with the same serial number. In practice, though, most public CAs use long
       and randomly generated serial numbers so the probability of collision is quite low.

            The certificate path validator component is used throughout the whole
       system, so blacklists affect applications that use HTTP client classes, as well
       as the native Android browser and WebView. As mentioned above, modifying

                                                                       Network Security and PKI    165

                  the blacklists requires system permissions, so only core system apps can
                  change it. There are no apps in the AOSP source that actually call those
                  APIs, but a good candidate to manage blacklists are the Google services
                  components, available on “Google Experience” devices (that is, devices
                  with the Play Store client preinstalled). These manage Google accounts
                  and access to Google services, and provide push-style notifications via
                  Google Client Messaging (GCM). Because GCM allows for real-time
                  server-initiated push notifications, it’s a safe bet that those will be used
                  to trigger certificate blacklist updates.

                  Reexamining the PKI Trust Model
                  Android has taken steps to make its trust store more flexible by allowing
                  on-demand modification of both trust anchors and certificate blacklists
                  without requiring a system update. While certificate blacklisting does make
                  Android more resilient to some PKI-related attacks and vulnerabilities, it
                  doesn’t quite solve all problems related to using certificates issued by public
                  CAs. We present some of those problems and the proposed solutions next.
                  We then conclude our discussion of PKI and SSL with a description of
                  Android’s implementation of one of those solutions: certificate pinning.

                  Trust Problems in Today’s PKI
                  In the highly unlikely case that you haven’t heard about it, the trustworthi-
                  ness of the existing public CA model has been severely compromised in
                  recent years. It has been suspect for a while, but recent high profile CA secu-
                  rity breaches have brought this problem into the spotlight. Attackers have
                  managed to issue certificates for a wide range of sites, including Windows
                  Update servers and Gmail. Although not all were used (or at least they were
                  not detected) in real attacks, the incidents have shown just how much of cur-
                  rent Internet technology depends on certificates.
                       Fraudulent certificates can be used for anything from installing malware
                  to spying on Internet communication, all while fooling users into think-
                  ing that they are using a secure channel or installing a trusted executable.
                  Unfortunately, better security for CAs is not a solution because major CAs
                  have willingly issued hundreds of certificates for unqualified names such
                  as localhost, webmail, and exchange.14 Certificates issued for unqualified host
                  names can be used to launch a MITM attack against clients that accesses
                  internal servers using their unqualified name, thus making it easy to eaves-
                  drop on internal corporate traffic. And, of course, there is also the matter of
                  compelled certificate creation, where a government agency could compel a
                  CA to issue a false certificate to be used for intercepting secure traffic.
                       Clearly the current PKI system, which is largely based on a preselected
                  set of trusted CAs (whose certificates are preinstalled as trust anchors),
                  is problematic, but what are some of the actual problems? There are dif-
                  ferent takes on this, but for starters, there are too many public CAs. The

                  14. Electronic Frontier Foundation, Unqualified Names in the SSL Observatory, April 2011,
                  https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2011/04/unqualified-names-ssl-observatory

166   Chapter 6

Electronic Frontier Foundation’s SSL Observatory project15 has shown that
more than 650 public CAs are trusted by major browsers. Recent Android
versions ship with more than 100 trusted CA certificates and until version 4.0,
the only way to remove a trusted certificate was through a vendor-initiated
OS update.
     Additionally, there is generally no technical restriction on which cer-
tificates CAs can issue. As the Comodo and DigiNotar attacks, as well as
the recent ANNSI16 intermediate CA incident, have shown, anyone can
issue a certificate for *.google.com (name constraints don’t apply to root
CAs and don’t really work for a public CA). Furthermore, because CAs
don’t publicize the certificates they have issued, there is no way for site
operators (in this case, Google) to know when someone issues a new, pos-
sibly fraudulent certificate for one of their sites and take appropriate action
(certificate transparency standards17 aim to address this). In short, with
the current system, if any of the built-in trust anchors are compromised, an
attacker could issue a certificate for any site, and neither users accessing it
nor the site’s owner would notice.

Radical Solutions
Proposed solutions range from radical—scrap the whole PKI idea alto-
gether and replace it with something new and better (DNSSEC is a usual
favorite); to moderate—use the current infrastructure but do not implicitly
trust CAs; to evolutionary—maintain compatibility with the current system
but extend it in ways that limit the damage of CA compromise.
    Unfortunately, DNSSEC is still not universally deployed, although the
key TLD domains have already been signed. Additionally, it is inherently
hierarchical—with country top-level domains controlled by the respective
countries—and actually more rigid than PKI, so it doesn’t really fit the bill
too well. Improving the current PKI situation is an area of active research,
and other viable radical solutions have yet to emerge.
    Moving toward the moderate side, the SSH model has also been
suggested (sometimes called Trust on First Use, or TOFU ). In this model,
no sites or CAs are initially trusted, and users decide which site to trust
on first access. Unlike SSH however, the number of sites that you access
directly or indirectly (via CDNs, embedded content, and so on) is virtually
unlimited, and user-managed trust is quite unrealistic.

Convergence and Trust Agility
In a similar vein but much more practical is Convergence.18 Convergence is
a system based on the idea of trust agility, defined as “the ability to easily

15. Electronic Frontier Foundation, The EFF SSL Observatory, https://www.eff.org/observatory
16. Agence nationale de la sécurité des systèmes d’information, French Network and Information
Security Agency
17. B. Laurie, A. Langley, and E. Kasper, Certificate Transparency, June 2013, http://tools.ietf.org/
html/rfc6962
18. Thoughtcrime Labs, Convergence, http://convergence.io/

                                                                        Network Security and PKI    167

                  choose who you trust and to revise that decision at any time.” It both abol-
                  ishes the browser (or OS) preselected trust anchor set, and recognizes that
                  users cannot be relied on to independently make trust decisions about all
                  the sites they visit. Trust decisions are delegated to a set of notaries that can
                  vouch for a site by confirming that the certificate you receive from a site is
                  one they have seen before. If multiple notaries point out that the same cer-
                  tificate as correct, users can be reasonably sure that it is genuine and there-
                  fore trustworthy.
                       Convergence is not a formal standard, but a working implementation
                  has been released, including a Firefox plugin (client) and server-side notary
                  software. While this system is promising, the number of available notaries
                  is currently limited, and Google has publicly stated that it won’t add it to
                  Chrome. Additionally, it cannot currently be implemented as a browser
                  extension, because Chrome does not allow third-party extensions to over-
                  ride the default certificate validation module.

                  Certificate Pinning
                  That leads us to the current evolutionary solutions, which have been deployed
                  to a fairly large user base, mostly courtesy of the Chrome browser. One is
                  certificate blacklisting, which we already discussed, and the other is certifi-
                  cate pinning.
                       Certificate pinning (or more accurately, public key pinning) takes a con-
                  verse to the blacklisting approach: it whitelists the keys that are trusted to
                  sign certificates for a particular site. Pinning was introduced in Google
                  Chrome version 13 in order to limit the CAs that can issue certificates for
                  Google properties. It is implemented by maintaining a list of public keys
                  that are trusted to issue certificates for a particular DNS name. The list is
                  consulted when validating the certificate chain for a host, and if the chain
                  doesn’t include at least one of the whitelisted keys, validation fails. In prac-
                  tice, the browser keeps a list of SHA-1 hashes of the SubjectPublicKeyInfo
                  (SPKI) field of trusted certificates. Pinning the public keys instead of the
                  actual certificates allows for updating host certificates without breaking
                  validation and requiring pinning information updates.
                       However, a hardcoded pin list doesn’t really scale and a couple of
                  new Internet standards have been proposed to help solve this scalability
                                                                                 19
                  problem: Public Key Pinning Extension for HTTP (PKPE) by Google
                                                                        20
                  and Trust Assertions for Certificate Keys (TACK) by Moxie Marlinspike.
                  The first one is simpler and proposes a new HTTP header (Public-Key-Pin,
                  or PKP) that holds pinning information about a host’s certificate. The
                  header value can include public key hashes, pin lifetime, and a flag that
                  specifies whether pinning should be applied to subdomains of the current
                  host. Pinning information (or simply pins) is cached by the browser and
                  used when making trust decisions until it expires. Pins are required to be

                  19. C. Evans, C. Palmer, and R. Sleevi, Public Key Pinning Extension for HTTP, August 7, 2014,
                  http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-websec-key-pinning-20
                  20. M. Marlinspike, Trust Assertions for Certificate Keys, January 7, 2013, http://tack.io/draft.html

168   Chapter 6

delivered over a secure (SSL) connection, and the first connection that
includes a PKP header is implicitly trusted (or optionally validated against
pins built into the client). The protocol also supports an endpoint to
report failed validations via the report-uri directive and allows for a non-
enforcing mode (specified with the Public-Key-Pins-Report-Only header),
where validation failures are reported but connections are still allowed.
This makes it possible to notify host administrators about possible MITM
attacks against their sites, so that they can take appropriate action.
    The TACK proposal, on the other hand, is somewhat more complex
and defines a new TLS extension (also called TACK) that carries pinning
information signed with a dedicated TACK key. TLS connections to a pinned
hostname require the server to present a “tack” containing the pinned key
and a corresponding signature over the TLS server’s public key. Thus, both
pinning information exchange and validation are carried out at the TLS
layer. In contrast, PKPE uses the HTTP layer (over TLS) to send pinning
information to clients, but also requires validation to be performed at the
TLS layer, dropping the connection if validation against the pins fails.
    Now that we have an idea how pinning works, let’s see how it’s imple-
mented on Android.

Certificate Pinning in Android
Pinning is one of the many security enhancements introduced in Android 4.2.
The OS doesn’t come with any built-in pins, but instead reads them from a
file in the /data/misc/keychain/ directory (where user-added certificates and
blacklists are stored). The file is simply called pins and is in the following
format (see Listing 6-10):

hostname=enforcing|SPKI SHA512 hash, SPKI SHA512 hash,...

Listing 6-10: System pins file format

     Here, enforcing is either true or false and is followed by a list of SPKI
SHA-512 hashes separated by commas. Note that there is no validity period,
so pins are valid until deleted. The file is used not only by the browser, but
system-wide by virtue of pinning being integrated in libcore. In practice, this
means that the default (and only) system X509TrustManager implementation
(TrustManagerImpl) consults the pin list when validating certificate chains.
     But there’s a twist: the standard checkServerTrusted() method doesn’t
consult the pin list. Thus, any legacy libraries that do not know about cer-
tificate pinning would continue to function exactly as before, regardless of
the contents of the pin list. This has probably been done for compatibility
reasons and is something to be aware of: running on Android 4.2 or above
doesn’t necessarily mean that you get the benefit of system-level certificate
pins. The pinning functionality is exposed to third-party libraries and apps
via the new X509TrustManagerExtensions SDK class. It has a single method,
checkServerTrusted() (full signature shown in Listing 6-11) that returns a
validated chain on success or throws a CertificateException if validation fails.

                                                        Network Security and PKI    169

List<X509Certificate> checkServerTrusted(X509Certificate[] chain, String authType, String host)

Listing 6-11: X509TrustManagerExtensions certificate validation method

                        The last parameter, host, is what the underlying implementation
                   (TrustManagerImpl) uses to search the pin list for matching pins. If one is
                   found, the public keys in the chain being validated will be checked against
                   the hashes in the pin entry for that host. If none matches, validation will
                   fail and you will get a CertificateException.
                        What part of the system uses the new pinning functionality then?
                   The default SSL engine (JSSE provider), namely the client handshake
                   (ClientHandshakeImpl), and SSL socket (OpenSSLSocketImpl) implementations
                   check their underlying X509TrustManager and if it supports pinning, they per-
                   form additional validation against the pin list. If validation fails, the con-
                   nection won’t be established, thus implementing pin validation on the TLS
                   layer as required by the standards discussed in the previous section.
                        The pins file is not written directly by the OS. Its updates are triggered
                   by a broadcast (android.intent.action.UPDATE_PINS) that contains the new pins
                   in its extras. The extras contain the path to the new pins file, its new ver-
                   sion (stored in /data/misc/keychain/metadata/version/), a hash of the current
                   pins, and a SHA512withRSA signature over all the above. The receiver of the
                   broadcast (CertPinInstallReceiver) then verifies the version, hash, and signa-
                   ture, and if valid, atomically replaces the current pins file with new content
                   (the same procedure is used for updating the premium SMS numbers list).
                   Signing the new pins ensures that they can only by updated by whoever con-
                   trols the private signing key. The corresponding public key used for valida-
                   tion is stored as a system secure setting under the config_update_certificate key
                   (usually in the secure table of the /data/data/com.android.providers.settings/
                   databases/settings.db). (As of this writing, the pins file on Nexus devices con-
                   tains more than 40 pin entries, which cover most Google properties, includ-
                   ing Gmail, YouTube, and Play Store servers.)

     Summary
                   Android builds on standard Java APIs such as JSSE and CertPath to imple-
                   ment SSL connections and the required authentication mechanisms. Most of
                   the secure sockets functionality is provided by the largely native, OpenSSL-
                   based JSSE implementation, while certificate validation and trust store man-
                   agement are implemented in Java. Android provides a shared system trust
                   store that can be managed via the Settings UI or the KeyStore API. All appli-
                   cations that use SSL or certificate validation APIs inherit the system trust
                   anchors, unless an app-specific trust store is explicitly specified. Certificate
                   validation in Android does not use online revocation checking but relies
                   on the system certificate blacklist to detect compromised CA or end entity
                   certificates. Finally, recent versions of Android support system-level certifi-
                   cate pinning in order to be able to constrain the set of certificates that are
                   allowed to issue a server certificate for a particular host.

170   Chapter 6

