                         10
                  D e v ice Security

Until now, we’ve focused on how Android implements
sandboxing and privilege separation in order to iso-
late applications from one another and the core OS.
In this chapter, we look at how Android ensures OS
integrity and protects device data from attackers that
have physical access to a device. We start with a brief
description of Android’s bootloader and recovery OS,
then discuss Android’s verified boot feature, which guarantees that the
system partition is not modified by malicious programs. Next we look at
how Android encrypts the userdata partition, which hosts OS configuration
files and application data. This guarantees that the device can’t be booted
without the decryption password and that user data can’t be extracted even
by direct access to the device’s flash memory. We then show how Android’s
screen locking functionality is implemented, and how unlock patterns,
PINs, and passphrases are hashed and stored on the device.
     We’ll also discuss secure USB debugging, which authenticates hosts that
connect to the Android Debug Bridge (ADB) daemon over USB and requires

                   users to explicitly allow access for each host. Because ADB access over
                   USB allows execution of privileged operations such as application instal-
                   lation, full backup, and filesystem access (including full access to external
                   storage), this feature helps prevent unauthorized access to device data
                   and applications on devices that have ADB debugging enabled. Finally, we
                   describe the implementation and archive encryption format of Android’s
                   full backup feature.

     Controlling OS Boot-Up and Installation
                   Given physical access to a device, an attacker can access or modify user and
                   system data not only via higher-level OS constructs such as files and directo-
                   ries, but also by accessing memory or raw disk storage directly. Such direct
                   access can be achieved by physically interfacing with the device’s electronic
                   components by, for example, disassembling the device and connecting to
                   hidden hardware debug interfaces or desoldering flash memory and read-
                   ing the contents with a specialized device.

        N ote      Such hardware attacks are beyond the scope of this book; see Chapter 10 of the
                   Android Hacker’s Handbook (Wiley, 2014) for an introduction to this topic.

                       A less intrusive, but still powerful way to gain access to this data is
                   to use the device update mechanism to modify system files and remove
                   access restrictions, or boot an alternative operating system that allows
                   direct access to storage devices. Most consumer Android devices are
                   locked down by default so that those techniques are either not possible
                   or require possession of a code signing key, typically available only to
                   the device manufacturer.
                       In the next sections, we briefly discuss how Android’s bootloader and
                   recovery OS regulate access to boot images and device update mechanisms.
                   (We’ll explore bootloader and recovery functionality in more detail in
                   Chapter 13.)

                   Bootloader
                   A bootloader is a specialized, hardware-specific program that executes when
                   a device is first powered on (coming out of reset for ARM devices). Its pur-
                   pose is to initialize device hardware, optionally provide a minimal device
                   configuration interface, and then find and start the operating system.
                        Booting a device typically requires going through different stages,
                   which may involve a separate bootloader for each stage—but we’ll refer to
                   a single, aggregate bootloader that includes all boot stages, for the sake of
                   simplicity. Android bootloaders are typically proprietary and specific to
                   the system on a chip (SoC) that the device is built upon. Device and SoC
                   manufacturers provide different functionality and levels of protection in
                   their bootloaders, but most bootloaders support a fastboot, or more gener-
                   ally, download mode, which allows for the writing (usually called flashing) of
                   raw partition images to the device’s persistent storage, as well as booting

252   Chapter 10

transient system images (without flashing them to the device). Fastboot
mode is enabled by a special hardware key combination applied while the
device is booting, or by sending the reboot bootloader command via ADB.
     In order to ensure device integrity, consumer devices are shipped with
locked bootloaders, which either disallow flashing and booting system
images completely or allow it only for images that have been signed by the
device manufacturer. Most consumer devices allow for unlocking the boot-
loader, which removes fastboot restrictions and image signature checks.
Unlocking the bootloader typically requires formatting the userdata parti-
tion, thus ensuring that a malicious OS image cannot get access to existing
user data.
     On some devices, unlocking the bootloader is an irreversible proce-
dure, but most devices provide a way to relock the bootloader and return
it to its original state. This is typically implemented by storing a bootloader
state flag on a dedicated system partition (typically called param or misc) that
hosts various device metatdata. Relocking the bootloader simply resets the
value of this flag.

Recovery
A more flexible way to update a device is via its recovery OS. The recovery
OS, or simply recovery, is a minimal Linux-based OS that includes a kernel,
RAM disk with various low-level tools, and a minimal UI that is typically
operated using the device’s hardware buttons. The recovery is used to apply
post-ship updates, generally delivered in the form of over-the-air (OTA)
update packages. OTA packages include the new versions (or a binary
patch) of updated system files and a script that applies the update. As we
learned in Chapter 3, OTA files are also code signed with the private key
of the device manufacturer. The recovery includes the public part of that
key and verifies OTA files before applying them. This ensures that only
OTA files that originate from a trusted party can modify the device OS.
     The recovery OS is stored on a dedicated partition, just like the main
Android OS. Therefore, it can be replaced by putting the bootloader into
download mode and flashing a custom recovery image, which replaces the
embedded public key, or does not verify OTA signatures at all. Such a recov-
ery OS allows the main OS to be completely replaced with a build produced
by a third party. A custom recovery OS can also allow unrestricted root
access via ADB, as well as raw partition data acquisition. While the userdata
partition could be encrypted (see “Disk Encryption” on page 258), mak-
ing direct data access impossible, it is trivial to install a malicious program
(rootkit) on the system partition while in recovery mode. The rootkit can
then enable remote access to the device when the main OS is booted and
thus allow access to user data that is transparently decrypted when the
main OS boots. Verified boot (discussed in the next section) can prevent
this, but only if the device verifies the boot partition using an unmodifiable
verification key, stored in hardware.
     An unlocked bootloader allows booting or flashing custom system
images and direct access to system partitions. While Android security

                                                               Device Security   253

                   features such as verified boot and disk encryption can limit the damage
                   that a malicious system image flashed via an unlocked bootloader can do,
                   controlling access to the bootloader is integral to protecting an Android
                   device. Therefore the bootloader should only be unlocked on test or devel-
                   opment devices, or relocked and returned to its original state immediately
                   after modifying the system.

     Verified Boot
                   Android’s verified boot implementation is based on the dm-verity device-
                   mapper block integrity checking target.1 Device-mapper 2 is a Linux kernel
                   framework that provides a generic way to implement virtual block devices.
                   It’s the basis of Linux’s Logical Volume Manager (LVM), and it’s used to
                   implement full-disk encryption (using the dm-crypt target), RAID arrays,
                   and even distributed replicated storage.
                         Device-mapper works by essentially mapping a virtual block device
                   to one or more physical block devices and optionally modifying trans-
                   ferred data in transit. For example, dm-crypt (which is also the basis of
                   Android’s userdata partition encryption, as discussed in “Disk Encryption”
                   on page 258) decrypts read physical blocks and encrypts written blocks
                   before committing them to disk. Thus, disk encryption is transparent to
                   users of the virtual dm-crypt block device. Device-mapper targets can be
                   stacked on top of each other, making it possible to implement complex data
                   transformations.

                   dm-verity Overview
                   Because dm-verity is a block integrity checking target, it transparently
                   verifies the integrity of each device block as it’s being read from disk. If
                   the block checks out, the read succeeds; if not, the read generates an I/O
                   error as if the block were physically corrupted.
                        Under the hood, dm-verity is implemented using a precalculated hash
                   tree (also called a Merkle tree) that includes the hashes of all device blocks.
                   The leaf nodes of the tree include hashes of physical device blocks, while
                   intermediate nodes are hashes of their child nodes (hashes of hashes). The
                   root node is called the root hash and is based on all hashes in lower levels,
                   as shown in Figure 10-1. Thus, a change even in a single device block will
                   result in a change of the root hash, and in order to verify that a hash tree is
                   genuine we only need to verify its root hash.
                        At runtime, dm-verity calculates the hash of each block when it’s read
                   and verifies it by traversing the precalculated hash tree. Because reading
                   data from a physical device is already a time-consuming operation, the

                   1. Milan Broz, “dm-verity: device-mapper block integrity checking target,” https://
                   code.google.com/p/cryptsetup/wiki/DMVerity
                   2. Red Hat, Inc., “Device-Mapper Resource Page,” https://www.sourceware.org/dm/

254   Chapter 10

latency added by hashing and verification is relatively low. Furthermore,
once verified, disk blocks are cached, and subsequent reads of the same
block do not trigger integrity verification.

                                Root Hash

             Hash123                                 HashXYZ

    Hash1     Hash2    Hash3                HashX     HashY    HashZ

    Block1   Block2    Block3      ...      BlockX   BlockY    BlockZ

Figure 10-1: dm-verity hash tree

     Because dm-verity depends on a precalculated hash tree over all blocks
of a device, the underlying device must be mounted read-only in order for
verification to be possible. Most filesystems record mount times and other
metadata in their superblock, so even if no files are changed at runtime,
block integrity checks will fail if the underlying block device is mounted
read-write. Even though this can be seen as a limitation, it works well for
devices or partitions that hold system files, which are only changed by OS
updates. Any other change indicates either OS or disk corruption, or that a
malicious program is trying to modify the OS or masquerade as a system file.
     Ultimately, dm-verity’s read-only requirement fits well with Android’s
security model, which hosts only application data on a read-write partition
and keeps OS files on the read-only system partition.

Android Implementation
The dm-verity device-mapper target was originally developed in order to
implement verified boot in Chrome OS and was integrated into the main-
line Linux kernel in version 3.4. It’s enabled with the CONFIG_DM_VERITY kernel
configuration item.
    Like Chrome OS, Android 4.4 also uses the dm-verity target, but the
cryptographic verification of the root hash and mounting of verified parti-
tions are implemented differently. The RSA public key used for verification
is embedded in the boot partition under the verity_key filename and is used
to verify the dm-verity mapping table, which holds the locations of the tar-
get device and the offset of the hash table, as well as the root hash and salt.
    The mapping table and its signature are part of the verity metadata
block, which is written to disk directly after the last filesystem block of the
target device. A partition is marked as verifiable by adding the verify flag
to the Android-specific fs_mgr_flags field of the device’s fstab file. When
Android’s filesystem manager encounters the verify flag in fstab, it loads

                                                                        Device Security   255

                   the verity metadata from the block device specified in fstab and verifies its
                   signature using the included verity key. If the signature check succeeds, the
                   filesystem manager parses the dm-verity mapping table and passes it to the
                   Linux device-mapper, which uses the information contained in the map-
                   ping table in order to create a virtual dm-verity block device. This virtual
                   block device is then mounted at the mount point specified in fstab in place
                   of the corresponding physical device. As a result, all reads from the under-
                   lying physical device are transparently verified against the pre-generated
                   hash tree. Modifying or adding files, or even remounting the partition as
                   read-write results in an integrity verification and an I/O error.

        NOTE       Because dm-verity is a kernel feature, in order for its integrity protection to be effec-
                   tive, the kernel that the device boots needs to be trusted. On Android, this requires
                   verifying the boot partition, which also contains the root filesystem RAM disk (initrd)
                   and the verity public key. Kernel or boot image verification is a device-specific process,
                   which is typically implemented in the device bootloader and relies on an unmodifiable
                   signature verification key stored in hardware.

                   Enabling Verified Boot
                   The official Android documentation describes the procedure required
                   to enable verified boot on Android as a multi-step process, which involves
                   generating a hash tree, creating a dm-verity mapping table for the hash
                   tree, signing the table, and generating and writing a verity metadata block
                   to the target device.3 In this section, we briefly describe the key steps of this
                   process.
                        A dm-verity hash tree is generated with the veritysetup program, which
                   is part of the cryptsetup cryptographic volume management tools package.
                   The veritysetup program can operate directly on block devices or gener-
                   ate a hash tree using a filesystem image, and write the hash table to a file.
                   Android’s dm-verity implementation expects that the hash tree data to be
                   stored on the same device as the target filesystem, so an explicit hash offset
                   that points to a location after the verity metadata block must be specified
                   when invoking veritysetup. Figure 10-2 shows the layout of a disk partition
                   prepared for use with dm-verity.
                                                                                         Superblock
                    Superblock

                                                                             Verity
                                                                  Block N
                                 Block 1

                                           Filesystem Data                  Metadata                  Hash Tree Data
                                                                             Block

Figure 10-2: Layout of a disk partition prepared for dm-verity verification

                        Generating the hash tree produces the root hash, which is used to build
                   the dm-verity mapping table for the target device. A sample mapping table
                   is shown in Listing 10-1.

                   3. Google, “dm-verity on boot,” https://source.android.com/devices/tech/security/dm-verity.html

256   Chapter 10

                    1u /dev/block/mmcblk0p21v /dev/block/mmcblk0p21w 4096x 4096y
                    204800z 204809{ sha256|
                    1F951588516c7e3eec3ba10796aa17935c0c917475f8992353ef2ba5c3f47bcb}
                    5f061f591b51bf541ab9d89652ec543ba253f2ed9c8521ac61f1208267c3bfb1~

Listing 10-1: Android dm-verity device mapping table

                        As shown in the listing, the table is a single line (split across multiple
                    lines for readability) that, besides the root hash }, contains the dm-verity
                    version u, name of the underlying data and hash device (v and w), data
                    and hash block sizes (x and y), data and hash disk offsets (z and {),
                    hash algorithm |, and salt ~.
                        The mapping table is signed using a 2048-bit RSA key, and along with
                    the resulting PKCS#1 v1.5 signature, is used to form the 32 KB verity
                    metadata block. Table 10-1 shows the contents and size of each field of
                    the metadata block.

Table 10-1: Verity Metadata Block Contents

                     Field                         Description               Size          Value
                     Magic number                  Used by fs_mgr as a       4 bytes       0xb001b001
                                                   sanity check
                     Version                       Metadata block version    4 bytes       Currently 0
                     Signature                     Mapping table signature   256 bytes
                                                   (PKCS#1 v1.5)
                     Mapping table length          Mapping table length      4 bytes
                                                   in bytes
                     Mapping table                 dm-verity mapping table   variable
                     Padding                       Zero-byte padding to      variable
                                                   32k byte length

                         The RSA public key used for verification needs to be in mincrypt for-
                    mat (a minimalistic cryptographic library, also used by the stock recovery
                    when verifying OTA file signatures), which is a serialization of mincrypt’s
                    RSAPublicKey structure. The interesting thing about this structure is that it
                    doesn’t simply include the key’s modulus and public exponent values, but
                    contains pre-computed values used by mincrypt’s RSA implementation
                    (based on Montgomery reduction). The public key is included in the root
                    of the boot image under the verity_key filename.
                         The last step needed to enable verified boot is to modify the device’s
                    fstab file in order to enable block integrity verification for the system parti-
                    tion. This is simply a matter of adding the verify flag, as shown in Listing 10-2
                    (example fstab file for Nexus 4).

/dev/block/platform/msm_sdcc.1/by-name/system /system ext4 ro,barrier=1 wait,verify

Listing 10-2: fstab entry for a dm-verity-formatted partition verified

                                                                                         Device Security   257

                        When the device boots, Android automatically creates a virtual dm-verity
                   device based on the fstab entry and the information in the mapping table
                   (contained in the metadata block), and mounts it at /system as shown in
                   Listing 10-3.

                   # mount|grep system
                   /dev/block/dm-0 /system ext4 ro,seclabel,relatime,data=ordered 0 0

                   Listing 10-3: dm-verity virutal block device mounted at /system

                        Now, any modifications to the system partition will result in read errors
                   when reading the corresponding file(s). Unfortunately, system modifications
                   by file-based OTA updates, which modify file blocks without updating verity
                   metadata, also invalidate the hash tree. As mentioned in the official docu-
                   mentation, in order to be compatible with dm-verity-based verified boot,
                   OTA updates should operate at the block level, ensuring that both file
                   blocks and the hash tree and metadata are updated. This requires chang-
                   ing the current OTA update infrastructure, which is probably one of the
                   reasons verified boot has yet to be deployed to production devices.

     Disk Encryption
                   Android 3.0 introduced disk encryption along with device administrator
                   policies (see Chapter 9 for details) that can enforce mandatory device
                   encryption as one of the several “enhancements for the enterprise”
                   included in that release. Disk encryption has been available in all sub-
                   sequent versions with relatively few changes until version 4.4, which intro-
                   duced a new key derivation function (scrypt). This section describes how
                   Android implements disk encryption and how encryption keys and meta-
                   data are stored and managed.

        NOTE       The Android Compatibility Definition requires that “IF the device has lockscreen, the
                   device MUST support full-disk encryption.”  4

                       Disk encryption uses an encryption algorithm to convert every bit of data
                   that goes to disk to ciphertext, ensuring that data cannot be read from the
                   disk without the decryption key. Full-disk encryption (FDE) promises that
                   everything on disk is encrypted, including operating system files, cache,
                   and temporary files. In practice, a small part of the OS, or a separate OS
                   loader, must be kept unencrypted so that it can obtain the decryption key
                   and then decrypt and mount the disk volume(s) used by the main OS. The
                   disk decryption key is usually stored encrypted and requires an additional
                   key encryption key (KEK) in order to be decrypted. The KEK can either
                   be stored in a hardware module, such as a smart card or a TPM, or derived

                   4. Google, Android 4.4 Compatibility Definition, “9.9. Full-Disk Encryption,” https://static
                   .googleusercontent.com/media/source.android.com/en//compatibility/4.4/android-4.4-cdd.pdf

258   Chapter 10

from a passphrase obtained from the user on each boot. When stored in a
hardware module, the KEK can also be protected by a user-supplied PIN or
password.
     Android’s FDE implementation encrypts only the userdata partition,
which stores system configuration files and application data. The boot and
system partitions, which store the kernel and OS files, are not encrypted,
but system can optionally be verified using the dm-verity device-mapper
target as described earlier in “Verified Boot” on page 254. Android’s disk
encryption is not enabled by default, and the disk encryption process must
be triggered either by the user or by a device policy on managed devices.
We examine Android’s disk encryption implementation in the following
sections.

Cipher Mode
Android’s disk encryption uses dm-crypt, 5 currently the standard disk
encryption subsystem in the Linux kernel. Like dm-verity, dm-crypt is a
device-mapper target that maps an encrypted physical block device to
a virtual device-mapper device. All data access to the virtual device is
decrypted (for reads) or encrypted (for writes) transparently.
     The encryption mechanism employed in Android uses a randomly
generated 128-bit key together with AES in CBC mode. As we learned in
Chapter 5, CBC mode requires an initialization vector (IV) that needs to
be both random and unpredictable in order for encryption to be secure.
This presents a problem when encrypting block devices, because blocks
are accessed non-sequentially, and therefore each sector (or device block)
requires a separate IV.
     Android uses the encrypted salt-sector initialization vector (ESSIV)
method with the SHA-256 hash algorithm (ESSIV:SHA256) in order to
generate per-sector IVs. ESSIV employs a hash algorithm to derive a sec-
ondary key s from the disk encryption key K, called a salt. It then uses the
salt as an encryption key and encrypts the sector number SN of each sec-
tor to produce a per-sector IV. In other words, IV(SN) = AESs (SN), where
s = SHA256(K).
     Because the IV of each sector depends on a secret piece of information
(the disk encryption key), per-sector IVs cannot be deduced by an attacker.
However, ESSIV does not change CBC’s malleability property and does not
ensure the integrity of encrypted blocks. In fact, it’s been demonstrated
that an attacker who knows the original plaintext stored on disk can manip-
ulate stored data and even inject a backdoor on volumes that use CBC for
disk encryption.6

5. Milan Broz, “dm-crypt: Linux kernel device-mapper crypto target,” https://code.google.com/
p/cryptsetup/wiki/DMCrypt
6. Jakob Lell, “Practical malleability attack against CBC-Encrypted LUKS partitions,” http://
www.jakoblell.com/blog/2013/12/22/practical-malleability-attack-against-cbc-encrypted-luks-partitions/

                                                                                 Device Security   259

                                         Altern ati v e Ciper Mode s: X T S

                       This particular attack against the ESSIV mode can be avoided by switching to a
                       tweakable encryption cipher mode such as XTS (XEX-based tweaked-codebook
                       mode with ciphertext stealing), which uses a combination of the sector address
                       and index of the cipher block inside the sector to derive a unique “tweak” (vari-
                       able parameter) for each sector.
                             Using a distinct tweak for each sector has the same effect as encrypting
                       each sector with a unique key: the same plaintext will result in different cipher-
                       text when stored in different sectors, but has much better performance than
                       deriving a separate key (or IV) for each sector. However, while better than the
                       CBC ESSIV mode, XTS is still susceptible to data manipulation in some cases
                       and does not provide ciphertext authentication.
                             As of this writing, Android does not support the XTS mode for disk encryp-
                       tion. However, the underlying dm-crypt device-mapper target supports XTS,
                       and it can easily be enabled with some modifications to Android’s volume dae-
                       mon (vold) implementation.

                   Key Derivation
                   The disk encryption key (called the “master key” in Android source code) is
                   encrypted with another 128-bit AES key (KEK), derived from a user-supplied
                   password. In Android versions 3.0 to 4.3, the key derivation function used
                   was PBKDF2 with 2,000 iterations and a 128-bit random salt value. The
                   resulting encrypted master key and the salt are stored, along with other
                   metadata like the number of failed decryption attempts, in a footer struc-
                   ture occupying the last 16 KB of the encrypted partition, called a crypto
                   footer. Storing an encrypted key on disk instead of using a key derived from
                   the user-supplied password directly allows for changing the decryption
                   password quickly, because the only thing that needs to be re-encrypted with
                   the key derived from the new password is the master key (16 bytes).
                        While using a random salt makes it impossible to use precomputed
                   tables to speed up key cracking, the number of iterations (2,000) used for
                   PBKDF2 is not sufficiently large by today’s standards. (The keystore key
                   derivation process uses 8,192 iterations as discussed in Chapter 7. Backup
                   encryption uses 10,000 iterations, as discussed later in “Android Backup” on
                   page 283.) Additionally, PBKDF2 is an iterative algorithm, based on stan-
                   dard and relatively easy to implement hash functions, which makes it pos-
                   sible for PBKDF2 key derivation to be parallelized, taking full advantage of
                   the processing power of multi-core devices such as GPUs. This allows even
                   fairly complex alphanumeric passphrases to be brute-forced in a matter of
                   days, or even hours.
                        In order to make it harder to brute-force disk encryption passwords,
                   Android 4.4 introduced support for a new key derivation function called

260   Chapter 10

       scrypt.7 Scrypt employs a key derivation algorithm specifically designed to
       require large amounts of memory, as well as multiple iterations (such an
       algorithm is called memory hard). This makes it harder to mount brute-
       force attacks on specialized hardware such as ASICs or GPUs, which typi-
       cally operate with a limited amount of memory.
            Scrypt can be tuned by specifying the variable parameters N, r, and p,
       which influence the required CPU resources, memory amount, and par-
       allelization cost, respectively. The values used in Android by default are
       N = 32768 (215), r = 8, and p = 2. They can be changed by setting the value of
       the ro.crypto.scrypt_params system property using the N_factor:r_factor:p_factor
       format; for example, 15:3:1 (the default). The value of each parameter is
       computed by raising 2 to the power of the respective factor. Android 4.4
       devices automatically update the key derivation algorithm in the crypto
       footer from PBKDF2 to scrypt and re-encrypt the master key using a scrypt-
       derived encryption key. When the encrypted master key is updated, the N,
       r, and p parameters that were used for KEK derivation are written to the
       crypto footer.

NOTE   On the same desktop machine, brute-forcing a 4-digit PIN (using a naive, single-
       threaded algorithm that generates all possible PINs starting from 0000) takes about
       5 milliseconds per PIN when using PBKDF2, and about 230 milliseconds per PIN
       when using scrypt as the KEK derivation function. In other words, brute-forcing
       PBKDF2 is almost 50 times cheaper (that is, faster) compared to scrypt.

       Disk Encryption Password
       As discussed in the previous section, the KEK used to encrypt the disk
       encryption key is derived from a user-supplied password. When you first
       start the device encryption process, you’re asked to either confirm your
       device unlock PIN or password, or set one if you haven’t already or you’re
       using the pattern screen lock (see Figure 10-3). The entered password
       or PIN is then used to derive the master key encryption key, and you’re
       required to enter the password or PIN each time you boot the device, and
       then once more to unlock the screen after it starts.
            Android doesn’t have a dedicated setting to manage the encryption pass-
       word after the device is encrypted, and changing the screen lock password or
       PIN will also silently change the device encryption password. This is most
       probably a usability-driven decision: most users would be confused by having
       to remember and enter two different passwords at different times and would
       probably quickly forget the less frequently used, and possibly more complex,
       disk encryption password. While this design is good for usability, it effectively
       forces users to use a simple disk encryption password, because they have to
       enter it each time they unlock the device, usually dozens of times a day. No
       one wants to enter a complex password that many times, and thus most users
       opt for a simple numeric PIN (unless a device policy requires otherwise).

       7. C. Percival and S. Josefsson, The scrypt Password-Based Key Derivation Function, http://tools.ietf
       .org/html/draft-josefsson-scrypt-kdf-01/

                                                                                         Device Security   261

                   Additionally, passwords are limited to
                   16 characters (a limit that is hardwired
                   in the framework and not configu-
                   rable), so using a passphrase is not an
                   option.
                        What’s the problem with using the
                   same password for both disk encryp-
                   tion and the lockscreen? After all,
                   to get to the data on the phone you
                   need to guess the lockscreen password
                   anyway, so why bother with a separate
                   one for disk encryption? The reason
                   is that the two passwords protect your
                   phone against two different types of
                   attack. Most screen lock attacks would
                   be online, brute-force ones: essen-
                   tially someone trying out different
                   passwords on a running device when
                   they get brief access to it. After a few
                   unsuccessful attempts, Android will
                   lock the screen for 30 seconds (rate
                   limiting), and even wipe the device if
                   there are more failed unlock attempts          Figure 10-3: Device encryption screen
                   (if required by device policy). Thus,
                   even a relatively short screen-lock
                   PIN offers adequate protection against online attacks in most cases (see
                   “Brute-Force Attack Protection” on page 276 for details).
                        Of course, if someone has physical access to the device or a disk image
                   of it, they can extract password hashes and crack them offline without wor-
                   rying about rate-limiting or device wiping. This, in fact, is the scenario that
                   full disk encryption is designed to protect against: when a device is stolen
                   or confiscated, the attacker can either brute-force the actual device, or copy
                   its data and analyze it even after the device is returned or disposed of. As
                   mentioned earlier in “Key Derivation” on page 260, the encrypted master
                   key is stored on disk, and if the password used to derive its encryption key is
                                                                                           8
                   based on a short numeric PIN, it can be brute-forced in minutes (or even
                   seconds on pre-4.4 devices that use PBKDF2 for key derivation). A remote
                   wipe solution could prevent this attack by deleting the master key, which
                   only takes a moment and renders the device useless, but this is often not an
                   option because the device might be offline or turned off.

                   Changing the Disk Encryption Password
                   The user-level part of disk encryption is implemented in the cryptfs module
                   of Android’s volume management daemon (vold). crypfs has commands for

                   8. Demonstrated by viaForensics in the “Into The Droid” talk, presented at DEF CON 20.
                   Slides are available at https://www.defcon.org/images/defcon-20/dc-20-presentations/Cannon/
                   DEFCON-20-Cannon-Into-The-Droid.pdf

262   Chapter 10

       both creating and mounting an encrypted volume, and for verifying and
       changing the master key encryption password. Android system services
       communicate with cryptfs by sending commands to vold through a local
       socket (also named vold), and vold sets system properties that describe the
       current state of the encryption or mount process based on the received
       command. (This results in a fairly complex boot procedure, described in
       detail in “Enabling Encryption” below and “Booting an Encrypted Device”
       on page 265.)
           Android does not provide a UI to change only the disk encryption
       password, but one can do so by communicating directly with the vold dae-
       mon using the vdc command-line utility. However, access to the vold control
       socket is limited to the root user and members of the mount group, and fur-
       thermore, cryptfs commands are only available to the root and system users. If
       you’re using an engineering build, or your device provides root access via a
       “superuser” app (see Chapter 13), you can send the cryptfs command shown
       in Listing 10-4 to vold in order to change the disk encryption password.

       # vdc cryptfs changepw <newpass>
       200 0 0

Listing 10-4: Changing the disk encryption password using vdc

NOTE   If you change your lockscreen password, the disk encryption password will be changed
       automatically. (This does not apply to secondary users on multi-user devices.)

       Enabling Encryption
       As mentioned in the previous section, the user-level part of Android’s
       disk encryption is implemented by a dedicated cryptfs module of the vold
       daemon. cryptfs provides the checkpw, restart, cryptocomplete, enablecrypto,
       changepw, verifypw, getfield, and setfield commands, which the framework
       sends at various points of the encryption or encrypted volume mount pro-
       cess. In addition to the permissions set on the vold local socket, crypfs explic-
       itly checks the identity of the command sender, and only allows access to the
       root and system users.

       Controlling Device Encryption Using System Properties
       The vold daemon sets a number of system properties in order to trigger the
       various stages of device encryption or mounting and to communicate the
       current encryption state to framework services. The ro.crypto.state property
       holds the current encryption state, which is set to encrypted when the data
       partition has been successfully encrypted, and to unencrypted when it has
       not yet been encrypted. The property can also be set to unsupported if the
       device does not support disk encryption. The vold daemon also sets various
       predefined values to the vold.decrypt property in order to signal the current
       state of device encryption or mounting. The vold.encrypt_progress property
       holds the current encryption progress (from 0 to 100), or an error string if
       an error occurred during device encryption or mounting.

                                                                          Device Security   263

                       The ro.crypto.fs_crypto_blkdev system property contains the name of the
                   virtual device allocated by the device mapper. After successfully decrypting
                   the disk encryption key, this virtual device is mounted at /data in place of the
                   underlying physical volume, as shown in Listing 10-5 (with output split for
                   readability).

                    # mount|grep '/data'
                   /dev/block/dm-0 /data ext4 rw,seclabel,nosuid,nodev,noatime,
                   errors=panic,user_xattr,barrier=1,nomblk_io_submit,data=ordered 0 0

Listing 10-5: Encrypted virtual block device mounted at /data

                   Unmounting /data
                   The Android framework expects /data to be available, but it needs to be
                   unmounted in order to be encrypted. This creates a catch-22 situation, which
                   Android solves by unmounting the physical userdata partition and mounting
                   an on-memory filesystem (tempfs) in its place while performing encryption.
                   Switching partitions at runtime in turn requires stopping and restarting cer-
                   tain system services, which vold triggers by setting the value of the vold.decrypt
                   system property to trigger_restart_framework, trigger_restart_min_framework, or
                   trigger_shutdown_framework. These values trigger different parts of init.rc, as
                   shown in Listing 10-6.

                   --snip--
                   on post-fs-datau
                       chown system system /data
                       chmod 0771 /data
                       restorecon /data
                       copy /data/system/entropy.dat /dev/urandom
                   --snip--
                   on property:vold.decrypt=trigger_reset_mainv
                       class_reset main

                   on property:vold.decrypt=trigger_load_persist_props
                       load_persist_props

                   on property:vold.decrypt=trigger_post_fs_dataw
                       trigger post-fs-data

                   on property:vold.decrypt=trigger_restart_min_frameworkx
                       class_start main

                   on property:vold.decrypt=trigger_restart_frameworky
                       class_start main
                       class_start late_start

                   on property:vold.decrypt=trigger_shutdown_frameworkz
                       class_reset late_start
                       class_reset main
                   --snip-

                   Listing 10-6: vold.decrypt triggers in init.rc

264   Chapter 10

                    Triggering the Encryption Process
                    When the user starts the encryption process via the system Settings UI with
                    Security4Encrypt phone, the Settings app calls MountService, which in turn
                    sends the cryptfs enablecrypto inplace password command to vold, where password
                    is the lockscreen password. In turn, vold unmounts the userdata partition
                    and sets vold.decrypt to trigger_shutdown_framework (z in Listing 10-6), which
                    shuts down most system services except for those that are part of the core
                    service class. The vold daemon then unmounts /data, mounts a tempfs file-
                    system in its place, and then sets vold.encrypt_progress to 0 and vold.decrypt
                    to trigger_restart_min_framework (x in Listing 10-6). This starts a few more
                    system services (in the main class) that are required for showing the encryp-
                    tion progress UI.

                    Updating the Crypto Footer and Encrypting Data
                    Next, vold sets up the virtual dm-crypt device and writes the crypto footer.
                    The footer can be written to the end of the userdata partition or to a dedi-
                    cated partition or file, and its location is specified in the fstab file as the
                    value of the encryptable flag. For example, on the Nexus 5 the crypto footer
                    is written to the dedicated partition metadata, as shown in Listing 10-7 as u
                    (with the single line broken for readability). When the crypto footer is writ-
                    ten at the end of the encrypted partition, the encryptable flag is set to the
                    string footer.

--snip--
/dev/block/platform/msm_sdcc.1/by-name/userdata /data ext4
noatime,nosuid,nodev,barrier=1,data=ordered,nomblk_io_submit,noauto_da_alloc,errors=panic
wait,check,encryptable=/dev/block/platform/msm_sdcc.1/by-name/metadatau
--snip--

Listing 10-7: The encryptable fstab flag specifies the location of the crypto footer

                        The crypto footer contains the encrypted disk encryption key (master
                    key), the salt used for KEK derivation, and other key derivation parameters
                    and metadata. Its flags field is set to CRYPT_ENCRYPTION_IN_PROGRESS (0x2) to
                    signal that device encryption has started but not been completed.
                        Finally, each block is read from the physical userdata partition and writ-
                    ten to the virtual dm-crypt device, which encrypts read blocks and writes
                    them to disk, thus encrypting the userdata partition in place. If encryption
                    completes without errors, vold clears the CRYPT_ENCRYPTION_IN_PROGRESS flag
                    and reboots the device.

                    Booting an Encrypted Device
                    Booting an encrypted device requires asking the user for the disk encryption
                    password. Rather then use a specialized bootloader UI, Android sets the vold.
                    decrypt system property to 1 and then starts a minimal set of system services in
                    order to show a standard Android UI. As with device encryption, this again
                    requires mounting a tmpfs filesystem at /data in order to allow core system

                                                                                       Device Security   265

                   services to start. When the core framework is up, Android detects that vold.
                   decrypt is set to 1 and starts the userdata partition mount process.

                   Obtaining the Disk Encryption Password
                   The first step in this process is to check whether the partition has been suc-
                   cessfully encrypted by sending the cryptfs cryptocomplete command to vold,
                   which in turn checks whether the crypto footer is properly formatted and
                   that the CRYPT_ENCRYPTION_IN_PROGRESS flag is not set. If the partition is found
                   to be successfully encrypted, the framework launches the password entry UI
                   shown in Figure 10-4 provided by CryptKeeper, part of the system Settings app.
                   This activity acts as a home screen (launcher), and because it has higher pri-
                   ority than the default launcher, it’s started first after the device boots.
                        If the device is unencrypted, CryptKeeper disables itself and finishes,
                   which causes the system activity manager to launch the default home screen
                   application. If the device is encrypted or in the process of being encrypted
                   (that is, the vold.crypt property is not empty or set to trigger_restart_framework),
                   the CryptKeeper activity starts and hides the status and system bars. In addi-
                   tion, CryptKeeper ignores hardware back button presses, thus disallowing navi-
                   gation away from the password input UI.
                        If the encrypted device is corrupted, or the encryption process inter-
                   rupted and the userdata partition left only partially encrypted, the device
                   cannot be booted. In this case, CryptKeeper displays the UI shown in Fig­
                   ure 10-5, allowing the user to trigger a factory reset, which reformats the
                   userdata partition.

Figure 10-4: Device encryption pass-             Figure 10-5: UI shown if device
                   word input UI                                    encryption fails

266   Chapter 10

Decrypting and Mounting /data
When the user enters their password, CryptKeeper sends the cryptfs checkpw
command to vold by calling the decryptStorage() method of the system
MountService. This instructs vold to check whether the entered password
is correct by trying to mount the encrypted partition at a temporary
mount point and then unmounting it. If the procedure succeeds, vold
sets the name of the virtual block device allocated by the device-mapper
as the value of ro.crypto.fs_crypto_blkdev property and returns control to
MountService, which in turn sends the cryptfs restart command, instructing
vold to restart all system services in the main class (v in Listing 10-6). This
allows the tempfs filesystem to be unmounted, and the newly allocated vir-
tual dm-crypt block device to be mounted at /data.

Starting All System Services
After the encrypted partition is mounted and prepared, vold sets vold.decrypt
to trigger_post_fs_data (w in Listing 10-6), thus triggering the post-fs-data u
section of init.rc. The commands in this section set up file and directory
permissions, restore SELinux contexts, and create required directories
under /data if necessary.
     Finally, post-fs-data sets the vold.post_fs_data_done property to 1, which
vold polls periodically. When vold detects a value of 1, it sets the vold.decrypt
property to trigger_restart_framework (y in Listing 10-6), which restarts all
services in the main class, and starts all delayed services (class late_start). At
this point, the framework is fully initialized and the device boots using the
decrypted view of the userdata partition mounted at /data. From this point
on, all data written by applications or the system is automatically encrypted
before being committed to disk.

                     Limitations of disk encryption

    Disk encryption only protects data at rest; that is, when the device is turned off.
    Because disk encryption is transparent and implemented at the kernel level,
    after an encrypted volume is mounted, it is indistinguishable from a plaintext
    volume to user-level processes. Therefore disk encryption does not protect data
    from malicious programs running on the device. Applications that deal with
    sensitive data should not rely solely on full-disk encryption, but should imple-
    ment their own, file-based encryption instead. The file encryption key should
    be encrypted with a KEK derived from a user-supplied password, or some
    unchangeable hardware property if the data needs to be bound to the device.
    To ensure file integrity, encrypted data must be authenticated using either an
    authenticated encryption scheme like GCM, or an additional authentication
    function such as HMAC.

                                                                          Device Security   267

     Screen Security
                   One way to control access to an Android
                   device is by requiring user authentica-
                   tion in order to access the system UI
                   and applications. User authentication
                   is implemented by showing a lockscreen
                   each time the device boots or its screen
                   is turned on. The lockscreen on a single-
                   user device, configured to require a
                   numeric PIN to unlock, might look like
                   Figure 10-6.
                        In early Android versions, the lock-
                   screen was only designed to protect
                   access to the device’s UI. As the plat-
                   form evolved, the lockscreen has been
                   extended with features that display
                   widgets that show up-to-date device
                   or application state, allow switching
                   between users on multi-user devices,
                   and the ability to unlock the system
                   keystore. Similarly, the screen unlock
                   PIN or password is now used to derive
                   the credential storage encryption key
                   (for software implementations), as well           Figure 10-6: PIN lockscreen
                   as the disk encryption key KEK.

                   Lockscreen Implementation
                   Android’s lockscreen (or keyguard) is implemented like regular Android
                   applications: with widgets laid out on a window. It’s special because its win-
                   dow lives on a high window layer that other applications cannot draw on top
                   of or control. Additionally, the keyguard intercepts the normal navigation
                   buttons, which makes it impossible to bypass and thus “locks” the device.
                       The keyguard window layer is not the highest layer, however; dialogs
                   originating from the keyguard itself, and the status bar, are drawn over
                   the keyguard. You can see a list of the currently shown windows using the
                   Hierarchy Viewer tool available with the ADT. When the screen is locked,
                   the active window is the Keyguard window, as shown in Figure 10-7.

        NOTE       Prior to Android 4.0, third-party applications could show windows in the keyguard
                   layer, which allowed applications to intercept the Home button and implement
                   “kiosk”-style applications. However, because this functionality was abused by certain
                   malware applications, since Android 4.0 adding windows to the keyguard layer
                   requires the INTERNAL_SYSTEM_WINDOW signature permission, which is available only to
                   system applications.

268   Chapter 10

Figure 10-7: Keyguard window position in Android’s
window stack

     For a long time, the keyguard was an implementation detail of Android’s
window system and was not separated into a dedicated component. With
the introduction of lockscreen widgets, dreams (that is, screensavers), and
support for multiple users, the keyguard gained quite a lot of new functional-
ity and was eventually extracted in a dedicated system application, Keyguard, in
Android 4.4. The Keyguard app lives in the com.android.systemui process, along
with the core Android UI implementation.
     The UI for each unlock method (discussed next) is implemented as a
specialized view component. This component is hosted by a dedicated view
container class called KeyguardHostView, along with keyguard widgets and
other helper UI components. For example, the PIN unlock view shown in
Figure 10-6 is implemented in the KeyguardPINView class, and password unlock
is implemented by the KeyguardPasswordView class. The KeyguardHostView class
automatically selects and displays the appropriate keyguard view for the cur-
rently configured unlock method and device state. Unlock views delegate
password checks to the LockPatternUtils class, which is responsible for compar-
ing user input to saved unlock credentials, as well as for persisting password
changes to disk and updating authentication-related metadata.
     Besides the implementations of keyguard unlock views, the Keyguard
system application includes the exported KeyguardService service, which
exposes a remote AIDL interface, IKeyguardService. This service allows its
clients to check the current state of the keyguard, set the current user,
launch the camera, and hide or disable the keyguard. Operations that
change the state of the keyguard are protected by a system signature per-
mission, CONTROL_KEYGUARD.

Keyguard Unlock Methods
Stock Android provides several keyguard unlock methods (also called secu-
rity modes in Android’s source code). Of these, five can be directly selected
in the Choose screen lockscreen: Slide, Face Unlock, Pattern, PIN, and
Password, as shown in Figure 10-8.

                                                               Device Security   269

                        The Slide unlock method requires no user authentication and its
                   security level is therefore equivalent to selecting None. Both states
                   are represented internally by setting the current security mode to the
                   KeyguardSecurityModel.SecurityMode.None enum value. As of this writing, Face
                   Unlock is the only implementation of the SecurityMode.Biometric security
                   mode and is internally referred to as “weak biometric” (a “strong bio­
                   metric” could be implemented with fingerprint or iris recognition in a
                   future version). Unlock methods that are not compatible with the current
                   device security policy (the top three in Figure 10-8) are disabled and can-
                   not be selected. The security policy can be set either explicitly by a device
                   administrator, or implicitly by enabling a security-related OS feature such
                   as credential storage or full-disk encryption.
                        The Pattern unlock method (SecurityMode.Pattern) is Android-specific
                   and requires drawing a predefined pattern on a 3×3 grid to unlock the
                   device, as shown in Figure 10-9.

Figure 10-8: Directly selectable             Figure 10-9: Configuring the Pattern
                   keyguard unlock methods                      unlock method

                       The PIN (SecurityMode.PIN) and Password (SecurityMode.Password) unlock
                   methods are implemented similarly, but differ by the scope of allowed char-
                   acters: only numeric (0-9) for the PIN, or alphanumeric for Password are
                   allowed.

270   Chapter 10

     The SecurityMode enum defines three more unlock methods that are not
directly selectable in the Choose screen lockscreen: SecurityMode.Account,
SecurityMode.SimPin, and SecurityMode.SimPuk. The SecurityMode.Account
method is available only on devices that support Google accounts (Google
experience devices) and is not an independent unlock method. It can
only be used as a fallback method for another security mode. Similarly,
SecurityMode.SimPin and SecurityMode.SimPuk are not lockscreen unlock meth-
ods per se; they’re only available if the device’s SIM card requires a PIN
before use. Because the SIM card remembers the PIN authentication sta-
tus, the PIN or PUK must be entered only once—when the device boots
(or if the SIM card state is otherwise reset). We’ll delve deeper into the
implementation of each lockscreen security mode in the next sections.

Face Unlock
Face Unlock is a relatively new unlock
method introduced in Android 4.0. It
uses the device’s front-facing camera to
register an image of the owner’s face
(see Figure 10-10) and relies on image
recognition technology to recognize
the face captured when unlocking the
device. Although improvements to Face
Unlock’s accuracy have been made
since its introduction, it’s considered
the least secure of all unlock methods,
and even the setup screen warns users
that “someone who looks similar to you
could unlock your phone.” In addition,
Face Unlock requires a backup unlock
method—either a pattern or a PIN, to
handle situations when face recogni-
tion is not possible (such as poor light-
ing, camera malfunction, and so on).
The Face Unlock implementation is
based on facial recognition technology
developed by the PittPatt (Pittsburgh
Pattern Recognition) company, which         Figure 10-10: Face Unlock setup
Google acquired in 2011. The code           screen
remains proprietary and no details are
available about the format of the stored
data or the recognition algorithms employed. As of this writing, the imple-
mentation of Face Unlock resides in the com.android.facelock package.

                                                            Device Security   271

                   Pattern Unlock
                   As shown in Figure 10-9, the code for pattern unlock is entered by join-
                   ing at least four points on a 3×3 matrix. Each point can be used only once
                   (crossed points are disregarded) and the maximum number of points is
                   nine. Internally, the pattern is stored as a byte sequence, with each point
                   represented by its index, where 0 is top left and 8 is bottom right. Thus the
                   pattern is similar to a PIN with a minimum of four and maximum of nine
                   digits, which uses only nine distinct digits (0 to 8). However, because points
                   cannot be repeated, the number of variations in an unlock pattern is con-
                   siderably lower compared to those of a nine-digit PIN.
                        The hash for the pattern lock is stored in /data/system/gesture.key (/data/
                   system/users/<user ID>/gesture.key on multi-user devices) as an unsalted SHA-1
                   value. By simply dumping this file, we can easily see that the contents of the
                   gesture.key file for the pattern in Figure 10-9 (represented as 00010204060708
                   in hexadecimal) shown in Listing 10-8 matches the SHA-1 hash of the pat-
                   tern byte sequence, which is 6a062b9b3452e366407181a1bf92ea73e9ed4c48 for
                   this example.

                   # od -t x1 /data/system/gesture.key
                   0000000 6a 06 2b 9b 34 52 e3 66 40 71 81 a1 bf 92 ea 73
                   0000020 e9 ed 4c 48

Listing 10-8: Contents of the /data/system/gesture.key file

                        Because a random salt value isn’t used when calculating the hash,
                   each pattern is always hashed to the same value, which makes it relatively
                   easy to generate a precomputed table of all possible patterns and their
                   respective hashes. (Such tables are readily available online.) This allows
                   for instant recovery of the pattern once the gesture.key file is obtained.
                   However, the file is owned by the system user and its permissions are set
                   to 0600, so recovery is not usually possible on production devices. The
                   entered pattern is checked against the saved hash using the checkPattern()
                   method of the LockScreenUtils class, and the pattern hash is calculated and
                   persisted using the saveLockPattern() method of that class. Saving the pat-
                   tern also sets the current password quality value to DevicePolicyManager
                   .PASSWORD_QUALITY_SOMETHING.
                        Another unfortunate property of the pattern unlock method is that
                   because capacitive touch screens are operated directly using a finger (not
                   with a stylus or a similar tool), drawing the unlock pattern multiple times
                   leaves a distinct trace on a touch screen, making it vulnerable to the so
                   called “smudge attack.” Using appropriate lighting and cameras, finger
                   smudges on the screen can be detected, and the unlock pattern can be
                   inferred with a very high probability. For these reasons, the pattern unlock
                   method’s security level is considered very low. In addition, because the
                   number of combinations is limited, the unlock pattern is a poor source
                   of entropy and is disallowed when the user’s unlock credential is used

272   Chapter 10

       to derive an encryption key, such as
       those used for system’s keystore and
       device encryption.
            Like Face Unlock, the pattern
       unlock method supports a backup
       unlock mechanism that is only made
       available after the user enters an invalid
       pattern more than five times. Backup
       authentication must be manually acti-
       vated by pressing the Forgot Pattern
       button shown at the bottom of the lock-
       screen. After the button is pressed, the
       device goes into the SecurityMode.Account
       security mode and displays the screen
       shown in Figure 10-11.
            The user can enter the creden-
       tials of any Google account registered
       on the device to unlock it, and then
       reset or change the unlock method.
       Therefore, having a Google account
       with an easy to guess (or shared) pass-
       word registered on the device could
       be a potential backdoor to the device’s            Figure 10-11: Google account unlock
       lockscreen.                                        mode

NOTE   As of this writing, Google accounts that have been configured to require two-factor
       authentication cannot be used to unlock the device.

       PIN and Password Unlock
       The PIN and password methods are essentially equivalent: they compare
       the hash of the user’s input to a salted hash stored on the device and unlock
       it if the values match. The hash of the PIN or password is a combination
       of the SHA-1 and MD5 hash values of the user input, salted with a 64-bit
       random value. The calculated hash is stored in the /data/misc/password.key
       (/data/system/users/<user ID>/password.key on multi-user devices) file as a
       hexadecimal string and may look like Listing 10-9.

       # cat /data/system/password.key && echo
       9B93A9A846FE2FC11D49220FC934445DBA277EB0AF4C9E324D84FFC0120D7BAE1041FAAC

Listing 10-9: Contents of the /data/misc/password.key file

            The salt used for calculating the hash values was saved in the secure
       table of the system’s SettingsProvider content provider under the lockscreen
       .password_salt key in Android versions prior to 4.2, but was moved to a dedi-
       cated database, along with other lockscreen-related metadata in order to

                                                                            Device Security   273

                   support multiple users per device. As of Android 4.4, the database is located
                   in /data/system/locksettings.db and is accessed via the ILockSettings AIDL
                   interface of the LockSettingsService.
                        Accessing the service requires the ACCESS_KEYGUARD_SECURE_STORAGE signature
                   permission, which is only allowed to system applications. The locksettings.db
                   database has a single table, also called locksettings, which may contain data
                   like Listing 10-10 for a particular user (the user column contains the Android
                   user ID).

                   sqlite> select name, user, value from locksettings where user=0;
                   name                              |user|value
                   --snip--
                   lockscreen.password_salt          |0   |6909501022570534487u
                   --snip--
                   lockscreen.password_type_alternate|0   |0v
                   lockscreen.password_type          |0   |131072w
                   lockscreen.passwordhistory        |0   |5BFE43E89C989972EF0FA0EC00BA30F356EE7B
                   7C7BF8BC08DEA2E067FF6C18F8CD7134B8,EE29A531FE0903C2144F0618B08D1858473C50341A7
                   8DEA85D219BCD27EF184BCBC2C18Cx

Listing 10-10: Contents of /data/system/locksettings.db for the owner user

                        Here, the lockscreen.password_salt setting u stores the 64-bit (represented
                   as a Java long type) salt value, and the lockscreen.password_type_alternate set-
                   ting v contains the type of the backup (also called alternate) unlock method
                   type (0 means none) for the current unlock method. lockscreen.password_type w
                   stores the currently selected password type, represented by the value of the
                   corresponding PASSWORD_QUALITY constant defined in the DevicePolicyManager
                   class. In this example, 131072 (0x00020000 in hexadecimal) corresponds to
                   the PASSWORD_QUALITY_NUMERIC constant, which is the password quality provided
                   by a numeric PIN. Finally, lockscreen.passwordhistory x contains the password
                   history, saved as a sequence of previous PIN or password hashes, separated by
                   commas. The history is only saved if the history length has been set to a value
                   greater than zero using one of the setPasswordHistoryLength() methods of the
                   DevicePolicyManager class. When password history is available, entering a new
                   password that is the same as any password in the history is forbidden.
                        The password hash can be easily calculated by concatenating the pass-
                   word or PIN string (1234 for this example) with the salt value formatted as a
                   hexadecimal string (5fe37a926983d657 for this example) and calculating the
                   SHA-1 and MD5 hashes of the resulting string, as shown in Listing 10-11.

$ SHA1=`echo -n '12345fe37a926983d657'|sha1sum|cut -d- -f1|tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'`u
$ MD5=`echo -n '12345fe37a926983d657'|md5sum|cut -d- -f1|tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'`v
$ echo "$SHA1$MD5"|tr -d ' 'w
9B93A9A846FE2FC11D49220FC934445DBA277EB0AF4C9E324D84FFC0120D7BAE1041FAAC

Listing 10-11: Calculating a PIN or password hash using sha1sum and md5sum

                      In this example the hashes are calculated using the sha1sum u and md5sum
                   v commands. When concatenated w, the output of the two commands pro-
                   duces the string contained in the password.key file shown in Listing 10-9.

274   Chapter 10

     Note that while using a random hash makes it impossible to use a single
precalculated table for brute-forcing the PIN or password of any device, cal-
culating the password or hash requires a single hash invocation, so generat-
ing a targeted hash table for a particular device (assuming the salt value is
also available) is still relatively cheap. Additionally, while Android calculates
both the SHA-1 and MD5 hashes of the PIN or password, this provides no
security value, as it is sufficient to target the shorter hash (MD5) in order to
uncover the PIN or password.
     The entered password is checked against the stored hash using the
LockPatternUtils.checkPassword() method, and the hash of a user-supplied
password is calculated and persisted using the one of the saveLockPassword()
methods of that class. Calling saveLockPassword() updates the password.key
file for the target (or current) user. Like gesture.key, this file is owned by the
system user and has permissions 0600. In addition to updating the password
hash, saveLockPassword() calculates the complexity of the entered password
and updates the value column corresponding to the lockscreen.password_type
key (w in Listing 10-10) in locksettings.db with the calculated complexity
value. If password history is enabled, saveLockPassword() also adds the PIN
or password hash to the locksettings table (x in Listing 10-11).
     Recall that when the device is encrypted, the PIN or password is used
to derive a KEK that encrypts the disk encryption key. Therefore, changing
the PIN or password of the owner user also re-encrypts the disk encryp-
tion key by calling the changeEncryptionPassword() method of the system’s
MountService. (Changing the PIN or password of a secondary user does not
affect the disk encryption key.)

PIN and PUK Unlock
The PIN and PUK security modes are not lockscreen unlock methods per se
because they depend on the state of the device’s SIM card and are only shown
if the SIM card is in a locked state. A SIM card can require users to enter a
preconfigured PIN code in order to unlock the card and get access to any
network authentication keys stored inside, which are required to register with
the mobile network and place non-emergency calls.
     Because a SIM card retains its unlock state until reset, the PIN code
typically must be entered only when the device first boots. If an incorrect
code is entered more than three times, the SIM card locks and requires the
user to enter a separate code to unlock it called the PIN unlock key (PUK), or
personal unblocking code (PUC).
     When the lockscreen is shown, Android checks the state of the SIM
card, and if it’s State.PIN_REQUIRED (defined in the IccCardConstants class), it
shows the SIM unlock keyguard view shown in Figure 10-12. When the user
enters a SIM unlock PIN, it’s passed to the supplyPinReportResult() method
of the ITelephony interface (implemented in the TeleService system appli-
cation), which in turn passes it to the device’s baseband processor (the
device component that implements mobile network communication, also
sometimes referred to as the modem or radio) via the radio interface dae-
mon (rild). Finally, the baseband processor, which is directly connected to

                                                                 Device Security   275

                   the SIM, sends the PIN to the SIM card
                   and receives a status code in exchange.
                   The status code is passed back to the
                   unlock view via the same route. If the
                   status code indicates that the SIM card
                   accepted the PIN and no screen lock is
                   configured, the home screen (launcher)
                   is displayed next. If, on the other hand,
                   a screen lock has been configured, it’s
                   shown after unlocking the SIM card, and
                   the user must enter their credentials in
                   order to unlock the device.
                        If the SIM card is locked (that is, in
                   the PUK_REQUIRED state), Android shows a
                   PUK entry screen and allows the user to
                   set up a new PIN after they unlock the
                   card. The PUK and new PIN are passed
                   to the supplyPukReportResult() method of
                   the ITelephony interface, which delivers
                   them to the SIM card. If a screen lock is
                   configured, it is shown when the PUK is
                   validated and the new PIN configured.
Figure 10-12: SIM unlock screen
                        The Keyguard system application
                   monitors SIM state changes by register-
                   ing for the TelephonyIntents.ACTION_SIM_
                   STATE_CHANGED broadcast and shows the
                   lockscreen if the card becomes locked
                   or permanently disabled. Users can
                   toggle the SIM card’s PIN protection
                   by navigating to Settings4Security4
                   Set up SIM card lock and using the
                   Lock SIM card checkbox.

                   Brute-Force Attack Protection
                   Because complex passwords can be
                   tricky to input on a touch screen key-
                   board, users typically use relatively
                   short unlock credentials, which can
                   easily be guessed or brute-forced.
                   Android protects against brute-force
                   attacks executed directly on the device
                   (online attacks) by requiring users to
                   wait 30 seconds after each five sub­
                   sequent failed authentication attempts,
                   as shown in Figure 10-13. This tech-
                   nique is referred to as rate limiting.        Figure 10-13: Rate limiting after five
                                                                 subsequent failed authentication
                                                                 attempts

276   Chapter 10

            To further deter brute-force attacks, password complexity, expiration,
       and history rules can be set and enforced using the DevicePolicyManager
       API, as discussed in Chapter 9. If the device stores or allows access to
       sensitive corporate data, device administrators can also set a threshold
       for the allowed failed authentication attempts using the DevicePolicyManager
       .setMaximumFailedPasswordsForWipe() method. When the threshold is reached,
       all user data on the device is automatically deleted, preventing attackers
       from gaining unauthorized access to it.

Secure USB Debugging
       One reason for Android’s success is the low entry barrier to application
       development; apps can be developed on any OS, in a high-level language,
       without the need to invest in developer tools or hardware (when using the
       Android emulator). Developing software for embedded or other dedicated
       devices has traditionally been difficult, because it’s usually hard (or in some
       cases impossible) to inspect a program’s internal state or otherwise interact
       with the device in order to debug programs.
           Since its earliest versions, Android has included a powerful device
       interaction toolkit that allows interactive debugging and inspecting device
       state, called the Android Debug Bridge (ADB). ADB is typically turned off
       on consumer devices, but can be turned on via the system UI in order to
       enable app development and debugging on the device. Because ADB pro-
       vides privileged access to the device’s filesystem and applications, it can be
       used to obtain unauthorized access to data. In the following sections, we’ll
       discuss ADB’s architecture, then discuss the steps recent Android versions
       have taken to restrict access to ADB.

       ADB Overview
       ADB keeps track of all devices (or emulators) connected to a host, and
       offers various services to its clients (command line clients, IDEs, and so on).
       It consists of three main components: the ADB server, the ADB daemon
       (adbd), and the default command-line client (adb). The ADB server runs
       on the host machine as a background process and decouples clients from
       the actual devices or emulators. It monitors device connectivity and sets
       their state appropriately (CS_CONNECTED, CS_OFFLINE, CS_RECOVERY, and so on).
            The ADB daemon runs on an Android device (or emulator) and pro-
       vides the actual services client use. It connects to the ADB server through
       USB or TCP/IP, and receives and processes commands from it. The adb
       command-line client lets you send commands to a particular device. In prac-
       tice, it is implemented in the same binary as the ADB server and thus shares
       much of its code. Figure 10-14 shows an overview of ADB’s architecture.

                                                                       Device Security   277

                                  Host (PC)                                              Android Device
                        ADB Client 1
                       (adb command)

                                           ADB Client 2
                                           (Eclipse ADT)

                                       TCP
                                 localhost:5037

                               ADB Server (adb)                     USB or TCP                  adbd

Figure 10-14: ADB architecture

        NOTE       In addition to the native implementation in the adb command and the Java-based one
                   in the Android Development Tools (ADT) Eclipse plugin, various third-party imple-
                   mentations of the ADB protocol are also available, including a Python client 9 and
                   an ADB server implemented in JavaScript,10 which can be embedded in the Chrome
                   browser as an extension.

                        The client talks to the local ADB server via TCP (typically via
                   localhost:5037) using text-based commands, and receives OK or FAIL
                   responses in return. Some commands, like enumerating devices, port for-
                   warding, or daemon restart are handled by the local daemon, while oth-
                   ers (like shell or log access) require a connection to the target Android
                   device. Device access is generally accomplished by forwarding input and
                   output streams to/from the host. The transport layer that implements
                   this uses simple messages with a 24-byte header, which contains a com-
                   mand identifier, two arguments, the length and CRC32 of the optional
                   payload that follows, and a magic value, which simply flips all bits of the
                   command. The message structure is defined in system/core/adb/adb.h and
                   is shown in Listing 10-12 for reference. Messages are in turn encapsulated
                   in packets, which are sent over the USB or TCP link to the ADB server
                   running on the device.

                   struct amessage {
                       unsigned command;            /* command identifier constant      */
                       unsigned arg0;               /* first argument                   */
                       unsigned arg1;               /* second argument                  */
                       unsigned data_length;        /* length of payload (0 is allowed) */

                   9. Anthony King, “PyAdb: basic ADB core for python using TCP,” https://github.com/cybojenix/
                   PyAdb/
                   10. Kenny Root, “adb-on-chrome: ADB (Android Debug Bridge) server as a Chrome exten-
                   sion,” https://github.com/kruton/adb-on-chrome/

278   Chapter 10

             unsigned data_check;      /* checksum of data payload            */
             unsigned magic;           /* command ^ 0xffffffff                */
        };

Listing 10-12: ADB message structure

            We won’t discuss the ADB protocol in more detail other than to note
        the authentication commands added to the protocol in order to implement
        secure USB debugging. (For more details on ADB, see the protocol descrip-
        tion in the system/core/adb/protocol.txt file in Android’s source tree.)

N ote   You can enable trace logs for all ADB services by setting the ADB_TRACE environment
        variable to 1 on the host and the persist.adb.trace_mask system property on the
        device. Selected services can be traced by setting the value of ADB_TRACE or persist
        .adb.trace_mask to a comma- or space-separated (columns or semi-columns as a sepa-
        rator are also supported) list of service tags. See system/core/adb/adb.c for the full
        list of supported tags.

        The Need for Secure ADB
        If you’ve done any development, you know that “debugging” is usually the
        exact opposite of “secure.” Debugging typically involves inspecting (and
        sometimes even changing) internal program state, dumping encrypted
        communication data to log files, universal root access, and other scary but
        necessary activities. Debugging is hard enough without having to bother
        with security, so why further complicate things by adding additional secu-
        rity layers? Android debugging, as provided by the ADB, is quite versatile
        and gives you almost complete control over a device when enabled. This fea-
        ture is, of course, very welcome when developing or testing an application
        (or the OS itself), but it can also be used for other purposes.
             Here’s a selective list of things ADB lets you do:

        •    Copy files to and from the device
        •    Debug apps running on the device (using JWDP or gdbserver)
        •    Execute shell commands on the device
        •    Get the system and apps logs
        •    Install and remove apps

            If debugging is enabled on a device, you can do all of the above and
        more (for example, inject touch events or input text in the UI) simply by
        connecting the device to a computer with a USB cable. Because ADB does
        not depend on the device’s screen lock, you don’t have to unlock the device
        in order to execute ADB commands, and on most devices that provide
        root access, connecting via ADB allows you to access and change every file,
        including system files and password databases. Worse, you don’t actually
        need a computer with development tools in order to access an Android
        device via ADB; another Android device and a USB On-The-Go (OTG)
        cable are sufficient. Android tools that can extract as much data as possible

                                                                            Device Security   279

                   from another device in a very short time are readily available.11 If the device
                   is rooted, such tools can extract all of your credentials, disable or brute-
                   force the screen lock, and even log into your Google account. But even with-
                   out root, anything on external storage, most notably photos, is accessible, as
                   are your contacts and text messages.

                   Securing ADB
                   Android 4.2 was the first version to try to make ADB access harder by hid-
                   ing the Developer options settings screen, requiring you to use a “secret
                   knock” (tapping the build number seven times) in order to enable it. While
                   not a very effective access protection method, it makes sure that most users
                   don’t accidentally enable ADB access. This is, of course, only a stop-gap
                   measure, and as soon as you man-
                   age to turn USB debugging on, your
                   device is once again vulnerable.
                        Android 4.2.2 introduced a proper
                   solution with the so-called secure USB
                   debugging feature. “Secure” here
                   refers to the fact that only hosts that
                   are explicitly authorized by the user
                   can now connect to the adbd daemon
                   on the device and execute debugging
                   commands. Thus if someone tries to
                   connect a device to another one via USB
                   in order to access ADB, they must first
                   unlock the target device and authorize
                   access from the debug host by clicking
                   OK in the confirmation dialog shown
                   in Figure 10-15.
                        You can make your decision persis-
                   tent by checking the Always allow from
                   this computer checkbox and debug-
                   ging will work just as before, as long as
                   you’re on the same machine.
                        Naturally, this secure USB debug-
                   ging is only effective if you have a rea-    Figure 10-15: USB debugging autho-
                                                                rization dialog
                   sonably secure lockscreen password in
                   place.

        NOTE       On tablets with multi-user support, the confirmation dialog is only shown to the
                   primary (owner) user.

                   11. Kyle Osborn, “p2p-adb Framework,” https://github.com/kosborn/p2p-adb/

280   Chapter 10

       Secure ADB Implementation
       The ADB host authentication functionality is enabled by default when the
       ro.adb.secure system property is set to 1, and there is no way to disable it via
       the system interface. When a device connects to a host, it is initially in the
       CS_UNAUTHORIZED state and only goes into the CS_DEVICE state after the host has
       authenticated. Hosts use RSA keys in order to authenticate to the ADB dae-
       mon on the device, typically following this three-step process:

       1.   When a host tries to connect, the device sends an A_AUTH message with
            an argument of type ADB_AUTH_TOKEN that includes a 20-byte random
            value (read from /dev/urandom/).
       2.   The host responds with an A_AUTH message with an argument of type
            ADB_AUTH_SIGNATURE, which includes a SHA1withRSA signature of the ran-
            dom token with one of the host’s private keys.
       3.   The device tries to verify the received signature, and if signature veri-
            fication succeeds, it responds with an A_CNXN packet and goes into the
            CS_DEVICE state. If verification fails, either because the signature value
            doesn’t match, or because there is no corresponding public key to verify
            with, the device sends another ADB_AUTH_TOKEN with a new random value
            so that the host can try authenticating again (slowing down if the num-
            ber of failures goes over a certain threshold).

            Signature verification typically fails the first time you connect the device
       to a new host because it doesn’t yet have the host’s key. In that case the host
       sends its public key in an A_AUTH message with an ADB_AUTH_RSAPUBLICKEY argu-
       ment. The device takes the MD5 hash of that key and displays it in the Allow
       USB debugging confirmation dialog shown in Figure 10-15. Since adbd is a native
       daemon, the key must be passed to the main Android OS in order for its hash
       to be displayed on screen. This is accomplished by simply writing the key to a
       local socket (also named adbd), which the adbd daemon monitors.
            When you enable ADB debugging from the developer settings screen, a
       thread that listens to that adbd socket is started. When the thread receives a
       message starting with PK, it treats it as a public key, parses it, calculates the
       MD5 hash and displays the confirmation dialog (implemented in a dedi-
       cated activity, UsbDebuggingActivity, part of the SystemUI package). If you tap
       OK, the activity sends a simple OK response to adbd, which uses the key to
       verify the authentication message. If you check the Always allow from this
       computer checkbox, the public key is written to disk and automatically used
       for signature verification the next time you connect to the same host.

NOTE   As of version 4.3, Android allows you to clear all saved host authentication keys.
       This functionality can be triggered by selecting Settings4Developer options4Revoke
       USB debugging authorizations.

                                                                          Device Security   281

                        The UsbDeviceManager class provides public methods for allowing and
                   denying USB debugging, clearing cached authentication keys, as well as
                   for starting and stopping the adbd daemon. Those methods are made avail-
                   able to other applications via the IUsbManager AIDL interface of the system
                   UsbService. Calling IUsbManager methods that modify device state requires the
                   MANAGE_USB system signature permission.

                   ADB Authentication Keys
                   Although we described the ADB authentication protocol above, we haven’t
                   said much about the actual keys used in the process: 2048-bit RSA keys gen-
                   erated by the local ADB server. These keys are typically stored in $HOME/
                   .android (%USERPOFILE%\.android on Windows) as adbkey (private key)
                   and adbkey.pub (public key). The default key directory can be overridden by
                   setting the ANDROID_SDK_HOME environment variable. If the ADB_VENDOR_KEYS envi-
                   ronment variable is set, the directory it points to is also searched for keys. If
                   no keys are found in any of the above locations, a new key pair is generated
                   and saved.
                        The private key file (adbkey), which is only stored on the host, is in stan-
                   dard OpenSSL PEM format. The public key file (adbkey.pub) contains the
                   Base 64–encoded mincrypt-compatible representation of the public key,
                   which is basically a serialization of mincrypt’s RSAPublicKey structure (see
                   “Enabling Verified Boot” on page 256), followed by a user@host user identi-
                   fier, separated by space. The user identifier doesn’t seem to be used as of
                   this writing and is only meaningful on Unix-based OSes; on Windows, it is
                   always unknown@unknown.
                        Keys are stored on the device in the /data/misc/adb/adb_keys/ file, and
                   new authorized keys are appended to the same file as you accept them.
                   Read-only “vendor keys” are stored in the /adb_keys file, but it doesn’t seem
                   to exist on current Nexus devices. Public keys are in the same format as on
                   the host, making it easy to load in libmincrypt, which adbd links statically.
                   Listing 10-13 shows some sample adb_keys. The file is owned by the system
                   user, its group is set to shell, and its permissions to 0640.

                   # cat data/misc/adb/adb_keys
                   QAAAAJs1UDFt17wyV+Y2GNGF+EgWoiPfsByfC4frNd3s64w3IGt25fKERnl7O8/A+iVPGv1W
                   --snip--
                   yZ61cFd7R6ohLFYJRPB6Dy7tISUPRpb+NF4pbQEAAQA= unknown@unknown
                   QAAAAKFLvP+fp1cB4Eq/6zyV+hnm1S1eV9GYd7cYe+tmwuQZFe+O4vpeow6huIN8YbBRkr7
                   --snip--
                   m7+bGd6F0hRkO82gopy553xywXU7rI/aMl6FBAEAAQA= user1@host2

Listing 10-13: Contents of the adb_keys file

                   Verifying the Host Key Fingerprint
                   While the USB debugging confirmation dialog helpfully displays a key fin-
                   gerprint to let you verify that you’re connected to the expected host, the
                   adb client doesn’t have a handy command to print the fingerprint of the

282   Chapter 10

       host key. Although it may seem that there’s little room for confusion (after
       all, there is only one cable plugged in to a single machine) when running a
       couple of VMs, things can get a little fuzzy. Listing 10-14 shows one way to
       display the host key’s fingerprint in the same format used by the confirma-
       tion dialog shown in Figure 10-15 (run in $HOME/.android or specify the
       full path to the public key file).

       $ cut -d' ' -f1 adbkey.pub|openssl base64 -A -d -a | \
       openssl md5 -c|cut -d' ' -f2|tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'
       69:D4:AC:0D:AF:6B:17:88:BA:6B:C4:BE:0C:F7:75:9A

Listing 10-14: Displaying the host key’s fingerprint

Android Backup
       Android includes a backup framework that allows application data to be
       backed up to Google’s cloud storage and supports full backup of installed
       APK files, application data, and external storage files to a host machine
       connected via USB. While device backup is not exactly a security feature,
       backups allow application data to be extracted from the device, which can
       present a security issue.

       Android Backup Overview
       Android’s backup framework was publicly announced in Android 2.2, but
       it was probably available internally earlier. The framework lets applications
       declare special components called backup agents, which are called by the sys-
       tem when creating a backup for an application and when restoring its data.
       While the backup framework did support pluggable backup transports
       internally, initially the only transport that was usable in practice was a pro-
       prietary one that stores application data in Google’s cloud storage.

       Cloud Backup
       Because backups are associated with a user’s Google account, when they
       install an application that has a backup agent on a new device, the applica-
       tion’s data can be automatically restored if the user has registered the same
       Google account as the one used when the backup was created. Backup and
       restore is managed by the system and cannot typically be triggered or con-
       trolled by users (though developer commands that trigger cloud backup are
       accessible via the Android shell). By default, backups are triggered periodi-
       cally, and restore only when an app is first installed on a device.

       Local Backup
       Android 4.0 added a new, local backup transport that lets users save back-
       ups to a file on their desktop computer as well. Local backup (also called
       full backup) requires ADB debugging to be enabled and authorized because

                                                                      Device Security   283

                   backup data is streamed to the host
                   computer using the same method that
                   ADB (via adb pull) employs to transfer
                   device files to a host.
                        Full backup is started by executing
                   the adb backup command in a shell. This
                   command starts a new Java process on
                   the device, which binds to the system’s
                   BackupManagerService and requests a
                   backup with the parameters specified
                   to adb backup. The BackupManagerService
                   in turn starts a confirmation activity
                   like the one shown in Figure 10-16,
                   prompting the user to authorize the
                   backup and specify a backup encryp-
                   tion password if desired. If the device
                   is already encrypted, the user must enter
                   the device encryption password to pro-
                   ceed. This password will be used to
                   encrypt the backup as well, because
                   using a dedicated backup encryp-
                   tion password is not supported. The
                   full backup process is started when            Figure 10-16: Backup confirmation
                   the user presses the Back up my data           dialog
                   button.
                        Full backup calls the backup agent of each target package in
                   order to obtain a copy of its data. If a backup agent is not defined, the
                   BackupManagerService uses an internal FullBackupAgent class, which copies
                   all of the package’s files. Full backup honors the allowBackup attribute of
                   the <application> tag in the package’s AndroidManifest.xml file, and will not
                   extract package data if allowBackup is set to false.
                        In addition to application data, full backup can include user-installed
                   and system application APK files, as well as external storage contents, with
                   some limitations: full backup doesn’t back up protected (with DRM) apps,
                   and skips some system settings such as mobile network APNs and Wi-Fi
                   access points’ connection details.
                        Backups are restored using the adb restore command. Backup restore
                   is quite limited and doesn’t allow any options to be specified, as it can only
                   perform a full restore.

                   Backup File Format
                   Android backup files start with a few lines of text, followed by binary data.
                   These lines are the backup header and they specify the backup format and
                   encryption parameters (if a backup password was specified) used to create
                   the backup. The header of an unencrypted backup is shown in Listing 10-15.

284   Chapter 10

ANDROID BACKUPu
1v
1w
nonex

Listing 10-15: Unencrypted backup header

     The first line u is the file magic (format identifier), the second v is
the backup format version (1 up till Android 4.4.2, 2 in later versions; ver-
sion 2 denotes a change in the key derivation method, which now takes into
account multibyte password characters), the third w is a compression flag
(1 if compressed), and the last x is the encryption algorithm used (none or
AES-256).
     The actual backup data is a compressed and optionally encrypted tar
file that includes a backup manifest file, followed by the application APK
(if any), and app data (files, databases, and shared preferences). The data
is compressed using the deflate algorithm and can be decompressed using
OpenSSL’s zlib command, as shown in Listing 10-16.

$ dd if=mybackup.ab bs=24 skip=1|openssl zlib -d > mybackup.tar

Listing 10-16: Uncompressing an Android backup using OpenSSL

     After the backup is uncompressed, you can view its contents or extract
it with the standard tar command, as shown in Listing 10-17.

$ tar tvf mybackup.tar
-rw------- 1000/1000      1019 apps/org.myapp/_manifestu
-rw-r--r-- 1000/1000   1412208 apps/org.myapp/a/org.myapp-1.apkv
-rw-rw---- 10091/10091     231 apps/org.myapp/f/share_history.xmlw
-rw-rw---- 10091/10091       0 apps/org.myapp/db/myapp.db-journalx
-rw-rw---- 10091/10091    5120 apps/org.myapp/db/myapp.db
-rw-rw---- 10091/10091    1110 apps/org.myapp/sp/org.myapp_preferences.xmly

Listing 10-17: Viewing the contents of an uncompressed backup using tar

    Inside the tar file, app data is stored in the apps/ directory, which con-
tains a subdirectory for each backed-up package. Each package directory
includes a _manifest file u in its root, the APK file (if requested) in a/ v,
app files in f/ w, databases in db/ x, and shared preferences in sp/ y. The
manifest contains the app’s package name and version code, the platform’s
version code, a flag indicating whether the archive contains the app APK,
and the app’s signing certificate.
    The BackupManagerService uses this information when restoring an app
in order to check whether it’s been signed with the same certificate as the
currently installed one. If the certificates don’t match, it will skip installing
the APK, except for system packages, which might be signed with a differ-
ent (manufacturer-owned) certificate on different devices. Additionally,
BackupManagerService expects the files to be in the order shown in Listing 10-17

                                                                     Device Security   285

                   and restore will fail if they are out for order. For example, if the manifest
                   states that the backup includes an APK, the BackupManagerService will try to
                   read and install the APK first, before restoring the app’s files. This restore
                   order is required because you cannot restore files for an app you don’t have
                   installed. However, BackupManagerService will not search for the APK in the
                   archive, and if it is not right after the manifest, all other files will be skipped.
                        If the user requested external storage backup (by passing the -shared
                   option to adb backup), there will also be a shared/ directory in the archive,
                   containing external storage files.

                   Backup Encryption
                   If the user supplied an encryption password when requesting the backup,
                   the backup file is encrypted with a key derived from the password. The
                   password is used to generate a 256-bit AES key using 10,000 rounds of
                   PBKDF2 with a randomly generated 512-bit salt. This key is then used to
                   encrypt another, randomly generated 256-bit AES bit master key, which is
                   in turn used to encrypt the actual archive data in CBC mode (using the
                   AES/CBC/PKCS5Padding Cipher transformation). A master key checksum is
                   also calculated and saved in the backup file header. In order to generate
                   the checksum, the generated raw master key is converted to a Java charac-
                   ter array by casting each byte to char, with the result treated as a password
                   string, and run through the PBKDF2 function to effectively generate
                   another AES key, whose bytes are used as the checksum.

        NOTE       Because an AES key is essentially a random byte sequence, the raw key usually con-
                   tains several bytes that don’t map to printable characters. Because PKCS#5 does not
                   specify the actual encoding of a password string, Android’s encryption checksum gen-
                   eration method produces implementation and version-dependent results.

                        The checksum is used to verify whether the user-supplied decryption
                   password is correct before actually decrypting the backup data. When
                   the master key is decrypted, its checksum is calculated using the method
                   described above and then compared to the checksum in the archive header.
                   If the checksums don’t match, the password is considered incorrect, and the
                   restore process is aborted. Listing 10-18 shows an example backup header
                   for an encrypted archive.

                   ANDROID BACKUP
                   1
                   1
                   AES-256u
                   68404C30DF8CACA5FA004F49BA3A70...v
                   909459ADCA2A60D7C2B117A6F91E3D...w
                   10000x
                   789B1A01E3B8FA759C6459AF1CF1F0FD y
                   8DC5E483D3893EC7F6AAA56B97A6C2...z

Listing 10-18: Encrypted backup header

286   Chapter 10

    Here, AES-256 u is the backup encryption algorithm used, the next
line v is the user password salt as a hexadecimal string, followed by the
master key checksum salt w, the number of PBKDF2 rounds used to
derive a key x, and the user key IV y. The final line z is the master key
blob, which contains the archive data encryption IV, the actual master
key and its checksum, all encrypted with the key derived from the user-
supplied password. Listing 10-19 shows the detailed format of the master
key blob.

byte Nivu
byte[Niv] IVv
byte Nmkw
byte [Nmk] MKx
byte Ncky
byte [Nck] MKckz

Listing 10-19: Master key blob format

     The first field u is the IV length, followed by the IV value v, the master
key (MK) length w, and the actual master key x. The last two fields store
the master key checksum hash length y, and the master key checksum hash
itself z.

Controlling Backup Scope
Android’s security model guarantees that each application runs within its
own sandbox and that its files cannot be accessed by other applications or
the device user, unless the application explicitly allows access. Therefore,
most applications do not encrypt their data before storing it to disk. However,
both legitimate users and attackers that have somehow obtained the device
unlock password can easily extract applications data using Android’s full
backup feature. For this reason, applications that store sensitive data should
either encrypt it or provide an explicit backup agent that limits exportable
data in order to guarantee that sensitive data cannot be easily extracted
via backup.
     As mentioned in “Android Backup Overview” on page 283, if applica-
tion data backup isn’t needed or desirable, applications can disallow it com-
pletely by setting their allowBackup attribute to false in AndroidManifest.xml,
as shown in Listing 10-20.

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<manifest xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
    package="org.example.app"
    android:versionCode="1"
    android:versionName="1.0" >
    --snip--
    <application
        android:icon="@drawable/ic_launcher"
        android:label="@string/app_name"
        android:theme="@style/AppTheme"
        android:allowBackup="false">

                                                               Device Security   287

                           --snip--
                       </application>
                   </manifest>

Listing 10-20: Disallowing application data backup in AndroidManifest.xml

     Summary
                   Android employs various measures in order to protect user data and appli-
                   cations, and ensure the integrity of the operating system. On production
                   devices, the bootloader is locked, and the recovery OS only allows OTA
                   updates signed by the device manufacturer to be installed, thus ensuring
                   that only authorized OS builds can be booted or flashed to a device. When
                   enabled, dm-verity-based verified boot guarantees that the system partition
                   is not modified by checking the hash value of each device block against a
                   trusted hash tree, which prevents the installation of malicious programs
                   such as rootkits on the system partition. Android can also encrypt the
                   userdata partition, making it harder to extract applications data by directly
                   accessing storage devices.
                        Android supports various screen lock methods and applies rate limit-
                   ing to unsuccessful authentication attempts, thus deterring online attacks
                   against a booted device. The type and complexity of the unlock PIN or
                   password can be specified and enforced by device administrator applica-
                   tions. A device policy that wipes the device after too many unsuccessful
                   authentication attempts is also supported. Secure USB debugging requires
                   debug hosts to be explicitly authorized by the user and added to a whitelist,
                   thus preventing information extraction via USB.
                        Finally, full device backups can be encrypted with a key derived from
                   a user-supplied password, making it harder to access device data that has
                   been extracted into a backup. To achieve a higher level of device secu-
                   rity, all supported security measures should be enabled and configured
                   accordingly.

288   Chapter 10

