                                  11
              N F C a nd Secure E le m ent s

       This chapter gives a brief overview of near field com-
       munication (NFC) and secure elements (SEs), and
       explains how they’re integrated into mobile devices.
       While NFC has many uses, we focus on its card emula-
       tion mode, which is used to provide an interface to an
       SE integrated into a mobile device. Secure elements offer protected storage
       for private data, such as authentication keys, and provide a secure execution
       environment that can protect security-critical code. We’ll describe which
       types of SEs Android supports and introduce the APIs that Android appli-
       cations can use to communicate with SEs. Finally, we’ll discuss host-based
       card emulation (HCE) and its Android implementations, and demonstrate
       how to implement an HCE application.

NFC Overview
       NFC is a technology that allows devices that are in close proximity (usually
       10 centimeters or less) to establish radio communication with each other
       and exchange data. NFC is not a single standard, but is based on a set of

                   standards that define radio frequencies, communication protocols, and
                   data exchange formats. NFC builds upon radio-frequency identification
                   (RFID) technology and operates at the 13.56 MHz frequency, allowing vari-
                   ous data transmission rates such as 106kbps, 212kbps, and 424kbps.
                        NFC communication involves two devices: an initiator and a target. In
                   active mode, both the initiator and the target have their own power supplies
                   and each can transmit a radio signal in order to communicate with the
                   other party. In passive mode, the target device does not have its own power
                   source and is activated and powered by the electromagnetic field emitted
                   by the initiator.
                        When communicating in passive mode, the initiator is often called
                   a reader, and the target a tag. The reader can be a dedicated device or be
                   embedded in a general purpose device, such as a personal computer or a
                   mobile phone. Tags come in various shapes and sizes and range from simple
                   stickers with very limited amount of memory to contactless smart cards,
                   which have an embedded CPU.
                        NFC devices can operate in three different modes: reader/writer (R/W),
                   peer-to-peer (P2P), and card emulation (CE). In R/W mode, a device acts
                   as an active initiator and can read and write data to external tags. In P2P
                   mode, two NFC devices can actively exchange data using a bidirectional
                   communication protocol. The CE mode allows an NFC device to emulate
                   a tag or a contactless smart card. Android supports all three modes with
                   some limitations. We give an overview of Android’s NFC architecture and
                   show how to use each mode in the next section.

     Android NFC Support
                   NFC support in Android was introduced in version 2.3 and the related
                   architecture and features remained largely unchanged until version 4.4,
                   which introduced HCE support.
                       Android’s NFC implementation resides in the NfcService system service,
                   part of the Nfc system application (package com.android.nfc). It wraps the
                   native libraries required to drive each supported NFC controller; implements
                   access control, tag discovery, and dispatch; and controls card emulation.
                   Android doesn’t expose a low-level API to the functionality of NfcService,
                   but instead offers an event-driven framework that allows interested applica-
                   tions to register for NFC events. This event-driven approach is used in all
                   three NFC operating modes.

                   Reader/Writer Mode
                   NFC-enabled Android applications can’t directly set the device in R/W
                   mode. Instead, they declare the type of tags they’re interested in, and
                   Android’s tag dispatch system selects and starts the matching application
                   when it discovers a tag.
                        The tag dispatch system both uses the tag technology (discussed shortly)
                   and parses tag contents in order to decide which application to dispatch the
                   tag to. The tag dispatch system uses three intent actions to notify applications

290   Chapter 11

about the discovered tag: ACTION_NDEF_DISCOVERED, ACTION_TECH_DISCOVERED, and
ACTION_TAG_DISCOVERED. The ACTION_NDEF_DISCOVERED intent has the highest
priority and is sent when Android discovers a tag that is formatted using
the standard NFC Data Exchange Format (NDEF)1 and that contains a
recognized data type. The ACTION_TECH_DISCOVERED intent is sent when the
scanned tag does not contain NDEF data or the data format is not recog-
nized by applications that can handle the discovered tag technology. If no
applications can handle ACTION_NDEF_DISCOVERED or ACTION_TECH_DISCOVERED, the
NfcService sends the generic ACTION_TAG_DISCOVERED intent. Tag dispatch events
are delivered only to activities, and therefore cannot be processed in the
background without user interaction.

Registering for Tag Dispatch
Applications register for NFC events using the standard intent filter sys-
tem by declaring the intents that an NFC-enabled activity supports in
AndroidManifest.xml, as shown in Listing 11-1.

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<manifest xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
    package="com.example.nfc" ...>
    --snip--

    <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.NFC" />u
    --snip--
    <application ...>
        <activity
             android:name=".NfcActivity"v
             android:launchMode="singleTop" >
             <intent-filter>
                 <action android:name="android.nfc.action.NDEF_DISCOVERED"/>w
                 <category android:name="android.intent.category.DEFAULT"/>
                 <data android:mimeType="text/plain" />
             </intent-filter>
             <intent-filter>
                 <action android:name="android.nfc.action.TECH_DISCOVERED" />x
             </intent-filter>
             <intent-filter>
                 <action android:name="android.nfc.action.TAG_DISCOVERED" />y
             </intent-filter>

             <meta-data
                  android:name="android.nfc.action.TECH_DISCOVERED"z
                  android:resource="@xml/filter_nfc" >
             </meta-data>
         </activity>
         --snip--

1. The NDEF format and its implementation using various tag technologies are described
in the NFC Forum specification, available on its website: http://nfc-forum.org/our-work/
specifications-and-application-documents/specifications/nfc-forum-technical-specifications/

                                                                    NFC and Secure Elements   291

                       </application>
                   </manifest>

Listing 11-1: Manifest file of an NFC-enabled application

                        As you can see in this listing, the application first requests the
                   android.permission.NFC permission u, which is required to access the
                   NFC controller, and then declares an activity that handles NFC events,
                   NfcActivity v. The activity registers three intent filters; one for each tag
                   discovery event. The application declares that it can handle NDEF data
                   with the text/plain MIME type by specifying the mimeType attribute of the
                   <data> tag in the NDEF_DISCOVERED intent filter w. NfcActivity also declares
                   that it can handle the TECH_DISCOVERED intent x, which is sent if the scanned
                   tag uses one of the technologies specified in the associated metadata XML
                   resource file z. Finally, the application requests that it be notified about all
                   discovered NFC tags by adding the catch-all TAG_DISCOVERED intent filter y.
                       If more than one activity that supports the scanned tag is found, Android
                   shows a selection dialog, allowing the user to select which activity should
                   handle the tag. Applications already in the foreground can short-circuit this
                   selection by calling the NfcAdapter.enableForegroundDispatch() method. Such
                   an application will be given priority over all other matching applications
                   and will automatically receive the NFC intent when it’s in the foreground.

                   Tag Technologies
                   A tag technology is an abstract term that describes a concrete NFC tag. The
                   tag technology is determined by the communication protocol the tag uses,
                   its internal structure, or the features it offers. For example, a tag that uses the
                   NFC-A protocol (based on ISO 14443-3A)2 for communication matches the
                   NfcA technology, and a tag that contains NDEF-formatted data matches
                   the Ndef technology, regardless of the underlying communication protocol.
                   (See the TagTechnology class reference documentation3 for a full list of tag
                   technologies supported by Android.)
                         An activity that specifies the TECH_DISCOVERED intent filter must provide
                   an XML resource file that in turn specifies the concrete technologies it sup-
                   ports with a <tech-list> element. An activity is considered a match for a tag
                   if one of the tech lists it declares is a subset of the technologies supported
                   by the tag. Multiple tech lists can be declared in order to match different
                   tags, as shown in Listing 11-2.

                   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
                   <resources>
                       <tech-list>u
                           <tech>android.nfc.tech.IsoDep</tech>

                   2. Official versions of all ISO standards can be purchased on its website, http://www.iso.org/
                   iso/home/store/catalogue_ics.htm. Draft versions of standards can usually be obtained from the
                   website of the standard working group.
                   3. Google, Android API Reference, “TagTechnology,” https://developer.android.com/reference/
                   android/nfc/tech/TagTechnology.html

292   Chapter 11

        <tech>android.nfc.tech.NfcA</tech>
    </tech-list>

    <tech-list>v
        <tech>android.nfc.tech.NfcF</tech>
    </tech-list>
</resources>

Listing 11-2: Declaring technologies to match using tech lists

     Here, the first tech list u will match tags that provide a communica-
tion interface compatible with ISO 14443-4 (ISO-DEP), and which are
implemented using the NFC-A technology (usually used by NXP contact-
less smart cards); the second tech list v matches tags that use the NFC-F
technology (typically Felica cards). Because both tech lists are defined inde-
pendently, our example NfcActivity (see Listing 11-1) will be notified when
either a contactless NXP smart card or a Felica card or tag is scanned.

Reading a Tag
After the tag dispatch system selects an activity to handle the scanned tag, it
creates an NFC intent object and passes it to the selected activity. The activ-
ity can then use the EXTRA_TAG extra to obtain a Tag object representing the
scanned tag and call its methods in order to read or write to the tag. (Tags
that contain NDEF data also provide the EXTRA_NDEF_MESSAGES extra, which
contains an array of NDEF messages parsed from the tag.)
     A concrete Tag object representing the underlying tag technology can
be obtained using the static get() method of the corresponding technol-
ogy class, as shown in Listing 11-3. If the Tag object does not support the
requested technology, the get() method returns null.

protected void onNewIntent(Intent intent) {
    setIntent(intent);

    Tag tag = intent.getParcelableExtra(NfcAdapter.EXTRA_TAG);
    IsoDep isoDep = IsoDep.get(tag);
    if (isoDep != null) {
         isoDep.connect();
         byte[] command = {...};
         byte[] response = isoDep.transceive(command);
         --snip--
    }
}

Listing 11-3: Obtaining a concrete Tag instance from the NFC intent

Using Reader Mode
In addition to the intent-based tag dispatch system, Android 4.4 adds a
new method that activities can use to obtain a live Tag object, called reader
mode. Reader mode guarantees that while the target activity is in the
foreground, all other operation modes supported by the NFC controller

                                                                 NFC and Secure Elements   293

                   (such as peer-to-peer and card emulation) are disabled. This mode is help-
                   ful when scanning an active NFC device, such as another Android device in
                   host-based emulation mode, which could trigger point-to-point communica-
                   tion and thus take control away from the current foreground activity.
                       Activities can enable reader mode by calling the enableReaderMode()
                   method of the NfcAdapter class,4 as shown in Listing 11-4.

                   public class NfcActivity extends Activity implements NfcAdapter.ReaderCallback {
                       private NfcAdapter adapter;
                       --snip--
                       @Override
                       public void onResume() {
                           super.onResume();
                           if (adapter != null) {
                               adapter.enableReaderMode(this, this, NfcAdapter.FLAG_READER_NFC_Au
                                       | NfcAdapter.FLAG_READER_SKIP_NDEF_CHECK, null);
                           }
                       }

                        @Override
                        public void onTagDiscovered(Tag tag) {v
                            IsoDep isoDep = IsoDep.get(tag);
                            if (isoDep != null) {
                                 isoDep.connect();
                                 byte[] command = {...};
                                 byte[] response = isoDep.transceive(command);
                                 --snip--
                            }
                        }
                        --snip--
                   }

Listing 11-4: Enabling reader mode and obtaining a Tag object using ReaderCallback

                        In this case, the activity enables reader mode when it comes to the
                   foreground by calling the enableReaderMode() method u (the activity should
                   disable reader mode using the matching disableReaderMode() method when
                   it leaves the foreground), and obtains a Tag instance directly (without an
                   intermediate intent) via the onTagDiscovered() callback v. The Tag object is
                   then used in the same way as in intent-based dispatch.

                   Peer-to-Peer Mode
                   Android implements a limited NFC P2P mode data exchange between
                   devices using the proprietary NDEF push and the standard Simple NDEF
                   Exchange Protocol (SNEP) protocols.5 Android devices can exchange a

                   4. Google, Android API Reference, “NfcAdapter,” https://developer.android.com/reference/android/
                   nfc/NfcAdapter.html
                   5. NFC Forum, “NFC Forum Technical Specifications,” http://nfc-forum.org/our-work/
                   specifications-and-application-documents/specifications/nfc-forum-technical-specifications/

294   Chapter 11

        single NDEF message with any device that supports either of these proto-
        cols, but the P2P mode is typically used with another Android device in
        order to implement the so-called Android Beam feature.
             In addition to NDEF messages, Android Beam allows for the transfer of
        larger data objects, such as photos and videos, which cannot fit in a single
        NDEF message by creating a temporary Bluetooth connection between
        devices. This process is called NFC handover and was added in Android 4.1.
             NDEF message exchange in P2P mode is enabled by calling the
        setNdefPushMessage() or setNdefPushMessageCallback() methods of the
                                                          6
        NfcAdapter class. (See the official NFC API guide for more details and
        sample code.)

        Card Emulation Mode
        As mentioned in “NFC Overview” on page 289, CE mode allows an
        Android device to emulate a contactless smart card or an NFC tag. In
        CE mode, the device receives commands over NFC, processes them, and
        sends replies, again over NFC. The component responsible for process-
        ing commands can be either a hardware secure element (as discussed
        in the next section) connected to the device’s NFC controller, or an
        Android application running on the device (when in host-based card
        emulation, HCE).
             In the following sections, we’ll discuss secure elements in mobile
        devices, and the Android APIs that applications can use to communicate
        with SEs. We’ll also describe how Android implements HCE and demon-
        strate how to create an application that enables card emulation.

Secure Elements
        A secure element (SE) is a tamper-resistant smart card chip capable of run-
        ning smart card applications (called applets or cardlets) with a certain level
        of security and isolation. A smart card is essentially a minimal computing
        environment on a single chip, complete with a CPU, ROM, EEPROM, RAM,
        and I/O port. Recent cards also include cryptographic co-processors that
        implement common algorithms such as AES and RSA.
             Smart cards use various techniques to implement tamper resistance,
        making it quite hard to extract data by disassembling or analyzing the
        chip. Modern smart cards come pre-programmed with a multi-application
        OS that takes advantage of the hardware’s memory protection features to
        ensure that each application’s data is only available to itself. Application
        installation and (optionally) access is controlled by requiring the use of
        cryptographic keys for each operation.

        6. Google, Android API Guides, “NFC Basics,” https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/
        connectivity/nfc/nfc.html#p2p

                                                                             NFC and Secure Elements   295

                        The SE can be integrated in mobile devices as a Universal Integrated
                   Circuit Card (UICC, commonly known as a SIM card) embedded in the
                   handset or connected to a SD card slot. If the device supports NFC, the SE
                   is usually connected to (or embedded into) the NFC controller, making it
                   possible to communicate with the SE wirelessly.
                        Smart cards have been around since the 1970s and are now used in app­
                   lications ranging from pre-paid phone calls and transit ticketing to credit
                   cards and VPN credential storage. Because an SE installed in a mobile
                   device has equivalent or superior capabilities to that of a smart card, it
                   can theoretically be used for any application that physical smart cards are
                   currently used for. Additionally, because an SE can host multiple applica-
                   tions, it has the potential to replace the bunch of cards people use daily
                   with a single device. Furthermore, because the SE can be controlled by the
                   device’s OS, access to it can be restricted by requiring additional authenti-
                   cation (PIN, passphrase, or code signature) to enable it.
                        One of the main applications of SEs in mobile devices is that of emu-
                   lating contactless payment cards, and the goal of enabling mobile pay-
                   ments has indeed been the driving force behind SE deployment. Aside
                   from financial applications, mobile SEs could be used to emulate other
                   contactless cards that are in wide use, such as access cards, loyalty cards,
                   and so on.
                        Mobile SEs could also be used to enhance the security of apps that deal
                   with sensitive information or algorithms: The security-critical part of the
                   app, such as credential storage or license verification, can be implemented
                   inside the SE in order to guarantee that it’s impervious to reverse engineer-
                   ing and information extraction. Other apps that can benefit from being
                   implemented in the SE are One Time Password (OTP) generators and, of
                   course, credential storage (for shared secret keys, or private keys in a PKI).
                        While it’s possible to implement SE-enabled apps today with stan-
                   dard tools and technologies, using them in practice on current commer-
                   cial Android devices isn’t straightforward. We’ll discuss this in detail in
                   “Android SE Execution Environment” on page 302, but let’s first explore
                   the types of SEs available on mobile devices, and the level of support they
                   have in Android.

                   SE Form Factors in Mobile Devices
                   Figure 11-1 shows a simplified block diagram of the components of an
                   Android device as they relate to NFC and SE support, including the embed-
                   ded SE (eSE) and the UICC. We’ll refer to the components in this diagram
                   in our discussion of secure elements and host-based card emulation in the
                   rest of this chapter.
                        In the following subsections, we briefly review the types of SEs available
                   on Android devices, how they’re connected to other device components,
                   and the methods the OS uses to communicate with each type of SE.

296   Chapter 11

                                                           Android Device
                                                      Application Processor
                                                                  HCE
                                                     App                            App
                                                                  App

                                                            Android OS

                             NFC-A

                                           Antenna
                  Antenna
 Contactless                                                  Baseband
                            13.56 MHz                                               UICC
  Reader                                                      Processor
                             NFC-B

                                                                          SWP

                                                      NFC Controller
                                                        (PN544)
                                                                                     eSE
                                                                          S2C

                                                           NFC Chip (PN65N)

Figure 11-1: Android NFC and SE components

UICC
Most mobile devices today have some kind of UICC. Although UICCs are
smart cards that can host applications, because the UICC has tradition-
ally only been connected to the baseband processor (not the application
processor that runs the main device OS), they can’t be accessed directly
from Android. All communication goes through the Radio Interface Layer
(RIL), which is essentially a proprietary IPC interface to the baseband.
     Communication with the UICC SE is carried out using extended AT
                                                                     7
commands (AT+CCHO, AT+CCHC, AT+CGLA as defined by 3GPP TS 27.007), which
the current Android telephony manager does not support. The SEEK for
Android project8 provides patches to implement the needed commands,
allowing for communication with the UICC via the SmartCard API, which
is a reference implementation of the SIMalliance Open Mobile API specifi-
cation9 (discussed in “Using the OpenMobile API” on page 308). However,
as with most components that talk directly to the hardware in Android,

7. 3GPP, AT command set for User Equipment (UE), http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/
27007.htm
8. “Secure Element Evaluation Kit for the Android platform,” https://code.google.com/p/
seek-for-android/
9. SIMalliance Limited, Open Mobile API Specification v2.05, http://www.simalliance.org/en?t=/
documentManager/sfdoc.file.supply&fileID=1392314878580

                                                                        NFC and Secure Elements   297

                   the RIL consists of an open source part (rild), and a proprietary library
                   (libXXX-ril.so). In order to support communication with the UICC secure
                   element, support must be added both to the rild and to the underlying pro-
                   prietary library. The choice of whether to add that support is left to hard-
                   ware vendors.
                        As of this writing, the SmartCard API has not been integrated into main-
                   line Android (although the AOSP source tree includes an empty packages/
                   apps/SmartCardService/ directory). However, Android devices from major
                   vendors ship with an implementation of the SmartCard API, which allows
                   communication from the UICC to third-party applications (subject to vari-
                   ous access restrictions).
                        The Single Wire Protocol (SWP) offers an alternative way to use the
                   UICC as an SE. SWP is used to connect the UICC to a NFC controller,
                   allowing the NFC controller to expose the UICC to external readers when
                   in card emulation mode. The NFC controllers built into recent Nexus
                   devices (such as the Broadcom BCM20793M in the Nexus 5) support SWP,
                   but this functionality is disabled by default. (It can be enabled by changing
                   the configuration file of the libnfc-brcm library on the Nexus 5.) A standard
                   API to switch between the UICC, the embedded SE (if available), and HCE
                   when in card emulation mode is currently not exposed, but the “off-host”
                   routing functionality available in Android 4.4 can theoretically route com-
                   mands to the UICC (see “APDU Routing” on page 311 for details).

                   microSD-Based SE
                   Another form factor for an SE is an Advanced Security SD card (ASSD),10 which
                   is basically an SD card with an embedded SE chip. When connected to an
                   Android device with an SD card slot, running a SEEK-patched Android
                   version, the SE can be accessed via the SmartCard API. However, Android
                   devices with an SD card slot are becoming the exceptions rather than the
                   norm, so it’s unlikely that ASSD Android support will make it to the main-
                   stream. Additionally, even when available, recent Android versions treat SD
                   cards as secondary storage devices and allow access to them only via a very
                   high-level, restrictive API.

                   Embedded SE
                   An embedded SE (eSE) is not a distinct device but is usually integrated with
                   the NFC controller and housed in the same enclosure. An example of an
                   eSE is NXP’s PN65N chip, which combines the PN544 NFC radio controller
                   with the P5CN072 SE (part of the SmartMX series).
                       The first mainstream Android device to feature an embedded SE was the
                   Nexus S, which also introduced NFC support to Android and was built using
                   the PN65N controller. Its successors, the Galaxy Nexus and the Nexus 4, also

                   10. SD Association, “Advanced Security SD Card: ASSD,” https://www.sdcard.org/developers/
                   overview/ASSD/

298   Chapter 11

came equipped with an eSE. However, recent Google-branded devices, such
as the Nexus 5 and Nexus 7 (2013), have deprecated the eSE in favor of
host-based card emulation and do not include an eSE.
    The embedded SE is connected to the NFC controller through a
SignalIn/SignalOut connection (S2C), standardized as NFC Wired
Interface (NFC-WI),11 and has three modes of operation: off, wired,
and virtual. In off mode, there’s no communication with the SE. In wired
mode, the SE is visible to the Android OS as if it were a contactless smart
card connected to the NFC reader. In virtual mode, the SE is visible to
external readers as if the phone were a contactless smart card. These modes
are mutually exclusive, so we can communicate with the SE either via the
contactless interface (that is, from an external reader), or through the
wired interface (that is, from an Android app). The next section shows how
to use the wired mode to communicate with the eSE from an Android app.

Accessing the Embedded SE
As of this writing, no public Android SDK API allows communication with
the embedded SE, but recent Android versions include an optional library
called nfc_extras, which offers a stable interface to the eSE. This section
demonstrates how to configure Android to allow eSE access to certain
Android applications, as well as how to use the nfc_extras library.
     Card emulation, and consequently, internal APIs for accessing the
embedded SE were introduced in Android 2.3.4 (the version that intro-
duced Google Wallet). Those APIs are hidden from SDK applications and
using them required system signature permissions (WRITE_SECURE_SETTINGS or
NFCEE_ADMIN) in Android 2.3.4 and subsequent 2.3.x releases, as well as in the
initial Android 4.0 release (API Level 14). A signature permission is quite
restrictive because it allows only parties that control the platform signature
keys to distribute apps that can use the eSE.
     Android 4.0.4 (API Level 15) lifted this restriction by replacing the
signature permission with signing certificate whitelisting at the OS level.
While this still requires modifying core OS files, and thus vendor coopera-
tion, there is no need to sign SE applications with the vendor key, which
greatly simplifies distribution. Additionally, since the whitelist is maintained
in a file, it can easily be updated using an OTA to add support for more SE
applications.

Granting Access to the eSE
The new whitelisting access control approach is implemented by the
NfceeAccessControl class and enforced by the system NfcService. The
NfceeAccessControl class reads the whitelist from /etc/nfcee_access.xml, which
is an XML file that stores a list of signing certificates and package names
that are allowed to access the eSE. Access can be granted both to all apps

11. ECMA International, ECMA-373: Near Field Communication Wired Interface (NFC-WI),
http://www.ecma-international.org/publications/files/ECMA-ST/ECMA-373.pdf

                                                                 NFC and Secure Elements   299

                   signed by a particular certificate’s private key (if no package name is speci-
                   fied), or to a single package (app) only. Listing 11-5 shows how the contents
                   of the nfcee_access.xml file might appear:

                   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
                   <resources xmlns:xliff="urn:oasis:names:tc:xliff:document:1.2">
                       <signer android:signature="308204a830820390a003020102020900b399...">u
                           <package android:name="com.example.nfc">v
                           </package>
                       </signer>
                   </resources>

Listing 11-5: Contents of the nfcee_access.xml file

                         This configuration allows SE access to the com.example.nfc package v
                   if it is signed by the specified signing certificate u. On production devices,
                   this file usually contains only the Google Wallet app signing certificate, thus
                   restricting eSE access to Google Wallet.

        NOTE       As of April 2014, Google Wallet is supported only on Android 4.4 and later, and uses
                   HCE rather than the eSE.

                       After an application’s signing certificate has been added to nfcee_access
                   .xml, no permissions other than the standard NFC permission are required
                   to access the eSE. In addition to whitelisting the app’s signing certificate,
                   the nfc_extras library must be explicitly added to the app’s manifest and
                   marked as required with the <uses-library> tag in order to enable eSE
                   access (because the library is optional, it’s not loaded by default), as
                   shown in Listing 11-6 at u.

                   <manifest xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
                       package="com.example.nfc" ...>
                       --snip--
                       <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.NFC" />
                       <application ...>
                           --snip--
                           <uses-library
                                android:name="com.android.nfc_extras"u
                                android:required="true" />
                       </application>
                   </manifest>

Listing 11-6: Adding the nfc_extras library to AndroidManifest.xml

                   Using the NfcExecutionEnvironment API
                   Android’s eSE access API isn’t based on a standard smart card communica-
                   tion API, such as JSR 17712 or the Open Mobile API, but instead offers a very

                   12. Oracle, “JSR 177: Security and Trust Services API for J2METM,” https://jcp.org/en/jsr/
                   detail?id=177

300   Chapter 11

basic communication interface, implemented in the NfcExecutionEnvironment
class. The class has only three public methods, as shown in Listing 11-7.

public class NfcExecutionEnvironment {
    public void open() throws EeIOException {...}

    public void close() throws IOException {...}

    public byte[] transceive(byte[] in) throws IOException {...}
}

Listing 11-7: NfcExecutionEnvironment API

    This simple interface is sufficient to communicate with the SE, but in order
to use it you first need to obtain an instance of the NfcExecutionEnvironment class.
An instance can be obtained from the NfcAdapterExtras class, which is in
turn accessed via its static get() method, as shown in Listing 11-8.

NfcAdapterExtras adapterExtras =
     NfcAdapterExtras.get(NfcAdapter.getDefaultAdapter(context));u
NfcExecutionEnvironment nfceEe =
     adapterExtras.getEmbeddedExecutionEnvironment();v
nfcEe.open();w
byte[] emptySelectCmd = { 0x00, (byte) 0xa4, 0x04, 0x00, 0x00 };
byte[] response = nfcEe.transceive(emptySelectCmd);x
nfcEe.close();y

Listing 11-8: Using the NfcExecutionEnvironment API

    Here, we first obtain an NfcAdapterExtras instance u, and then call its
getEmbeddedExecutionEnvironment() method in order to obtain an interface to
the eSE v. To be able to communicate with the eSE, we first open a connec-
tion w, and then use the transceive() method to send a command and get a
response x. Finally, we close the connection using the close() method y.

eSE-Related Broadcasts
An SE-enabled app needs to be notified of NFC events such as RF field detec-
tion, as well as of events pertaining to the eSE and the applets installed on it,
such as applet selection via the NFC interface, in order to be able to change
state accordingly. Because disclosure of such events to malicious applica-
tions can lead to leaking of sensitive information and denial of service attacks,
access to eSE-related events must be limited to trusted applications only.
     In Android, global events are implemented by using broadcasts, and
applications can create and register broadcast receivers that receive the
broadcasts the app is interested in. Access to eSE-related broadcasts can
be controlled with standard Android signature-based permissions, but this
approach has the disadvantage that only apps signed with the platform
certificate can receive eSE events, thus limiting SE-enabled apps to those
created by the device manufacturer or mobile network operator (MNO).
To avoid this limitation, Android uses the same mechanism employed to

                                                           NFC and Secure Elements   301

                   control eSE access; namely, whitelisting application certificates, in order
                   to control the scope of applications that can receive eSE-related broadcasts.
                   Any application whose signing certificate (and optionally package name) is
                   registered in nfcee_access.xml can receive eSE-related broadcasts by register-
                   ing a receiver like the one shown in Listing 11-9.

<receiver android:name="com.example.nfc.SEReceiver" >
  <intent-filter>
   <action android:name="com.android.nfc_extras.action.RF_FIELD_ON_DETECTED" />u
   <action android:name="com.android.nfc_extras.action.RF_FIELD_OFF_DETECTED" />v
   <action android:name="com.android.nfc_extras.action.APDU_RECEIVED" />w
   <action android:name="com.android.nfc_extras.action.AID_SELECTED" />x
   <action android:name="com.android.nfc_extras.action.MIFARE_ACCESS_DETECTED" />y
   <action android:name="com.android.nfc_extras.action.EMV_CARD_REMOVAL" />z
   <action android:name="com.android.nfc.action.INTERNAL_TARGET_DESELECTED" />{
   <action android:name="android.intent.action.MASTER_CLEAR_NOTIFICATION" />|
  </intent-filter>
</receiver>

Listing 11-9: Declaring a broadcast receiver for eSE-related events in AndroidManifest.xml

                       As you can see, Android offers notifications for lower-level commu-
                   nication events, such as RF field detection , APDU reception , and
                   applet selection , as well as for higher-level events, such as MIFARE sec-
                   tor access  and EMV card removal . (APDUs are Application Protocol
                   Data Units, the basic building block of smart card protocols; see “SE
                   Communication Protocols” on page 303. The APDU_RECIEVED broadcast is
                   not implemented, because in practice the NFC controller routes incom-
                   ing APDUs directly to the eSE, which makes them invisible to the OS.)
                   SE-enabled apps register for these broadcasts in order to be able to change
                   their internal state or start a related activity when each event occurs (for
                   example, to start a PIN entry activity when an EMV applet is selected).
                   The INTERNAL_TARGET_DESELECTED broadcast { is sent when card emulation is
                   deactivated, and the MASTER_CLEAR_NOTIFICATION broadcast | is sent when the
                   contents of the eSE are cleared. (Pre-HCE versions of Google Wallet offered
                   users the option to clear the eSE remotely if their device was lost or stolen.)

                   Android SE Execution Environment
                   The Android SE is essentially a smart card in a different package, so most
                   standards and protocols originally developed for smart cards apply. Let’s
                   briefly review the most important ones.
                        Smart cards have traditionally been filesystem-oriented and the main
                   role of their OS has been to handle file access and enforce access permis-
                   sions. Newer cards support a virtual machine running on top of the native
                   OS that allows for the execution of “platform independent” applications
                   called applets, which use a well-defined runtime library to implement their
                   functionality. While different implementations of this paradigm exist, by
                   far the most popular one is the Java Card runtime environment ( JCRE).
                   Applets are implemented in a restricted version of the Java language and

302   Chapter 11

use a limited runtime library, which offers basic classes for I/O, message
parsing, and cryptographic operations. While the JCRE specification13 fully
defines the applet runtime environment, it does not specify how to load, ini-
tialize, and delete applets on actual physical cards (tools are only provided
for the JCRE emulator).
     Because one of the main applications of smart cards are various payment
services, the application loading and initialization process (often referred
to as card personalization) needs to be controlled, and only authorized enti-
ties should be able to alter the state of the card and installed applications.
Visa originally developed a specification for securely managing applets,
called Open Platform, which is now maintained and developed by the
GlobalPlatform (GP) organization under the name GlobalPlatform Card
Specification.14 The gist of this specification is that each GP-compliant
card has a mandatory Issuer Security Domain (ISD) component (informally
referred to as the Card Manager) that offers a well-defined interface for card
and application life cycle management. Executing ISD operations requires
authentication using cryptographic keys saved on the card, and thus only
an entity that knows those keys can change the state of the card (one of
OP_READY, INITIALIZED, SECURED, CARD_LOCKED, or TERMINATED) or manage applets.
Additionally, the GP card specification defines various secure communica-
tion protocols (called Secure Channels) that offer authentication, confiden-
tiality, and message integrity when communicating with the card.

SE Communication Protocols
As discussed in “Using the NfcExecutionEnvironment API” on
page 300, Android’s interface for communicating with the SE is the
byte[] transceive(byte[] command) method of the NfcExecutionEnvironment
class. The messages exchanged using this API are in practice APDUs,
and their structure is defined in the ISO/IEC 7816-4: Organization, security
and commands for interchange standard.15 The reader (also known as a Card
Acceptance Device, or CAD) sends command APDUs (sometimes referred to
as C-APDUs) to the card, composed of a mandatory four-byte header with a
command class (CLA), instruction (INS), and two parameters (P1 and P2).
This is followed by the optional command data length (Lc), the actual data,
and finally the maximum number of response bytes expected, if any (Le).
The card returns a response APDU (R-APDU ) with a mandatory status word
(SW, consisting of two bytes: SW1 and SW2) and optional response data.
    Historically, command APDU data has been limited to 255 bytes (total
APDU length 261 bytes) and response APDU data to 256 bytes (total APDU
length 258 bytes). Recent cards and readers support extended APDUs with
data length up to 65536 bytes, but extended APDUs are not always usable,

13. Oracle, “Java Card Classic Platform Specification 3.0.4,” http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/
java/javacard/specs-jsp-136430.html
14. GlobalPlatform, “Card Specifications,” http://www.globalplatform.org/specificationscard.asp
15. A summary of ISO 7816 and other smart card-related standards is available on CardWerk’s
website: http://www.cardwerk.com/smartcards/smartcard_standards.aspx

                                                                     NFC and Secure Elements   303

                   mostly for reasons of compatibility. The lower-level communication between
                   the reader and the card is carried out by one of several transmission proto-
                   cols, the most widely used of which are T=0 (byte-oriented) and T=1 (block-
                   oriented). Both are defined in ISO 7816-3: Cards with contacts — Electrical
                   interface and transmission protocols. The APDU exchange is not completely
                   protocol-agnostic, because T=0 cannot directly send response data, but only
                   notify the reader of the number of available bytes. Additional command
                   APDUs (GET RESPONSE) need to be sent in order to retrieve the response data.
                        The original ISO 7816 standards were developed for contact cards, but
                   the same APDU-based communication model is used for contactless cards
                   as well. It’s layered on top of the wireless transmission protocol defined by
                   ISO/IEC 14443-4, which behaves much like T=1 for contact cards.

                   Querying the eSE Execution Environment
                   As discussed in “Embedded SE” on page 298, the eSE in the Galaxy Nexus
                   is a chip from NXP’s SmartMX series. It runs a Java Card–compatible
                   operating system and comes with a GlobalPlatform-compliant ISD. The
                   ISD is configured to require authentication for most card management
                   operations, and the authentication keys are, naturally, not publicly avail-
                   able. Additionally, a number of subsequent failed authentication attempts
                   (usually 10) will lock the ISD and make it impossible to install or remove
                   applets, so trying to brute-force the authentication keys is not an option.
                   However, the ISD does provide some information about itself and the run-
                   time environment on the card without requiring authentication in order to
                   make it possible for clients to adjust their behavior dynamically and be com-
                   patible with different cards.
                        Because both Java Card and GlobalPlatform define a multi-application
                   environment, each application needs a unique identifier called the Application
                   Identifier (AID). The AID consists of a 5-byte Registered Application Provider
                   Identifier (RID, also called a Resource Identifier) and a Proprietary Identifier
                   eXtension (PIX), which can be up to 11 bytes long. Thus, the length of
                   an AID can be 5 to 16 bytes long. Before being able to send commands to
                   a particular applet, it needs to be made active, or selected, by issuing the
                   SELECT (CLA=00, INS=A4) command with its AID. As all applications, the ISD
                   is also identified by an AID, which varies between card manufacturers and
                   GP implementations. We can find out the AID of the ISD by sending an
                   empty SELECT command, which both selects the ISD and returns informa-
                   tion about the card and the ISD configuration. An empty SELECT is simply
                   a select without an AID specified, so the SELECT command APDU becomes
                   00 A4 04 00 00. If we send this command using the transcieve() method of
                   the NfcExecutionEnvironment class (Listing 11-8 at x), the returned response
                   might look like Listing 11-10 at v (u is the SELECT command).

                   --> 00A4040000u
                   <-- 6F658408A000000003000000A5599F6501FF9F6E06479100783300734A06072A86488

304   Chapter 11

6FC6B01600C060A2A864886FC6B02020101630906072A864886FC6B03640B06092A86488
6FC6B040215650B06092B8510864864020103660C060A2B060104012A026E0102 9000v

Listing 11-10: Galaxy Nexus eSE’s response to empty SELECT

     The response includes a successful status (0x9000) and a long string of
bytes. The format of this data is defined in “APDU Command Reference,”
Chapter 9 of the GlobalPlatform Card Specification and, as with most things
in the smart card world, is in tag-length-value (TLV) format. In TLV, each
unit of data is described by a unique tag, followed by its length in bytes,
and finally the actual data. Most structures are recursive, so the data can
host another TLV structure, which in turns wraps another, and so on. The
structure shown in Listing 11-10 is called File Control Information (FCI) and
in this case it wraps a Security Domain Management Data structure, which
describes the ISD. When parsed, the FCI might look like Listing 11-11.

SD FCI: Security Domain FCI
   AID: a0 00 00 00 03 00 00 00u
    RID: a0 00 00 00 03 (Visa International [US])
    PIX: 00 00 00

   Data field max length: 255
   Application prod. life cycle data: 479100783300
   Tag allocation authority (OID): globalPlatform 01
   Card management type and version (OID): globalPlatform 02020101
   Card identification scheme (OID): globalPlatform 03
   Global Platform version: 2.1.1v
   Secure channel version: SC02 (options: 15)w
   Card config details: 06092B8510864864020103x
   Card/chip details: 060A2B060104012A026E0102y

Listing 11-11: Parsed FCI of the ISD on the eSE in Galaxy Nexus

    Here, the AID of the ISD is A0 00 00 00 03 00 00 00 u, the version
of the GlobalPlatform implementation is 2.1.1 v, the supported Secure
Channel protocol is SC02 w, and the last two fields of the structure contain
some proprietary data about the card configuration (x and y). The only
other GP command that doesn’t require authentication is GET DATA, which
can be used to return additional data about the ISD configuration.

UICC as a Secure Element
As discussed in “SE Form Factors in Mobile Devices” on page 296, the UICC
in a mobile device can be used as a general-purpose SE when accessed
using the Open Mobile API or a similar programming interface. This sec-
tion gives a brief overview of UICCs and the applications they typically host,
and then shows how to access the UICC via the Open Mobile API.

SIM Cards and UICCs
The predecessor of the UICC is the SIM card, and UICCs are still collo-
quially referred to as “SIM cards.” SIM stands for Subscriber Identity Module

                                                                  NFC and Secure Elements   305

                   and refers to a smart card that securely stores the subscriber identifier and
                   the associated key used to identify and authenticate a device to a mobile
                   network. SIMs were initially used on GSM networks and the original GSM
                   standards were later extended to support 3G and LTE. Because SIMs are
                   smart cards, they conform to ISO-7816 standards regarding physical char-
                   acteristics and electrical interface. The first SIM cards were the same size as
                   “regular” smart cards (Full-size, FF), but by far the most popular sizes today
                   are Mini-SIM (2FF) and Micro-SIM (3FF), with Nano-SIM (4FF), which was
                   introduced in 2012, also gaining market share.
                        Of course, not every smart card that fits in the SIM slot can be used in
                   a mobile device, so the next question is: What makes a smart card a SIM
                   card? Technically, it’s conformance to mobile communication standards
                   such as 3GPP TS 11.11 and certification by the SIMalliance. In practice, it
                   is the ability to run an application that allows it to communicate with the
                   phone (referred to as Mobile Equipment or Mobile Station in related standards)
                   and connect to a mobile network. While the original GSM standard did
                   not distinguish between the physical smart card and the software required
                   to connect to the mobile network, with the introduction of 3G standards,
                   a clear distinction has been made. The physical smart card is referred to
                   as a Universal Integrated Circuit Card (UICC), and different mobile network
                   applications that run on it have been defined: GSM, CSIM, USIM, ISIM,
                   and so on. A UICC can host and run more than one network application
                   (hence the name universal), and thus can be used to connect to different
                   networks. While network application functionality depends on the specific
                   mobile network, their core features are quite similar: store network param-
                   eters securely and identify to the network, as well as authenticate the user
                   (optionally) and store user data.

                   UICC Applications
                   Let’s take GSM as an example and briefly review how a network applica-
                   tion works. For GSM, the main network parameters are network identity
                   (International Mobile Subscriber Identity, IMSI; tied to the SIM), phone
                   number (MSISDN, used for routing calls and changeable), and a shared
                   network authentication key Ki. To connect to the network, the phone needs
                   to authenticate and negotiate a session key. Both authentication and session
                   keys are derived using Ki, which is also known to the network and looked
                   up by IMSI. The phone sends a connection request that includes its IMSI,
                   which the network uses to find the corresponding Ki. The network then
                   uses the Ki to generate a challenge (RAND), expected challenge response
                   (SRES), and session key Kc. When those parameters have been generated,
                   the network sends RAND to the phone and the GSM application running
                   on the SIM card comes into play: the mobile passes the RAND to the SIM
                   card, which generates its own SRES and Kc. The SRES is sent to the network
                   and if it matches the expected value, encrypted communication is estab-
                   lished using the session key Kc.
                        As you can see, the security of this protocol hinges solely on the secrecy
                   of the Ki. Because all operations involving the Ki are implemented inside

306   Chapter 11

the SIM card, and it never comes in direct contact with the phone or the
network, the scheme is kept reasonably secure. Of course, security depends
on the encryption algorithms used as well, and major weaknesses that allow
intercepted GSM calls to be decrypted using off-the-shelf hardware were found
in the original versions of the A5/1 stream cipher (which was initially secret).
     In Android, network authentication is implemented by the baseband
processor (more on this in “Accessing the UICC” below) and is never directly
visible to the main OS.

UICC Application Implementation and Installation
We’ve seen that UICCs need to run applications; now let’s see how those
applications are implemented and installed. Initial smart cards were based
on a filesystem model, where files (called elementary files, or EF ) and direc-
tories (called dedicated files, or DF ) were named with a two-byte identifier.
Thus, developing “an application” involved selecting an ID for the DF that
hosts the application’s files (called ADF ), and specifying the formats and
names of the EFs that store data. For example, the GSM application is
under the 7F20 ADF, and the USIM ADF hosts the EF_imsi, EF_keys, EF_sms,
and other required files.
     Because practically all UICCs in use today are based on Java Card
technology and implement GlobalPlatform card specifications, all net-
work applications are implemented as Java Card applets and emulate the
legacy file-based structure for backward compatibility. Applets are installed
according to GlobalPlatform specifications by authenticating to the ISD
and issuing LOAD and INSTALL commands.
     One application management feature specific to SIM cards is support
for OTA updates via binary SMS. This functionality is not used by all car-
riers, but it allows carriers to remotely install applets on SIM cards they’ve
issued. OTA is implemented by wrapping card commands (APDUs) in SMS
T-PDUs (transport protocol data units), which the phone forwards to the
UICC. In most UICCs, this is the only way to load applets on the card, even
during initial personalization.
     The major use case for this OTA functionality is to install and maintain
SIM Toolkit (STK) applications that can interact with the handset via stan-
dard “proactive” commands (which in reality are implemented via polling),
and to display menus or even open web pages and send SMS. Android sup-
ports STK with a dedicated STK system app, which is automatically disabled
if the UICC card has no STK applets installed.

Accessing the UICC
As we discussed in “UICC Applications” on page 306, mobile network–
related functionality in Android, including UICC access, is implemented
by the baseband software. The main OS (Android) is limited in what it can
do with the UICC by the features the baseband exposes. Android supports
STK applications and can look up and store contacts on the SIM, so it’s
clear that it has internal support for communicating to the SIM. However,
the Android security overview explicitly states that “low-level access to the

                                                         NFC and Secure Elements   307

                   SIM card is not available to third-party apps.”16 How can we use the SIM
                   card (UICC) as an SE then? Some Android builds from major vendors,
                   most notably Samsung, provide an implementation of the SIMalliance
                   Open Mobile API, and an open source implementation (for compatible
                   devices) of the API is available from the SEEK for Android project. The
                   Open Mobile API aims to provide a unified interface for accessing SEs on
                   Android, including the UICC.
                        To understand how the Open Mobile API works and the cause of its lim-
                   itations, let’s review how access to the SIM card is implemented in Android.
                   On Android devices, all mobile network functionality (dialing, sending SMS,
                   and so on) is provided by the baseband processor (also referred to as modem
                   or radio). Android applications and system services communicate with the
                   baseband only indirectly via the Radio Interface Layer (RIL) daemon (rild).
                   The rild in turn talks to the actual hardware by using a manufacturer-
                   provided RIL HAL library, which wraps the proprietary interface that the
                   baseband provides. The UICC card is typically connected only to the base-
                   band processor (though sometimes also to the NFC controller via SWP),
                   and thus all communication needs to go through the RIL.
                        While the proprietary RIL implementation can always access the UICC
                   in order to perform network identification and authentication, as well as
                   read and write contacts and access STK applications, support for transpar-
                   ent APDU exchange is not always available. As we mentioned in “UICC” on
                   page 297, the standard way to provide this feature is to use extended AT
                   commands such AT+CSIM (Generic SIM access) and AT+CGLA (Generic UICC
                   Logical Channel Access), but some vendors implement APDU exchange
                   using proprietary extensions, so support for the necessary AT commands
                   doesn’t automatically provide UICC access.
                        SEEK for Android implements a resource manager service
                   (SmartCardService) that can connect to any supported SE (eSE, ASSD,
                   or UICC) and extensions to the Android telephony framework that allow
                   for transparent APDU exchange with the UICC. Because access through
                   the RIL is hardware- and HAL-dependent, you need both a compatible
                   device and a build that includes the SmartCardService and related framework
                   extensions, such as those found in most recent Samsung Galaxy devices.

                   Using the OpenMobile API
                   The OpenMobile API is relatively small and defines classes that represent
                   the card reader that an SE is connected to (Reader), a communication ses-
                   sion with an SE (Session), and a basic (channel 0, as per ISO 7816-4) or logi-
                   cal channel with the SE (Channel). The Channel class allows applications to
                   exchange APDUs with the SE using the transmit() method. The entry point
                   to the API is the SEService class, which connects to the remote resource
                   manager service (SmartcardService) and provides a method that returns a list

                   16. Google, Android Security Overview, “SIM Card Access,” https://source.android.com/devices/tech/
                   security/#sim-card-access

308   Chapter 11

of Reader objects available on the device. (For more information about the
OpenMobile API and the architecture of the SmartcardService, refer to the
SEEK for Android Wiki.17)
     In order to be able to use the OpenMobile API, applications need to
request the org.simalliance.openmobileapi.SMARTCARD permission and add the
org.simalliance.openmobileapi extension library to their manifest as shown in
Listing 11-12.

<manifest ...>
    --snip--
    <uses-permission android:name="org.simalliance.openmobileapi.SMARTCARD" />

    <application ...>
        <uses-library
            android:name="org.simalliance.openmobileapi"
            android:required="true" />
     --snip--
    </application>
</manifest>

Listing 11-12: AndroidManifest.xml configuration required to use the OpenMobile API

    Listing 11-13 demonstrates how an application can use the OpenMobile
API to connect and send a command to the first SE on the device.

Context context = getContext();
SEService.CallBack callback = createSeCallback();
SEService seService = new SEService(context, callback);u
Reader[] readers = seService.getReaders();v
Session session = readers[0].openSession();w
Channel channel = session.openLogicalChannel(aid);x
byte[] command = { ... };
byte[] response = channel.transmit(command);y

Listing 11-13: Sending a command to the first SE using the OpenMobile API

     Here, the application first creates an SEService u instance, which con-
nects to the SmartCardService asynchronously and notifies the application
via the serviceConnected() method (not shown) of the SEService.CallBack
interface when the connection is established. The app can then get a list of
the available SE readers using the getReaders() method v, and then open
a session to the selected reader using the openSession() method w. If the
device does not contain an eSE (or another form of SE besides the UICC),
or the SmartCardService hasn’t been configured to use it, the list of readers
contains a single Reader instance that represents the built-in UICC reader in
the device. When the app has an open Session with the target SE, it calls the
openLogicalChannel() method x in order to obtain a Channel, which it then
uses to send APDUs and receive responses using its transmit() method y.

17. SEEK for Android, “SmartCardAPI,” https://code.google.com/p/seek-for-android/wiki/
SmartcardAPI

                                                                     NFC and Secure Elements   309

     Software Card Emulation
                   Software card emulation (also referred to as host-based card emulation or HCE)
                   allows commands received by the NFC controller to be delivered to the
                   application processor (main OS), and to be processed by regular Android
                   applications, instead of by applets installed on a hardware SE. Responses
                   are then sent back to the reader via NFC, allowing an app to act as a virtual
                   contactless smart card.
                        Before being officially added to the Android API, HCE was first avail-
                   able as an experimental feature of the CyanogenMod Android distribu-
                   tion.18 Beginning with version 9.1, CyanogenMod integrated a set of
                   patches (developed by Doug Yeager) that unlock the HCE functionality
                   of the popular PN544 NFC controller and provide a framework interface
                   to HCE. In order to support HCE, two new tag technologies (IsoPcdA and
                   IsoPcdB, representing external contactless readers based on NFC Type A
                   and Type B technology, respectively) were added to the NFC framework.
                   (The letters Pcd stand for Proximity Coupling Device, which is just another
                   technical term for contactless reader.)
                        The IsoPcdA and IsoPcdB classes reversed the role of Tag objects in the
                   Android NFC API: because the external contactless reader is presented as
                   a “tag,” “commands” you send from the phone are actually replies to the
                   reader-initiated communication. Unlike the rest of Android’s NFC stack, this
                   architecture was not event driven and required applications to handle block-
                   ing I/O while waiting for the reader to send its next command. Android 4.4
                   introduced a standard, event-driven framework for developing HCE applica-
                   tions, which we discuss next.

                   Android 4.4 HCE Architecture
                   Unlike the R/W and P2P mode, which are only available to activities, HCE
                   applications can work in the background and are implemented by defining
                   a service that processes commands received from the external reader and
                   returns responses. Such HCE services extend the HostApduService abstract
                   framework class and implement its onDeactivated() and processCommand()
                   methods. HostApduService itself is a very thin mediator class that enables two-
                   way communication with the system NfcService by using Messenger objects.19
                   For example, when the NfcService receives an APDU that needs to be
                   routed (APDU routing is discussed in the next section) to a HCE ser-
                   vice, it sends a MSG_COMMAND_APDU to HostApduService, which then extracts the
                   APDU from the message and passes it to its concrete implementation by
                   calling the processCommand() method. If processCommand() returns an APDU,
                   HostApduService encapsulates it in a MSG_RESPONSE_APDU message and sends it
                   to the NfcService, which in turn forwards it to the NFC controller. If the
                   concrete HCE service cannot return a response APDU immediately, it

                   18. CyanogenMod, http://www.cyanogenmod.org/
                   19. Google, Android API Reference, “Messenger,” https://developer.android.com/reference/android/
                   os/Messenger.html

310   Chapter 11

                   returns null and sends the response later (when it is available) by calling
                   the sendResponseApdu(), which sends the response to the NfcService wrapped
                   in a MSG_RESPONSE_APDU message.

                   APDU Routing
                   When the device is in card emulation mode, the NFC controller receives all
                   APDUs coming from external readers and decides whether to send them
                   to a physical SE (if any), or to an HCE service based on its internal APDU
                   routing table. The routing table is AID-based and is populated using the
                   metadata SE-enabled applications and HCE services declared in their
                   application manifests. When the external reader sends a SELECT command
                   that is not directly routed to the SE, the NFC controller forwards it to the
                   NfcService, which extracts the target AID from the command and searches
                   the routing table for a matching HCE service by calling the resolveAidPrefix()
                   method of the RegisteredAidCache class.
                        If a matching service is found, NfcService binds to it and obtains a
                   Messenger instance, which it then uses to send subsequent APDUs (wrapped
                   in MSG_COMMAND_APDU messages, as discussed in the previous section). For this
                   to work, the app’s HCE service needs to be declared in AndroidManifest.xml
                   as shown in Listing 11-14.

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<manifest xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
    package="com.example.hce" ...>
    --snip--
    <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.NFC" />

    <application ...>
        --snip--
        <service
            android:name=".MyHostApduService"u
            android:exported="true"
            android:permission="android.permission.BIND_NFC_SERVICE" >v
            <intent-filter>
                 <action
                     android:name="android.nfc.cardemulation.action.HOST_APDU_SERVICE" />w
            </intent-filter>

            <meta-data
                 android:name="android.nfc.cardemulation.host_apdu_service"x
                 android:resource="@xml/apduservice" />
        </service>
        --snip--
    </application>
</manifest>

Listing 11-14: Declaring a HCE service in AndroidManifest.xml

                        The application declares its HCE service u as usual, using the <service>
                   tag, but there are a few additional requirements. First, the service must
                   be protected with the BIND_NFC_SERVICE system signature permission v, to

                                                                           NFC and Secure Elements   311

                   guarantee that only system apps (in practice, only the NfcService) can bind
                   to it. Next, the service needs to declare an intent filter that matches the
                   android.nfc.cardemulation.action.HOST_APDU_SERVICE action w so that it can be
                   identified as a HCE service when scanning installed packages, and be bound
                   to when a matching APDU is received. Finally, the service must have an XML
                   resource metadata entry under the name android.nfc.cardemulation.host_apdu_
                   service x, which points to an XML resource file listing the AIDs that the
                   service can handle. The contents of this file is used to build the AID routing
                   table, which the NFC stack consults when it receives a SELECT command.

                   Specifying Routing for HCE Services
                   For HCE applications, the XML file must include a <host-apdu-service> root
                   element as shown in Listing 11-15.

                   <host-apdu-service
                       xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
                       android:description="@string/servicedesc"
                       android:requireDeviceUnlock="false">u
                       <aid-group android:description="@string/aiddescription"v
                                  android:category="other">w
                           <aid-filter android:name="A0000000010101"/>x
                       </aid-group>
                   </host-apdu-service>

Listing 11-15: HCE service AID metadata file

                       The <host-apdu-service> tag has a description attribute and a
                   requireDeviceUnlock attribute u, which specifies whether the corresponding
                   HCE service should be activated when the device is locked. (The device’s
                   screen must be on for NFC to work.) The root element contains one or
                   more <aid-group> entries v, which each have a category attribute w and con-
                   tain one or more <aid-filter> x tags that specify an AID in their name attri-
                   bute (A0000000010101 in this example).
                        An AID group defines a set of AIDs that is always handled by a par-
                   ticular HCE service. The NFC framework guarantees that if a single AID
                   is handled by an HCE service, then all other AIDs in the group are also
                   handled by the same service. If two or more HCE services define the same
                   AID, the system shows a selection dialog letting the user choose which
                   application should handle the incoming SELECT command. When an app is
                   chosen, all subsequent commands are routed to it after the user confirms
                   the selection by tapping on the dialog shown in Figure 11-2.
                        Each AID group is associated with a category (specified with the category
                   attribute), which allows the system to set a default handler per category,
                   rather than per AID. An application can check if a particular service is the
                   default handler for a category by calling the isDefaultServiceForCategory()
                   method of the CardEmulation class, and get the selection mode for a category
                   by calling the getSelectionModeForCategory() method. As of this writing, only
                   two categories are defined: CATEGORY_PAYMENT and CATEGORY_OTHER.

312   Chapter 11

    Android enforces a single active payment category in order to ensure
that the user has explicitly selected which app should handle payment
transactions. The default app for the payment category is selected in the
Tap & pay screen of the system Settings app, as shown in Figure 11-3. (See
the official HCE documentation20 for more on payment applications.)

Figure 11-2: HCE application selec-                    Figure 11-3: Selecting the default pay-
tion confirmation dialog                               ment application in the Tap & pay
                                                       screen

Specifying Routing for SE Applets
If a device supports HCE and also has a physical SE, a SELECT command
sent by an external reader can target either an HCE service, or an applet
installed on the SE. Because Android 4.4 directs all AIDs not listed in the
AID routing table to the host, the AIDs of applets installed on the SE must
be explicitly added to the NFC controller’s routing table. This is accom-
plished with the same mechanism used for registering HCE services: by
adding a service entry to the application’s manifest, and linking it to a meta-
data XML file that specifies a list of AIDs that should be routed to the SE.
When the route is established, command APDUs are sent directly to the SE
(which processes them and returns a response via the NFC controller), so
the service is used only as a marker and provides no functionality.

20. Google, Host-based Card Emulation, “Payment Applications,” https://developer.android.com/
guide/topics/connectivity/nfc/hce.html#PaymentApps

                                                                    NFC and Secure Elements   313

                       The Android SDK includes a helper service (OffHostApduService) that
                   can be used to list AIDs that should be routed directly to the SE. This
                   OffHostApduService class defines some useful constants, but is otherwise
                   empty. An application can extend it and declare the resulting service com-
                   ponent in its manifest as shown in Listing 11-16.

<manifest xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
    package="com.example.hce" ...>
    --snip--
    <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.NFC" />

    <application ... >
        --snip--
        <service android:name=".MyOffHostApduService"
                  android:exported="true"
                  android:permission="android.permission.BIND_NFC_SERVICE">
        <intent-filter>
             <action
                 android:name="android.nfc.cardemulation.action.OFF_HOST_APDU_SERVICE"/>u
        </intent-filter>
        <meta-data
             android:name="android.nfc.cardemulation.off_host_apdu_service"v
             android:resource="@xml/apduservice"/>
    </service>
    --snip--
    </application>
</manifest>

Listing 11-16: Declaring an off-host APDU service in AndroidManifest.xml

                        The service declaration is similar to that of Listing 11-14, except that
                   the declared intent action is android.nfc.cardemulation.action.OFF_HOST_
                   APDU_SERVICE u and the XML metadata name is android.nfc.cardemulation
                   .off_host_apdu_service v. The metadata file is also slightly different, as shown
                   in Listing 11-17.

                   <offhost-apdu-service
                       xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
                       android:description="@string/servicedesc">u
                       <aid-group android:description="@string/se_applets"
                                  android:category="other">v
                           <aid-filter android:name="F0000000000001"/>w
                           <aid-filter android:name="F0000000000002"/>x
                       </aid-group>
                   </offhost-apdu-service>

Listing 11-17: Off-host APDU service metadata file

                       As you can see, the format is the same as that of an HCE service,
                   but the root element of the file is <offhost-apdu-service> u instead of
                   <host-apdu-service>. Another subtle difference is that <offhost-apdu-service>
                   does not support the requireDeviceUnlock attribute, because transactions are
                   sent directly to the SE and therefore the host cannot intervene regardless

314   Chapter 11

of the state of the lockscreen. The AIDs of the applets residing on the SE
(w and x) are included in a <aid-group> v. Those AIDs are sent directly to
the NFC controller, which saves them in its internal routing table in order
to be able to send matching APDUs directly to the SE, without interacting
with the Android OS. If the received APDU is not in the NFC controller’s
routing table, it forwards it to the NfcService, which sends it to the matching
HCE service, or returns an error if no matches are found.

Writing an HCE Service
When the HCE service of an application has been declared in its manifest
as shown in Listing 11-14, HCE functionality can be added by extending the
HostApduService base class and implementing its abstract methods as shown
in Listing 11-18.

public class MyHostApduService extends HostApduService {
    --snip--
    static final int OFFSET_CLA = 0;u
    static final int OFFSET_INS = 1;
    static final int OFFSET_P1 = 2;
    static final int OFFSET_P2 = 3;
    --snip--
    static final short SW_SUCCESS = (short) 0x9000;v
    static final short SW_CLA_NOT_SUPPORTED = 0x6E00;
    static final short SW_INS_NOT_SUPPORTED = 0x6D00;
    --snip--
    static final byte[] SELECT_CMD = { 0x00, (byte) 0xA4,
             0x04, 0x00, 0x06, (byte) 0xA0,
             0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x01, 0x01, 0x01 };w

    static final byte MY_CLA = (byte) 0x80;x
    static final byte INS_CMD1 = (byte) 0x01;
    static final byte INS_CMD2 = (byte) 0x02;

    boolean selected = false;

    public byte[] processCommandApdu(byte[] cmd, Bundle extras) {
        if (!selected) {
            if (Arrays.equals(cmd, SELECT_CMD)) {y
                selected = true;

                return toBytes(SW_SUCCESS);
            }
            --snip--
        }

        if (cmd[OFFSET_CLA] != MY_CLA) {z
            return toBytes(SW_CLA_NOT_SUPPORTED);
        }

        byte ins = cmd[OFFSET_INS];{
        switch (ins) {
            case INS_CMD1:|

                                                        NFC and Secure Elements   315

                                    byte p1 = cmd[OFFSET_P1];
                                    byte p2 = cmd[OFFSET_P2];
                                    --snip--
                                    return toBytes(SW_SUCCESS);
                                case INS_CMD2:
                                    --snip--
                                    return null;}
                                default:
                                    return toBytes(SW_INS_NOT_SUPPORTED);
                            }
                       }

                       @Override
                       public void onDeactivated(int reason) {
                           --snip--
                           selected = false;~
                       }
                       --snip--
                   }

Listing 11-18: Implementing a HostApduService

                         Here, the example HCE service first declares a few constants that will
                   be helpful when accessing APDU data u and returning a standard status
                   result v. The service defines the SELECT command that is used to activate
                   it, including the AID w. The next few constants x declare the instruction
                   class (CLA) and instructions that the service can handle.
                         When the HCE service receives an APDU, it passes it to the
                   processCommandApdu() method as a byte array, which the service analyzes.
                   If the service hasn’t been selected yet, the processCommandApdu() method
                   checks if the APDU contains a SELECT command y, and sets the selected
                   flag if it does. If the APDU contains some other command, the code checks
                   to see if it has a class byte (CLA) the services supports z, and then extracts
                   the instruction byte (INS) included in the command {. If the command
                   APDU contains the INS_CMD1 instruction |, the service extracts the P1 and
                   P2 parameters, possibly parses the data included in the APDU (not shown),
                   sets some internal state, and returns a success status.
                         If the command includes INS_CMD2, which in our example maps to a
                   hypothetical operation that requires some time to process (for example,
                   asymmetric key generation), the service starts a worker thread (not shown),
                   and returns null } in order not to block the main thread of the application.
                   When the worker thread completes execution, it can return its result using the
                   inherited sendResponseApdu() (defined in the parent HostApduService class). When
                   another service or SE applet is selected, the system calls the onDeactivated()
                   method, which should release any used resources before returning, but in
                   our example simply sets the selected flag to false ~.

316   Chapter 11

           Because an HCE service essentially parses command APDUs and
       returns responses, the programming model is very similar to that of
       Java Card applets. However, because a HCE service lives inside a regular
       Android application, it does not execute in a constrained environment
       and can take advantage of all available Android features. This makes it
       easy to implement complex functionality, but also impacts the security of
       HCE apps, as discussed next.

       Security of HCE Applications
       Because any Android application can declare an HCE service and receive
       and process APDUs, the system guarantees that a malicious application
       cannot inject rogue APDU commands into an HCE service by requiring the
       BIND_NFC_SERVICE system signature permission in order to bind to HCE ser-
       vices. Additionally, Android’s sandboxing model ensures that other applica-
       tions cannot access sensitive data stored by the HCE application by reading
       its files or calling any data access APIs it might expose without permission
       (assuming such APIs have been properly secured, of course).
             Nevertheless, a malicious application that manages to obtain root
       privileges on a device (for example, by exploiting a privilege escalation
       vulnerability) can both inspect and inject APDUs targeted at an HCE ser-
       vice, and read its private data. The HCE application can take some mea-
       sures to detect this situation, for example by inspecting the identity and
       signing certificate of the caller of its processCommandApdu() method, but such
       measures can ultimately be defeated given unconstrained access to the
       OS. Like all applications that store sensitive data, HCE applications should
       also take steps to protect stored data, such as by encrypting it on disk or by
       storing it in the system credential store in the case of cryptographic keys.
       Another way to protect both the code and data of HCE applications is to
       forward all received commands to a remote server, over an encrypted chan-
       nel, and relay only its replies. However, because most of these measures are
       implemented in software, they can ultimately be disabled or bypassed by a
       sufficiently sophisticated malicious application with root access.
             In contrast, hardware security elements offer physical tamper resis-
       tance, reduced attack surface due to their constrained functionality, and
       tight control over installed applets. Therefore, physical SEs are much harder
       to attack and provide much stronger protection of sensitive data used in
       typical card emulation scenarios like contactless payments, even when the
       default security guarantees of the host OS have been bypassed.

NOTE   For a detailed discussion of the difference in security level of card emulation applica-
       tions when implemented in secure elements as opposed to in software using HCE, see
       the “HCE vs embedded secure element” blog post series by Cem Paya (who worked on the
       original eSE-backed Google Wallet implementation).21

       21. Cem Paya, Random Oracle, “HCE vs embedded secure element,” parts I to VI, http://
       randomoracle.wordpress.com/2014/03/08/hce-vs-embedded-secure-element-comparing-risks-part-i/

                                                                              NFC and Secure Elements   317

     Summary
                   Android supports the three NFC modes: reader/writer, point-to-point, and
                   card emulation. In reader/writer mode, Android devices can access NFC
                   tags, contactless cards, and NFC emulation devices, while the point-to-point
                   mode provides simple data exchange functionality. The card emulation
                   mode can be backed either by a physical secure element (SE) such as a
                   UICC, one that is integrated with the NFC controller (embedded SE), or
                   by regular Android applications since Android 4.4. Hardware security ele-
                   ments provide the highest security by offering physical tamper resistance
                   and stringent control over SE application (typically implemented as Java
                   Card applets) management. However, because the authentication keys
                   required to install an application on an SE are typically controlled by a
                   single entity (such as the device manufacturer or MNO), distributing SE
                   applications can be problematic. Host-based card emulation (HCE), intro-
                   duced in Android 4.4, makes it easy to develop and distribute applications
                   that work in card emulation mode, but it relies solely on the OS to enforce
                   security and therefore offers weaker protection of sensitive application code
                   and data.

318   Chapter 11

