Preface

CERT was formed by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in November 1988 in response to the
Morris worm incident, which brought 10 percent of Internet systems to a halt in November 1988. CERT is located in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, at the Software Engineering Institute (SEI), a federally funded research and development center
sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense.
   The initial focus of CERT was incident response and analysis. Incidents include successful attacks such as compromises and
denials of service, as well as attack attempts, probes, and scans. Since 1988, CERT has received more than 22,665 hotline
calls reporting computer security incidents or requesting information and has handled more than 319,992 computer security
incidents. The number of incidents reported each year continues to grow.
   Responding to incidents, while necessary, is insufficient to secure the Internet and interconnected information systems.
Analysis indicates that the majority of incidents is caused by trojans, social engineering, and the exploitation of software
vulnerabilities, including software defects, design decisions, configuration decisions, and unexpected interactions among
systems. CERT monitors public sources of vulnerability information and regularly receives reports of vulnerabilities. Since
1995, more than 16,726 vulnerabilities have been reported. When a report is received, CERT analyzes the potential
vulnerability and works with technology producers to inform them of security deficiencies in their products and to facilitate
and track their responses to those problems.1
  1. CERT interacts with more than 1,900 hardware and software developers.
   Similar to incident reports, vulnerability reports continue to grow at an alarming rate.2 While managing vulnerabilities
pushes the process upstream, it is again insufficient to address the issues of Internet and information system security. To
address the growing number of both vulnerabilities and incidents, it is increasingly apparent that the problem must be attacked
at the source by working to prevent the introduction of software vulnerabilities during software development and ongoing
maintenance. Analysis of existing vulnerabilities indicates that a relatively small number of root causes accounts for the
majority of vulnerabilities. The goal of this book is to educate developers about these root causes and the steps that can be
taken so that vulnerabilities are not introduced.
  2. See www.cert.org/stats/cert_stats.html for current statistics.

Audience
Secure Coding in C and C++ should be useful to anyone involved in the development or maintenance of software in C and
C++.
    • If you are a C/C++ programmer, this book will teach you how to identify common programming errors that result in
      software vulnerabilities, understand how these errors are exploited, and implement a solution in a secure fashion.
    • If you are a software project manager, this book identifies the risks and consequences of software vulnerabilities to
      guide investments in developing secure software.
    • If you are a computer science student, this book will teach you programming practices that will help you to avoid
      developing bad habits and enable you to develop secure programs during your professional career.
    • If you are a security analyst, this book provides a detailed description of common vulnerabilities, identifies ways to
      detect these vulnerabilities, and offers practical avoidance strategies.
Organization and Content
Secure Coding in C and C++ provides practical guidance on secure practices in C and C++ programming. Producing secure
programs requires secure designs. However, even the best designs can lead to insecure programs if developers are unaware of
the many security pitfalls inherent in C and C++ programming. This book provides a detailed explanation of common
programming errors in C and C++ and describes how these errors can lead to code that is vulnerable to exploitation. The book
concentrates on security issues intrinsic to the C and C++ programming languages and associated libraries. It does not
emphasize security issues involving interactions with external systems such as databases and Web servers, as these are rich
topics on their own. The intent is that this book be useful to anyone involved in developing secure C and C++ programs
regardless of the specific application.
   Secure Coding in C and C++ is organized around functional capabilities commonly implemented by software engineers that
have potential security consequences, such as formatted output and arithmetic operations. Each chapter describes insecure
programming practices and common errors that can lead to vulnerabilities, how these programming flaws can be exploited, the
potential consequences of exploitation, and secure alternatives. Root causes of software vulnerabilities, such as buffer
overflows, integer type range errors, and invalid format strings, are identified and explained where applicable. Strategies for
securely implementing functional capabilities are described in each chapter, as well as techniques for discovering
vulnerabilities in existing code.
   This book contains the following chapters:
     • Chapter 1 provides an overview of the problem, introduces security terms and concepts, and provides insight into why
       so many vulnerabilities are found in C and C++ programs.
     • Chapter 2 describes string manipulation in C and C++, common security flaws, and resulting vulnerabilities, including
       buffer overflow and stack smashing. Both code and arc injection exploits are examined.
     • Chapter 3 introduces arbitrary memory write exploits that allow an attacker to write a single address to any location in
       memory. This chapter describes how these exploits can be used to execute arbitrary code on a compromised machine.
       Vulnerabilities resulting from arbitrary memory writes are discussed in later chapters.
     • Chapter 4 describes dynamic memory management. Dynamically allocated buffer overflows, writing to freed memory,
       and double-free vulnerabilities are described.
     • Chapter 5 covers integral security issues (security issues dealing with integers), including integer overflows, sign
       errors, and truncation errors.
     • Chapter 6 describes the correct and incorrect use of formatted output functions. Both format string and buffer overflow
       vulnerabilities resulting from the incorrect use of these functions are described.
     • Chapter 7 focuses on concurrency and vulnerabilities that can result from deadlock, race conditions, and invalid
       memory access sequences.
     • Chapter 8 describes common vulnerabilities associated with file I/O, including race conditions and time of check, time
       of use (TOCTOU) vulnerabilities.
     • Chapter 9 recommends specific development practices for improving the overall security of your C / C++ application.
       These recommendations are in addition to the recommendations included in each chapter for addressing specific
       vulnerability classes.
   Secure Coding in C and C++ contains hundreds of examples of secure and insecure code as well as sample exploits.
Almost all of these examples are in C and C++, although comparisons are drawn with other languages. The examples are
implemented for Windows and Linux operating systems. While the specific examples typically have been compiled and tested
in one or more specific environments, vulnerabilities are evaluated to determine whether they are specific to or generalizable
across compiler version, operating system, microprocessor, applicable C or C++ standards, little or big endian architectures,
and execution stack architecture.
   This book, as well as the online course based on it, focuses on common programming errors using C and C++ that frequently
result in software vulnerabilities. However, because of size and space constraints, not every potential source of vulnerabilities
is covered. Additional and updated information, event schedules, and news related to Secure Coding in C and C++ are
available at www.cert.org/books/secure-coding/. Vulnerabilities discussed in the book are also cross-referenced with real-
world examples from the US-CERT Vulnerability Notes Database at www.kb.cert.org/vuls/.
   Access to the online secure coding course that accompanies this book is available through Carnegie Mellon’s Open Learning
Initiative (OLI) at https://oli.cmu.edu/. Enter the course key: 0321822137.
Acknowledgments

I would like to acknowledge the contributions of all those who made this book possible. First, I would like to thank Noopur
Davis, Chad Dougherty, Doug Gwyn, David Keaton, Fred Long, Nancy Mead, Robert Mead, Gerhard Muenz, Rob Murawski,
Daniel Plakosh, Jason Rafail, David Riley, Martin Sebor, and David Svoboda for contributing chapters to this book. I would
also like to thank the following researchers for their contributions: Omar Alhazmi, Archie Andrews, Matthew Conover, Jeffrey
S. Gennari, Oded Horovitz, Poul-Henning Kamp, Doug Lea, Yashwant Malaiya, John Robert, and Tim Wilson.
   I would also like to thank SEI and CERT managers who encouraged and supported my efforts: Jeffrey Carpenter, Jeffrey
Havrilla, Shawn Hernan, Rich Pethia, and Bill Wilson.
   Thanks also to my editor, Peter Gordon, and to the folks at Addison-Wesley: Jennifer Andrews, Kim Boedigheimer, John
Fuller, Eric Garulay, Stephane Nakib, Elizabeth Ryan, and Barbara Wood.
   I would also like to thank everyone who helped develop the Open Learning Initiative course, including the learning scientist
who helped design the course, Marsha Lovett, and everyone who helped implement the course, including Norman Bier and
Alexandra Drozd.
   I would also like to thank the following reviewers for their thoughtful comments and insights: Tad Anderson, John Benito,
William Bulley, Corey Cohen, Will Dormann, William Fithen, Robin Eric Fredericksen, Michael Howard, Michael Kaelbling,
Amit Kalani, John Lambert, Jeffrey Lanza, David LeBlanc, Ken MacInnis, Gary McGraw, Randy Meyers, Philip Miller,
Patrick Mueller, Dave Mundie, Craig Partridge, Brad Rubbo, Tim Shimeall, Michael Wang, and Katie Washok.
   I would like to thank the remainder of the CERT team for their support and assistance, without which I would never have
been able to complete this book. And last but not least, I would like to thank our in-house editors and librarians who helped
make this work possible: Rachel Callison, Pamela Curtis, Len Estrin, Eric Hayes, Carol J. Lallier, Karen Riley, Sheila
Rosenthal, Pennie Walters, and Barbara White.
About the Author

Robert C. Seacord is the Secure Coding Technical Manager in the CERT Program of Carnegie Mellon’s Software Engineering
Institute (SEI) in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The CERT Program is a trusted provider of operationally relevant cybersecurity
research and innovative and timely responses to our nation’s cybersecurity challenges. The Secure Coding Initiative works
with software developers and software development organizations to eliminate vulnerabilities resulting from coding errors
before they are deployed. Robert is also an adjunct professor in the School of Computer Science and the Information
Networking Institute at Carnegie Mellon University. He is the author of The CERT C Secure Coding Standard (Addison-
Wesley, 2008) and coauthor of Building Systems from Commercial Components (Addison-Wesley, 2002), Modernizing
Legacy Systems (Addison-Wesley, 2003), and The CERT Oracle Secure Coding Standard for Java (Addison-Wesley, 2011).
He has also published more than forty papers on software security, component-based software engineering, Web-based system
design, legacy-system modernization, component repositories and search engines, and user interface design and development.
Robert has been teaching Secure Coding in C and C++ to private industry, academia, and government since 2005. He started
programming professionally for IBM in 1982, working in communications and operating system software, processor
development, and software engineering. Robert has also worked at the X Consortium, where he developed and maintained
code for the Common Desktop Environment and the X Window System. He represents Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) at
the ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG14 international standardization working group for the C programming language.

Current and former members of the CERT staff who contributed to the development of this book. From left to right: Daniel
Plakosh, Archie Andrews, David Svoboda, Dean Sutherland, Brad Rubbo, Jason Rafail, Robert Seacord, Chad Dougherty.
