Chapter 5. Integer Security

with Douglas A. Gwyn, David Keaton, and David Svoboda1
  1. Douglas A. Gwyn is retired from the U.S. Army and is an Emeritus Member of INCITS PL22.11. David Keaton is a senior member of the technical staff in the
     CERT Program of Carnegie Mellon’s Software Engineering Institute (SEI) and chair of INCITS PL22.11. David Svoboda is a member of the technical staff for the
     SEI’s CERT.

                                Everything good is the transmutation of something evil: every god has a devil for a father.
                                                               —Friedrich Nietzsche, Sämtliche Werke: Kritische Studienausgabe

5.1. Introduction to Integer Security
The integers are formed by the natural numbers including 0 (0, 1, 2, 3, . . .) together with the negatives of the nonzero natural
numbers (–1, –2, –3, . . .). Viewed as a subset of the real numbers, they are numbers that can be written without a fractional or
decimal component and fall within the set {. . . –2, –1, 0, 1, 2, . . .}. For example, 65, 7, and –756 are integers; 1.6 and 1½ are
not integers.
   Integers represent a growing and underestimated source of vulnerabilities in C programs, primarily because boundary
conditions for integers, unlike other boundary conditions in software engineering, have been intentionally ignored. Most
programmers emerging from colleges and universities understand that integers have fixed limits. However, because these limits
were deemed sufficient or because testing the results of each arithmetic operation was considered prohibitively expensive,
violations of integer boundary conditions have gone unchecked for the most part in commercial software.
   When developing secure systems, we cannot assume that a program will operate normally, given a range of expected inputs,
because attackers are looking for input values that produce an abnormal effect. Digital integer representations are, of course,
imperfect. A software vulnerability may result when a program evaluates an integer to an unexpected value (that is, a value
other than the one obtained with pencil and paper) and then uses the value as an array index, size, or loop counter.
   Because integer range checking has not been systematically applied in the development of most C software systems, security
flaws involving integers will definitely exist, and some of them will likely cause vulnerabilities.
5.2. Integer Data Types
An integer type provides a model of a finite subset of the mathematical set of integers. The value of an object having integer
type is the mathematical value attached to the object. The representation of a value for an object having integer type is the
particular encoding of the value in the bit pattern contained in the storage allocated for the object.
   C provides a variety of standard integer types (with keyword-specified names) and allows implementations to define other
extended integer types (with non-keyword reserved identifier names); either can be included in type definitions in standard
headers.
   The standard integer types include all the well-known integer types that have existed from the early days of Kernighan and
Ritchie C (K&R C). These integer types allow a close correspondence with the underlying machine architecture. Extended
integer types are defined in the C Standard to specify integer types with fixed constraints.
   Each integer-type object in C requires a fixed number of bytes of storage. The constant expression CHAR_BIT from the
<limits.h> header gives the number of bits in a byte, which must be at least 8 but might be greater depending on the specific
implementation. With the exception of the unsigned char type, not all of the bits are necessarily available to represent the
value; unused bits are called padding. Padding is allowed so that implementations can accommodate hardware quirks, such as
skipping over a sign bit in the middle of a multiple-word representation.
   The number of nonpadding bits used to represent a value of a given type is called the width of that type, which we denote by
w(type) or sometimes just N. The precision of an integer type is the number of bits it uses to represent values, excluding any
sign and padding bits.
   For example, on architectures such as x86-32 where no padding bits are used, the precision of signed types is w(type) – 1,
while, for unsigned types, the precision equals w(type).
   There are other ways to represent integers, such as arbitrary-precision or bignum arithmetic. Those methods dynamically
allocate storage as required to accommodate the widths necessary to correctly represent the values. However, the C Standard
does not specify any such scheme, and, unlike C++, built-in operators such as + and / cannot be overloaded and used in
expressions containing such abstract data types. Applications such as public-key encryption generally use such a scheme to get
around the limitations of C’s fixed sizes.
   The standard integer types consist of a set of signed integer types and corresponding unsigned integer types.
Unsigned Integer Types
C requires that unsigned integer types represent values using a pure binary system with no offset. This means that the value of
the binary number is     . The rightmost bit has the weight 20, the next bit to the left has the weight 21, and so forth. The value

of the binary number is the sum of all the set bits. This means that all-zero value bits always represent the value 0, and the
value 1 is represented by all zeros except for a single 1 bit, which is the least significant bit. Unsigned integer types represent
values from 0 through an upper limit of 2w(type) − 1.
   All bitwise operators (|, &, ^, ~) treat the bits as pure binary, as shown in Example 5.1.

Example 5.1. Bitwise Operators: 13 ^ 6 = 11

     1 1 0 1 = 13
   ^ 0 1 1 0 = 6
   --------------
     1 0 1 1 = 11

   Unsigned integers are the natural choice for counting things. The standard unsigned integer types (in nondecreasing length
order) are
    1. unsigned char
    2. unsigned short int
    3. unsigned int
    4. unsigned long int
    5. unsigned long long int
   The keyword int can be omitted unless it is the only integer-type keyword present.
   Nondecreasing length order means that, for example, unsigned char cannot be longer than unsigned long long int (but can
be the same size). The many different widths reflect existing hardware; as time progressed, registers also became larger, so
longer and longer types were introduced as needed.
   Compiler- and platform-specific integral limits are documented in the <limits.h> header file. Familiarize yourself with
these limits, but remember that these values are platform specific. For portability, use the named constants and not the actual
values in your code. The “Minimum Magnitudes” column in Table 5.1 identifies the guaranteed portable range for each
unsigned integer type, that is, the smallest maximum value allowed by an implementation. These magnitudes are replaced by
implementation-defined magnitudes with the same sign, such as those shown for the x86-32 architecture.

                                 Table 5.1. Compiler- and Platform-Specific Integral Limits

  Because these are unsigned values, the minimum magnitude is always 0, and no constants are defined for it.
  Minimum widths for the standard unsigned types are unsigned char (8), unsigned short (16), unsigned int (16), unsigned
long (32), and unsigned long long (64).
  C added a first-class Boolean type. An object declared type _Bool is large enough to store the values 0 and 1 and acts as
unsigned. When any scalar value is converted to _Bool, the result is 0 if the value compares equal to 0; otherwise, the result is
1.
Wraparound
A computation involving unsigned operands can never overflow, because a result that cannot be represented by the resulting
unsigned integer type is reduced modulo the number that is 1 greater than the largest value that can be represented by the
resulting type. For addition and multiplication, this is the same as pretending that there are additional high-order (most
significant) bits appended to make sufficient room for the representation and then discarding these bits.
   You can visualize wraparound using the 4-bit unsigned integers wheel shown in Figure 5.1.

                                     Figure 5.1. Four-bit unsigned integer representation
   Incrementing a value on the wheel produces the value immediately clockwise from it. Note that incrementing an unsigned
integer at its maximum value (15) results in the minimum value for that type (0). This is an example of wraparound, shown in
Example 5.2.

Example 5.2. Wraparound

   1   unsigned int ui;
   2   ui = UINT_MAX; // e.g., 4,294,967,295 on x86-32
   3   ui++;
   4   printf("ui = %u\n", ui); // ui = 0
   5   ui = 0;
   6   ui--;
   7   printf("ui = %u\n", ui); // ui = 4,294,967,295 on x86-32

   An unsigned integer expression can never evaluate to less than zero because of wraparound. Therefore, it is possible to code
tests in C that are always true or always false. In Example 5.3, i can never take on a negative value, so this loop will never
terminate.

Example 5.3. Unsigned Integer Expression and Wraparound

   for (unsigned i = n; --i >= 0; ) // will never terminate

   Such tests are probably coding errors, but this wraparound-induced infinite loop is not considered to be an error according
to the language definition. Whether it is an error from the intended algorithm’s point of view depends on the algorithm; for
counting things (++n), it is certainly an error. If you have counted 32,768 events, you probably do not expect the code to act as
if no events occurred after the next event is registered.
   This type of software failure occurred on Saturday, December 25, 2004, when Comair halted all operations and grounded
1,100 flights after a crash of its flight-crew-scheduling software. The software failure was the result of a 16-bit counter that
limits the number of changes to 32,768 in any given month. Storms earlier in the month caused many crew reassignments, and
the 16-bit value was exceeded.
   To avoid such unplanned behavior, it is important to check for wraparound either before performing the operation that might
cause it or (sometimes) afterward. The limits from <limits.h> are helpful, but naïve use of them does not work. Example 5.4
shows a check for wraparound.

Example 5.4. Testing for Wraparound

   1   unsigned int i, j, sum;
   2   if (sum + i > UINT_MAX) // cannot happen, because sum + i wraps
   3        too_big();
   4   else
   5        sum += i;

You must implement your test in a manner that eliminates the possibility of wraparound:
   1   if (i > UINT_MAX - sum) // much better!
   2        too_big();
   3   else
   4        sum += i;

The same problem exists when checking against the minimum unsigned value 0:
   1   if (sum - j < 0) // cannot happen, because sum – j wraps
   2        negative();
   3   else
   4        sum -= j;

The proper test is as follows:
   1   if (j > sum) // correct
   2        negative();
   3   else
   4        sum -= j;

   Unless the exact-width types such as uint32_t from <stdint.h> are used (discussed in the section “Other Integer Types”),
the width used in a wraparound depends on the implementation, which means different results on different platforms. Unless
the programmer takes this into account, a portability error will likely occur.
   Table 5.2 indicates which operators can result in wrapping.

                                               Table 5.2. Operator Wrapping

Signed Integer Types
Signed integers are used to represent positive and negative values, the range of which depends on the number of bits allocated
to the type and the representation.
   In C, each unsigned integer type, excluding the type _Bool, has a corresponding signed integer type that occupies the same
amount of storage.
   Standard signed integer types include the following types, in nondecreasing length order (for example, long long int
cannot be shorter than long int):
     1. signed char
     2. short int
     3. int
     4. long int
     5. long long int
   Except for char, signed can be omitted (unadorned char acts like either unsigned char or signed char, depending on the
implementation and, for historical reasons, is considered a separate type). int can be omitted unless it is the only keyword
present.
   Furthermore, all sufficiently small nonnegative values have the same representation in corresponding signed and unsigned
types. One bit, which is called the sign bit and is treated as the highest-order bit, indicates whether the represented value is
negative. The C Standard permits negative values to be represented as sign and magnitude, one’s complement, or two’s
complement.
Sign and Magnitude
The sign bit represents whether the value is negative (sign bit set to 1) or positive (bit set to 0), and the other value
(nonpadding) bits represent the magnitude of the value in pure binary notation (same as for unsigned). To negate a sign and
magnitude value, just toggle the sign bit.
   For example, 0000101011 equals 43 in pure binary notation or sign and magnitude. To negate this value, simply set the sign
bit: 1000101011 = –43.
One’s Complement

In one’s complement representation, the sign bit is given the weight –(2N–1 – 1), and the other value bits have the same weights
as for unsigned. For example, 1111010100 equals –43 in one’s complement representation. Given a width of 10 bits, the sign
bit is given the weight –(29 – 1) or –511. The remaining bits equal 468, so 468 – 511 = –43.
   To negate a one’s complement value, toggle each bit (including the sign bit).
Two’s Complement

In two’s complement representation, the sign bit is given the weight –(2N–1), and the other value bits have the same weights as
for unsigned. For example, 1111010101 equals –43 in two’s complement representation. Given a width of 10 bits, the sign bit
is given the weight –(29) or –512. The remaining bits equal 469, so 469 – 512 = –43.

 One’s Complement Arithmetic
  The one’s complement representation of integers replaced sign and magnitude representation because the circuitry was
  easier to implement. Many early computers, including those manufactured by Digital, CDC, and UNIVAC, used one’s
  complement representation of integers.
     A one’s complement representation of a negative integer value is formed by writing the pure binary representation of
  the positive value and then reversing each bit. (Each 1 is replaced with a 0, and each 0 is replaced with a 1. Even the
  sign bit is reversed.)
     Adding a pair of one’s complement integers involves two steps:
      1. Perform a binary addition of the pair of one’s complement integers.
      2. If a 1 is carried past the most significant bit, add it into the least significant bit of the sum.
 One’s Complement Addition
     Problems with one’s complement representation include needing to add in the carry digit and having two different bit
   representations for 0.
   All three methods are in use on various platforms. However, on desktop systems, two’s complement is most prevalent.
   To negate a two’s complement value, first form the one’s complement negation and then add 1 (with carries as required).
   Table 5.3 shows the binary and decimal representations for illustrative values of an 8-bit two’s complement (signed) integer
type with no padding (that is, N = 8). Starting from the rightmost bit int, the binary representation and increment i from 0 to N,
the weight of each bit is 2i, except for the leftmost bit, whose weight is –2i.

                           Table 5.3. Values of an 8-Bit Two’s Complement (Signed) Integer Type

  Figure 5.2 shows the two’s complement representation for 4-bit signed integers.

                            Figure 5.2. Two’s complement representation for 4-bit signed integers
   Note that incrementing a 4-bit two’s complement signed integer at its maximum value (7) results in the minimum value for
that type (–8).
Integer Representations Compared
Table 5.4 shows the sign and magnitude, one’s complement, and two’s complement representations for some interesting values
assuming a width of 10 and ignoring padding.
                                    Table 5.4. Comparison of Integer Representations

   Sign and magnitude and one’s complement have two representations for the mathematical value 0: normal zero and negative
zero. The negative zero representation might be produced by logical operations but is not allowed for the result of any
arithmetic operation unless one of the operands had a negative zero representation.
  On a computer using two’s complement arithmetic, a signed integer ranges from –2N–1 through 2N–1 – 1. When one’s
complement or signed-magnitude representations are used, the lower bound is –2N–1 + 1, and the upper bound remains the
same.
Signed Integer Ranges
The “Minimum Magnitudes” column in Table 5.5 identifies the guaranteed portable range for each standard signed integer type.
They are replaced by implementation-defined magnitudes with the same sign, for example, those shown for the x86-32
architecture.

                             Table 5.5. Portable Ranges for Standard Signed Integer Types
  C-Standard–mandated minimum widths for the standard signed types are signed char (8), short (16), int (16), long (32),
and long long (64).
  Actual widths for a given implementation may be inferred from the maximum representable values defined in <limits.h>.
The sizes (number of storage bytes) of these types of objects can be determined by sizeof(typename); the size includes
padding (if any).
  The minimum and maximum values for an integer type depend on the type’s representation, signedness, and width. Figure 5.3
shows the ranges of integer types for x86-32.

                               Figure 5.3. Ranges of integer types for x86-32 (not to scale)

 Why Are So Many Integers Signed?
  Historically, most integer variables in C code are declared as signed rather than unsigned integers. On the surface, this
   seems odd. Most integer variables are used as sizes, counters, or indices that require only nonnegative values. So why
   not declare them as unsigned integers that have a greater range of positive values?
      One possible explanation is the lack of an exception-handling mechanism in C. As a result, C programmers have
   developed various mechanisms for returning status from functions. Although C programmers could return status in a
   “call by reference” argument, the preferred mechanism is for the return value of the function to provide status. A user of
   the function can then test the return status directly in an if-else statement rather than by allocating a variable for the return
   status. This approach works fine when the function does not normally return a value, but what if the function already
   returns a value?
      A common solution is to identify an invalid return value and use it to represent an error condition. As already noted,
   most applications of integers produce values in the nonnegative range, so it is thereby possible to represent error
   conditions in a return value as a negative number. To store these values, however, a programmer must declare the values
   signed instead of unsigned—possibly adding to the profusion of signed integers.
Integer Overflow
Overflow occurs when a signed integer operation results in a value that cannot be represented in the resulting type. Signed
integer overflow is undefined behavior in C, allowing implementations to silently wrap (the most common behavior), trap, or
both. Because signed integer overflow produces a silent wraparound in most existing C compilers, some programmers assume
that this is a well-defined behavior.

                                (Source: From xkcd.com, available under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial license)
  The following code shows the consequences of signed integer overflows on platforms that silently wrap. The signed integer
i is assigned its maximum value of 2,147,483,647 and then incremented. This operation results in an integer overflow, and i is
assigned the value –2,147,483,648 (the minimum value for an int). The result of the operation (2,147,483,647 + 1 = –
2,147,483,648) clearly differs from the mathematical result.
   1   int i;
   2   i = INT_MAX; // 2,147,483,647
   3   i++;
   4   printf("i = %d\n", i); /* i = -2,147,483,648 */

  Integer overflows also occur when a signed integer already at its minimum value is decremented:
   1   i = INT_MIN; // -2,147,483,648;
   2   i--;
   3   printf("i = %d\n", i); /* i = 2,147,483,647 */

  Conforming C compilers can deal with undefined behavior in many ways, such as ignoring the situation completely (with
unpredictable results), translating or executing the program in a documented manner characteristic of the environment (with or
without the issuance of a diagnostic message), or terminating a translation or execution (with the issuance of a diagnostic
message). Because compilers are not obligated to generate code for undefined behaviors, those behaviors are candidates for
optimization. By assuming that undefined behaviors will not occur, compilers can generate code with better performance
characteristics. For example, GCC version 4.1.1 optimizes out integer expressions that depend on undefined behavior for all
optimization levels.
  The negative of two’s complement most negative value for a given type cannot be represented in that type because two’s
complement representation is asymmetrical, with the value 0 being represented as a “positive” number. This asymmetrical
representation has caused errors such as the following:
   // undefined or wrong for the most negative value
   #define abs(n) ((n) < 0 ? -(n) : (n))

  A similar error occurs, for example, when converting a character string to an integer using the following code:

   01    int my_atoi(const unsigned char *s) {
   02      _Bool neg;
   03      int val = 0;
   04      if (neg = *s == '-')
   05        ++s;
   06      while (isdigit(*s)) {
   07        if (val > INT_MAX/10) // this check is correct
   08    err: report_error("atoi overflow"); // assumed to not return
   09        else
   10          val *= 10;
   11        int i = *s++ - '0'; // C Standard requires *s - '0' to work
   12        if (i > INT_MAX - val) // this check is correct
   13          goto err;
   14        val += i;
   15      }
   16      return neg ? -val : val;
   17    }

The problem with this solution is that for a two’s complement implementation, a valid negative value (INT_MIN, for example, –
32,768) incorrectly reports an overflow. A correct solution must take into account that the positive range and the negative
range of int may be different.
  Table 5.6 indicates which operators can result in overflow.

                                     Table 5.6. Operators That Can Result in Overflow

Character Types
The CERT C Secure Coding Standard [Seacord 2008], “INT07-C. Use only explicitly signed or unsigned char type for
numeric values,” recommends using only signed char and unsigned char types for the storage and use of small numeric values
(that is, values between the range of SCHAR_MIN and SCHAR_MAX, or 0 and UCHAR_MAX, respectively) because that is the only
portable way to guarantee the signedness of the character types. Plain char should never be used to store numeric values
because compilers have the latitude to define char to have the same range, representation, and behavior as either signed char
or unsigned char.
   In the following example, the char type variable c may be signed or unsigned:
   1    char c = 200;
   2    int i = 1000;
   3    printf("i/c = %d\n", i/c);

  The value of the initializer 200 (which has type signed int) is not representable in the (signed) char type (which is
undefined behavior). The compiler should diagnose this (but is not required to). Many compilers will, with or without a
warning message, convert the 200 to –56 by the standard modulo-word-size rule for converting unsigned to signed. Assuming
8-bit two’s complement character types, this code may either print out i/c = 5 (unsigned) or i/c = -17 (signed). In the signed
case, the value 200 exceeds SCHAR_MAX, which is +127 in this instance.
   In addition, the bit patterns of 8-bit unsigned 200 and 8-bit two’s complement (signed) –56 are the same; however, using
one’s complement, the rule would still produce the value –56, but the bit pattern would be different.
   It is much more difficult to reason about the correctness of a program when you do not know whether the integers are signed
or unsigned. Declaring the variable c unsigned char makes the subsequent division operation independent of the signedness of
char, and it consequently has a predictable result:

   1   unsigned char c = 200;
   2   int i = 1000;
   3   printf("i/c = %d\n", i/c);

Data Models
A data model defines the sizes assigned to standard data types for a given compiler. These data models are typically named
using an XXXn pattern, where each X refers to a C type and n refers to a size (typically 32 or 64):
    • ILP64: int, long, and pointer types are 64 bits wide.
    • LP32: long and pointer are 32 bits wide.
    • LLP64: long long and pointer are 64 bits wide.
  The data model for x86-32, for example, is ILP32, as shown in Table 5.7.

                                       Table 5.7. Data Models for Common Processors

Other Integer Types
C also defines additional integer types in the <stdint.h>, <inttypes.h>, and <stddef.h> standard headers. These types include
the extended integer types, which are optional, implementation-defined, fully supported extensions that, along with the
standard integer types, make up the general class of integer types. Identifiers such as whatever_t defined in the standard
headers are all typedefs, that is, synonyms for existing types—not new types. (Despite the name, typedefs never define a new
type.)
size_t
size_t is the unsigned integer type of the result of the sizeof operator and is defined in the standard header <stddef.h>.
Variables of type size_t are guaranteed to be of sufficient precision to represent the size of an object. The limit of size_t is
specified by the SIZE_MAX macro.
  K&R C (the early dialect of C described by Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie in The C Programming Language) did not
provide size_t. The C standards committee introduced size_t to eliminate a portability problem because, in some cases,
unsigned int is too small to represent the size of the address space and sometimes unsigned long long is too large (and
consequently inefficient).
  The portable and efficient way to declare a variable that contains a size is
   size_t n = sizeof(thing);

  Similarly, the portable and efficient way to define a function foo that takes a size argument is
   void foo(size_t thing);
   Functions with parameters of type size_t often have local variables that count up to or down from that size and index into
arrays, and size_t is often a good type for those variables. Similarly, variables that represent the count of elements in an array
should be declared as size_t, particularly for character arrays in which the element count can be as large as the largest object
that can be allocated in the system.
ptrdiff_t

ptrdiff_t is the signed integer type of the result of subtracting two pointers and is defined in the standard header <stddef.h>.
  When two pointers are subtracted, the result is the difference of the subscripts of the two array elements. The size of the
result is implementation defined, and its type (a signed integer type) is ptrdiff_t. For example, given the following
declarations:
   T *p, *q;

for any nonvoid type T, you can write expressions such as
   d = p - q;

  If you declare d as
   ptrdiff_t d;

the preceding assignment should behave properly when compiled with any standard C compiler. If you declare d as some other
integer type, such as
   int d;

the assignment might provoke a warning from the compiler, or worse, silently truncate the assigned value at runtime, for
example, if ptrdiff_t were an alias for long long int for that implementation.
   The lower and upper limits of ptrdiff_t are defined by PTRDIFF_MIN and PTRDIFF_MAX respectively. The minimum
acceptable limits defined by the C Standard are
   PTRDIFF_MIN –65535
   PTRDIFF_MAX +65535

These limits require that any 16-bit implementation must have at least a 17-bit ptrdiff_t to represent all possible differences
of 16-bit pointers.
   Although the standard does not explicitly guarantee that sizeof(ptrdiff_t) equals sizeof(size_t), it typically is the case
on 32-bit or 64-bit implementations. This may seem somewhat surprising because a signed integer type may not be able to
represent the difference between two pointers on such a system.
   For example, on a system that supports objects up to 232 – 1 bytes, the sizeof operator can yield values only from 0 to 232 –
1, so 32 bits are sufficient. However, pointer subtraction for pointers to elements of an array of 232 – 1 bytes could yield
values from –(232 – 1) to +(232 – 1). Consequently, ptrdiff_t would have to be at least 33 bits to represent all possible
differences. However, C allows an implementation in which ptrdiff_t is 32 bits by making it undefined behavior if the result
of subtracting two pointers is not representable in an object of type ptrdiff_t. In most cases, a ptrdiff_t overflow on a two’s
complement machine with quiet wraparound on overflow does not affect the result of the operation. To program securely,
however, you should carefully consider the consequences of your operation when the subtraction of two pointers may result in
such large values.
intmax_t and uintmax_t
intmax_t and uintmax_t are integer types with the greatest width and can represent any value representable by any other
integer types of the same signedness. Among other applications, intmax_t and uintmax_t can be used for formatted I/O on
programmer-defined integer types. For example, given an implementation that supports 128-bit unsigned integers and provides
a uint_fast128_t type, a programmer may define the following type:
   typedef uint_fast128_t mytypedef_t;

   This creates a problem with using these types with formatted output functions, such as printf(), and formatted input
functions, such as scanf(). For example, the following code prints the value of x as an unsigned long long, even though the
value is of a programmer-defined integer type:
   mytypedef_t x;
   printf("%llu", (unsigned long long) x);
There is no guarantee that this code prints the correct value of x because x may be too large to represent as an unsigned long
long.
  The intmax_t and uintmax_t types are capable of representing any value representable by any other integer types of the
same signedness, allowing conversion between programmer-defined integer types (of the same signedness) and intmax_t and
uintmax_t:
   01    mytypedef_t x;
   02    uintmax_t temp;
   03    /* ... */
   04    temp = x; /* always secure*/
   05
   06    /* ... change the value of temp ... */
   07
   08    if (temp <= MYTYPEDEF_MAX) {
   09        x = temp;
   10    }

   Formatted I/O functions can be used to input and output greatest-width integer typed values. The j length modifier in a
format string indicates that the following d, i, o, u, x, X, or n conversion specifier will apply to an argument with type intmax_t
or uintmax_t. The following code guarantees that the correct value of x is printed, regardless of its length, provided that
mytypedef_t is an unsigned type:

   mytypedef_t x;
   printf("%ju", (uintmax_t) x);

   In addition to programmer-defined types, there is no requirement that an implementation provide format length modifiers for
implementation-defined integer types. For example, a machine with an implementation-defined 48-bit integer type may not
provide format length modifiers for the type. Such a machine would still have to have a 64-bit long long, with intmax_t being
at least that large. The CERT C Secure Coding Standard [Seacord 2008], “INT15-C. Use intmax_t or uintmax_t for formatted
IO on programmer-defined integer types,” provides further examples of this use of the intmax_t and uintmax_t types.
intptr_t and uintptr_t
The C Standard does not guarantee that an integer type exists that is big enough to hold a pointer to an object. However, if such
a type does exist, its signed version is called intptr_t, and its unsigned version is called uintptr_t.
   Arithmetic on those types is not guaranteed to produce a useful value. For example, a pointer might be a “capability” (which
is basically a nonsequential hash value or magic cookie), or it might be a segment descriptor and an offset within the segment.
These are also reasons there might not even be an integer big enough to hold a pointer.
   Therefore, you can do nothing portable with those types. The X/Open System Interface (XSI) flavor of POSIX requires that
they exist but does not require their arithmetic to do anything meaningful in relation to pointers. They are in the C Standard to
allow nonportable code, such as in device drivers, to be written.
Platform-Independent Integer Types for Controlling Width
C introduced integer types in <stdint.h> and <inttypes.h>, which provide typedefs to give programmers better control over
width. These integer types are implementation defined and include the following types:
     • int#_t, uint#_t, where # represents an exact width: for example, int8_t, uint24_t
     • int_least#_t, uint_least#_t, where # represents a width of at least that value: for example, int_least32_t,
        uint_least16_t
    • int_fast#_t, uint_fast#_t, where # represents a width of at least that value for fastest integer types: for example,
      int_fast16_t, uint_fast64_t
  The <stdint.h> header also defines constant macros for the corresponding maximum (and for signed types, minimum)
representable values for the extended types.
Platform-Specific Integer Types
In addition to the integer types defined in the C Standard types, vendors often define platform-specific integer types. For
example, the Microsoft Windows API defines a large number of integer types, including __int8, __int16, __int32, __int64,
ATOM, BOOLEAN, BOOL, BYTE, CHAR, DWORD, DWORDLONG, DWORD32, DWORD64, WORD, INT, INT32, INT64, LONG, LONGLONG, LONG32, LONG64,
and so forth.
   If you are a Windows programmer, you will frequently come across these types. You should use these types where
appropriate but understand how they are defined, particularly when combined in operations with differently typed integers.
5.3. Integer Conversions
Converting Integers
Conversion is a change in the underlying type used to represent the value resulting from assignment, type casting, or
computation.
   Conversion from a type with one width to a type with a wider width generally preserves the mathematical value. However,
conversion in the opposite direction can easily cause loss of high-order bits (or worse, when signed integer types are
involved) unless the magnitude of the value is kept small enough to be represented correctly.
   Conversions occur explicitly as the result of a cast or implicitly as required by an operation. For example, implicit
conversions occur when operations are performed on mixed types or when a value needs to be converted to an appropriate
argument type.
   For example, most C programmers would not think twice before adding an unsigned char to a signed char and storing the
result in a short int. In this case, the C compiler makes the necessary conversions so that the operation “just works” from the
programmer’s point of view. While implicit conversions simplify programming, they can also lead to lost or misinterpreted
data. This section describes how and when conversions are performed and identifies their pitfalls.
   The C Standard rules define how C compilers handle conversions. These rules, which are described in the following
sections, include integer promotions, integer conversion rank, and usual arithmetic conversions.
Integer Conversion Rank
Every integer type has an integer conversion rank that determines how conversions are performed.
   The following rules for determining integer conversion rank are defined by the C Standard:
     • No two different signed integer types have the same rank, even if they have the same representation.
     • The rank of a signed integer type is greater than the rank of any signed integer type with less precision.
     • The rank of long long int is greater than the rank of long int, which is greater than the rank of int, which is greater
       than the rank of short int, which is greater than the rank of signed char.
     • The rank of any unsigned integer type is equal to the rank of the corresponding signed integer type, if any.
     • The rank of any standard integer type is greater than the rank of any extended integer type with the same width.
     • The rank of _Bool shall be less than the rank of all other standard integer types.
     • The rank of char is equal to the rank of signed char and unsigned char.
     • The rank of any extended signed integer type relative to another extended signed integer type with the same precision is
       implementation defined but still subject to the other rules for determining the integer conversion rank.
     • For all integer types T1, T2, and T3, if T1 has greater rank than T2 and T2 has greater rank than T3, then T1 has greater rank
       than T3.
   The C Standard recommends that the types used for size_t and ptrdiff_t should not have an integer conversion rank greater
than that of signed long int, unless the implementation supports objects large enough to make this necessary.
   Integer conversion rank provides a standard rank ordering of integer types that is used to determine a common type for
computations.
Integer Promotions
An object or expression with an integer type whose integer conversion rank is less than or equal to the rank of int and
unsigned int is promoted when used in an expression where an int or unsigned int is required. The integer promotions are
applied as part of the usual arithmetic conversions.
  The integer promotions preserve value, including sign. If all values of the original, smaller type can be represented as an
int:
   • The value of the original, smaller type is converted to int.
   • Otherwise, it is converted to unsigned int.
  The following code fragment illustrates the use of integer promotions:
   1   int sum;
   2   char c1, c2;
   3   sum = c1 + c2;

  The integer promotions rule requires the promotion of the values of each variable in this example (c1 and c2) to type int.
The two values of type int are added, yielding a value of type int, and the result is stored in the integer-typed variable sum.
  Integer promotions are performed to avoid arithmetic errors resulting from the overflow of intermediate values and to
perform operations in a natural size for the architecture. In the following code segment, the value of c1 is multiplied by the
value of c2, and the product is divided by the value of c3 according to operator precedence rules. The compiler has license to
reorder the evaluation of these subexpressions in an actual implementation.
   1   signed char cresult, c1, c2, c3;
   2   c1 = 100;
   3   c2 = 3;
   4   c3 = 4;
   5   cresult = c1 * c2 / c3;

   If the expression is evaluated in this order, without integer promotions, the multiplication of c1 and c2 results in an overflow
of the signed char type on platforms where signed char is represented by an 8-bit two’s complement value because the result
of the operation exceeds the maximum value of signed char (+127) on these platforms. Because of integer promotions,
however, c1, c2, and c3 are converted to int (which has a minimum range of –32,767 to +32,767), and the overall expression
is evaluated successfully. The resulting value is then truncated and stored in cresult. Because the result is in the range of the
signed char type, the truncation does not result in lost or misinterpreted data.
   Another example is applying the bitwise complement operator ~ to a value of type unsigned char:

   unsigned char uc = UCHAR_MAX; // 0xFF
   int i = ~uc;

On the x86-32architecture, for example, uc is assigned the value 0xFF. When uc is used as the operand to the complement
operator ~, it is promoted to signed int by zero-extending it to 32 bits:
   0x000000FF

The complement of this value is
   0xFFFFFF00

Consequently, this operation always results in a negative value of type signed int on this platform.
Usual Arithmetic Conversions
The usual arithmetic conversions are a set of rules that provides a mechanism to yield a common type (technically called a
common real type) when
      • Both operands of a binary operator are balanced to a common type
      • The second and third arguments of the conditional operator (?:) are balanced to a common type
   Balancing conversions involves two operands of different types. One or both operands may be converted.
   Many operators that accept integer operands perform conversions using the usual arithmetic conversions, including *, /, %,
+, -, <, >, <=, >=, ==, !=, &, ^, |, and the conditional operator ?:. After integer promotions are performed on both operands, the
following rules are applied to the promoted operands:
    1. If both operands have the same type, no further conversion is needed.
    2. If both operands have signed integer types or both have unsigned integer types, the operand with the type of lesser integer
        conversion rank is converted to the type of the operand with greater rank. For example, if a signed int operand is
        balanced with a signed long operand, the signed int operand is converted to signed long.
    3. If the operand that has unsigned integer type has rank greater than or equal to the rank of the other operand’s type, the
        operand with signed integer type is converted to the type of the operand with unsigned integer type. For example, if a
        signed int operand is balanced with an unsigned int operand, the signed int operand is converted to unsigned int.
    4. If the type of the operand with signed integer type can represent all of the values of the type of the operand with unsigned
        integer type, the operand with unsigned integer type is converted to the type of the operand with signed integer type. For
        example, if a 64-bit two’s complement signed long operand is balanced with a 32-bit unsigned int operand, the
        unsigned int operand is converted to signed long.
    5. Otherwise, both operands are converted to the unsigned integer type corresponding to the type of the operand with signed
        integer type.
Conversions from Unsigned Integer Types
Conversions of smaller unsigned integer types to larger unsigned integer types are always safe and are accomplished by zero-
extending the value.
   When expressions contain unsigned integer operands of different widths, the C Standard requires the result of each operation
to have the type (and representation range) of the wider of its operands. Provided that the corresponding mathematical
operation produces a result within the representable range of the result type, the resulting represented value will be that of the
mathematical value.
   What happens when the mathematical result value cannot be represented in the result type?
Unsigned, Loss of Precision

For unsigned integer types only, C specifies that the value is reduced modulo 2w(type), which is the number that is 1 greater than
the largest value that can be represented by the resulting type.
   Assuming the following declarations are compiled for an implementation where w(unsigned char) is 8:
   unsigned int ui = 300;
   unsigned char uc = ui;

the value 300 is reduced modulo 28, or 300 – 256 = 44, when uc is assigned the value stored in ui.
   Conversion of a value in an unsigned integer type to a narrower width is well defined as being modulo the narrower width.
This is accomplished by truncating the larger value and preserving the low-order bits. Data is lost if the value cannot be
represented in the new type. If the programmer does not anticipate this possibility, a programming error or vulnerability could
occur.
   Conversions that occur between signed and unsigned integer types of any size can result in lost or misinterpreted data when
a value cannot be represented in the new type.
Unsigned to Signed
When converting a large unsigned value to a signed type of the same width, the C Standard states that when the starting value is
not representable in the new (signed) type:
     • The result is implementation defined, or
     • An implementation-defined signal is raised.
   Minimally, dependence on implementation-defined behavior is a porting issue and, if unanticipated by the programmer, a
likely source of errors.
   A common implementation is to not raise a signal but preserve the bit pattern, so no data is lost. In this case, the high-order
bit becomes the sign bit. If the sign bit is set, both the sign and magnitude of the value change. For example, if the unsigned int
value is UINT_MAX –1, as shown in Figure 5.4, the corresponding signed value is –2.

                                    Figure 5.4. Unsigned to two’s complement conversion
  Type range errors, including loss of data (truncation) and loss of sign (sign errors), can occur when converting from an
unsigned type to a signed type. When a large unsigned integer is converted to a smaller signed integer type, the value is
truncated and the high-order bit becomes the sign bit. The resulting value may be negative or positive depending on the value of
the high-order bit following truncation. Data will be lost (or misinterpreted) if the value cannot be represented in the new type.
If the programmer does not anticipate this possibility, a programming error or vulnerability could occur.
    The following example results in a truncation error on most implementations:
   1   unsigned long int ul = ULONG_MAX;
   2   signed char sc;
   3   sc = (signed char)ul; /* cast eliminates warning */

  Ranges should be validated when converting from an unsigned type to a signed type. The following code, for example, can
be used when converting from unsigned long int to a signed char:
   1   unsigned long int ul = ULONG_MAX;
   2   signed char sc;
   3   if (ul <= SCHAR_MAX) {
   4     sc = (signed char)ul; /* use cast to eliminate warning */
   5   }
   6   else {
   7     /* handle error condition */
   8   }

  Table 5.8 summarizes conversions from unsigned integer types for the x86-32 architecture.

                                    Table 5.8. Conversions from Unsigned Integer Types

  This table does not include signed/unsigned int (which is the same size as long on x86-32) and signed/unsigned long long.
Conversions from Signed Integer Types
Conversions of smaller signed integer types to larger signed integer types are always safe and are accomplished in two’s
complement representation by sign-extending the value.
Signed, Loss of Precision
Conversion of a value in a signed integer type to a narrower width result is implementation defined or may raise an
implementation-defined signal. A common implementation is to truncate to the smaller size. In this case, the resulting value may
be negative or positive depending on the value of the high-order bit following truncation. Data will be lost (or misinterpreted)
if the value cannot be represented in the new type. If the programmer does not anticipate this possibility, a programming error
or vulnerability could occur.
    For example, for an implementation in which the width of int is greater than the width of short, the following code has
implementation-defined behavior or may raise an implementation-defined signal:
   signed long int sl = LONG_MAX;
   signed char sc = (signed char)sl; /* cast eliminates warning */

For a typical implementation in which sc is truncated, sc = -1.
  Ranges should be validated when converting from a signed type to a signed type with less precision. The following code can
be used, for example, to convert from a signed int to a signed char:
   1    signed long int sl = LONG_MAX;
   2    signed char sc;
   3    if ( (sl < SCHAR_MIN) || (sl > SCHAR_MAX) ) {
   4      /* handle error condition */
   5    }
   6    else {
   7      sc = (signed char)sl; /* use cast to eliminate warning */
   8    }

  Conversions from signed types with greater precision to signed types with lesser precision require both the upper and lower
bounds to be checked.
Signed to Unsigned
Where unsigned and signed integer types are operated on, the usual arithmetic conversions determine the common type, which
will have width at least that of the widest type involved. C requires that if the mathematical result is representable in that
width, that value is produced. When a signed integer type is converted to an unsigned integer type, the width (2N) of the new
type is repeatedly added or subtracted to bring the result into the representable range.
   When a signed integer value is converted to an unsigned integer value of equal or greater width and the value of the signed
integer is not negative, the value is unchanged. When using two’s complement, for instance, the conversion to a greater width
integer type is made by sign-extending the signed value.
   For example, the following code compares the value of c (a signed integer) to the value of ui (an unsigned integer of greater
size on x86-32):
   1    unsigned int ui = ULONG_MAX;
   2    signed char c = -1;
   3    if (c == ui) {
   4      puts("Why is -1 = 4,294,967,295???");
   5    }

   Because of integer promotions, c is converted to an unsigned int with a value of 0xFFFFFFFF, or 4,294,967,295. This is a
good example of the inherent problem with comparing a negative and an unsigned value.
   Type range errors, including loss of data (truncation) and loss of sign (sign errors), can occur when converting from a signed
type to an unsigned type. The following code results in a loss of sign:
   signed int si = INT_MIN;
   unsigned int ui = (unsigned int)si; /* cast eliminates warning */

   When a signed integer type is converted to an unsigned integer type of equal width, no data is lost because the bit pattern is
preserved. However, the high-order bit loses its function as a sign bit. If the value of the signed integer is not negative, the
value is unchanged. If the value is negative, the resulting unsigned value is evaluated as a large signed integer. For example, if
the signed value is –2, as shown in Figure 5.5, the corresponding unsigned int value is UINT_MAX - 1.
                                     Figure 5.5. Two’s complement to unsigned conversion
  Ranges should be validated when converting from a signed type to an unsigned type. For example, the following code can be
used when converting from signed int to unsigned int:
   1   signed int si = INT_MIN;
   2   unsigned int ui;
   3   if (si < 0) {
   4     /* handle error condition */
   5   }
   6   else {
   7     ui = (unsigned int)si; /* cast eliminates warning */
   8   }

  Table 5.9 summarizes conversions from signed integer types on the x86-32 platform. Conversions from signed int are
omitted from the table because both int and long have 32-bit precision on this architecture.

                            Table 5.9. Conversions from Signed Integer Types on the x86-32 Platform
Conversion Implications
Implicit conversions simplify C language programming. However, conversions have the potential for lost or misinterpreted
data. Avoid conversions that result in
     • Loss of value: conversion to a type where the magnitude of the value cannot be represented
     • Loss of sign: conversion from a signed type to an unsigned type resulting in loss of sign
   The only integer type conversion guaranteed to be safe for all data values and all conforming implementations is to a wider
type of the same signedness.
5.4. Integer Operations
Integer operations can result in exceptional condition errors such as overflow, wrapping, and truncation. Exceptional
conditions occur when the product of an operation cannot be represented in the type resulting from the operation. Table 5.10
indicates which exceptional conditions are possible when performing operations on integral values. Not included are errors
caused by the usual arithmetic conversions that are applied when balancing operands to a common type.

                                             Table 5.10. Exceptional Conditions
   As you can see from this table, most integer operations cause exceptional conditions, even in cases where no type coercion
takes place. Of particular importance to security are operations on integer values that originate from untrusted sources and are
used in any of the following ways:
     • As an array index
     • In any pointer arithmetic
     • As a length or size of an object
     • As the bound of an array (for example, a loop counter)
     • As an argument to a memory allocation function
     • In security-critical code
   In the following sections we examine integer operations, discuss the possible resulting exceptional conditions, and review
effective mitigation strategies. The high-level semantics of these integer operations (as defined by the C Standard), as well as
the specific implementation of these operations on x86-32, are described. Precondition and postcondition tests for signed
overflow and unsigned wrapping are described as appropriate.
Assignment
In simple assignment (=), the value of the right operand is converted to the type of the assignment expression and replaces the
value stored in the object designated by the left operand. These conversions occur implicitly and can often be a source of
subtle errors.
   In the following program fragment, the int value returned by the function f() can be truncated when stored in the char and
then converted back to int width before the comparison:
   1   int f(void);
   2   char c;
   3   /* ... */
   4   if ((c = f()) == -1)
   5     /* ... */

   In an implementation in which “plain” char has the same range of values as unsigned char (and char is narrower than int),
the result of the conversion cannot be negative, so the operands of the comparison can never compare equal. As a result, for
full portability, the variable c should be declared as int.
   In the following program fragment, the value of i is converted to the type of the assignment expression c = i, that is, char
type:
   1    char c;
   2    int i;
   3    long l;
   4    l = (c = i);

The value of the expression enclosed in parentheses is then converted to the type of the outer assignment expression, that is,
long int type. The comparison l == i will not be true after this series of assignments if the value of i is not in the range of
char.
  An assignment from an unsigned integer to a signed integer or from a signed integer to an unsigned integer of equal width can
cause the resulting value to be misinterpreted. In the following program fragment, a negative signed value is converted to an
unsigned type of equal width:
   1    int si = -3;
   2    unsigned int ui = si;
   3    printf("ui = %u\n", ui); /* ui = 65533 */

   Because the new type is unsigned, the value is converted by repeatedly adding or subtracting 1 more than the maximum value
that can be represented in the new type until the value is in the range of the new type. The resulting value will be misinterpreted
as a large, positive value if accessed as an unsigned value.
   On most implementations, the original value can be trivially recovered by reversing the operation:
   si = ui;
   printf("si = %d\n", si); /* si = -3 */

However, because the resulting value cannot be represented as a signed int, the result is implementation defined or an
implementation-defined signal is raised. In most cases, this code would not result in an error. But instead of concentrating on
the details of platform-specific conversions, you should focus on choosing appropriate width and signedness for each intended
purpose, along with ways to ensure that the type limits are not exceeded. Then you have no need to worry about
implementation-defined behaviors.
   Truncation occurs as the result of assignment or casting from a type with greater width to a type with lesser width. Data may
be lost if the value cannot be represented in the resulting type. For example, adding c1 and c2 in the following program
fragment produces a value outside the range of unsigned char for an implementation where unsigned char is represented using
8 bits (28 – 1, or 255):
   1    unsigned char sum, c1, c2;
   2    c1 = 200;
   3    c2 = 90;
   4    sum = c1 + c2;

  Assuming that all values of type unsigned char can be represented as int in this implementation, the value is converted to
an int. The addition succeeds without wrapping, but the assignment to sum causes truncation because the unsigned char type
has a lesser width than the value resulting from the addition. Because the conversion is to an unsigned type, the result of this
operation is well defined but can be an error if the programmer expects the mathematical result.
  Assuming that signed int has a width of 32 bits, signed char has a width of 8 bits, and two’s complement representation is
shown in the following program fragment:
   signed int si = SCHAR_MAX + 1;
   signed char sc = si;

si is initialized to 128, which is represented in memory as

   00000000 00000000 00000000 10000000

When this value is assigned to sc, it is truncated to
   10000000

If interpreted in 8-bit two’s complement representation, the result now has a negative value (SCHAR_MIN, or –128) because the
high-order bit is set. In this case, the data cannot be recovered simply by reversing the operation:
   si = sc;

because this assignment results in sign-extending sc:
   11111111 11111111 11111111 10000000

The sign extension in this case preserves the value (SCHAR_MIN, or –128).
  The data can be recovered using the appropriate cast:
   si = (unsigned char) sc;

But this assumes that the programmer intentionally truncated to an integer size that was too small to represent this value. Doing
so is not a recommended practice and is presumably an error.
Addition
Addition can be used to add two arithmetic operands or a pointer and an integer. If both operands are of arithmetic type, the
usual arithmetic conversions are performed on them. The result of the binary + operator is the sum of the operands.
Incrementing is equivalent to adding 1. When an expression that has integer type is added to a pointer, the result is a pointer.
This is called pointer arithmetic and is not covered in this chapter.
   The result of adding two integers can always be represented using 1 more bit than the width of the larger of the two
operands. For example, assuming an 8-bit two’s complement signed char type, the minimum value of SCHAR_MIN is –128. For
this implementation, SCHAR_MIN + SCHAR_MIN = –256, which can be represented as a 9-bit two’s complement value.
Consequently, the result of any integer operation can be represented in any type with a width greater than the width of the larger
addend.
   Integer addition can cause an overflow or wraparound if the resulting value cannot be represented in the number of bits
allocated to the integer’s representation.
   The x86-32 instruction set includes an add instruction that takes the form add destination,source. This instruction adds the
first (destination) operand to the second (source) operand and stores the result in the destination operand. The destination
operand can be a register or memory location, and the source operand can be an immediate, register, or memory location. For
example, add ax,bx adds the 16-bit bx register to the 16-bit ax register and leaves the sum in the ax register [Intel 2010].
   Signed and unsigned overflow conditions resulting from an addition operation are detected and reported on x86-32. x86-32
instructions, including the add instruction, set flags in the flags register, as shown in Figure 5.6.

                                      Figure 5.6. Layout of the flags register for x86-32
   The two’s complement system has the advantage of not requiring that the addition and subtraction circuitry examine the signs
of the operands to determine whether to add or subtract. This means that, for two’s complement architectures such as x86-32, a
single instruction serves to add and subtract both signed and unsigned values. Consequently, the add instruction evaluates the
result for both signed and unsigned integer operands and sets the OF and CF to indicate an overflow or carry in the signed or
unsigned result respectively. Although each addition operation sets both the OF and CF, the OF has no meaning after an unsigned
addition, and the CF has no meaning after a signed addition.
   The Microsoft Visual C++ compiler, for example, generates the following instructions for the addition of the two signed
int values si1 and si2:
   1   si1 + si2
   2     mov eax, dword ptr [si1]
   3     add eax, dword ptr [si2]

and exactly the same instructions for the addition of the two unsigned int values ui1 and ui2:
   1    ui1 + ui2
   2      mov eax, dword ptr [ui1]
   3      add eax, dword ptr [ui2]

In each case, the first addend is moved into the 32-bit eax register and then added to the second addend.
   The addition of 64-bit signed long long and unsigned long long requires two separate addition instructions on x86-32:
   01    sll = sll1 + sll2;
   02        mov eax, dword ptr [sll1]
   03        add eax, dword ptr [sll2]
   04        mov ecx, dword ptr [ebp-8]
   05        adc ecx, dword ptr [ebp-18h]
   06    ull = ull1 + ull2;
   07        mov eax, dword ptr [ull1]
   08        add eax, dword ptr [ull2]
   09        mov ecx, dword ptr [ebp-28h]
   10        adc ecx, dword ptr [ebp-38h]

The add instruction adds the low-order 32 bits. If this addition wraps, the extra carry bit is stored in CF. The adc instruction
then adds the high-order 32 bits, along with the value of the carry bit, to produce the correct 64-bit sum.
Avoiding or Detecting Signed Overflow Resulting from Addition
Signed integer overflow is undefined behavior in C, allowing implementations to silently wrap (the most common behavior),
trap, saturate (stick at the maximum/minimum value), or perform any other behavior that the implementation chooses.
Postcondition Test Using Status Flags
At the x86-32 assembly level, signed overflows can be detected using either the jo instruction (jump if overflow) or the jno
instruction (jump if not overflow) after execution of the add instruction (32-bit case) or adc instruction (64-bit case).
   This allows for the creation of a library of arithmetic functions that check the status of the overflow flag and return a status
code to indicate when overflow has occurred. The following function would allow the addition of signed int values in such a
library:
   01    _Bool add_int(int lhs, int rhs, int *sum) {
   02        __asm {
   03           mov eax, dword ptr [lhs]
   04           add eax, dword ptr [rhs]
   05           mov ecx, dword ptr [sum]
   06           mov dword ptr [ecx], eax
   07           jo   short j1
   08           mov al, 1 // 1 is success
   09           jmp short j2
   10    j1:
   11           xor al, al // 0 is failure
   12    j2:
   13        };
   14    }

   Although it works, the solution has a number of problems. First, the function implementation depends on compiler-specific
extensions (in this case Microsoft’s) to incorporate assembly language instructions in a C program. Second, this code relies on
the x86-32 instruction set and is consequently nonportable. Third, this approach has been reported to have poor performance in
optimized code because of the inability of the compiler to optimize the assembly language instructions. Finally, this approach
is hard to use because it prevents the use of standard inline arithmetic. For example, the following code:
   1    int a = /* ... */;
   2    int b = /* ... */;
   3
   4    int sum = a + b + 3;

would need to be implemented as follows:
   1    int a = /* ... */;
   2    int b = /* ... */;
   3
   4    if ( add_int(a, b, &sum) && add_int(sum, 3, &sum) ) {
   5      /* ok */
   6    }
   7    else {
   8      /* overflow */
   9    }

Precondition Test, Two’s Complement
Another approach to eliminating integer exceptional conditions is to test the values of the operands before an operation to
prevent overflow. This testing is especially important for signed integer overflow, which is undefined behavior that can result
in a trap on some architectures (for example, a division error on x86-32). The complexity of these tests varies significantly.
   The following code performs a precondition test of the addition’s operands to ensure that no overflow occurs. It employs the
principle that an addition overflow has occurred when the two operands have the same sign as each other and the result has the
opposite sign. It also takes advantage of the fact that unsigned integer operations wrap in C, so they can be used to detect
signed overflow without any danger of causing a trap.
   01    signed int si1, si2, sum;
   02
   03    /* Initialize si1 and si2 */
   04
   05    unsigned int usum = (unsigned int)si1 + si2;
   06
   07    if ((usum ^ si1) & (usum ^ si2) & INT_MIN) {
   08       /* handle error condition */
   09    } else {
   10      sum = si1 + si2;
   11    }

   Exclusive-or can be thought of as a “not-equal” operator on each individual bit. We are concerned only with the sign
position, so we mask with INT_MIN, which has only the sign bit set.
   This solution works only on architectures that use two’s complement representation. Although most modern platforms use
that type of representation, it is best not to introduce unnecessary platform dependencies. (See The CERT C Secure Coding
Standard [Seacord 2008], “MSC14-C. Do not introduce unnecessary platform dependencies.”) This solution can also be more
expensive than a postcondition test, especially on RISC CPUs.
Precondition Test, General
The following code tests the suspect addition operation to ensure that no overflow occurs regardless of the representation
used:
   01    signed int si1, si2, sum;
   02
   03    /* Initialize si1 and si2 */
   04
   05    if ((si2 > 0 && si1 > INT_MAX - si2) ||
   06        (si2 < 0 && si1 < INT_MIN - si2)) {
   07       /* handle error condition */
   08    }
   09    else {
   10      sum = si1 + si2;
   11    }

  This solution is more readable and more portable but may be less efficient than the solution that is specific to two’s
complement representation.
Downcast from a Larger Type
The true sum of any two signed integer values of width w can always be represented in w+1 bits, as shown in Figure 5.7.

                                      Figure 5.7. True sum of any two signed integer values
  As a result, performing the addition in a type with greater width will always succeed. The resulting value can be range-
checked before downcasting to the original type.
  Generally, this solution is implementation dependent in C because the standard does not guarantee that any one standard
integer type is larger than another.
Avoiding or Detecting Wraparound Resulting from Addition
Wraparound can occur when adding two unsigned values if the sum of the operands is larger than the maximum value that can
be stored in the resulting type. Although unsigned integer wrapping is well defined by the C Standard as having modulo
behavior, unexpected wrapping has led to numerous software vulnerabilities.
Postcondition Test Using Status Flags
At the x86-32 assembly level, unsigned overflows can be detected using either the jc instruction (jump if carry) or the jnc
instruction (jump if not carry). These conditional jump instructions are placed after the add instruction in the 32-bit case or
after the adc instruction in the 64-bit case. The following function, for example, can be used to add two values of type size_t:
   01    _Bool add_size_t(size_t lhs, size_t rhs, size_t *sum) {
   02      __asm {
   03         mov eax, dword ptr [lhs]
   04         add eax, dword ptr [rhs]
   05         mov ecx, dword ptr [sum]
   06         mov dword ptr [ecx], eax
   07         jc   short j1
   08         mov al, 1 // 1 is success
   09         jmp short j2
   10    j1:
   11         xor al, al // 0 is failure
   12    j2:
   13      };
   14    }

  Testing for wraparound by testing status flags suffers from all the same problems as checking status flags for signed
overflow.
Precondition Test
The following code performs a precondition test of the addition’s operands to guarantee that there is no possibility of
wraparound:
   01    unsigned int ui1, ui2, usum;
   02
   03    /* Initialize ui1 and ui2 */
   04
   05    if (UINT_MAX - ui1 < ui2) {
   06      /* handle error condition */
   07    }
   08    else {
   09      usum = ui1 + ui2;
   10    }

Postcondition Test
Postcondition testing occurs after the operation is performed and then tests the resulting value to determine if it is within valid
limits. This approach is ineffective if an exceptional condition can result in an apparently valid value; however, unsigned
addition can always be tested for wrapping.
   The following code performs a postcondition test to ensure that sum usum resulting from the addition of two addends of
unsigned int type is not less than the first operand, which would indicate that wraparound has occurred:
   1    unsigned int ui1, ui2, usum;
   2
   3    /* Initialize ui1 and ui2 */
   4
   5    usum = ui1 + ui2;
   6    if (usum < ui1) {
   7      /* handle error condition */
   8    }

Subtraction
Like addition, subtraction is an additive operation. For subtraction, both operands must have arithmetic type or be pointers to
compatible object types. It is also possible to subtract an integer from a pointer. Decrementing is equivalent to subtracting 1. In
this section we are concerned only with the subtraction of two integral values.
Postcondition Test Using Status Flags
The x86-32 instruction set includes sub (subtract) and sbb (subtract with borrow). The sub instruction subtracts the source
operand from the destination operand and stores the result in the destination operand. The destination operand can be a register
or memory location, and the source operand can be an immediate, register, or memory location. However, the destination
operand and source operand cannot both be memory locations.
   The sbb instruction is usually executed as part of a multibyte or multiword subtraction in which a sub instruction is followed
by an sbb instruction. The sbb instruction adds the source operand (second operand) and the carry flag and subtracts the result
from the destination operand. The result of the subtraction is stored in the destination operand. The carry flag represents a
borrow from a previous subtraction.
   The sub and sbb instructions set the overflow and carry flags to indicate an overflow in the signed and unsigned result
respectively.
   Subtraction for the x86-32 architecture is similar to addition. The Microsoft Visual C++ compiler, for example, generates
the following instructions for the subtraction of two values of type signed long long:
   1    sll1 - sll2
   2
   3      mov eax, dword ptr [sll1]
   4      sub eax, dword ptr [sll2]
   5      mov ecx, dword ptr [ebp-0E0h]
   6      sbb ecx, dword ptr [ebp-0F0h]

   The sub instruction subtracts the low-order 32 bits. If this subtraction wraps, the extra carry bit is stored in CF. The sbb
instruction adds the source operand (representing the high-order 32 bits) and the carry [CF] flag and subtracts the result from
the destination operand (representing the high-order 32 bits) to produce the 64-bit difference.
Avoiding or Detecting Signed Overflow Resulting from Subtraction
At the x86-32 assembly level, signed overflows resulting from subtraction can be detected using either the jo instruction (jump
if overflow) or the jno instruction (jump if not overflow) after execution of the sub instruction (32-bit case) or sbb instruction
(64-bit case).
Precondition Test
Overflow cannot occur when subtracting two positive values or two negative values. Assuming two’s complement
representation, the following code tests the operands of the subtraction to guarantee that there is no possibility of signed
overflow using bit operations. It makes use of the principle that a subtraction overflow has occurred if the operands have
opposite signs and the result has the opposite sign of the first operand. It also takes advantage of the wrapping behavior of
unsigned operations in C.
   01    signed int si1, si2, result;
   02
   03    /* Initialize si1 and si2 */
   04
   05    if ((si1 ^ si2) & (((unsigned int)si1 - si2) ^ si1) & INT_MIN) {
   06      /* handle error condition */
   07    }
   08    else {
   09      result = si1 - si2;
   10    }

   Exclusive-or is used as a bitwise “not-equal” operator. To test the sign position, the expression is masked with INT_MIN,
which has only the sign bit set.
   This solution works only on architectures that use two’s complement representation. Although most modern platforms use
that type of representation, it is best not to introduce unnecessary platform dependencies. (See The CERT C Secure Coding
Standard [Seacord 2008], “MSC14-C. Do not introduce unnecessary platform dependencies.”)
   It is also possible to implement a portable precondition test for overflow resulting from subtraction. If the second operand is
positive, check that the first operand is less than the minimum value for the type plus the second operand. For operands of
signed int type, for example, test that op1 < INT_MIN + op2. If the second operand is negative, check that the first operand is
greater than the maximum value for the type plus the second operand.
Avoiding or Detecting Wraparound Resulting from Subtraction
Wraparound can occur when subtracting two unsigned values if the difference between the two operands is negative.
Postcondition Test Using Status Flags
At the x86-32 assembly level, unsigned wraparound can be detected using either the jc instruction (jump if carry) or the jnc
instruction (jump if not carry). These conditional jump instructions are placed after the sub instruction in the 32-bit case or sbb
instruction in the 64-bit case.
Precondition Test
The following program fragment performs a precondition test of the subtraction operation’s unsigned operands to guarantee
there is no possibility of unsigned wrap:
   01    unsigned int ui1, ui2, udiff;
   02
   03    /* Initialize ui1 and ui2 */
   04
   05    if (ui1 < ui2){
   06      /* handle error condition */
   07    }
   08    else {
   09      udiff = ui1 - ui2;
   10    }

Postcondition Test
The following program fragment performs a postcondition test that the result of the unsigned subtraction operation udiff is not
greater than the first operand:
   1    unsigned int ui1, ui2, udiff ;
   2
   3    /* Initialize ui1 and ui2 */
   4
   5    udiff = ui1 - ui2;
   6    if (udiff > ui1) {
   7      /* handle error condition */
   8    }

Multiplication
Multiplication in C can be accomplished using the binary * operator that results in the product of the operands. Each operand
of the binary * operator has arithmetic type. The usual arithmetic conversions are performed on the operands. Multiplication is
prone to overflow errors because relatively small operands, when multiplied, can overflow a given integer type.
   In general, the product of two integer operands can always be represented using twice the number of bits used by the larger
of the two operands. For example, the unsigned range of an integer with width N is 0 to 2N – 1. The result of squaring the
maximum unsigned value for a given width is represented by the following formula:

                                              0 ≤ x * y ≤ (2N – 1)2 = 22N – 2N+1 + 1

The product in this case can require up to 2N bits to represent.
   The signed two’s complement range of a type with width N is –2N–1 to 2N–1 – 1. The minimum two’s complement results
from multiplying the minimum and maximum values:

                                        0 ≤ x * y ≤ (–2N–1) (2N–1 – 1) = –22 N –2 + 2 N –1

In this case, the product requires up to 2N – 2 bits plus 1 bit for the sign bit equals 2N – 1 bits.
   The maximum two’s complement value results from squaring the signed two’s complement minimum value:

                                                    x * y ≤ (–2 N –1)2 = 22 N –2

In this case, the product requires up to 2N bits including the sign bit.
   This means that, for example, the product of two 8-bit operands can always be represented by 16 bits, and the product of
two 16-bit operands can always be represented by 32 bits.
   Because doubling the number of bits provides 1 more bit than is needed to hold the result of signed multiplication, room is
left for an extra addition or subtraction before it becomes necessary to check for overflow. Because a multiplication followed
by an addition is common, an overflow check can be skipped fairly often.
Postcondition Test Using Status Flags
The x86-32 instruction set includes both a mul (unsigned multiply) and imul (signed multiply) instruction. The mul instruction
performs an unsigned multiplication of the destination operand and the source operand and stores the result in the destination
operand.
  The mul instruction is shown here using C-style pseudocode:
   01    if (OperandSize == 8) {
   02      AX = AL * SRC;
   03    else {
   04      if (OperandSize == 16) {
   05        DX:AX = AX * SRC;
   06      }
   07      else { // OperandSize == 32
   08        EDX:EAX = EAX * SRC;
   09      }
   10    }

   The mul instruction accepts 8-, 16-, and 32-bit operands and stores the results in 16-, 32-, and 64-bit destination registers
respectively. This is referred to as a widening-multiplication instruction because twice the number of bits allocated for the
product is twice the size of the operands. If the high-order bits are required to represent the product of the two operands, the
carry and overflow flags are set. If the high-order bits are not required (that is, they are equal to 0), the carry and overflow
flags are cleared.
   The x86-32 instruction set also includes imul, a signed form of the mul instruction with one-, two-, and three-operand forms
[Intel 2004]. The carry and overflow flags are set when significant bits (including the sign bit) are carried into the upper half of
the result and cleared when they are not.
   The imul instruction is similar to the mul instruction in that the length of the product is calculated as twice the length of the
operands.
   The principal difference between the mul (unsigned multiply) instruction and the imul (signed multiply) instruction is in the
handling of the flags. If the flags are not tested and the most significant half of the result is not used, it makes little difference
which instruction is used. Consequently, the Microsoft Visual Studio compiler uses the imul instruction for both signed and
unsigned multiplication:
   01    int si1 = /* some value */;
   02    int si2 = /* some value */;
   03    int si_product = si1 * si2;
   04    mov eax, dword ptr [si1]
   05    imul eax, dword ptr [si2]
   06    mov dword ptr [ui_product], eax
   07
   08    unsigned int ui1 = /* some value */;
   09    unsigned int ui2 = /* some value */;
   10    unsigned int ui_product = ui1 * ui2;
   11    mov eax, dword ptr [ui1]
   12    imul eax, dword ptr [ui2]
   13    mov dword ptr [ui_product], eax

   To test for signed overflow or unsigned wrapping following multiplication, it is first necessary to determine if the operation
is a signed or unsigned operation and use the appropriate multiplication instruction. For the mul instruction, the overflow and
carry flags are set to 0 if the upper half of the result is 0; otherwise, they are set to 1. For the imul instruction, the carry and
overflow flags are set when significant bits (including the sign bit) are carried into the upper half of the result and cleared
when the result (including the sign bit) fits exactly in the lower half of the result.
Downcast from a Larger Type
A similar solution for detecting signed overflow or unsigned wrapping following multiplication can be implemented in the C
language without resorting to assembly language programming. This solution is to cast both operands to an integer type that is
at least twice the width of the larger of the two operands and then multiply them. As already shown, this is guaranteed to work
because in all cases the product can be stored in 2N bits.
   In the case of unsigned multiplication, if the high-order bits are required to represent the product of the two operands, the
result has wrapped.
   01    unsigned int ui1 = /* some value */;
   02    unsigned int ui2 = /* some value */;
   03    unsigned int product;
   04
   05    /* Initialize ui1 and ui2 */
   06
   07    static_assert(
   08       sizeof(unsigned long long) >= 2 * sizeof(unsigned int),
   09       "Unable to detect wrapping after multiplication"
   10    );
   11
   12    unsigned long long tmp = (unsigned long long)ui1 *
   13                             (unsigned long long)ui2;
   14    if (tmp > UINT_MAX) {
   15      /* handle unsigned wrapping */
   16    }
   17    else {
   18      product = (unsigned int)tmp;
   19    }

   For signed integers, all 0s or all 1s in the upper half of the result and the sign bit in the lower half of the result indicate no
overflow.
   The following solution guarantees that there is no possibility of signed overflow on systems where the width of long long is
at least twice the width of int:
   01    /* Initialize si1 and si2 */
   02
   03    static_assert(
   04       sizeof(long long) >= 2 * sizeof(int),
   05       "Unable to detect overflow after multiplication"
   06    );
   07
   08    long long tmp = (long long)si1 * (long long)si2;
   09
   10    if ( (tmp > INT_MAX) || (tmp < INT_MIN) ) {
   11      /* handle signed overflow */
   12    }
   13    else {
   14      result = (int)tmp;
   15    }

  Both solutions use static assertion to ensure that the tests for unsigned wrapping and signed overflow succeed. See The
CERT C Secure Coding Standard [Seacord 2008], “DCL03-C. Use a static assertion to test the value of a constant
expression,” to find out more about static assertions.
Precondition Test, General
The following portable solution prevents unsigned integer wrapping without requiring upcasting to an integer type with twice
the number of bits. Consequently, this solution could be used for integer values of type uintmax_t.
   01    unsigned int ui1 = /* some value */;
   02    unsigned int ui2 = /* some value */;
   03    unsigned int product;
   04
   05    if (ui1 > UINT_MAX/ui2) {
   06      /* handle unsigned wrapping */
   07    }
   08    else {
   09      product = ui1 * ui2;
   10    }

   Example 5.5 is a portable solution that prevents signed overflow without requiring upcasting to an integer type with twice
the number of bits. Consequently, this solution could be used for integer values of type intmax_t.

Example 5.5. Preventing Signed Overflow without Upcasting
   01    signed int si1 = /* some value */;
   02    signed int si2 = /* some value */;
   03    signed int product;
   04
   05    if (si1 > 0) { /* si1 is positive */
   06      if (si2 > 0) { /* si1 and si2 are positive */
   07        if (si1 > (INT_MAX / si2)) {
   08          /* handle error condition */
   09        }
   10      } /* end if si1 and si2 are positive */
   11      else { /* si1 positive, si2 non-positive */
   12        if (si2 < (INT_MIN / si1)) {
   13          /* handle error condition */
   14        }
   15      } /* si1 positive, si2 non-positive */
   16    } /* end if si1 is positive */
   17    else { /* si1 is non-positive */
   18      if (si2 > 0) { /* si1 is non-positive, si2 is positive */
   19        if (si1 < (INT_MIN / si2)) {
   20          /* handle error condition */
   21        }
   22      } /* end if si1 is non-positive, si2 is positive */
   23      else { /* si1 and si2 are non-positive */
   24        if ( (si1 != 0) && (si2 < (INT_MAX / si1))) {
   25          /* handle error condition */
   26        }
   27      } /* end if si1 and si2 are non-positive */
   28    } /* end if si1 is non-positive */
   29
   30    product = si1 * si2;

Division and Remainder
When integers are divided, the result of the / operator is the integral algebraic quotient with any fractional part discarded; the
result of the % operator is the remainder. This is often called truncation toward zero. In both operations, if the value of the
second operand is 0, the behavior is undefined.
   Unsigned integer division cannot wrap because the quotient is always less than or equal to the dividend.
   It is not always immediately apparent that signed integer division can result in overflow because you might expect the
quotient to always be less than the dividend. However, an integer overflow can occur when the minimum two’s complement
value is divided by –1. For example, assuming infinitely ranged integers, –2,147,483,648/–1 = 2,147,483,648. However,
signed 32-bit two’s complement integer division results in an overflow because 2,147,483,648 cannot be represented as a
signed 32-bit integer. Consequently, the resulting value of –2,147,483,648/–1 is –2,147,483,648.
   C11, Section 6.5.5, states that
        if the quotient a/b is representable, the expression (a/b)*b + a%b shall equal a; otherwise, the behavior of both a/b
        and a%b is undefined.
This makes the behavior of both a/b and a%b explicitly undefined in C11 when the quotient a/b is not representable and, by
association, implicitly undefined in C99.
Error Detection
The x86-32 instruction set includes the div and idiv instructions. The div instruction divides the (unsigned) integer value in the
ax, dx:ax, or edx:eax register (dividend) by the source operand (divisor) and stores the quotient in the ax (ah:al), dx:ax, or
edx:eax register. The idiv instruction performs the same operations on (signed) values. The results of the div/idiv instructions
depend on the operand size (dividend/divisor), as shown in Table 5.11. The quotient range shown is for the signed (idiv)
instruction.

                                            Table 5.11. div and idiv Instructions
  Nonintegral results are truncated toward zero. The remainder is always less than the divisor in magnitude. Overflow is
indicated by the divide error exception rather than with the carry flag.
  The disassembly in Example 5.6 shows the Intel assembly instructions generated by Microsoft Visual Studio for signed and
unsigned division.

Example 5.6. Intel Assembly Instructions

   01    int si_dividend = /* some value */;
   02    int si_divisor = /* some value */;
   03    int si_quotient = si_dividend / si_divisor;
   04        mov eax, dword ptr [si_dividend]
   05        cdq
   06        idiv eax, dword ptr [si_divisor]
   07        mov dword ptr [si_quotient], eax
   08
   09    unsigned int ui_dividend = /* some value */;
   10    unsigned int ui_divisor = /* some value */;
   11    unsigned int ui_quotient = ui1_dividend / ui_divisor;
   12        mov eax, dword ptr [ui_dividend]
   13        xor edx, edx
   14        div eax, dword ptr [ui_divisor]
   15        mov dword ptr [ui_quotient], eax

   As expected, signed division uses the idiv instruction, and unsigned division uses the div instruction. Because the divisor in
both the signed and unsigned cases is a 32-bit value, the dividend is interpreted as a quadword. In the signed case, this is
handled by doubling the size of the si_dividend in register eax by means of sign extension and storing the result in registers
edx:eax. In the unsigned case, the edx register is cleared using the xor instruction before calling the div instruction to make
sure there is no residual value in this register.
   Unlike the add, mul, and imul instructions, the Intel division instructions div and idiv do not set the overflow flag; they
generate a division error if the source operand (divisor) is 0 or if the quotient is too large for the designated register. A divide
error results in a fault on interrupt vector 0. A fault is an exception that can generally be corrected and that, once corrected,
allows the program to restart with no loss of continuity. When a fault is reported, the processor restores the machine state to
what it was before the execution of the faulting instruction began. The return address (saved contents of the cs and eip
registers) for the fault handler points to the faulting instruction rather than the instruction following the faulting instruction [Intel
2004].
Precondition
Overflow resulting from signed integer division can be prevented by checking to see whether the numerator is the minimum
value for the integer type and the denominator is –1. Division by 0 can be prevented, of course, by ensuring that the divisor is
nonzero. The following program fragment shows a test to prevent both overflow and division by 0 when dividing two signed
long values:
   01    signed long sl1 = /* some value */;
   02    signed long sl2 = /* some value */;
   03    signed long quotient;
   04
   05    /* Initialize sl1 and sl2 */
   06
   07    if ( (sl2 == 0) || ( (sl1 == LONG_MIN) && (sl2 == -1) ) ) {
   08      /* handle error condition */
   09    }
   10    else {
   11      quotient = sl1 / sl2;
   12    }

  The following program fragment can also result in undefined behavior, such as a divide-by-zero error on x86-32:
   signed long sl1, sl2, result;
   /* Initialize sl1 and sl2 */
   result = sl1 % sl2;

  Furthermore, many hardware platforms implement remainder as part of the division operator, which can overflow.
Overflow can occur during a remainder operation when the dividend is equal to the minimum (negative) value for the signed
integer type and the divisor is equal to –1. This occurs despite the fact that the result of such a remainder operation should
theoretically be 0. On x86-32 platforms, for example, the remainder from signed division is also calculated by the idiv
instruction, which as we have seen generates a division error if the quotient is too large for the designated register.
   This precondition tests the remainder operand to guarantee that there is no possibility of a divide-by-zero error or an
(internal) overflow error:
   01    signed long sl1, sl2, result;
   02
   03    /* Initialize sl1 and sl2 */
   04
   05    if ( (sl2 == 0 ) || ( (sl1 == LONG_MIN) && (sl2 == -1) ) ) {
   06      /* handle error condition */
   07    }
   08    else {
   09      result = sl1 % sl2;
   10    }

Postcondition
Normal C++ exception handling does not allow an application to recover from a hardware exception or fault such as an access
violation or divide by zero [Richter 1999]. Microsoft does provide a facility called structured exception handling (SEH) for
dealing with hardware and other exceptions. SEH is an operating system facility that is distinct from C++ exception handling.
Microsoft provides a set of extensions to the C language that enable C programs to handle Win32 structured exceptions.
  The program fragment in Example 5.7 shows how SEH can be used in a C program to recover from divide-by-zero and
overflow faults resulting from division operations.

Example 5.7. Using SEH to Recover from Faults

   01    #include <windows.h>
   02     #include <limits.h>
   03
   04     int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
   05       int x, y;
   06
   07        __try {
   08           x = 5;
   09           y = 0;
   10           x = x / y;
   11        }
   12      __except (GetExceptionCode() ==
   13          EXCEPTION_INT_DIVIDE_BY_ZERO ?
   14          EXCEPTION_EXECUTE_HANDLER :
   15          EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH){
   16            puts("Divide by zero error.");
   17      }
   18
   19      __try {
   20        x = INT_MIN;
   21        y = -1;
   22        x = x / y;
   23      }
   24      __except (GetExceptionCode() ==
   25        EXCEPTION_INT_OVERFLOW ?
   26        EXCEPTION_EXECUTE_HANDLER : EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH) {
   27          puts("Integer overflow during division.");
   28      }
   29
   30      __try {
   31        x = INT_MAX;
   32        x++;
   33        printf("x = %d.\n", x);
   34      }
   35      __except (GetExceptionCode() ==
   36        EXCEPTION_INT_OVERFLOW ?
   37        EXCEPTION_EXECUTE_HANDLER :
   38        EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH) {
   39            puts("Integer overflow during increment.");
   40         }
   41        /* ... */
   42    }

   The program fragment also shows how SEH cannot be used to detect overflow errors resulting from addition or other
operations.
   Lines 6 through 10 contain a __try block containing code that causes a divide-by-zero fault when executed. Lines 11 through
16 contain an __except block that catches and handles the fault. Similarly, lines 18 through 27 contain code that causes an
integer overflow fault at runtime and corresponding exception handler to recover from the fault. Lines 29 through 39 contain an
important counterexample. The code in the __try block results in an integer overflow condition. However, the same exception
handler that caught the overflow exception after the division fault will not detect this overflow because the addition operation
does not generate a hardware fault.
   In the Linux environment, hardware exceptions such as division errors are managed using signals. In particular, if the divisor
is 0 or the quotient is too large for the designated register, a SIGFPE (floating-point exception) is generated. (This type of signal
is raised even though the exception is being generated by an integer operation and not a floating-point operation.) To prevent
abnormal termination of the program, a signal handler can be installed using the signal() call as follows:
   signal(SIGFPE, Sint::divide_error);

   The signal() call accepts two parameters: the signal number and the signal handler’s address. But because a division error
is a fault, the return address points to the faulting instruction. If the signal handler simply returns, the instruction and the signal
handler are called alternately in an infinite loop.
   As a developer, you are extremely limited in what you can (portably) do from a signal handler. See Chapter 11, “Signals
(SIG),” of The CERT C Secure Coding Standard [Seacord 2008] for further guidance.
Unary Negation (–)
Negating a signed integer can also lead to a sign error for two’s complement representation because the range of possible
values for a signed integer type is asymmetric. Assuming an x86-32, two’s complement implementation in the following
program fragment:
   signed int x = INT_MIN;
   signed int y = -x;

x is represented as

   10000000 00000000 00000000 00000000

in two’s complement and negated by taking two’s complement to produce
   10000000 00000000 00000000 00000000

the same value as INT_MIN and x.
Shifts
Shift operations include left-shift operations of the form
   shift-expression << additive-expression

and right-shift operations of the form
   shift-expression >> additive-expression

   The integer promotions are performed on the operands, each of which has integer type. The type of the result is that of the
promoted left operand.
   The right operand of a shift operator provides the number of bits by which to shift. If that number is negative or greater than
or equal to the number of bits in the result type, the behavior is undefined. This can be a problem when code is developed on
one platform where the developer happens to know the sizes, and that code is later ported to another platform where some of
the integer sizes are smaller.
   In almost every case, an attempt to shift by a negative number of bits or by more bits than exist in the operand indicates a bug
(logic error). This is different from overflow, where there is a representational deficiency.
   For more information, see The CERT C Secure Coding Standard [Seacord 2008], “INT34-C. Do not shift a negative
number of bits or more bits than exist in the operand.”
Left Shift
The result of E1 << E2 is E1 left-shifted E2-bit positions; vacated bits are filled with 0s. See Figure 5.8.

                                                        Figure 5.8. Left shift
   If E1 has a signed type and nonnegative value, and E1 * 2E2 is representable in the result type, then that is the resulting value;
otherwise, the behavior is undefined.
   The following program fragment eliminates the possibility of undefined behavior resulting from a left-shift operation on
unsigned integers:
    01       unsigned int ui1;
    02       unsigned int ui2;
    03       unsigned int uresult;
    04       /* Initialize ui1 and ui2 */
    05       if (ui2 >= sizeof(unsigned int)*CHAR_BIT) {
    06         /* handle error condition */
    07       }
    08       else {
    09         uresult = ui1 << ui2;
    10       }

   Modulo behavior resulting from left-shifting an unsigned integer value is almost always intentional and therefore not
considered an error (according to The CERT C Secure Coding Standard [Seacord 2008]). Shift operators and other bitwise
operators should be used only with unsigned integer operands, in accordance with “INT13-C. Use bitwise operators only on
unsigned operands.”
   A left shift can be used in place of a multiplication by a power of 2. Historically, some software developers have done this
because a shift can be faster than multiplication. However, any modern compiler knows when to perform this substitution for
the compiler’s target architecture. It is best to use left shifts only when bit manipulation is the goal and to use multiplication
where traditional arithmetic is being performed, to make the code more readable and therefore reduce opportunities to create
vulnerabilities.
Right Shift
The result of E1 >> E2 is E1 right-shifted E2-bit positions. If E1 has an unsigned type or a signed type and a nonnegative value,
the value of the result is the integral part of the quotient of E1/2E2. If E1 has a signed type and a negative value, the resulting
value is implementation defined and can be either an arithmetic (signed) shift, as in Figure 5.9a, or a logical (unsigned) shift,
as in Figure 5.9b.

                                Figure 5.9. (a) Arithmetic (signed) shift; (b) logical (unsigned) shift
  The following code example can result in an error condition on implementations in which an arithmetic shift is performed,
and the sign bit is propagated as the number is shifted:
    01       unsigned int ui1;
    02       unsigned int ui2;
    03       unsigned int uresult;
    04
   05    /* Initialize ui1 and ui2 */
   06
   07    if (ui2 >= sizeof(unsigned int)*CHAR_BIT) {
   08      /* handle error condition */
   09    } else {
   10      uresult = ui1 << ui2;
   11    }

   In the following example, stringify >> 24 evaluates to 0xFFFFFF80 or 4,294,967,168. When converted to a string, the
resulting value, 4294967168, is too large to store in buf and is truncated by sprintf(), resulting in a buffer overflow.
   1    int rc = 0;
   2    int stringify = 0x80000000;
   3    char buf[sizeof("256")];
   4    rc = sprintf(buf, "%u", stringify >> 24);
   5    if (rc == -1 || rc >= sizeof(buf)) {
   6      /* handle error */
   7    }

   This problem can be repaired by declaring stringify as an unsigned integer. The value of the right-shift operation’s result is
the integral part of the quotient of stringify/224. Another way to mitigate buffer overflows in these situations is to use
snprintf() in preference to sprintf(), which will truncate the string to the destination size.
   Also, consider using the sprintf_s() function defined in ISO/IEC TR 24731-1 and in C11 Annex K, “Bounds-checking
interfaces,” instead of snprintf(), to provide some additional checks. (See The CERT C Secure Coding Standard [Seacord
2008], “STR07-C. Use TR 24731 for remediation of existing string manipulation code.”)
   Because a left shift can be substituted for a multiplication by a power of 2, people often assume that a right shift can be
substituted for a division by a power of 2. However, this is the case for only positive values for two reasons. First, as
mentioned earlier, it is implementation defined whether a right shift of a negative value is arithmetic or logical.
   Second, even on a platform that is known to perform arithmetic right shifts, the result is not the same as division. For
example, consider an 8-bit two’s complement representation of the value –3 and the result of shifting that value right by 1 bit:
   11111101 Original value –3
   11111110 Value shifted right by 1 bit = –2
The arithmetic result of dividing –3 by 2 is –1 (truncating toward zero). However, the result of the shift is –2 instead.
   In addition, modern compilers can determine when it is safe to use a shift instead of division and will do so when it is faster
for their target architectures.
   For these reasons, and to keep code clear and easy to read, a left shift should be used only when bit manipulation is the goal,
and division should be used whenever traditional arithmetic is being performed.
5.5. Integer Vulnerabilities
Vulnerabilities
A vulnerability is a set of conditions that allows violation of an explicit or implicit security policy. Security flaws can result
from hardware-level integer error conditions or from faulty program logic involving integers. When combined with other
conditions, these security flaws can result in vulnerabilities. This section describes situations in which integer error conditions
or faulty logic involving integers can lead to vulnerabilities.
Wraparound
The following program shows an example of a real-world vulnerability resulting from unsigned integer wraparound in the
handling of the comment field in JPEG files [Solar 2000]:
   01    void getComment(size_t len, char *src) {
   02       size_t size;
   03       size = len - 2;
   04       char *comment = (char *)malloc(size + 1);
   05       memcpy(comment, src, size);
   06       return;
   07     }
   08
   09     int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
   10       getComment(1, "Comment ");
   11       return 0;
   12    }

   JPEG files contain a comment field that includes a 2-byte length field. The length field indicates the length of the comment,
including the length field itself. To determine the length of the comment string alone (for memory allocation), the getComment()
function reads the value from the length field and subtracts 2 (line 3). The getComment() function then allocates storage for the
length of the comment plus 1 byte for the terminating null byte (line 4). The length field is not validated by the program,
allowing an attacker to create an image with a comment length field containing a value that results in wraparound in the
calculation of the length. If the length field contains the value 1, for example, malloc() is passed a size argument of 0 bytes (1
minus 2 [length field] plus 1 [null termination]).
   According to the C Standard, if the size of the space requested is 0, the behavior is implementation defined: either a null
pointer is returned, or the behavior is as if the size were some nonzero value, except that the returned pointer shall not be used
to access an object.
   On platforms that implement the latter behavior, the memory allocation will succeed. However, undefined behavior will
occur as soon as the comment pointer is used to access the object in the subsequent memcpy() call. This vulnerability may be
exploited to execute arbitrary code, as described in Chapter 4.
   A second real-world example of a vulnerability resulting from unsigned integer wraparound, described in RUS-CERT
Advisory 2002-08:02, occurs when the size of a memory region is being computed in calloc() and other memory allocation
functions.
   For example, the following program fragment may lead to vulnerabilities:
   p = calloc(sizeof(element_t), count);

The calloc() library call accepts two arguments: the storage size of the element type and the number of elements. To compute
the size of the memory required, the storage size is multiplied by the number of elements. If the result cannot be represented in
an unsigned integer of type size_t, the allocation routine can appear to succeed but allocate an area that is too small. As a
result, the application can write beyond the end of the allocated buffer, resulting in a heap-based buffer overflow.
   A third real-world example was documented in NetBSD Security Advisory 2000-002. NetBSD 1.4.2 and prior versions
used integer range checks of the following form to validate incoming messages:
   if (off > len - sizeof(type-name)) goto error;

where both off and len are declared as signed int. Because the sizeof operator, as defined by the C Standard, returns an
unsigned integer type (size_t), the integer conversion rules require that len - sizeof(type-name) be computed as an unsigned
value on implementations where the width of signed int is the same as the width of size_t. If len is less than the value
returned by the sizeof operator, the subtraction operation wraps and yields a large positive value. As a result, the options-
processing code may continue on to overwrite 4 bytes of memory near the packet buffer with one of its IP addresses.
   An alternative form of the integer range check that eliminates this problem can be written as follows:
   if ((off + sizeof(type-name)) > len)         goto error;

The programmer still must ensure that the addition operation does not result in wraparound by guaranteeing that the value of
off is within a defined range. Both off and len should also be declared as size_t in this example to eliminate potential
conversion errors.
   Not all unsigned integer wrapping is a security flaw. The well-defined modulo property of unsigned integer arithmetic has
often been intentionally used, for example, in hashing algorithms and in the example implementation of rand() in the C
Standard.
Conversion and Truncation Errors
Conversion Errors
The following function contains a security flaw resulting from a conversion error:
   1    void initialize_array(int size) {
   2      if (size < MAX_ARRAY_SIZE) {
   3        array = malloc(size);
   4        /* initialize array */
   5      } else {
   6        /* handle error */
   7      }
   8    }
In this example, the initialize_array() function allocates memory for array and initializes its contents. A check is made to
avoid initializing array if the actual size argument is too large. However, if size is negative, this check will pass, and
malloc() will be passed a negative size. Because malloc() takes a size_t argument, size is converted to a large unsigned
number. When a signed integer type is converted to an unsigned integer type, the width (2N) of the new type is repeatedly
added or subtracted to bring the result into the representable range. Consequently, this conversion could result in a value larger
than MAX_ARRAY_SIZE. This error can be eliminated by declaring size as size_t and not int.
Truncation Errors
The following program contains a buffer overflow vulnerability that results from an integer truncation error:
   1   int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
   2     unsigned short int total;
   3     total = strlen(argv[1]) + strlen(argv[2]) + 1;
   4     char *buff = (char *)malloc(total);
   5     strcpy(buff, argv[1]);
   6     strcat(buff, argv[2]);
   7     /* ... */
   8   }

The program accepts two string arguments and calculates their combined length (plus an extra byte for the terminating null
character). The program allocates enough memory to store the concatenated strings. The first string argument is copied into the
buffer, and the second argument is concatenated to the end of the first argument.
   At first glance, you wouldn’t expect a vulnerability to exist because the memory is dynamically allocated as required to
contain the two strings. However, an attacker can supply arguments such that the sum of the lengths of these strings cannot be
represented by the unsigned short integer total. As a result, the value is reduced modulo the number that is 1 greater than the
largest value that can be represented by the resulting type. For example, if the first string argument has a length of 65,500
characters and the second string argument has a length of 36 characters, the sum of the two lengths + 1 is 65,537. The strlen()
function returns a result of the unsigned integer type size_t. Variables of type size_t are guaranteed to be of sufficient
precision to represent the size of an object. For most implementations, the width of size_t is greater than the width of unsigned
short, meaning a demotion is required.
   Assuming, for example, 16-bit short integers, the result of the assignment on line 3 is (65,500 + 37) % 65,536 = 1. The
malloc() call successfully allocates the requested byte, and the strcpy() and strcat() invocations result in buffer overflow.
   The following char_arr_dup() function also shows how a truncation error may lead to a vulnerability:
   1   char *char_arr_dup(char *s, long size) {
   2   unsigned short bufSize = size;
   3   char *buf = (char *)malloc(bufSize);
   4   if (buf) {
   5     memcpy(buf, s, size);
   6     return buf;
   7   }
   8   return NULL;

   The char_arr_dup() function is similar to the POSIX strdup() function in that it allocates storage for a character array of
sufficient size to make an exact copy of the character array referenced by s. The only difference is that the char_arr_dup()
function accepts a character array and not a null-terminated byte string, so it is also necessary to provide an additional
argument that specifies the length of the array.
   The formal parameter size is declared long and used as an argument to memcpy(). The size parameter is also used to
initialize bufSize on line 2, which in turn is used to allocate memory for buf on line 3.
   At first glance, this function appears to be immune to a buffer overflow because the size of the destination buffer for
memcpy() is dynamically allocated. But the problem is that size is temporarily stored in the unsigned short bufSize. For
implementations in which LONG_MAX > USHRT_MAX, a truncation error will occur on line 2 for values of size greater than
USHRT_MAX. This would be only an error, not a vulnerability, if bufSize were used for the calls to both malloc() and memcpy().
However, because bufSize is used to allocate the size of the buffer and cbBuf is used as the size on the call to memcpy(), a
buffer overflow is possible.
   Note that some compilers will diagnose the truncation on line 2 at higher warning levels.
Nonexceptional Integer Logic Errors
Many exploitable software flaws do not require an exceptional condition to occur but are simply a result of poorly written
code. The following function contains a security flaw caused by using a signed integer as an index variable:
   01    int *table = NULL;
   02    int insert_in_table(int pos, int value) {
   03      if (!table) {
   04        table = (int *)malloc(sizeof(int) * 100);
   05      }
   06      if (pos > 99) {
   07        return -1;
   08      }
   09      table[pos] = value;
   10      return 0;
   11    }

  The insert_in_table function inserts a value at position pos in an array of integers. Storage for the array is allocated on the
heap on line 4 the first time the function is called. The range check on lines 6, 7, and 8 ensures that pos is not greater than 99.
The value is inserted into the array at the specified position on line 9.
  Although no exceptional condition can occur, a vulnerability results from the lack of range checking of pos. Because pos is
declared as a signed integer, both positive and negative values can be passed to the function. An out-of-range positive value
would be caught on line 6, but a negative value would not.
  The following assignment statement from line 9:
   table[pos] = value;

is equivalent to
   (table + (pos * sizeof(int))) = value;

   If pos is negative, value will be written to a location pos * sizeof(int) bytes before the start of the actual buffer. This is
considered an arbitrary write condition and is a common source of vulnerabilities. This security flaw could be eliminated by
declaring the formal argument pos as an unsigned integer type (such as size_t) or by checking both the upper and lower bounds
as part of the range check.
5.6. Mitigation Strategies
Mitigations are methods, techniques, processes, tools, or runtime libraries that can prevent or limit exploits against
vulnerabilities. At the source code level, a mitigation may involve replacing an unbounded string copy operation with a
bounded one. At a system or network level, a mitigation may involve turning off a port or filtering traffic to prevent an attacker
from accessing a vulnerability. This section discusses mitigation strategies for preventing or limiting vulnerabilities that result
from integer errors.
   As we have seen, integer vulnerabilities result from integer type range errors. For example, integer overflows occur when
integer operations generate a value that is out of range for a particular integer type. Truncation errors occur when a value is
stored in a type that is too small to represent the result. Conversions, particularly those resulting from assignment or casts, can
result in values that are out of the range of the resulting type. Even the logic errors described in this chapter are the result of
improper range checking.
   Because all integer vulnerabilities are type range errors, type range checking—if properly applied—can eliminate all
integer vulnerabilities. Languages such as Pascal and Ada allow range restrictions to be applied to any scalar type to form
subtypes. Ada, for example, allows range restrictions to be declared on derived types using the range keyword:
   type day is new INTEGER range 1..31;

The range restrictions are then enforced by the language runtime. The C programming language, however, lacks a similar
mechanism, and ranged integer types are not likely to become part of the C Standard. Fortunately, some avoidance strategies
can be used to reduce or eliminate the risk from integer type range errors.
Integer Type Selection
The first step in developing secure code is to select the appropriate data types. An integer type provides a model of a finite
subset of the mathematical set of integers. Select integer types that can represent the range of possible runtime values, and then
ensure that these ranges are not exceeded. Unsigned integer values should be used to represent integer values that can never be
negative, and signed integer values should be used for values that can become negative. In general, you should use the smallest
signed or unsigned type that can fully represent the range of possible values for any given variable to conserve memory. When
memory consumption is not an issue, you may decide to declare variables as signed int or unsigned int to minimize potential
conversion errors.
  Say, for example, that you need to represent the size of an object as an integer. You could represent the size of the object as a
short int, as in the following declaration:

   short total = strlen(argv[1])+ 1;

However, this is suboptimal for several reasons. First, sizes are never negative, so there is no need to use a signed integer
type. Doing so halves the range of possible values that can be represented. Second, a short integer type may not have an
adequate range of possible object sizes. You may remember that the section “Other Integer Types” describes the unsigned
size_t type, which was introduced by the C standards committee to represent object sizes. Variables of type size_t are
guaranteed to be precise enough to represent the size of an object, as in the following example:
   size_t total = strlen(argv[1])+ 1;

The limit of size_t is specified by the SIZE_MAX macro.
  ISO/IEC TR 24731-1-2007 and C11 Annex K introduce a new type, rsize_t, defined to be size_t but explicitly used to
hold the size of a single object:
   rsize_t total = strlen(argv[1])+ 1;

Functions that accept parameters of type rsize_t diagnose a constraint violation if the values of those parameters are greater
than RSIZE_MAX because extremely large sizes frequently indicate that an object’s size was calculated incorrectly. For example,
negative numbers appear as very large positive numbers when converted to an unsigned type like size_t. For those reasons, it
is sometimes beneficial to restrict the range of object sizes to detect errors. For machines with large address spaces, C11
recommends that RSIZE_MAX be defined as the smaller of the following, even if this limit is smaller than the size of some
legitimate, but very large, objects:
     • The size of the largest object supported
     • SIZE_MAX >> 1
   Any variable that is used to represent the size of an object, including integer values used as sizes, indices, loop counters, and
lengths, should be declared as rsize_t if available, or otherwise as size_t. (See The CERT C Secure Coding Standard
[Seacord 2008], “INT01-C. Use rsize_t or size_t for all integer values representing the size of an object.”) Let’s examine the
case where an integer variable is used as both a loop counter and an array index:
   1   char a[MAX_ARRAY_SIZE] = /* initialize */;
   2   size_t cnt = /* initialize */;
   3
   4   for (unsigned int i = cnt-2; i >= 0; i--) {
   5     a[i] += a[i+1];
   6   }

   In this case, the variable i is assigned a value in the range of 2 to MAX_ARRAY_SIZE + 1, and the loop is counted down from
high to low (sometimes called a counted minus loop). So, of course, this code is incorrect because it fails to consider that the
unsigned integer value will wrap around. Consequently, the value of i will never be less than 0, causing an infinite loop.
Changing the type of i to signed int solves the problem. However, if we declare i as signed int in this loop, we have other
problems:
   1   for (int i = cnt-2; i >= 0; i--) {
   2     a[i] += a[i+1];
   3   }

   It is common that SIZE_MAX > INT_MAX. For example, on the x86-32 architecture, int is a signed 32-bit value, and size_t is
an unsigned 32-bit value. This means that actual objects can be larger than INT_MAX, and consequently cnt-2 can also be larger
than INT_MAX. In this case, after cnt-2 is converted to signed int because of the assignment to i, the size is represented as a
(possibly large) negative value. Using this negative value as an index for array a[] could result in a write outside the bounds of
the array and an exploitable vulnerability. However, in this case, the controlling expression of the for loop evaluates to 0, and
the loop terminates without changing the contents of the array.
   The correct solution is to declare i to be of type size_t, as in the following example:
   1   for (size_t i = cnt-2; i != SIZE_MAX; i--) {
   2     a[i] += a[i+1];
   3   }

  Although i wraps in this example, because size_t is an unsigned type, this behavior is well defined by the standard to be
modulo.
Abstract Data Types
One way to provide better type checking is to provide better types. Using an unsigned type, for example, can guarantee that a
variable does not contain a negative value. However, this solution does not prevent range errors.
   Data abstractions can support data ranges in a way that standard and extended integer types cannot. Data abstractions are
possible in C, although C++ provides more support. For example, a variable used to store the temperature of water in liquid
form using the Fahrenheit scale could be declared as follows:
   unsigned char waterTemperature;

   Using waterTemperature to represent an unsigned 8-bit value from 1 to 255 is sufficient: water ranges from 32 degrees
Fahrenheit (freezing) to 212 degrees Fahrenheit (the boiling point). However, this type does not prevent overflow, and it also
allows for invalid values (that is, 1–31 and 213–255).
   It is possible to create a new typedef for this type:
   typedef unsigned char watertemp_t;

However, a typedef never creates a new type, only an alias for an existing type.
   Consequently, the true type of something declared watertemp_t is unsigned char, so it matches exactly (it is more than just
compatible). A compiler should never complain if you use an unsigned char instead of a watertemp_t; it is also unlikely that a
static analysis tool would complain, although it is possible. Consequently, the two main benefits to typedefs are readability
and portability. The size_t type is a good example of using a typedef for portability.
   One solution is to create an abstract type in which waterTemperature is private and cannot be directly accessed by the user.
A user of this data abstraction can access, update, or operate on this value only through public method calls. These methods
must provide type safety by ensuring that the value of waterTemperature does not leave the valid range. If this is done
properly, there is no possibility of an integer type range error occurring.
   This data abstraction is easy to write in C++ and C. A C programmer could specify create() and destroy() methods instead
of constructors and destructors but would not be able to redefine operators. Inheritance and other features of C++ are not
required to create usable data abstractions. The CERT C Secure Coding Standard [Seacord 2008], “DCL12-C. Implement
abstract data types using opaque types,” describes creating abstract data types using private (opaque) data types and
information hiding.
Arbitrary-Precision Arithmetic
Arbitrary-precision arithmetic effectively provides a new integer type whose width is limited only by the available memory of
the host system. Many arbitrary-precision arithmetic packages are available, primarily for scientific computing. However, they
can also solve the problem of integer type range errors, which result from a lack of precision in the representation.
GNU Multiple-Precision Arithmetic Library (GMP)
GMP is a portable library written in C for arbitrary-precision arithmetic on integers, rational numbers, and floating-point
numbers. It was designed to provide the fastest possible arithmetic for applications that require higher precision than what is
directly supported by the basic C types.
   GMP emphasizes speed over simplicity and elegance. It uses sophisticated algorithms, full words as the basic arithmetic
type, and carefully optimized assembly code.
Java BigInteger
Newer versions of the Java Development Kit (JDK) contain a BigInteger class in the java.math package. It provides
arbitrary-precision integers as well as analogs to all of Java’s primitive integer operators. While this does little for C
programmers, it does illustrate that the concept is not entirely foreign to language designers.
C Language Solution
A language solution to prevent integer arithmetic overflow could be accomplished by adding arbitrary-precision integers to the
type system of a compiler. The advantages of a language solution over a library solution include the following:
     • Adding a language solution to existing code could be as easy as recompiling and testing.
     • Reading and understanding code would be easier (no third-party library functions peppered throughout the code to try to
       learn and understand).
       • The potential for the compiler to optimize it would be present (but not a requirement).
Range Checking
The burden for integer range checking in C is mostly left to the programmer. Integers used as array indices should be range-
checked unless the logic ensures the absence of out-of-bound memory accesses.
   Each integer expression in C has a well-known resulting type. As we have seen, wrapping, overflow, and conversions can
all lead to results that are out of range for that type. Providing range checks for all operations that may result in range errors
can be problematic because a typical program can have many, many such operations. Checking all of them could result in
software that is bloated and difficult to read, executes slowly, and uses more memory.
   The CERT C Secure Coding Standard [Seacord 2008] has several rules to prevent range errors:
       INT30-C. Ensure that unsigned integer operations do not wrap.
       INT31-C. Ensure that integer conversions do not result in lost or misinterpreted data.
       INT32-C. Ensure that operations on signed integers do not result in overflow.
These rules do not require that all potential range errors be eliminated. Range errors resulting in integer values that are used in
allocating or accessing memory are more likely to result in a security vulnerability than are integers used for other purposes.
For example, INT30-C requires that integer values not be allowed to wrap if they are used in any of the following ways:
     • In any pointer arithmetic, including array indexing
     • As a length or size of an object (for example, the size of a variable-length array)
     • As the bound of access to an array (for example, a loop counter)
     • In function arguments of type size_t or rsize_t (for example, as an argument to a memory allocation function)
     • In security-critical code
   The following function, for example, accepts two arguments specifying the size of a given structure and the number of
structures to allocate. These two values are then multiplied to determine what size memory to allocate. If these two values can
be influenced by an attacker, the multiplication operation could easily wrap around, resulting in a too-small allocation.
   1     void* CreateStructs(size_t StructSize, size_t HowMany) {
   2       return malloc(StructSize * HowMany);
   3     }

   It is less critical to provide range checking in cases where there is no possibility of a range error occurring. For example, it
is not necessary to range-check the postincrement of i in the following example because the logic guarantees that no range
errors may occur and that the array access will never be out of bounds:

   1     /* . . . */
   2     char a[RSIZE_MAX];
   3     for (rsize_t i = 0; i < RSIZE_MAX; i++) {
   4       a[i] = '\0';
   5     }
   6     /* . . . */

   Wraparound can result in data integrity issues, for example, if a malicious user violates program invariants in state data. If
the data is used only by the malicious user, there is no need to guarantee data integrity, although a well-intentioned user who
accidentally provides an out-of-range value might appreciate the error being detected and reported.
   Signed integer overflow is more problematic because it is undefined behavior and may result in a trap (for example, a
division error on x86-32). It is important to find and eliminate cases of signed integer overflow that may result in a trap (unless
traps are caught and handled). When signed integer overflows do not result in a trap, they should be treated in a consistent
manner as unsigned integer values that may wrap.
   One problem with trapping overflow is fussy overflows, which are overflows in intermediate computations that do not affect
the resulting value. For example, on two’s complement architectures, the following code:
   int x = /* nondeterministic value */;
   x = x + 100 – 1000;

overflows for values of x > INT_MAX - 100 but overflows back into a representable range during the subsequent subtraction,
resulting in a correct as-if infinitely ranged integer value. This expression will also overflow for values of x < INT_MIN + 900.
Most compilers will perform constant folding to simplify the preceding expression to x – 900, eliminating the possibility of a
fussy overflow. However, in some situations, this is not possible; for example:
   1    int x = /* nondeterministic value */;
   2    int y = /* nondeterministic value */;
   3    x = x + 100 – y;

Because this expression cannot be optimized, a fussy overflow may result in a trap, and a potentially successful operation may
be converted into an error condition.
   One way to limit the number of tests that need to be performed is to restrict the input of integer values to ranges that could
never result in an out-of-range integer value. All external inputs should be evaluated to determine whether there are
identifiable upper and lower bounds. If so, these limits should be enforced by the interface. Anything that can be done to limit
the input of excessively large or small integer values will help prevent range errors. Furthermore, it is easier to correct errors
discovered by range-checking inputs than it is to trace overflows and other range errors back to faulty inputs.
   Range checks can be accomplished through a variety of mechanisms:
     • Precondition or postcondition tests that are added to the existing logic
     • Secure integer operations that are packaged into reusable libraries
     • Compilers that can be used to automatically insert range checks
Each of these approaches is examined in the following sections.
Precondition and Postcondition Testing
One approach to eliminating integer exceptional conditions is to test the values of the operands before an operation to prevent
overflow and wrapping from occurring. This testing is especially important for signed integer overflow, which is undefined
behavior and may result in a trap on some architectures (for example, a division error on x86-32). The complexity of these
tests varies significantly.
   A precondition test for wrapping when adding two unsigned integers is relatively simple:
   1    unsigned int ui1, ui2, usum;
   2    /* Initialize ui1 and ui2 */
   3    if (UINT_MAX - ui1 < ui2) {
   4      /* handle error condition */
   5    }
   6    else {
   7      usum = ui1 + ui2;
   8    }

  A strictly conforming test to ensure that a signed multiplication operation does not result in an overflow is significantly more
involved:
   01    signed int si1, si2, result;
   02    /* Initialize si1 and si2 */
   03    if (si1 > 0) {
   04      if (si2 > 0) {
   05        if (si1 > (INT_MAX / si2)) {
   06           /* handle error condition */
   07        }
   08      }
   09      else {
   10        if (si2 < (INT_MIN / si1)) {
   11           /* handle error condition */
   12        }
   13      }
   14    }
   15    else {
   16      if (si2 > 0) {
   17        if (si1 < (INT_MIN / si2)) {
   18           /* handle error condition */
   19        }
   20      }
   21      else {
   22        if ((si1!=0) && (si2<(INT_MAX/si1))) {
   23           /* handle error condition */
   24        }
   25      }
   26    }
   27    result = si1 * si2;

   Similar examples of precondition testing are shown in The CERT C Secure Coding Standard [Seacord 2008], “INT30-C.
Ensure that unsigned integer operations do not wrap,” “INT31-C. Ensure that integer conversions do not result in lost or
misinterpreted data,” and “INT32-C. Ensure that operations on signed integers do not result in overflow.”
   Postcondition tests can be used to detect unsigned integer wrapping, for example, because these operations are well defined
as having modulo behavior. The following test can be performed to ensure that the result of the unsigned addition operation did
not wrap:
   1    unsigned int ui1, ui2, usum;
   2
   3    /* Initialize ui1 and ui2 */
   4
   5    usum = ui1 + ui2;
   6    if (usum < ui1) {
   7       /* handle error condition */
   8    }

   Detecting range errors in this manner can be relatively expensive, especially if the code must be strictly conforming.
Frequently, these checks must be in place before suspect system calls that may or may not perform similar checks before
performing integral operations. Redundant testing by the caller and by the called is a style of defensive programming that has
been largely discredited within the C and C++ community. The usual discipline in C and C++ is to require validation only on
one side of each interface.
   Furthermore, branches can be expensive on modern hardware, so programmers and implementers work hard to keep
branches out of inner loops. This expense argues against requiring the application programmer to pretest all arithmetic values
to prevent rare occurrences such as overflow. Preventing runtime overflow by program logic is sometimes easy, sometimes
complicated, and sometimes extremely difficult. Clearly, some overflow occurrences can be diagnosed in advance by static
analysis methods. But no matter how good this analysis is, some code sequences still cannot be detected before runtime. In
most cases, the resulting code is much less efficient than what a compiler could generate to detect overflow.
Secure Integer Libraries
Secure integer libraries can be used to provide secure integer operations that either succeed or report an error. Code must be
specifically developed to invoke secure integer functions rather than rely on built-in operators. This can be costly, particularly
when securing existing code. It does have the potential advantage that calls to secure integer library functions can be inserted
only where required.
  Michael Howard has written parts of a safe integer library that detects integer overflow conditions using architecture-
specific mechanisms [Howard 2003a]. The Uadd() function adds two arguments of type size_t on the x86-32 architecture:
   01    bool UAdd(size_t a, size_t b, size_t *r) {
   02      __asm {
   03         mov eax, dword ptr [a]
   04         add eax, dword ptr [b]
   05         mov ecx, dword ptr [r]
   06         mov dword ptr [ecx], eax
   07         jc short j1
   08         mov al, 1 // 1 is success
   09         jmp short j2
   10    j1:
   11         xor al, al // 0 is failure
   12    j2:
   13      };
   14    }

  The use of embedded Intel assembly instructions prevents porting to other architectures. This particular function is not even
portable to x86-64 because it assumes size_t is implemented as a dword (32-bit) value.
  The following short program that calculates the combined length of the two strings is performed using the UAdd() call with
appropriate checks for error conditions. Even adding 1 to the sum can result in an overflow, and consequently both addition
operations need to be checked.
   01   int main(int argc, char *const *argv) {
   02     unsigned int total;
   03     if (UAdd(strlen(argv[1]), 1, &total) &&
   04         UAdd(total, strlen(argv[2]), &total)) {
   05       char *buff = (char *)malloc(total);
   06       strcpy(buff, argv[1]);
   07       strcat(buff, argv[2]);
   08     else {
   09       abort();
   10     }
   11   }

   The Howard approach can be used in C programs but has a number of issues. The use of embedded Intel assembly
instructions can interfere with optimizations, adding significant overhead to integer operations as well as preventing porting to
other architectures. Both of these problems can be addressed by replacing the assembly instructions with high-performance
algorithms such as the ones defined by Henry S. Warren in the book Hacker’s Delight [Warren 2003]. The library also has an
awkward interface, which can be partially addressed by returning the result of the arithmetic operation and replacing the
status-reporting mechanism with the runtime-constraint-handling mechanisms defined by ISO/IEC TR 24731-1 and C11.
However, without operator overriding, it is necessary to nest function calls to replace normal inline arithmetic operations.
Furthermore, there is no good solution for adding small integer types that will take advantage of integer promotions to
eliminate overflows from intermediate operations. This problem alone has the potential to change working programs into
programs that result in range errors.
Overflow Detection
The C Standard defines the <fenv.h> header to support the floating-point exception status flags and directed-rounding control
modes required by IEC 60559 and similar floating-point state information. This support includes the ability to determine which
floating-point exception flags are set.
   A potential solution to handling integer exceptions in C is to provide an inquiry function (just as C provides for floating-
point) that interrogates status flags being maintained by the (compiler-specific) assembler code that performs the various
integer operations. If the inquiry function is called after an integral operation and returns a “no overflow” status, the value is
reliably represented correctly.
   At the level of assembler code, the cost of detecting overflow is zero or nearly zero. Many architectures do not even have an
instruction for “add two numbers but do not set the overflow or carry bit”; the detection occurs for free whether it is desired or
not. But only the specific compiler code generator knows what to do with those status flags.
   These inquiry functions may be defined, for example, by translating the <fenv.h> header into an equivalent <ienv.h> header
that provides access to the integer exception environment. This header would support the integer exception status flags and
similar integer exception state information.
   However, anything that can be performed by an <ienv.h> interface could be performed better by the compiler. For example,
the compiler may choose a single, cumulative integer exception flag in some cases and one flag per variable in others,
depending on what is most efficient in terms of speed and storage for the particular expressions involved. Additionally, the
concept of a runtime-constraint handler did not exist until the publication of ISO/IEC TR 24731-1. Consequently, when
designing <fenv.h>, the C standards committee defined an interface that put the entire burden on the programmer.
   Floating-point code is different from integer code in that it includes concepts such as rounding mode, which need not be
considered for integers. Additionally, floating-point has a specific value, NaN (Not a Number), which indicates that an
unrepresentable value was generated by an expression. Sometimes floating-point programmers want to terminate a computation
when a NaN is generated; at other times, they want to print out the NaN because its existence conveys valuable information
(and one NaN might occur in the middle of an array being printed out while the rest of the values are valid results). Because of
the combination of NaNs and the lack of runtime-constraint handlers, the programmer needed to be given more control.
   In general, there is no NaI (Not an Integer) value, so there is no requirement to preserve such a value to allow it to be
printed out. Therefore, the programmer does not need fine control over whether an integer runtime-constraint handler gets
called after each operation. Without this requirement, it is preferable to keep the code simple and let the compiler do the work,
which it can generally do more reliably and efficiently than individual application programmers.
Compiler-Generated Runtime Checks
Microsoft Visual Studio Runtime Error Checks
Visual Studio 2010 and older versions include native runtime checks enabled by the /RTCc compiler flag that detects
assignments that result in lost data. This option will result in a runtime error whenever an assignment results in data loss,
including casts to smaller data types:
   1   int value = /* ... */;
   2   unsigned char ch;
   3   ch = (unsigned char)value;

Use a mask to cast into a smaller type and deliberately clear the high-order bits:
   ch = (unsigned char)(value & 0xFF);

   Visual Studio 2010 also includes a runtime_checks pragma that disables or restores native runtime checks but does not
include flags for catching other runtime errors such as overflows.
   Unfortunately, runtime error checks do not work in a release (optimized) build.
The GCC –ftrapv Flag
GCC provides an -ftrapv compiler option that offers limited support for detecting integer overflows at runtime. The GCC
runtime system generates traps for signed overflow on addition, subtraction, and multiplication operations for programs
compiled with the -ftrapv flag. This trapping is accomplished by invoking existing, portable library functions that test an
operation’s postconditions and call the C library abort() function when results indicate that an integer error has occurred. For
example, the following function from the GCC runtime system is used to detect overflows resulting from the addition of signed
16-bit integers:
   1   Wtype __addvsi3(Wtype a, Wtype b) {
   2     const Wtype w = a + b;
   3     if (b >= 0 ? w < a : w > a)
   4       abort ();
   5       return w;
   6     }
   7   }

   The two operands are added, and the result is compared to the operands to determine whether an overflow condition has
occurred. For __addvsi3(), if b is nonnegative and w < a, an overflow has occurred and abort() is called. Similarly, abort()
is called if b is negative and w > a.
   The –ftrapv option is known to have substantial problems. The __addvsi3() function requires a function call and
conditional branching, which can be expensive on modern hardware. An alternative implementation tests the processor
overflow condition code, but it requires assembly code and is nonportable. Furthermore, the GCC –ftrapv flag works for only
a limited subset of signed operations and always results in an abort() when a runtime overflow is detected. Discussions on
how to trap signed integer overflows in a reliable and maintainable manner are ongoing within the GCC community.
Verifiably In-Range Operations
Verifiably in-range operations are often preferable to treating out-of-range values as an error condition because the handling of
these errors has been shown to cause denial-of-service problems in actual applications (for example, when a program aborts).
The quintessential example of this incorrect handling is the failure of the Ariane 5 launcher, which resulted from an improperly
handled conversion error that caused the processor to be shut down.
   A program that detects an imminent integer overflow may either trap or produce an integer result that is within the range of
representable integers on that system. Some applications, particularly in embedded systems, are better handled by producing a
verifiably in-range result because it allows the computation to proceed, thereby avoiding a denial-of-service attack. However,
when continuing to produce an integer result in the face of overflow, the question of what integer result to return to the user
must be considered.
   The saturation and modwrap algorithms and the technique of restricted-range usage produce integer results that are always
within a defined range. This range is between the integer values MIN and MAX (inclusive), where MIN and MAX are two
representable integers and MIN is less than MAX.
Saturation Semantics
Assuming that the mathematical result of the computation is represented by result, Table 5.12 shows the actual value returned
to the user.

                                       Table 5.12. Value Returned to User by result
   In the C Standard, signed integer overflow produces undefined behavior, meaning that any behavior is permitted.
Consequently, producing a saturated MAX or MIN result is permissible. Providing saturation semantics for unsigned integers
would require a change in the standard. For both signed and unsigned integers, there is currently no way of requiring a
saturated result. If a new standard pragma such as _Pragma(STDC SAT) were added to the C Standard, saturation semantics
could be provided without impacting existing code.
   Although saturation semantics may be suitable for some applications, it is not always appropriate in security-critical code
where abnormal integer values may indicate an attack.
Modwrap Semantics
In modwrap semantics (also called modulo arithmetic), integer values “wrap around.” That is, adding 1 to MAX produces MIN.
This is the defined behavior for unsigned integers in the C Standard. It is frequently the behavior of signed integers as well.
However, it is more sensible in many applications to use saturation semantics instead of modwrap semantics. For example, in
the computation of a size (using unsigned integers), it is often better for the size to stay at the maximum value in the event of
overflow rather than suddenly becoming a very small value.
Restricted Range Usage
Another tool for avoiding integer overflow is to use only half the range of signed integers. For example, when using an int, use
only the range [INT_MIN/2, INT_MAX/2]. This has been a trick of the trade in Fortran for some time, and now that optimizing C
compilers are becoming more sophisticated, it can be valuable in C.
   Consider subtraction. If the user types the expression a - b where both a and b are in the range [INT_MIN/2, INT_MAX/2],
then the result will be in the range [INT_MIN, INT_MAX] for a typical two’s complement machine.
   Now, if the user types a < b, there is often an implicit subtraction happening. On a machine without condition codes, the
compiler may simply issue a subtract instruction and check whether the result is negative. This is allowed because the
compiler is allowed to assume there is no overflow. If all explicitly user-generated values are kept in the range [INT_MIN/2,
INT_MAX/2], then comparisons will always work even if the compiler performs this optimization on such hardware.

As-If Infinitely Ranged Integer Model
To bring program behavior into greater agreement with the mathematical reasoning commonly used by programmers, the as-if
infinitely ranged (AIR) integer model guarantees that either integer values are equivalent to those obtained using infinitely
ranged integers or a runtime exception occurs. The resulting system is easier to analyze because undefined behaviors have been
defined and because the analyzer (either a tool or human) can safely assume that integer operations result in an AIR value or
trap. The model applies to both signed and unsigned integers, although either may be enabled or disabled per compilation unit
using compiler options.
   Traps are implemented by invoking a runtime-constraint handler or by using the existing hardware traps (such as divide by
zero) to invoke a runtime-constraint handler. These are the same runtime-constraint handlers used by the bounds-checking
interfaces defined in C11 Annex K. Runtime-constraint handlers can be customized to perform any action. They may, for
example, call abort(), log the error, or set a flag and continue (using the indeterminate value that was produced).
   In the AIR integer model, it is acceptable to delay catching an incorrectly represented value until an observation point is
reached or just before it causes a critical undefined behavior. An observation point occurs at an output, including a volatile
object access. The trap may occur any time between the overflow or truncation and the output or critical undefined behavior.
This model improves the ability of compilers to optimize, without sacrificing safety and security. AIR integers cannot
distinguish between erroneous overflows and “fussy” overflows, which may result in some false positives and require a
refactoring of otherwise correct code.
   Critical undefined behavior is a means of differentiating between behaviors that can perform an out-of-bounds store and
those that cannot. An out-of-bounds store is defined in C11 Annex L as “an (attempted) access (3.1) that, at runtime, for a given
computational state, would modify (or, for an object declared volatile, fetch) 1 or more bytes that lie outside the bounds
permitted by this Standard.” Specific critical undefined behaviors are also listed by C11 Annex L.
   In the AIR integer model, when an observation point is reached and before any critical undefined behavior occurs, any
integer value in the output is correctly represented (“as-if infinitely ranged”), provided that traps have not been disabled and
no traps have been raised. Optimizations are encouraged, provided the model is not violated.
  All integer operations are included in the model. Pointer arithmetic (which results in a pointer) is not part of the AIR integer
model but can be checked by Safe-Secure C/C++ methods.
Testing and Analysis
Static Analysis
Static analysis, by either the compiler or a static analyzer, can be used to detect potential integer range errors in source code.
Once identified, these problems can be corrected by either changing your program to use appropriate integer types or adding
logic to ensure that the range of possible values is within the range of the types you are using. Static analysis is prone to false
positives. False positives are programming constructs that are incorrectly diagnosed as erroneous by the compiler or analyzer.
It is difficult (or impossible) to provide analysis that is both sound (no false negatives) and complete (no false positives). For
this reason, static analysis cannot be counted on to identify all possible range errors. Some static analysis tools will try to
minimize false negatives, which frequently results in a high number of false positives. Other static analysis tools will try to
minimize false positives, which frequently results in a high number of false negatives. You may need to experiment with a
variety of compiler settings and static analyzers to determine what works best for you.
    Many static analysis tools are better at diagnosing potential conversion errors than overflow or wrapping. Two examples of
freely available open source static analysis tools are ROSE and Splint.
   ROSE
   ROSE is an open source compiler infrastructure to build source-to-source program transformation and analysis tools for
   large-scale Fortran 77/95/2003, C, C++, OpenMP, and UPC applications. The intended users of ROSE could be either
   experienced compiler researchers or library and tool developers who may have minimal compiler experience. ROSE is
   particularly well suited for building custom tools for static analysis, program optimization, arbitrary program
   transformation, domain-specific optimizations, complex loop optimizations, performance analysis, and cybersecurity.
   CERT has developed ROSE checkers to detect and report violations of The CERT C Secure Coding Guidelines. These
   checkers can be downloaded from CERT ROSE Checkers SourceForge project.2
   2. See http://sourceforge.net/projects/rosecheckers/

   Splint
   Splint is a tool for statically checking C programs for security vulnerabilities and coding mistakes. Splint uses lightweight
   static analysis to detect likely vulnerabilities in programs. Splint’s analyses are similar to those performed by a compiler
   and can detect a wide range of implementation flaws by exploiting annotations added to programs.
Microsoft Visual Studio
Visual Studio 2012 and older versions generate a warning (C4244) when an integer value is assigned to a smaller integer type:
    'conversion' conversion from 'type1' to 'type2', possible loss of data

  This is a level-4 warning if type1 is int and type2 is smaller than int. Otherwise, it is a level-3 warning (assigned a
value of type __int64 to a variable of type unsigned int).
  The following program fragment generates C4244:
    01    // C4244_level4.cpp
    02    // compile with: /W4
    03    int aa;
    04    unsigned short bb;
    05    int main(void) {
    06      int b = 0, c = 0;
    07      short a = b + c; // C4244
    08      bb += c; // C4244
    09      bb = bb + c; // C4244
    10    }

Testing
Checking the input values of integers is a good start, but it does not guarantee that subsequent operations on these integers will
not result in an overflow or other error condition. Unfortunately, testing does not provide any guarantees either; it is impossible
to cover all ranges of possible inputs on anything but the most trivial programs.
   If applied correctly, testing can increase confidence that the code is secure. For example, integer vulnerability tests should
include boundary conditions for all integer variables. If type range checks are inserted in the code, test that they function
correctly for upper and lower bounds. If boundary tests have not been included, test for minimum and maximum integer values
for the various integer sizes used. Use white-box testing to determine the types of these integer variables, or, in cases where
source code is not available, run tests with the various maximum and minimum values for each type.
   Most vulnerabilities resulting from integer exceptions manifest themselves as buffer overflows while manipulating null-
terminated byte strings in C and C++. Fang Yu, Tevfik Bultan, and Oscar Ibarra proposed an automata-based composite,
symbolic verification technique that combines string analysis with size analysis that focuses on statically identifying all
possible lengths of a string expression at a program point to eliminate buffer overflow errors [Yu 2009]. This technique
obviates the need for runtime checks, which is an advantage if the time to perform the checking can be favorably amortized
over the expected number of runtime invocations. Runtime property checking (as implemented by AIR integers) checks whether
a program execution satisfies a property. Active property checking extends runtime checking by determining if the property is
satisfied by all program executions that follow the same program path.
Source Code Audit
Source code should be audited or inspected for possible integer range errors. When auditing, check for the following:
    • Integer variables are typed correctly.
    • Integer type ranges are properly checked.
    • Input values are restricted to a valid range based on their intended use.
    • Integers that cannot assume negative values (for example, ones used for indices, sizes, or loop counters) are declared as
      unsigned and properly range-checked for upper and lower bounds.
5.7. Summary
Integer vulnerabilities result from lost or misrepresented data. The key to preventing these vulnerabilities is to understand the
nuances of integer behavior in digital systems and carefully apply this knowledge in the design and implementation of your
systems.
   Limiting integer inputs to a valid range can prevent the introduction of arbitrarily large or small numbers that can be used to
overflow integer types. Many integer inputs (for example, an integer representing a date or month) have well-defined ranges.
Other integers have reasonable upper and lower bounds. For example, because Jeanne Calment, believed by some to be the
world’s longest-lived person, died at age 122, it should be reasonable to limit an integer input representing someone’s age
from 0 to 150. For some integers, it can be difficult to establish an upper limit. Usability advocates would argue against
imposing arbitrary limits, introducing a trade-off between security and usability. However, if you accept arbitrarily large
integers, you must ensure that operations on these values do not cause integer errors that then result in integer vulnerabilities.
   Ensuring that operations on integers do not result in integer errors requires considerable care. Programming languages such
as Ada do a good job of enforcing integer type ranges, but if you are reading this book, you are probably not programming in
Ada. Ideally, C compilers will one day provide options to generate code to check for overflow conditions. But until that day, it
is a good idea to use one of the range checking mechanisms discussed in this chapter as a safety net.
   As always, it makes sense to apply available tools, processes, and techniques in the discovery and prevention of integer
vulnerabilities. Static analysis and source code auditing are useful for finding errors. Source code audits also provide a forum
for developers to discuss what does and does not constitute a security flaw and to consider possible solutions. Dynamic
analysis tools, combined with testing, can be used as part of a quality assurance process, particularly if boundary conditions
are properly evaluated.
   If integer type range checking is properly applied and safe integer operations are used for values that can pass out of range
(particularly because of external manipulation), it is possible to prevent vulnerabilities resulting from integer range errors.
