                                            Preface
_______________________________________________________________________________
The White Rabbit put on his spectacles,
"Where shall I begin, please your Majesty?" he asked.
"Begin at the beginning," the King said, very gravely,
"and go on till you come to the end: then stop."
     --Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

      This book is about "threads" and how to use them. “Thread” is just a name for a basic
software "thing" that can do work on a computer. A thread is smaller, faster, and more
maneuverable than a traditional process. In fact, once threads have been added to an operating
system, a "process" becomes just data--address space, files, and so forth--plus one or more threads
that do something with all that data.
      With threads, you can build applications that utilize system resources more efficiently, that
are more friendly to users, that run blazingly fast on multiprocessors, and that may even be easier
to maintain. To accomplish all this, you need only add some relatively simple function calls to
your code, adjust to a new way of thinking about programming, and leap over a few yawning
chasms. Reading this book carefully will, I hope, help you to accomplish all that without losing
your sense of humor.
      The threads model used in this book is commonly called "Pthreads," or "POSIX threads." Or,
more formally (since you haven't yet been properly introduced), the POSIX 1003. lc-1995
standard. I'll give you a few other names later--but for now, "Pthreads" is all you need to worry
about.
      Pthreads interfaces are included with Sun's Solaris; Hewlett-Packard's Tru64 UNIX,
OpenVMS, NonStop platform, and HP-UX; IBM's AIX, OS/400, and OS/390; SGI's IRIX; SCO's
UnixWare; Apple's Mac OS X; and Linux (any major distribution). There's even an Open Source
emulation package that allows you to use portable Pthread interfaces on Win32 systems.
      In the personal computer market, Microsoft's Win32 API (the primary programming interface
to both Windows NT and Windows 95) supports threaded programming, as does IBM's OS/2.
These threaded programming models are quite different from Pthreads, but the important first step
toward using them productively is understanding concurrency, synchronization, and scheduling.
The rest is (more or less) a matter of syntax and style, and an experienced thread programmer can
adapt to any of these models.
      The threaded model can be (and has been) applied with great success to a wide range of
programming problems. Here are just a few:
        Large scale, computationally intensive programs
        High-performance application programs and library code that can take advantage of
           multiprocessor systems
        Library code that can be used by threaded application programs
        Realtime application programs and library code
        Application programs and library code that perform I/O to slow external devices (such
           as networks and human beings).
Intended audience
      This book assumes that you are an experienced programmer, familiar with developing code
for an operating system in "the UNIX family" using the ANSI C language. I have tried not to
assume that you have any experience with threads or other forms of asynchronous programming.
The Introduction chapter provides a general overview of the terms and concepts you'll need for the
rest of the book. If you don't want to read the Introduction first, that's fine, but if you ever feel like
you're "missing something" you might try skipping back to get introduced.
      Along the way you'll find examples and simple analogies for everything. In the end I hope
that you'll be able to continue comfortably threading along on your own. Have fun, and "happy
threading."
About the author
     I have been involved in the Pthreads standard since it began, although I stayed at home for
the first few meetings. I was finally forced to spend a grueling week in the avalanche-proof
concrete bunker at the base of Snowbird ski resort in Utah; watching hard-working standards
representatives from around the world wax their skis. This was very distracting, because I had
expected a standards meeting to be a formal and stuffy environment. As a result of this
misunderstanding, I was forced to rent ski equipment instead of using my own.
     After the Pthreads standard went into balloting, I worked on additional thread
synchronization interfaces and multiprocessor issues with several POSIX working groups. I also
helped to define the Aspen threads extensions, which were fast tracked into X/Open XSH5.
     I have worked at Digital Equipment Corporation for (mumble, mumble) years, in various
locations throughout Massachusetts and New Hampshire. I was one of the creators of Digital’s
own threading architecture, and I designed (and implemented much of) the Pthreads interfaces on
Digital UNIX 4.0. I have been helping people develop and debug threaded code for more than
eight years.
     My unofficial motto is "Better Living Through Concurrency." Threads are not sliced bread,
but then, we're programmers, not bakers, so we do what we can.
Acknowledgments
      This is the part where I write the stuff that I'd like to see printed, and that my friends and
coworkers want to see. You probably don't care, and I promise not to be annoyed if you skip over
it but if you're curious, by all means read on.
      No project such as this book can truly be accomplished by a single person, despite the fact
that only one name appears on the cover. I could have written a book about threads without any
help--I know a great deal about threads, and I am at least reasonably competent at written
communication. However, the result would not have been this book, and this book is better than
that hypothetical work could possibly have been.
      Thanks first and foremost to my manager Jean Fullerton, who gave me the time and
encouragement to write this book on the job--and thanks to the rest of the DECthreads team who
kept things going while I wrote, including Brian Keane, Webb Scales, Jacqueline Berg, Richard
Love, Peter Portante, Brian Silver, Mark Simons, and Steve Johnson.
      Thanks to Garret Swart who, while he was with Digital at the Systems Research Center, got
us involved with POSIX. Thanks to Nawaf Bitar who worked with Garret to create, literally
overnight, the first draft of what became Pthreads, and who became POSIX thread evangelist
through the difficult period of getting everyone to understand just what the heck this threading
thing was all about anyway. Without Garret, and especially Nawaf, Pthreads might not exist, and
certainly wouldn't be as good as it is. (The lack of perfection is not their responsibility--that's the
way life is.)
     Thanks to everyone who contributed to the design of cma, Pthreads, UNIX98, and to the
users of DCE threads and DECthreads, for all the help, thought-provoking discourse, and assorted
skin-thickening exercises, including Andrew Birrell, Paul Borman, Bob Conti, Bill Cox, Jeff
Denham, Peter Gilbert, Rick Greer, Mike Grier, Kevin Harris, Ken Hobday, Mike Jones, Steve
Kleiman, Bob Knighten, Leslie Lamport, Doug Locke, Paula Long, Finnbarr P. Murphy, Bill
Noyce, Simon Patience, Harold Seigel, A1 Simons, Jim Woodward, and John Zolnowsky.
     Many thanks to all those who patiently reviewed the drafts of this book (and even to those
who didn't seem so patient at times). Brian Kernighan, Rich Stevens, Dave Brownell, Bill
Gallmeister, Ilan Ginzburg, Will Morse, Bryan O'Sullivan, Bob Robillard, Dave Ruddock, Bil
Lewis, and many others suggested or motivated improvements in structure and detail--and
provided additional skin-thickening exercises to keep me in shape. Devang Shah and Bart
Smaalders answered some Solaris questions, and Bryan O'Sullivan suggested what became the
"bailing programmers" analogy.
     Thanks to John Wait and Lana Langlois at Addison Wesley Longman, who waited with great
patience as a first-time writer struggled to balance writing a book with engineering and consulting
commitments. Thanks to Pamela Yee and Erin Sweeney, who managed the book's production
process, and to all the team (many of whose names I'll never know), who helped.
     Thanks to my wife, Anne Lederhos, and our daughters Amy and Alyssa, for all the things for
which any writers may thank their families, including support, tolerance, and just being there. And
thanks to Charles Dodgson (Lewis Carroll), who wrote extensively about threaded programming
(and nearly everything else) in his classic works Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, Through the
Looking-Glass, and The Hunting of the Snark.
                                                         Dave Butenhof
                                                         Digital Equipment Corporation
                                                         110 Spit Brook Road, ZKO2-3/Q18
                                                         Nashua, NH 03062
                                                         butenhof@zko.dec.com
                                                         December 1996
