2    Threads
"If seven maids with seven mops
Swept it for half a year,
Do you suppose," the Walrus said,
"That they could get it clear?"
"I doubt it," said the Carpenter,
And shed a bitter tear.
      --Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

     Threads are (and perhaps this will come as no surprise) the essential basis of the style of
programming that I am advocating. Although this chapter focuses on threads, you will never learn
everything you need to know about threads by simply skipping to this chapter and reading it.
Threads are a critical part of the landscape, but you can't do much with only threads. Nevertheless,
one must start somewhere, and here we are.
     Section 2.1 describes the programming aspects of creating and managing threads in your
program, that is, how to create threads, how they are represented in your program, and the most
basic things you can do to them once you've created them.
     Section 2.2 describes the life cycle of a thread, from creation through "recycling," taking you
through all the scheduling states threads can assume along the way.

2.1 Creating and using threads
“A loaf of bread," the Walrus said,
"Is what we chiefly need:
Pepper and vinegar besides
Are very good indeed--
Now, if you're ready, Oysters dear,
We can begin to feed."
     --Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

     pthread_t thread;
     int pthread_equal (pthread_t t1, pthread_t t2);
     int pthread_create (pthread_t *thread, const pthread_attr_t *attr, void *(*start)(void *),
                          void *arg);
     pthread_t pthread_self (void);
     int sched_yield (void);
     int pthread_exit (void *value_ptr);
     int pthread_detach (pthread_t thread);
     int pthread_join (pthread_t thread, void **value_ptr);

       The introduction covered some of the basics of what a thread is, and what it means to the
computer hardware. This section begins where the introduction left off. It explains how a thread is
represented in your program, what it means to your program, and some of the operations you can
perform on threads. If you haven't read the introduction, this would be a good time to skip back to
it. (I'll wait for you here.)
      Within your program a thread is represented by a thread identifier, of the opaque type
pthread_t. To create a thread, you must declare a variable of type pthread_t somewhere in your
program. If the identifier is needed only within a function, or if the function won't return until the
thread is done, you could declare the identifier with auto storage class. Most of the time, though,
the identifier will be stored in a shared (static or extern) variable, or in a structure allocated from
the heap.
      A Pthreads thread begins by calling some function that you provide. This "thread function"
should expect a single argument of type void *, and should return a value of the same type. You
create a thread by passing the thread function's address, and the argument value with which you
want the function to be called, to pthread_create.
      When you create a thread, pthread_create returns an identifier, in the pthread_t value referred
to by the thread argument, by which your code refers to the new thread. A thread can also get its
own identifier using the pthread_self function. There is no way to find a thread's identifier unless
either the creator or the thread itself stores the identifier somewhere. You need to have a thread's
identifier to do anything to the thread. If you'll need to know when a thread completes, for
example, you must keep the identifier somewhere.
      Pthreads provides the pthread_equal function to compare two thread identifiers. You can only
test for equality. It doesn't make any sense to ask whether one thread identifier is "greater than" or
"less than" another, because there is no ordering between threads. The pthread_equal function
returns a nonzero value if the thread identifiers refer to the same thread, and the value 0 if they do
not refer to the same thread.
      | The initial thread (main) is special.
      When a C program runs, it begins in a special function named main. In a threaded program,
this special stream of execution is called the "initial thread" or sometimes the "main thread." You
can do anything within the initial thread that you can do within any other thread. It can determine
its own thread identifier by calling pthread_self, for example, or terminate itself by calling
pthread_exit. If the initial thread stores its thread identifier somewhere accessible to another
thread, that thread can wait for the initial thread to terminate, or detach the initial thread.
      The initial thread is special because Pthreads retains traditional UNIX process behavior when
the function main returns; that is, the process terminates without allowing other threads to
complete. In general, you do not want to do this in a threaded program, but sometimes it can be
convenient. In many of the programs in this book, for example, threads are created that have no
effect on anything outside the process. It doesn't really matter what those threads are doing, then,
if the process goes away. When the process exits, those threads, all their states, and anything they
might accomplish, simply "evaporate"--there's no reason to clean up.
      | Detaching a thread that is still running doesn't affect the thread in any
      | way--it just informs the system that the thread's resources can be
      | reclaimed when the thread eventually terminates.
      Although "thread evaporation" is sometimes useful, most of the time your process will
outlive the individual threads you create. To be sure that resources used by terminated threads are
available to the process, you should always detach each thread you create when you're finished
with it. Threads that have terminated but are not detached may retain virtual memory, including
their stacks, as well as other system resources. Detaching a thread tells the system that you no
longer need that thread, and allows the system to reclaim the resources it has allocated to the
    thread.
          If you create a thread that you will never need to control, you can use an attribute to create
    the thread so that it is already detached. (We'll get to attributes later, in Section 5.2.3.) If you do
    not want to wait for a thread that you created, and you know that you will no longer need to
    control that thread, you can detach it at any time by calling pthread_detach. A thread may detach
    itself, or any other thread that knows its pthread_t identifier may detach it at any time. If you need
    to know a thread's return value, or if you need to know when a thread has completed, call
    pthread_join. The pthread_join function will block the caller until the thread you specify has
    terminated, and then, optionally, store the terminated thread's return value. Calling pthread_join
    detaches the specified thread automatically.
          As we've seen, threads within a process can execute different instructions, using different
    stacks, all at the same time. Although the threads execute independently of each other, they always
    share the same address space and file descriptors. The shared address space provides an important
    advantage of the threaded programming model by allowing threads to communicate efficiently.
          Some programs may create threads that perform unrelated activities, but most often a set of
    threads works together toward a common goal. For example, one set of threads may form an
    assembly line in which each performs some specific task on a shared data stream and then passes
    the data on to the next thread. A set of threads may form a work crew and divide independent parts
    of a common task. Or one "manager" thread may take control and divide work among a "crew" of
    worker threads. You can combine these models in a variety of ways; for example, a work crew
    might perform some complicated step in a pipeline, such as transforming a slice of an array.
          The following program, lifecycle.c, creates a thread. We'll refer to this simple example in the
    following sections about a thread's life cycle.
7-10      The thread function, thread_routine, returns a value to satisfy the standard thread function
    prototype. In this example the thread returns its argument, and the value is always NULL.
18-25 The program creates a thread by calling pthread_create, and then waits for it by calling
    pthread_join. You don't need to wait for a thread, but if you don't, you'll need to do something else
    to make sure the process runs until the thread completes. Returning from main will cause the
    process to terminate, along with all threads. You could, for example, code the main thread to
    terminate by calling pthread_exit, which would allow the process to continue until all threads have
    terminated.
26-29 When the join completes, the program checks the thread's return value, to be sure that the
    thread returned the value it was given. The program exits with 0 (success) if the value is NULL, or
    with 1 otherwise.
          It is a good idea for all thread functions to return something, even if it is simply NULL. If
    you omit the return statement, pthread_join will still return some value--whatever happens to be in
    the place where the thread's start function would have stored a return value (probably a register).

    lifecycle.c

         If the "joining" thread doesn't care about the return value, or if it knows that the "joinee" (the
    thread with which it is joining) didn't return a value, then it can pass NULL instead of &retval in
    the call to pthread_join. The joinee's return value will be ignored.
         When the call to pthread_join returns, the joinee has been detached and you can't join with it
again. In the rare cases where more than one thread might need to know when some particular
thread has terminated, the threads should wait on a condition variable instead of calling
pthread_join. The terminating thread would store its return value (or any other information) in
some known location, and broadcast the condition variable to wake all threads that might be
interested.

2.2 The life of a thread
Come, listen, my men, while I tell you again
The five unmistakable marks
By which you may know, wheresoever you go,
The warranted genuine Snarks.
     --Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark

     At any instant, a thread is in one of the four basic states described in Table 2.1. In
implementations, you may see additional "states" that distinguish between various reasons for
entering the four basic states. Digital UNIX, for example, represents these finer distinctions as
"substates," of which each state may have several. Whether they're called "substates" or additional
states, "terminated" might be divided into "exited" and "cancelled"; "blocked" might be broken up
into "blocked on condition variable," "blocked on mutex," "blocked in read," and so forth.

State           Meaning
Ready           The thread is able to run, but is waiting for a processor. It may have just started, or
                just been unblocked, or preempted by another thread.
Running         The thread is currently running; on a multiprocessor there may be more than one
                running thread in the process.
Blocked         The thread is not able to run because it is waiting for something; for example, it
                may be waiting for a condition variable, or waiting to lock a mutex, or waiting for
                an I/O operation to complete.
Terminated      The thread has terminated by returning from its start function, calling
                pthread_exit, or having been cancelled and completing all cleanup handlers. It
                was not detached, and has not yet been joined. Once it is detached or joined, it
                will be recycled.
                         TABLE 2.1 Thread states

     These finer distinctions can be important in debugging and analyzing threaded programs.
However, they do not add substantially to the basic understanding of thread scheduling, and we
will not deal with them here.
     Threads begin in the ready state. When the new thread runs it calls your specified thread start
function. It may be preempted by other threads, or block itself to wait for external events any
number of times. Eventually it completes and either returns from the thread start function or calls
the pthread_exit function. In either case it terminates. If the thread has been detached, it is
immediately recycled. (Doesn't that sound nicer than "destroyed"--and most systems reuse the
resources to make new threads.) Otherwise the thread remains in the terminated state until joined
or detached. Figure 2.1 shows the relationships between these thread states, and the events that
cause threads to move from one state to another.

2.2.1 Creation
     The "initial thread" of a process is created when the process is created. In a system that fully
supports threaded programming, there's probably no way to execute any code without a thread. A
thread is likely to be the only software context that includes the hardware state needed to execute
code: registers, program counter, stack pointer, and so forth.
     Additional threads are created by explicit calls. The primary way to create threads on a
Pthreads system is to call pthread_create. Threads may also be created when the process receives
a POSIX signal if the process signal notify mechanism is set to SIGEV_THREAD. Your system
may provide additional nonstandard mechanisms to create a thread.

                    FIGURE 2.1 Thread state transitions

     When a new thread is created, its state is ready. Depending on scheduling constraints, it may
remain in that state for a substantial period of time before executing. Section 5.5 contains more
information on thread scheduling. Going back to lifecycle.c, the thread running thread_routine
becomes ready during main's call to pthread_create, at line 18.
     The most important thing to remember about thread creation is that there is no
synchronization between the creating thread's return from pthread_create and the scheduling of
the new thread. That is, the thread may start before the creating thread returns. The thread may
even run to completion and terminate before pthread_create returns. Refer to Section 8.1.1 for
more information and warnings about what to expect when you create a thread.

2.2.2 Startup
      Once a thread has been created, it will eventually begin executing machine instructions. The
initial sequence of instructions will lead to the execution of the thread start function that you
specified to pthread_create. The thread start function is called with the argument value you
specified when you created the thread. In lifecycle.c, for example, the thread begins executing user
code at function thread_routine, with the formal parameter argument having a value of NULL.
      In the initial thread, the thread "start function" (main) is called from outside your program;
for example, many UNIX systems link your program with a file called crt0.o, which initializes the
process and then calls your main. This is a minor implementation distinction, but it is important to
remember because there are a few ways in which the initial thread is different. For one thing, main
is called with different arguments than a thread start function: the program's argument array (argc
and argv) instead of a single void* argument. For another thing, when a thread start function
returns, the thread terminates but other threads continue to run. When the function main returns in
the initial thread, the process will be terminated immediately. If you want to terminate the initial
thread while allowing other threads in the process to continue running, call pthread_exit instead of
returning from main.
      Another important difference to remember is that on most systems, the initial thread runs on
the default process stack, which can grow to a substantial size. “Thread" stacks may be much
more limited on some implementations, and the program will fail with a segmentation fault or bus
error if a thread overflows its stack.
2.2.3 Running and blocking
      Like us, threads usually can't stay awake their entire life. Most threads occasionally go to
sleep. A thread can go to sleep because it needs a resource that is not available (it becomes
"blocked") or because the system reassigned the processor on which it was running (it is
"preempted"). A thread spends most of its active life in three states: ready, running, and blocked.
      A thread is ready when it is first created, and whenever it is unblocked so that it is once again
eligible to run. Ready threads are waiting for a processor. Also, when a running thread is
preempted, for example, if it is timesliced (because it has run too long), the thread immediately
becomes ready.
      A thread becomes running when it was ready and a processor selects the thread for execution.
Usually this means that some other thread has blocked, or has been preempted by a timeslice--the
blocking (or preempted) thread saves its context and restores the context of the next ready thread
to replace itself. On a multiprocessor, however, a previously unused processor may execute a
readied thread without any other thread blocking.
      A thread becomes blocked when it attempts to lock a mutex that is currently locked, when it
waits on a condition variable, when it calls sigwait for a signal that is not currently pending, or
when it attempts an I/O operation that cannot be immediately completed. A thread may also
become blocked for other system operations, such as a page fault.
      When a thread is unblocked after a wait for some event, it is made ready again. It may
execute immediately, for example, if a processor is available. In lifecycle.c, the main thread blocks
at line 23, in pthread_join, to wait for the thread it created to run. If the thread had not already run
at this point, it would move from ready to running when main becomes blocked. As the thread
runs to completion and returns, the main thread will be unblocked--returning to the ready state.
When processor resources are available, either immediately or after the thread becomes terminated,
main will again become running, and complete.

2.2.4 Termination
       A thread usually terminates by returning from its start function (the one you pass to the
pthread_create function). The thread shown in lifecycle.c terminates by returning the value NULL,
for example. Threads that call pthread_exit or that are cancelled using pthread_cancel also
terminate after calling each cleanup handler that the thread registered by calling
pthread_cleanup_push and that hasn't yet been removed by calling pthread_cleanup_pop. Cleanup
handlers are discussed in Section 5.3.3.
       Threads may have private "thread-specific data" values (thread-specific data is discussed in
Section 5.4). If the thread has any non-NULL thread-specific data values, the associated destructor
functions for those keys (if any) are called.
       If the thread was already detached it moves immediately to the next section, recycling.
Otherwise, the thread becomes terminated. It will remain available for another thread to join with
it using pthread_join. This is analogous to a UNIX process that's terminated but hasn't yet been
"reaped" by a wait operation. Sometimes it is called a "zombie" because it still exists even though
it is "dead." A zombie may retain most or all of the system resources that it used when running, so
it is not a good idea to leave threads in this state for longer than necessary. Whenever you create a
thread with which you won't need to join, you should use the detachstate attribute to create it
"detached" (see Section 5.2.3).
       At a minimum, a terminated thread retains the identification (pthread_t value) and the void*
return value that was returned from the thread's start function or specified in a call to pthread_exit.
The only external difference between a thread that terminated "normally" by returning or calling
pthread_exit, and one that terminated through cancellation, is that a cancelled thread's return value
is always PTHREAD_CANCELLED. (This is why "cancelled" is not considered a distinct thread
state.)
       If any other thread is waiting to join with the terminating thread, that thread is awakened. It
will return from its call to pthread_join with the appropriate return value. Once pthread_join has
extracted the return value, the terminated thread is detached by pthread_join, and may be recycled
before the call to pthread_join returns. This means that, among other things, the returned value
should never be a stack address associated with the terminated thread's stack--the value at that
address could be overwritten by the time the caller could use it. In lifecycle.c, the main thread will
return from the pthread_join call at line 23 with the value NULL.
       | pthread_join is a convenience, not a rule.
       Even when you need a return value from a thread that you create, it is often at least as simple
to create the thread detached and devise your own customized return mechanism as it is to use
pthread_join. For example, if you pass information to a worker thread in some form of structure
that another thread can find later, you might have the worker thread simply place the result in that
same structure and broadcast a condition variable when done. The Pthreads context for the thread,
including the thread identifier, can then be recycled immediately when the thread is done, and you
still have the part you really need, the return value, where you can find it easily at any time.
       If pthread_join does exactly what you want, then by all means use it. But remember that it is
nothing more than a convenience for the simplest and most limited model of communicating a
thread's results. If it does not do exactly what you need, build your own return mechanism instead
of warping your design to fit the limitations of pthread_join.

2.2.5 Recycling
      If the thread was created with the detachstate attribute set to PTHREAD_CREATE_
DETACHED (see Section 5.2.3), or if the thread or some other thread has already called
pthread_detach for the thread's identifier, then the thread is immediately recycled when it becomes
terminated.
      If the thread has not been detached when it terminates, it remains in the terminated state until
the thread's pthread_t identifier is passed to pthread_detach or pthread_join. When either function
returns, the thread cannot be accessed again. In lifecycle.c, for example, the thread that had run
thread_routine will be recycled by the time the main thread returns from the pthread_join call at
line 23.
      Recycling releases any system or process resources that weren't released at termination. That
includes the storage used for the thread's return value, the stack, memory used to store register
state, and so forth. Some of these resources may have been released at termination; it is important
to remember that none of it should be accessed from any other thread after termination. For
example, if a thread passes a pointer to its stack storage to another thread through shared data, you
should treat that information as obsolete from the time the thread that owns the stack terminates.
