4    A few ways to use threads
"They were obliged to have him with them," the Mock Turtle said.
     "No wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise."
"Wouldn't it, really?" said Alice, in a tone of great surprise.
"Of course not," said the Mock Turtle. "Why, if a fish came to me,
     and told me he was going on a journey, I should say 'With what porpoise?'"
     --Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

     During the introduction to this book, I mentioned some of the ways you can structure a
threaded solution to a problem. There are infinite variations, but the primary models of threaded
programming are shown in Table 4.1.

Pipeline        Each thread repeatedly performs the same operation on a sequence of data sets,
                passing each result to another thread for the next step. This is also known as an
                "assembly line."
Work crew       Each thread performs an operation on its own data. Threads in a work crew may
                all perform the same operation, or each a separate operation, but they always
                proceed independently.
Client/server   A client "contracts" with an independent server for each job. Often the "contract"
                is anonymous--a request is made through some interface that queues the work
                item.
                    TABLE 4.1 Thread programming models

      All of these models can be combined in arbitrary ways and modified beyond all recognition
to fit individual situations. A step in a pipeline could involve requesting a service from a server
thread, and the server might use a work crew, and one or more workers in the crew might use a
pipeline. Or a parallel search "engine" might initiate several threads, each trying a different search
algorithm.

4.1 Pipeline
"I want a clean cup," interrupted the Hatter: "let's all move one place on."
He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare
     moved into the Dormouse's place, and Alice rather unwillingly took the
     place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any
     advantage from the change; and Alice was a good deal worse off than
     before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.
     --Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

     In pipelining, a stream of "data items" is processed serially by an ordered set of threads
(Figure 4.1). Each thread performs a specific operation on each item in sequence, passing the data
on to the next thread in the pipeline.
     For example, the data might be a scanned image, and thread A might process an image array,
thread B might search the processed data for a specific set of features, and thread C might collect
the serial stream of search results from thread B into a report. Or each thread might perform a
    single step in some sequence of modifications on the data.
          The following program, called pipe.c, shows the pieces of a simple pipeline program. Each
    thread in the pipeline increments its input value by 1 and passes it to the next thread. The main
    program reads a series of "command lines" from stdin. A command line is either a number, which
    is fed into the beginning of the pipeline, or the character "=," which causes the program to read the
    next result from the end of the pipeline and print it to stdout.

                         FIGURE 4.1 Pipelining

9-17     Each stage of a pipeline is represented by a variable of type stage_t. stage_t contains a mutex
    to synchronize access to the stage. The avail condition variable is used to signal a stage that data is
    ready for it to process, and each stage signals its own ready condition variable when it is ready for
    new data. The data member is the data passed from the previous stage, thread is the thread
    operating this stage, and next is a pointer to the following stage.
23-29 The pipe_t structure describes a pipeline. It provides pointers to the first and last stage of a
    pipeline. The first stage, head, represents the first thread in the pipeline. The last stage, tail, is a
    special stage_t that has no thread--it is a place to store the final result of the pipeline.

    pipe.c                                                                           part 1 definitions
         Part 2 shows pipe_send, a utility function used to start data along a pipeline, and also called
    by each stage to pass data to the next stage.
17-23 It begins by waiting on the specified pipeline stage's ready condition variable until it can
    accept new data.
28-30 Store the new data value, and then tell the stage that data is available.

    pipe.c                                                                              part 2 pipe_send

          Part 3 shows pipe_stage, the start function for each thread in the pipeline. The thread's
    argument is a pointer to its stage_t structure.
16-27 The thread loops forever, processing data. Because the mutex is locked outside the loop, the
    thread appears to have the pipeline stage's mutex locked all the time. However, it spends most of
    its time waiting for new data, on the avail condition variable. Remember that a thread
    automatically unlocks the mutex associated with a condition variable, while waiting on that
    condition variable. In reality, therefore, the thread spends most of its time with mutex unlocked.
22-26 When given data, the thread increases its own data value by one, and passes the result to the
    next stage. The thread then records that the stage no longer has data by clearing the data_ready
    flag, and signals the ready condition variable to wake any thread that might be waiting for this
    pipeline stage.

    pipe.c                                                                              part 3 pipe_stage

       Part 4 shows pipe_create, the function that creates a pipeline. It can create a pipeline of any
    number of stages, linking them together in a list.
18-34 For each stage, it allocates a new stage_t structure and initializes the members. Notice that
    one additional "stage" is allocated and initialized to hold the final result of the pipeline.
36-37 The link member of the final stage is set to NULL to terminate the list, and the pipeline's tail
     is set to point at the final stage. The tail pointer allows pipe_result to easily find the final product
     of the pipeline, which is stored into the final stage.
52-59 After all the stage data is initialized, pipe_create creates a thread for each stage. The extra
     "final stage" does not get a thread--the termination condition of the for loop is that the current
     stage's next link is not NULL, which means that it will not process the final stage.

    pipe.c                                                                               part 4 pipe_create

         Part 5 shows pipe_start and pipe_result. The pipe_start function pushes an item of data into
    the beginning of the pipeline and then returns immediately without waiting for a result. The
    pipe_result function allows the caller to wait for the final result, whenever the result might be
    needed.
9-22     The pipe_start function sends data to the first stage of the pipeline. The function increments a
    count of "active" items in the pipeline, which allows pipe_result to detect that there are no more
    active items to collect, and to return immediately instead of blocking. You would not always want
    a pipeline to behave this way--it makes sense for this example because a single thread alternately
    "feeds" and "reads" the pipeline, and the application would hang forever if the user inadvertently
    reads one more item than had been fed.
28-47 The pipe_result function first checks whether there is an active item in the pipeline. If not, it
    returns with a status of 0, after unlocking the pipeline mutex.
49-55 If there is another item in the pipeline, pipe_result locks the tail (final) stage, and waits for it
    to receive data. It copies the data and then resets the stage so it can receive the next item of data.
    Remember that the final stage does not have a thread, and cannot reset itself.

    pipe.c                                                               part 5    pipe_start,pipe_result

         Part 6 shows the main program that drives the pipeline. It creates a pipeline, and then loops
    reading lines from stdin. If the line is a single "=" character, it pulls a result from the pipeline and
    prints it. Otherwise, it converts the line to an integer value, which it feeds into the pipeline.

    pipe.c                                                                                    part 6 main

    4.2 Work crew
    The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates.
    "What are they doing?" Alice whispered to the Gryphon.
         "They ca'n't have anything to put down yet, before the trial's begun."
    "They're putting down their names," the Gryphon whispered in reply,
         "for fear they should forget them before the end of the trial."
         --Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

        In a work crew, data is processed independently by a set of threads (Figure 4.2). A "parallel
    decomposition" of a loop generally falls into this category. A set of threads may be created, for
    example, each directed to process some set of rows or columns of an array. A single set of data is
    split between the threads, and the result is a single (filtered) set of data. Because all the threads in
    the work crew, in this model, are performing the same operation on different data, it is often
    known as SIMD parallel processing, for "single instruction, multiple data." The original use of
    SIMD was in an entirely different form of parallelism, and doesn't literally apply to threads--but
    the concept is similar.
          The threads in a work crew don't have to use a SIMD model, though. They may perform
    entirely different operations on different data. The members of our work crew, for example, each
    remove work requests from a shared queue, and do whatever is required by that request. Each
    queued request packet could describe a variety of operations--but the common queue and “mission
    statement” (to process that queue) make them a "crew" rather than independent worker threads.
    This model can be compared to the original definition of MIMD parallel processing, "multiple
    instruction, multiple data."

                                    FIGURE 4.2 Work crew

          Section 7.2, by the way, shows the development of a more robust and general (and more
    complicated) “work queue manager” package. A “work crew” and a “work queue” are related in
    much the same way as "invariants" and “critical sections”--it depends on how you look at what's
    happening. A work crew is the set of threads that independently processes data, whereas a work
    queue is a mechanism by which your code may request that data be processed by anonymous and
    independent “agents." So in this section, we develop a "work crew," whereas in Section 7.2 we
    develop a more sophisticated “work queue." The focus differs, but the principle is the same.
          The following program, called crew.c, shows a simple work crew. Run the program with two
    arguments, a string, and a file path. The program will queue the file path to the work crew. A crew
    member will determine whether the file path is a file or a directory--if a file, it will search the file
    for the string; if a directory, it will use readdir_r to find all directories and regular files within the
    directory, and queue each entry as new work. Each file containing the search string will be
    reported on stdout.
          Part I shows the header files and definitions used by the program.
7         The symbol CREW_SIZE determines how many threads are created for each work crew.
13-17 Each item of work is described by a work_t structure. This structure has a pointer to the next
    work item (set to NULL to indicate the end of the list), a pointer to the file path described by the
    work item, and a pointer to the string for which the program is searching. As currently constructed,
    all work items point to the same search string.
23-27 Each member of a work crew has a worker_t structure. This structure contains the index of
    the crew member in the crew vector, the thread identifier of the crew member (thread), and a
    pointer to the crew_t structure (crew).
33-41 The crew_t structure describes the work crew state. It records the number of members in the
    work crew (crew_size) and an array of worker_t structures (crew). It also has a counter of how
    many work items remain to be processed (work_count) and a list of outstanding work items (first
    points to the earliest item, and last to the latest). Finally, it contains the various Pthreads
    synchronization objects: a mutex to control access, a condition variable (done) to wait for the
    work crew to finish a task, and a condition variable on which crew members wait to receive new
    work (go).
41-42 The allowed size of a file name and path name may vary depending on the file system to
    which the path leads. When a crew is started, the program calculates the allowable file name and
    path length for the specified file path by calling pathconf, and stores the values in path_max and
    name_max, respectively, for later use.

    crew.c                                                                                part 1 definitions

          Part 2 shows worker_routine, the start function for crew threads. The outer loop repeats
    processing until the thread is told to terminate.
22-26 This condition variable loop blocks each new crew member until work is made available.
40-43 POSIX is a little ambiguous about the actual size of the struct dirent type. The actual
    requirement for readdir_r is that you pass the address of a buffer large enough to contain a struct
    dirent with a name member of at least NAME_MAX bytes. To ensure that we have enough space,
    allocate a buffer the size of the system's struct dirent plus the maximum size necessary for a file
    name on the file system we're using. This may be bigger than necessary, but it surely won't be too
    small.
61-65 This wait is a little different. While the work list is empty, wait for more work. The crew
    members never terminate--once they're all done with the current assignment, they're ready for a
    new assignment. (This example doesn't take advantage of that capability--the process will
    terminate once the single search command has completed.)
73-76 Remove the first work item from the queue. If the queue becomes empty, also clear the
    pointer to the last entry, crew->last.
81-83 Unlock the work crew mutex, so that the bulk of the crew's work can proceed concurrently.
89        Determine what sort of file we've got in the work item's path string. We use lstat, which will
    return information for a symbolic link, rather than stat, which would return information for the file
    to which the link pointed. By not following symbolic links, we reduce the amount of work in this
    example, and, especially, avoid following links into other file systems where our name_max and
    path_max sizes may not be sufficient.
91-95 If the file is a link, report the name, but do nothing else with it. Note that each message
    includes the thread's work crew index (mine->index), so that you can easily see "concurrency at
    work" within the example.
96-165 If the file is a directory, open it with opendir. Find all entries in the directory by repeatedly
    calling readdir_r. Each directory entry is entered as a new work item.
166-206 If the file is a regular file, open it and read all text, looking for the search string. If we find it,
    write a message and exit the search loop.
207-218 If the file is of any other type, write a message attempting to identify the type.
232-252 Relock the work crew mutex, and report that another work item is done. If the count reaches
    0, then the crew has completed the assignment, and we broadcast to awaken any threads waiting to
    issue a new assignment. Note that the work count is decreased only after the work item is fully
    processed--the count will never reach 0 if any crew member is still busy (and might queue
    additional directory entries).

    crew.c                                                                     part 2 worker_routine
          Part 3 shows crew_create, the function used to create a new work crew. This simple example
    does not provide a way to destroy a work crew, because that is not necessary--the work crew
    would be destroyed only when the main program was prepared to exit, and process exit will
    destroy all threads and process data.
12-15 The crew_create function begins by checking the crew_size argument. The size of the crew is
     not allowed to exceed the size of the crew array in crew_t. If the requested size is acceptable,
     copy it into the structure.
16-31 Start with no work and an empty work queue. Initialize the crew's synchronization objects.
36-43 Then, for each crew member, initialize the member's worker_t data. The index of the member
    within the crew array is recorded, and a pointer back to the crew_t. Then the crew member thread
    is created, with a pointer to the member's worker_t as its argument.

    crew.c                                                                          part 3 crew_create

         Part 4 shows the crew_start function, which is called to assign a new path name and search
    string to the work crew. The function is synchronous--that is, after assigning the task it waits for
    the crew members to complete the task before returning to the caller. The crew_start function
    assumes that the crew_t structure has been previously created by calling crew_create, shown in
    part 3, but does not attempt to validate the structure.
Wait for the crew members to finish any previously assigned work. Although crew_start is
    synchronous, the crew may be processing a task assigned by another thread. On creation, the
    crew's work_count is set to 0, so the first call to crew_start will not need to wait.
28-43 Get the proper values of path_max and name_max for the file system specified by the file
    path we’ll be reading. The pathconf function may return a value of -1 without setting errno, if the
    requested value for the file system is “unlimited.” To detect this, we need to clear errno before
    making the call. If pathconf returns -1 without setting errno, assume reasonable values.
47-48 The values returned by pathconf don't include the terminating null character of a string--so
    add one character to both.
49-67 Allocate a work queue entry (work_t) and fill it in. Add it to the end of the request queue.
68-75 We've queued a single work request, so awaken one of the waiting work crew members by
    signaling the condition variable. If the attempt fails, free the work request, clear the work queue,
    and return with the error.
76-80 Wait for the crew to complete the task. The crew members handle all output, so when they're
    done we simply return to the caller.

    crew.c                                                                          part 4 crew_ start

         Part 5 shows the initial thread (main) for the little work crew sample.
10-13 The program requires three arguments--the program name, a string for which to search, and a
    path name. For example, "crew butenhof -"
15-23 On a Solaris system, call thr_setconcurrency to ensure that at least one LWP (kernel
    execution context) is created for each crew member. The program will work without this call, but,
    on a uniprocessor, you would not see any concurrency. See Section 5.6.3 for more information on
    "many to few" scheduling models, and Section 10.1.3 for information on "set concurrency"
    functions.
24-30          Create a work crew, and assign to it the concurrent file search.

    crew.c                                                                                  part 5 main

    4.3 Client/Server
    But the Judge said he never had summed up before;
    So the Snark undertook it instead,
    And summed it so well that it came to far more
    Than the Witnesses ever had said!
         --Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark

         In a client/server system, a "client" requests that a "server" perform some operation on a set
    of data {Figure 4.3). The server performs the operation independently-the client can either wait for
    the server or proceed in parallel and look for the result at a later time when the result is required.
    Although it is simplest to have the client wait for the server, that's rarely very useful--it certainly
    doesn't provide a speed advantage to the client. On the other hand, it can be an easy way to
    manage synchronization for some common resource.

                                   FIGURE 4.3 Client/Server

          If a set of threads all need to read input from stdin, it might be confusing for them to each
    issue independent prompt-and-read operations. Imagine that two threads each writes its prompt
    using printf, and then each reads the response using gets--you would have no way of knowing to
    which thread you were responding. If one thread asks "OK to send mail?" and the other asks "OK
    to delete root directory?." you'd probably like to know which thread will receive your response. Of
    course there are ways to keep the prompt and response "connected" without introducing a server
    thread; for example, by using the flockfile and funlockfile functions to lock both stdin and stdout
    around the prompt-and-read sequences, but a server thread is more interesting--and certainly more
    relevant to this section.
          In the following program, server.c, each of four threads will repeatedly read, and then echo,
    input lines. When the program is run you should see the threads prompt in varying orders, and
    another thread may prompt before the echo. But you'll never see a prompt or an echo between the
    prompt and read performed by the "prompt server."
7-9       These symbols define the commands that can be sent to the "prompt server" It can be asked
    to read input, write output, or quit.
14-22 The request_t structure defines each request to the server. The outstanding requests are linked
    in a list using the next member. The operation member contains one of the request codes (read,
    write, or quit). The synchronous member is nonzero if the client wishes to wait for the operation to
    be completed (synchronous), or 0 if it does not wish to wait (asynchronous).
27-33 The tty_server_t structure provides the context for the server thread. It has the
    synchronization objects (mutex and request), a flag denoting whether the server is running, and a
    list of requests that have been made and not yet processed (first and last).
35-37 This program has a single server, and the control structure (tty_server) is statically allocated
    and initialized here. The list of requests is empty, and the server is not running. The mutex and
    condition variable are statically initialized.
36-43 The main program and client threads coordinate their shutdown using these synchronization
    objects (client_mutex and clients_done) rather than using pthread_join.

    server.c                                                                            part 1 definitions

          Part 2 shows the server thread function, tty_server_routine. It loops, processing requests
    continuously until asked to quit.
25-30 The server waits for a request to appear using the request condition variable.
31-34 Remove the first request from the queue--if the queue is now empty, also clear the pointer to
    the last entry {try_server.last}.
43-66 The switch statement performs the requested work, depending on the operation given in the
    request packet. REQ_QUIT tells the server to shut down. REQ_READ tells the server to read,
    with an optional prompt string. REQ_WRITE tells the server to write a string.
67-79 If a request is marked "synchronous" (synchronous flag is nonzero), the server sets done_flag
    and signals the done condition variable. When the request is synchronous, the client is responsible
    for freeing the request packet. If the request was asynchronous, the server frees request on
    completion.
80-81 If the request was REQ_QUIT, terminate the server thread by breaking out of the while loop,
    to the return statement.

    server.c                                                                  part 2 tty_server_routine

          Part 3 shows the function that is called to initiate a request to the tty server thread. The caller
    specifies the desired operation (REQ_QUIT, REQ_READ, or REQ_WRITE), whether the
    operation is synchronous or not (sync), an optional prompt string (prompt) for REQ_READ
    operations, and the pointer to a string (input for REQ_WRITE, or a buffer to return the result of an
    REQ_READ operation).
16-40 If a tty server thread is not already running, start one. A temporary thread attributes object
    (detached_attr) is created, and the detachstate attribute is set to PTHREAD_CREATE_
    DETACHED. Thread attributes will be explained later in Section 5.2.3. In this case, we are just
    saying that we will not need to use the thread identifier after creation.
45-76 Allocate and initialize a server request (request_t) packet. If the request is synchronous,
    initialize the condition variable (done) in the request packet--otherwise the condition variable isn't
    used. The new request is linked onto the request queue.
81-83 Wake the server thread to handle the queued request.
88-105 If the request is synchronous, wait for the server to set done_flag and signal the done
    condition variable. If the operation is REQ_READ, copy the result string into the output buffer.
    Finally, destroy the condition variable, and free the request packet.

    server.c                                                                  part 3 tty_server_request
          Part 4 shows the thread start function for the client threads, which repeatedly queue tty
    operation requests to the server.
12-22 Read a line through the tty server. If the resulting string is empty, break out of the loop and
    terminate. Otherwise, loop four times printing the result string, at one-second intervals. Why four?
    It just "mixes things up" a little.
26-31 Decrease the count of client threads, and wake the main thread if this is the last client thread
    to terminate.

    server.c                                                                      part 4 client_routine

         Part 5 shows the main program for server. c. It creates a set of client threads to utilize the tty
    server, and waits for them.
7-15     On a Solaris system, set the concurrency level to the number of client threads by calling
    thr_setconcurrency. Because all the client threads will spend some of their time blocked on
    condition variables, we don't really need to increase the concurrency level for this
    program--however, it will provide less predictable execution behavior.
20-26 Create the client threads.
27-35 This construct is much like pthread_join, except that it completes only when all of the client
    threads have terminated. As I have said elsewhere, pthread_join is nothing magical, and there is no
    reason to use it to detect thread termination unless it does exactly what you want. Joining multiple
    threads in a loop with pthread_join is rarely exactly what you want, and a "multiple join" like that
    shown here is easy to construct.

    server.c                                                                                part 5 main
