5    Advanced threaded programming
"Take some more tea," the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.
"I've had nothing yet," Alice replied in an offended tone:
      "so I ca’n't take more."
"You mean you ca'n't take less," said the Hatter:
      "it's very easy to take more than nothing."
      --Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

     The Pthreads standard provides many capabilities that aren't needed by many programs. To
keep the sections dealing with synchronization and threads relatively simple, the more advanced
capabilities are collected into this additional section.
     Section 5.1 describes a facility to manage initialization of data, particularly within a library,
in a multithreaded environment.
     Section 5.2 describes "attributes objects," a way to control various characteristics of your
threads, mutexes, and condition variables when you create them.
     Section 5.3 describes cancellation, a way to ask your threads to "go away" when you don't
need them to continue.
     Section 5.4 describes thread-specific data, a sort of database mechanism that allows a library
to associate data with individual threads that it encounters and to retrieve that data later.
     Section 5.5 describes the Pthreads facilities for realtime scheduling, to help your program
interact with the cold, cruel world in a predictable way.

5.1 One-time initialization
"'Tis the voice of the Jubjub!" he suddenly cried.
(This man, that they used to call "Dunce.")
“As the Bellman would tell you," he added with pride,
"I have uttered that sentiment once."
      --Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark

     pthread_once_t once_control = PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT;
     int pthread_once (pthread_once_t *once_control, void(*init_routine) (void));

      Some things need to be done once and only once, no matter what. When you are initializing
an application, it is often easiest to do all that from main, before calling anything else that might
depend on the initialization--and, in particular before creating any threads that might depend on
having initialized mutexes, created thread-specific data keys, and so forth.
      If you are writing a library, you usually don't have that luxury. But you must still be sure that
the necessary initialization has been completed before you can use anything that needs to be
initialized. Statically initialized mutexes can help a lot, but sometimes you may find this "one-time
initialization" feature more convenient.
      In traditional sequential programming, one-time initialization is often managed by a boolean
variable. A control variable is statically initialized to 0, and any code that depends on the
initialization can test the variable. If the value is still 0 it can perform the initialization and then set
the variable to 1. Later checks will skip the initialization.
          When you are using multiple threads, it is not that easy. If more than one thread executes the
    initialization sequence concurrently, two threads may both find initializer to be 0, and both
    perform the initialization, which, presumably should have been performed only once. The state of
    initialization is a shared invariant that must be protected by a mutex.
          You can code your own one-time initialization using a boolean variable and a statically
    initialized mutex. In many cases this will be more convenient than pthread_once, and it will
    always be more efficient. The main reason for pthread_once is that you were not originally
    allowed to statically initialize a mutex. Thus to use a mutex, you had to first call
    pthread_mutex_init. You must initialize a mutex only once, so the initialization call must be made
    in one-time initialization code. The pthread_once function solved this recursive problem. When
    static initialization of mutexes was added to the standard, pthread_once was retained as a
    convenience function. If it's convenient, use it, but remember that you don't have to use it.
          First, you declare a control variable of type pthread_once_t. The control variable must be
    statically initialized using the PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT macro, as shown in the following program,
    called once.c. You must also create a function containing the code to perform all initialization that
    is to be associated with the control variable. Now, at any time, a thread may call pthread_once,
    specifying a pointer to the control variable and a pointer to the associated initialization function.
          The pthread_once function first checks the control variable to determine whether the
    initialization has already completed. If so, pthread_once simply returns. If initialization has not
    yet been started, pthread_once calls the initialization function (with no arguments), and then
    records that initialization has been completed. If a thread calls pthread_once while initialization is
    in progress in another thread, the calling thread will wait until that other thread completes
    initialization, and then return. In other words, when any call to pthread_once returns successfully,
    the caller can be certain that all states initialized by the associated initialization function are ready
    to go.
13-20 The function once_init_routine initializes the mutex when called--the use of pthread_once
    ensures that it will be called exactly one time.
29        The thread function thread_routine calls pthread_once before using mutex, to ensure that it
    exists even if it had not already been created by main.
51        The main program also calls pthread_once before using mutex, so that the program will
    execute correctly regardless of when thread_routine runs. Notice that, while I normally stress that
    all shared data must be initialized before creating any thread that uses it, in this case, the only
    critical shared data is really the once_block--it is irrelevant that the mutex is not initialized,
    because the use of pthread_once ensures proper synchronization.

    once.c

    5.2 Attributes objects
    The fifth is ambition. It next will be right
    To describe each particular batch:
    Distinguishing those that have feathers, and bite,
    From those that have whiskers, and scratch.
         --Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark
     So far, when we created threads, or dynamically initialized mutexes and condition variables,
we have usually used the pointer value NULL as the second argument. That argument is actually a
pointer to an attributes object. The value NULL indicates that Pthreads should assume the default
value for all attributes--just as it does when statically initializing a mutex or condition variable.
     An attributes object is an extended argument list provided when you initialize an object. It
allows the main interfaces (for example, pthread_create} to be relatively simple, while allowing
"expert" capability when you need it. Later POSIX standards will be able to add options without
requiring source changes to existing code. In addition to standard attributes provided by Pthreads,
an implementation can provide specialized options without creating nonstandard parameters.
     You can think of an attributes object as a private structure. You read or write the "members"
of the structure by calling special functions, rather than by accessing public member names. For
example, you read the stacksize attribute from a thread attributes object by calling
pthread_attr_getstacksize, or write it by calling pthread_attr_setstacksize.
     In a simple implementation of Pthreads the type pthread_attr_t might be a typedef struct and
the get and set functions might be macros to read or write members of the variable. Another
implementation might allocate memory when you initialize an attributes object, and it may
implement the get and set operations as real functions that perform validity checking.
     Threads, mutexes, and condition variables each have their own special attributes object type.
Respectively, the types are pthread_attr_t, pthread_mutexattr_t, and pthread_condattr_t.

5.2.1 Mutex attributes
     pthread_mutexattr_t attr;
     int pthread_mutexattr_init { pthread_mutexattr_t *attr);
     int pthread_mutexattr_destroy (pthread_mutexattr_t *attr);
     #ifdef _POSIX_THREAD PROCESS SHARED
     int pthread_mutexattr_getpshared (pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int *pshared);
     int pthread_mutexattr_setpshared (pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int pshared);
    endif

      Pthreads defines the following attributes for mutex creation: pshared, protocol, and
prioceiling. No system is required to implement any of these attributes, however, so check the
system documentation before using them.
      You initialize a mutex attributes object by calling pthread_mutexattr_init, specifying a
pointer to a variable of type pthread_mutexattr_t, as in mutex_attr.c, shown next. You use that
attributes object by passing its address to pthread_mutex_init instead of the NULL value we've
been using so far.
      If your system provides the _POSIX_THREAD_PROCESS_SHARED option, then it
supports the pshared attribute, which you can set by calling the function pthread_mutexattr_
setpshared. If you set the pshared attribute to the value PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED, you
can use the mutex to synchronize threads within separate processes that have access to the
memory where the mutex (pthread_mutex_t) is initialized. The default value for this attribute is
PTHREAD_PROCESS_PRIVATE.
      The mutex_attr.c program shows how to set a mutex attributes object to create a mutex using
the pshared attribute. This example uses the default value, PTHREAD_PROCESS_PRIVATE, to
avoid the additional complexity of creating shared memory and forking a process. The other
mutex attributes, protocol and prioceiling, will be discussed later in Section 5.5.5.

mutex_attr.c

5.2.2 Condition variable attributes
     pthread_condattr_t attr;
     int pthread_condattr_init (pthread_condattr_t *attr);
     int pthread_condattr_destroy (pthread_condattr_t *attr);
     #ifdef _POSIX_THREAD_PROCESS_SHARED
     int pthread_condattr_getpshared(pthread_condattr_t *attr, int *pshared);
     int pthread_condattr_setpshared (pthread_condattr_t *attr, int pshared);
     #endif

      Pthreads defines only one attribute for condition variable creation, pshared. No system is
required to implement this attribute, so check the system documentation before using it. You
initialize a condition variable attributes object using pthread_condattr_init, specifying a pointer to
a variable of type pthread_condattr_t, as in cond_attr.c, shown next. You use that attributes object
by passing its address to pthread_cond_init instead of the NULL value we've been using so far.
      If your system defines _POSIX_THREAD_PROCESS_SHARED then it supports the
pshared attribute. You set the pshared attribute by calling the function
pthread_condattr_setpshared. If you set the pshared attribute to the value PTHREAD_PROCESS
SHARED, the condition variable can be used by threads in separate processes that have access to
the memory where the condition variable (pthread_cond_t) is initialized. The default value for this
attribute is PTHREAD_PROCESS_PRIVATE.
      The cond_attr.c program shows how to set a condition variable attributes object to create a
condition variable using the pshared attribute. This example uses the default value, PTHREAD_
PROCESS_PRIVATE, to avoid the additional complexity of creating shared memory and forking
a process.

cond_attr.c

    To make use of a PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED condition variable, you must also use a
PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED mutex. That's because two threads that synchronize using a
condition variable must also use the same mutex. Waiting for a condition variable automatically
unlocks, and then locks, the associated mutex. So if the mutex isn't also created with
PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED, the synchronization won't work.

5.2.3 Thread attributes
     pthread_attr_t attr;
     int pthread_attr_init (pthread_attr_t *attr);
     int pthread_attr_destroy (pthread_attr_t *attr);
     int pthread_attr_getdetachstate (pthread_attr_t *attr, int *detachstate);
     int pthread_attr_setdetachstate (pthread_attr_t *attr, int detachstate);
     #ifdef _POSIX_THREAD_ATTR_STACKSISE
     int pthread_attr_getstacksize (pthread_attr_t *attr, size_t *stacksize);
     int pthreae_attr_setstacksize (pthread_attr_t *attr, size_t stacksize);
     #endif
     #ifdef _POSIX_THREAD_ATTR_STACKADDR
     int pthread_attr_getstarkaddr (pthread_attr_t *attr, void *stackaddr);
     int pthread_attr_set-tackaddr (pthread_attr_t *attr, void **stackaddr);
     #endif

      POSIX defines the following attributes for thread creation: detachstate, stacksize, stackaddr,
scope, inheritsched, schedpolicy, and schedparam. Some systems won't support all of these
attributes, so you need to check the system documentation before using them. You initialize a
thread attributes object using pthread_attr_init, specifying a pointer to a variable of type
pthread_attr_t, as in the program thread_attr.c, shown later. You use the attributes object you've
created by passing its address as the second argument to pthread_create instead of the NULL value
we've been using so far.
      All Pthreads systems support the detachstate attribute. The value of this attribute can be
either PTHREAD_CREATE_JOINABLE or PTHREAD_CREATE_DETACHED. By default,
threads are created joinable, which means that the thread identification created by pthread_create
can be used to join with the thread and retrieve its return value, or to cancel it. If you set the
detachstate attribute to PTHREAD_CREATE_DETACHED, the identification of threads created
using that attributes object can't be used. It also means that when the thread terminates, any
resources it used can immediately be reclaimed by the system.
      When you create threads that you know you won't need to cancel, or join with, you should
create them detached. Remember that, in many cases, even if you want to know when a thread
terminates, or receive some return value from it, you may not need to use pthread_join. If you
provide your own notification mechanism, for example, using a condition variable, you can still
create your threads detached.
      | Setting the size of a stack is not very portable.
      If your system defines the symbol _POSIX_THREAD_ATTR_STACKSIZE, then you can
set the stacksize attribute to specify the minimum size for the stack of a thread created using the
attributes object. Most systems will support this option, but you should use it with caution because
stack size isn't portable. The amount of stack space you'll need depends on the calling standards
and data formats used by each system.
      Pthreads defines the symbol PTHREAD_STACK_MIN as the minimum stack size required
for a thread: If you really need to specify a stack size, you might be best off calculating your
requirements in terms of the minimum required by the implementation. Or, you could base your
requirements on the default stacksize attribute selected by the implementation--for example, twice
the default, or half the default. The program thread_attr.c shows how to read the default stacksize
attribute value of an initialized attribute by calling pthread_attr_getstacksize.
      | Setting the address of a stack is less portable!
      If your system defines the symbol _POSIX_THREAD_ATTR_STACKADDR, then you can
set the stackaddr attribute to specify a region of memory to be used as a stack by any thread
created using this attributes object. The stack must be at least as large as PTHREAD_STACK_
MIN. You may need to specify an area of memory with an address that's aligned to some required
granularity. On a machine where the stack grows downward from higher addresses to lower
addresses, the address you specify should be the highest address in the stack, not the lowest. If the
stack grows up, you need to specify the lowest address.
     You also need to be aware of whether the machine increments (or decrements) the stack
before or after writing a new value--this determines whether the address you specify should be
"inside" or "outside" the stack you've allocated. The system can't tell whether you allocated
enough space, or specified the right address, so it has to trust you. If you get it wrong, undesirable
things will occur.
     Use the stackaddr attribute only with great caution, and beware that it may well be the least
portable aspect of Pthreads. While a reasonable value for the stacksize attribute will probably
work on a wide range of machines, it is little more than a wild coincidence if any particular value
of the stackaddr attribute works on any two machines. Also, you must remember that you can
create only one thread with any value of the stackaddr attribute. If you create two concurrent
threads with the same stackaddr attribute value, the threads will run on the same stack. (That
would be bad.)
     The thread_attr.c program that follows shows some of these attributes in action, with proper
conditionalization to avoid using the stacksize attribute if it is not supported by your system. If
stacksize is supported (and it will be on most UNIX systems), the program will print the default
and minimum stack size, and set stacksize to a value twice the minimum. The code also creates the
thread detached, which means no thread can join with it to determine when it completes. Instead,
main exits by calling pthread_exit, which means that the process will terminate when the last
thread exits.
     This example does not include the priority scheduling attributes, which are discussed (and
demonstrated) in Section 5.5.2. It also does not demonstrate use of the stackaddr attribute--as I
said, there is no way to use stackaddr in any remotely portable way and, although I have
mentioned it for completeness, I strongly discourage use of stackaddr in any program.

thread_attr.c

5.3 Cancellation
"Now, I give you fair warning,"
    shouted the Queen, stamping on the ground as she spoke;
    "either you or your head must be off,
    and that in about half no time! Take your choice!"
The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.
    --Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

     int pthread_cancel (pthread_t thread);
     int pthread_setcancelstate (int state, int * oldstate);
     int pthread_setcanceltype (int type, int *oldstate);
     void pthread_testcancel (void);
     void pthread_cleanup_push (void (*routine)(void *), void *arg);
     void pthread_cleanup_pop (int execute);
     Most of the time each thread runs independently, finishes a specific job, and exits on its own.
But sometimes a thread is created to do something that doesn't necessarily need to be finished. The
user might press a CANCEL button to stop a long search operation. Or the thread might be part of
a redundant algorithm and is no longer useful because some other thread succeeded. What do you
do when you just want a thread to go away? That's what the Pthreads cancellation interfaces are
for.
     Cancelling a thread is a lot like telling a human to stop something they're doing. Say that one
of the bailing programmers has become maniacally obsessed with reaching land, and refuses to
stop rowing until reaching safety (Figure 5.1). When the boat finally runs up onto the beach, he's
become so fixated that he fails to realize he's done. The other programmers must roughly shake
him, and forcibly remove the oars from his blistered hands to stop him--but clearly he must be
stopped. That's cancellation. Sort of. I can think of other analogies for cancellation within the
bailing programmer story, but I choose to ignore them. Perhaps you can, too.
     Cancellation allows you to tell a thread to shut itself down. You don't need it often, but it can
sometimes be extremely useful. Cancellation isn't an arbitrary external termination. It is more like
a polite (though not necessarily "friendly") request. You're most likely to want to cancel a thread
when you've found that something you set it off to accomplish is no longer necessary. You should
never use cancellation unless you really want the target thread to go away. It is a termination
mechanism, not a communication channel. So, why would you want to do that to a thread that you
presumably created for some reason?
     An application might use threads to perform long-running operations, perhaps in the
background, while the user continues working. Such operations might include saving a large
document, preparing to print a document, or sorting a large list. Most such interfaces probably will
need to have some way for the user to cancel an operation, whether it is pressing the ESC key or
Ctrl-C, or clicking a stop sign icon on the screen. The thread receiving the user interface cancel
request would then determine that one or more background operations were in progress, and use
pthread_cancel to cancel the appropriate threads.

               FIGURE 5.1 Thread cancellation analogy

      Often, threads are deployed to "explore" a data set in parallel for some heuristic solution. For
example, solving an equation for a local minimum or maximum. Once you've gotten one answer
that's good enough, the remaining threads may no longer be needed. If so, you can cancel them to
avoid wasting processor time and get on to other work.
      Pthreads allows each thread to control its own termination. It can restore program invariants
and unlock mutexes. It can even defer cancellation while it completes some important operation.
For example, when two write operations must both complete if either completes, a cancellation
between the two is not acceptable.
      Pthreads supports three cancellation modes, described in Table 5.1, which are encoded as two
binary values called "cancellation state" and "cancellation type." Each essentially can be on or off.
(While that technically gives four modes, one of them is redundant.) As shown in the table,
cancellation state is said to be enabled or disabled, and cancellation type is said to be deferred or
asynchronous.
Mode             State       Type             Meaning
Off              disabled    may be either    Cancellation remains pending until enabled.
Deferred         enabled     deferred         Cancellation occurs at next cancellation point.
Asynchronous     enabled     asynchronous     Cancellation may be processed at any time.
                           TABLE 5.1 Cancellation states

      By default, cancellation is deferred, and can occur only at specific points in the program that
check whether the thread has been requested to terminate, called cancellation points. Most
functions that can wait for an unbounded time should be deferred cancellation points. Deferred
cancellation points include waiting on a condition variable, reading or writing a file, and other
functions where the thread may be blocked for a substantial period of time. There is also a special
function called pthread_testcancel that is nothing but a deferred cancellation point. It will return
immediately if the thread hasn't been asked to terminate, which allows you to turn any of your
functions into cancellation points.
      Some systems provide a function to terminate a thread immediately. Although that sounds
useful, it is difficult to use such a function safely. In fact, it is nearly impossible in a normal
modular programming environment. If a thread is terminated with a mutex locked, for example,
the next thread trying to lock that mutex will be stuck waiting forever.
      It might seem that the thread system could automatically release the mutex; but most of the
time that's no help. Threads lock mutexes because they're modifying shared data. No other thread
can know what data has been modified or what the thread was trying to change, which makes it
difficult to fix the data. Now the program is broken. When the mutex is left locked, you can
usually tell that something's broken because one or more threads will hang waiting for the mutex.
      The only way to recover from terminating a thread with a locked mutex is for the application
to be able to analyze all shared data and repair it to achieve a consistent and correct state. That is
not impossible, and it is worth substantial effort when an application must be fail-safe. However, it
is generally not practical for anything but an embedded system where the application designers
control every bit of shared state in the process. You would have to rebuild not only your own
program or library state, but also the state affected by any library functions that might be called by
the thread (for example, the ANSI C library).
      To cancel a thread, you need the thread's identifier, the pthread_t value returned to the creator
by pthread_create or returned to the thread itself by pthread_self. Cancelling a thread is
asynchronous--that is, when the call to pthread_cancel returns, the thread has not necessarily been
canceled, it may have only been notified that a cancel request is pending against it. If you need to
know when the thread has actually terminated, you must join with it by calling pthread_join after
cancelling it.
      If the thread had asynchronous cancelability type set, or when the thread next reaches a
deferred cancellation point, the cancel request will be delivered by the system. When that happens,
the system will set the thread's cancelability type to PTHREAD_CANCEL_DEFERRED and the
cancelability state to PTHREAD_CANCEL_DISABLE. That is, the thread can clean up and
terminate without having to worry about being canceled again.
      When a function that is a cancellation point detects a pending cancel request, the function
does not return to the caller. The active cleanup handlers will be called, if there are any, and the
    thread will terminate. There is no way to "handle" cancellation and continue execution--the thread
    must either defer cancellation entirely or terminate. This is analogous to C++ object destructors,
    rather than C++ exceptions--the object is allowed to clean up after itself, but it is not allowed to
    avoid destruction.
         The following program, called cancel.c, shows how to write a thread that responds
    "reasonably quickly" to deferred cancellation, by calling pthread_testcancel within a loop.
11-19 The thread function thread_routine loops indefinitely, until canceled, testing periodically for
    a pending cancellation request. It minimizes the overhead of calling pthread_testcancel by doing
    so only every 1000 iterations (line 17).
27-35 On a Solaris system, set the thread concurrency level to 2, by calling thr_setconcurrency.
    Without the call to thr_setconcurrency, this program will hang on Solaris because thread_routine is
    "compute bound" and will not block. The main program would never have another chance to run
    once thread routine started, and could not call pthread_cancel.
36-54 The main program creates a thread running thread_routine, sleeps for two seconds, and then
    cancels the thread. It joins with the thread, and checks the return value, which should be
    PTHREAD_CANCELED to indicate that it was canceled, rather than terminated normally.

    cancel.c

          A thread can disable cancellation around sections of code that need to complete without
    interruption, by calling pthread_setcancelstate. For example, if a database update operation takes
    two separate write calls, you wouldn't want to complete the first and have the second canceled. If
    you request that a thread be canceled while cancellation is disabled, the thread remembers that it
    was canceled but won't do anything about it until after cancellation is enabled again. Because
    enabling cancellation isn't a cancellation point, you also need to test for a pending cancel request if
    you want a cancel processed immediately.
          When a thread may be canceled while it holds private resources, such as a locked mutex or
    heap storage that won't ever be freed by any other thread, those resources need to be released
    when the thread is canceled. If the thread has a mutex locked, it may also need to "repair" shared
    data to restore program invariants. Cleanup handlers provide the mechanism to accomplish the
    cleanup, somewhat like process atexit handlers. After acquiring a resource, and before any
    cancellation points, declare a cleanup handler by calling pthread_cleanup_push. Before releasing
    the resource, but after any cancellation points, remove the cleanup handler by calling
    pthread_cleanup_pop.
          If you don't have a thread's identifier, you can't cancel the thread. That means that, at least
    using portable POSIX functions, you can't write an "idle thread killer" that will arbitrarily
    terminate threads in the process. You can only cancel threads that you created, or threads for
    which the creator (or the thread itself) gave you an identifier. That generally means that
    cancellation is restricted to operating within a subsystem.

    5.3.1 Deferred cancelability
       "Deferred cancelability" means that the thread's cancelability type has been set to PTHREAD
    _CANCEL_DEFERRED and the thread's cancelability enable has been set to PTHREAD_
    CANCEL_ENABLE. The thread will only respond to cancellation requests when it reaches one of
a set of "cancellation points."
      The following functions are always cancellation points on any Pthreads system:
pthread_cond_wait               fsync          sigwaitinfo
pthread_cond_timedwait          mq_receive sigsuspend
pthread_join                    mq_send        sigtimedwait
pthread_testcancel              msync          sleep
sigwait                         nanosleep      system
aio_suspend                     open           tcdrain
close                           pause          wait
creat                           read           waitpid
fcntl (F_SETLCKW)               sem_wait       write
      The following list of functions may be cancellation points. You should write your code so
that it will function correctly if any of these are cancellation points and also so that it will not
break if any of them are not. If you depend upon any particular behavior, you may limit the
portability of your code. You'll have to look at the conformance documentation to find out which,
if any, are cancellation points for the system you are using:
closedir                        getc_unlocked                  printf
ctermid                         getchar                        putc
fclose                          getchar_unlocked               putc_unlocked
fcntl (except F_SETLCKW) getcwd                                putchar
fflush                          getgrgid                       putchar_unlocked
fgetc                           getgrgid_r                     puts
fgets                           getrtnam                       readdir
fopen                           getgrnam_r                     remove
fprintf                         getlogin                       rename
fputc                           getlogin_r                     rewind
fputs                           getpwnam                       rewinddir
fread                           getpwnam_r                     scanf
freopen                         getpwuid                       tmpfile
fscanf                          getpwuid_r                     tmpname
fseek                           gets                           ttyname
ftell                           lseek                          ttyname_r
fwrite                          opendir                        ungetc
getc                            perror
      Pthreads specifies that any ANSI C or POSIX function not specified in one of the two lists
cannot be a cancellation point. However, your system probably has many additional cancellation
points. That's because few UNIX systems are "POSIX." That is, they support other programming
interfaces as well--such as BSD 4.3, System V Release 4, UNIX95, and so forth. POSIX doesn't
recognize the existence of functions such as select or poll, and therefore it can't say whether or not
they are cancellation points. Yet clearly both are functions that may block for an arbitrary period
of time, and programmers using them with cancellation would reasonably expect them to behave
as cancellation points. X/Open is currently addressing this problem for UNIX98 (X/Open System
Interfaces, Issue 5), by extending the Pthreads list of cancellation points.
      Most cancellation points involve I/O operations that may block the thread for an
    "unbounded" time. They're cancelable so that the waits can be interrupted. When a thread reaches
    a cancellation point the system determines whether a cancel is pending for the current ("target")
    thread. A cancel will be pending if another thread has called pthread_cancel for the target thread
    since the last time the target thread returned from a cancellation point. If a cancel is pending, the
    system will immediately begin calling cleanup functions, and then the thread will terminate.
          If no cancel is currently pending, the function will proceed. If another thread requests that the
    thread be canceled while the thread is waiting for something (such as I/O) then the wait will be
    interrupted and the thread will begin its cancellation cleanup.
          If you need to ensure that cancellation can't occur at a particular cancellation point, or during
    some sequence of cancellation points, you can temporarily disable cancellation in that region of
    code. The following program, called cancel_disable.c, is a variant of cancel.c. The "target" thread
    periodically calls sleep, and does not want the call to be cancelable.
23-32 After each cycle of 755 iterations, thread_routine will call sleep to wait a second. (The value
    755 is just an arbitrary number that popped into my head. Do arbitrary numbers ever pop into your
    head?) Prior to sleeping, thread_routine disables cancellation by setting the cancelability state to
    PTHREAD_CANCEL_DISABLE. After sleep returns, it restores the saved cancelability state by
    calling pthread_setcancelstate again.
33-35 Just as in cancel.c, test for a pending cancel every 1000 iterations.

    cancel_disable.c

    5.3.2 Asynchronous cancelability
          Asynchronous cancellation is useful because the "target thread" doesn't need to poll for
    cancellation requests by using cancellation points. That can be valuable for a thread that runs a
    tight compute-bound loop (for example, searching for a prime number factor) where the overhead
    of calling pthread_testcancel might be severe.
          | Avoid asynchronous cancellation!
          | It is difficult to use correctly and is rarely useful.
          The problem is that you're limited in what you can do with asynchronous cancellation
    enabled. You can't acquire any resources, for example, including locking a mutex. That's because
    the cleanup code would have no way to determine whether the mutex had been locked.
    Asynchronous cancellation can occur at any hardware instruction. On some computers it may even
    be possible to interrupt some instructions in the middle. That makes it really difficult to determine
    what the canceled thread was doing.
          For example, when you call malloc the system allocates some heap memory for you, stores a
    pointer to that memory somewhere (possibly in a hardware register), and then returns to your code,
    which probably moves the return value into some local storage for later use. There are lots of
    places that malloc might be interrupted by an asynchronous cancel, with varying effects. It might
    be interrupted before the memory was allocated. Or it might be interrupted after allocating storage
    but before it stored the address for return. Or it might even return to your code, but get interrupted
    before the return value could be copied to a local variable. In any of those cases the variable where
    your code expects to find a pointer to the allocated memory will be uninitialized. You can't tell
    whether the memory really was allocated yet. You can't free the memory, so that memory (if it was
    allocated to you) will remain allocated for the life of the program. That's a memory leak, which is
    not a desirable feature.
          Or when you call pthread_mutex_lock, the system might be interrupted within a function call
    either before or after locking the mutex. Again, there's no way for your program to find out,
    because the interrupt may have occurred between any two instructions, even within the
    pthread_mutex_lock function, which might leave the mutex unusable. If the mutex is locked, the
    application will likely end up hanging because it will never be unlocked.
          | Call no code with asynchronous cancellation enabled unless you
          | wrote it to be async-cancel safe--and even then, think twice!
          You are not allowed to call any function that acquires resources while asynchronous
    cancellation is enabled. In fact, you should never call any function while asynchronous
    cancellation is enabled unless the function is documented as "async-cancel safe." The only
    functions required to be async safe by Pthreads are pthread_cancel, pthread_setcancelstate, and
    pthread_setcanceltype. (And there is no reason to call pthread_cancel with asynchronous
    cancelability enabled.) No other POSIX or ANSI C functions need be async-cancel safe, and you
    should never call them with asynchronous cancelability enabled.
          Pthreads suggests that all library functions should document whether or not they are
    async-cancel safe. However if the description of a function does not specifically say it is
    async-cancel safe you should always assume that it is not. The consequences of asynchronous
    cancellation in a function that is not async-cancel safe can be severe. And worse, the effects are
    sensitive to timing--so a function that appears to be async-cancel safe during experimentation may
    in fact cause all sorts of problems later when it ends up being canceled in a slightly different place.
          The following program, cancel_async.c, shows the use of asynchronous cancellation in a
    compute-bound loop. Use of asynchronous cancellation makes this loop "more responsive" than
    the deferred cancellation loop in cancel.c. However, the program would become unreliable if any
    function calls were made within the loop, whereas the deferred cancellation version would
    continue to function correctly. In most cases, synchronous cancellation is preferable.
24-28 To keep the thread running awhile with something more interesting than an empty loop,
    cancel_async.c uses a simple matrix multiply nested loop. The matrixa and matrixb arrays are
    initialized with, respectively, their major or minor array index.
34-36 The cancellation type is changed to PTHREAD_CANCEL_ASYNCHRONOUS, allowing
    asynchronous cancellation within the matrix multiply loops.
39-44 The thread repeats the matrix multiply until canceled, on each iteration replacing the first
    source array (matrixa) with the result of the previous multiplication (matrixc).
66-74 Once again, on a Solaris system, set the thread concurrency level to 2, allowing the main
    thread and thread_routine to run concurrently on a uniprocessor. The program will hang without
    this step, since user mode threads are not timesliced on Solaris.

    cancel_async.c

        | Warning: do not let "DCE threads'" habits carry over to Pthreads!
        I’ll end this section with a warning. DCE threads, a critical component of the Open Software
    Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment, was designed to be independent of the
    underlying UNIX kernel. Systems with no thread support at all often emulated "thread
    synchronous" I/O in user mode, using nonblocking I/O mode, so that a thread attempting I/O on a
    busy file was blocked on a condition variable until a later select or poll showed that the I/O could
    complete. DCE listener threads might block indefinitely on a socket read, and it was important to
    be able to cancel that read.
         When DCE was ported to newer kernels that had thread support, but not Pthreads support, the
    user mode I/O wrappers were usually omitted, resulting in a thread blocked within a kernel that
    did not support deferred cancellation. Users discovered that, in many cases, these systems
    implemented asynchronous cancellation in such a way that, quite by coincidence, a kernel wait
    might be canceled "safely" ff the thread switched to asynchronous cancellation immediately
    before the kernel call, and switched back to deferred cancellation immediately after. This
    observation was publicized in DCE documentation, but it is a very dangerous hack, even on
    systems where it seems to work. You should never try this on any Pthreads system! If your system
    conforms to POSIX 1003.lc-1995 (or POSIX 1003.1, 1996 edition, or later), it supports deferred
    cancellation of, at minimum, kernel functions such as read and write. You do not need
    asynchronous cancellation, and using it can be extremely dangerous.

    5.3.3 Cleaning up
          | When you write any library code, design it to handle deferred
          | cancellation gracefully. Disable cancellation where it is not
          | appropriate, and always use cleanup handlers at cancellation points.
          If a section of code needs to restore some state when it is canceled, it must use cleanup
    handlers. When a thread is canceled while waiting for a condition variable, it will wake up with
    the mutex locked. Before the thread terminates it usually needs to restore invariants, and it always
    needs to release the mutex.
          Each thread may be considered to have a stack of active cleanup handlers. Cleanup handlers
    are added to the stack by calling pthread_cleanup_push, and the most recently added cleanup
    handler is removed by calling pthread_cleanup_pop. When the thread is canceled or when it exits
    by calling pthread_exit, Pthreads calls each active cleanup handler in turn, beginning with the
    most recently added cleanup handler. When all active cleanup handlers have returned, the thread is
    terminated.
          Pthreads cleanup handlers are designed so that you can often use the cleanup handler even
    when the thread wasn't canceled. It is often useful to run the same cleanup function regardless of
    whether your code is canceled or completes normally. When pthread_cleanup_pop is called with a
    nonzero value, the cleanup handler is executed even if the thread was not canceled.
          You cannot push a cleanup handler in one function and pop it in another function. The
    pthread_cleanup_push and pthread_cleanup_pop operations may be defined as macros, such that
    pthread_cleanup_push contains the opening brace "{" of a block, while pthread_cleanup_pop
    contains the matching closing brace "}" of the block. You must always keep this restriction in
    mind while using cleanup handlers, if you wish your code to be portable.
          The following progranl, cancel_cleanup.c, shows the use of a cleanup handler to release a
    mutex when a condition variable wait is canceled.
10-17 The control structure (control) is used by all threads to maintain shared synchronization
    objects and invariants. Each thread increases the member counter by one when it starts, and
    decreases it at termination. The member busy is used as a dummy condition wait predicate--it is
    initialized to 1, and never cleared, which means that the condition wait loops will never terminate
    (in this example) until the threads are canceled.
23-34 The function cleanup_handler is installed as the cancellation cleanup handler for each thread.
    It is called on normal termination as well as through cancellation, to decrease the count of active
    threads and unlock the mutex.
47        The function thread_routine establishes cleanup_handler as the active cancellation cleanup
    handler.
54-58 Wait until the control structure's busy member is set to 0, which, in this example, will never
    occur. The condition wait loop will exit only when the wait is canceled.
60        Although the condition wait loop in this example will not exit, the function cleans up by
    removing the active cleanup handler. The nonzero argument to pthread_cleanup_pop, remember,
    means that the cleanup handler will be called even though cancellation did not occur.
          In some cases, you may omit "unreachable statements" like this pthread_cleanup_pop call.
    However, in this case, your code might not compile without it. The pthread_cleanup_push and
    pthread_cleanup_pop macros are special, and may expand to form, respectively, the beginning
    and ending of a block. Digital UNIX does this, for example, to implement cancellation on top of
    the common structured exception handling provided by the operating system.

    cancel_cleanup.c

         If one of your threads creates a set of threads to "subcontract" some function, say, a parallel
    arithmetic operation, and the "contractor" is canceled while the function is in progress, you
    probably won't want to leave the subcontractor threads running. Instead, you could "pass on" the
    cancellation to each subcontrator thread, letting them handle their own termination independently.
         If you had originally intended to join with the subcontractors, remember that they will
    continue to consume some resources until they have been joined or detached. When the contractor
    thread cancels them, you should not delay cancellation by joining with the subcontractors. Instead,
    you can cancel each thread and immediately detach it using pthread_detach. The subcontractor
    resources can then be recycled immediately as they finish, while the contractor can wrap things up
    independently.
         The following program, cancel_subcontract.c, shows one way to propagate cancellation to
    subcontractors.
9-12     The team_t structure defines the state of the team of subcontractor threads. The join_i
    member records the index of the last subcontractor with which the contractor had joined, so on
    cancellation from within pthread_join, it can cancel the threads it had not yet joined. The workers
    member is an array recording the thread identifiers of the subcontractor threads.
18-25 The subcontractor threads are started running the worker_routine function. This function
    loops until canceled, calling pthread_testcancel every 1000 iterations.
31-46 The cleanup function is established as the active cleanup handler within the contractor thread.
    When the contractor is canceled, cleanup iterates through the remaining (unjoined) subcontractors,
    cancelling and detaching each. Note that it does not join the subcontractors--in general, it is not a
    good idea to wait in a cleanup handler. The thread, after all, is expected to clean up and terminate,
    not to wait around for something to happen. But if your cleanup handler really needs to wait for
    something, don't be afraid, it will work just fine.
53-76 The contractor thread is started running thread_routine. This function creates a set of
    subcontractors, then joins with each subcontractor. As it joins each thread, it records the current
    index within the workers array in the team_t member join_i. The cleanup handler is established
    with a pointer to the team structure so that it can determine the last offset and begin cancelling the
    remaining subcontractors.
78-104 The main program creates the contractor thread, running thread_routine, and then sleeps for
    five seconds. When it wakes up, it cancels the contractor thread, and waits for it to terminate.

    cancel_subcontract.c

    5.4 Thread-specific data
    No, I've made up my mind about it: if I'm Mabel, I'll stay down here. It'll be
         no use their putting their heads down and saying "Come up again,
         dear!" I shall only look up and say "Who am I, then? Tell me that first, and
         then, if I like being that person, I'll come up: if not, I'll stay down here till
         I'm somebody else."
         --Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

         When a function in a single threaded program needs to create private data that persists across
    calls to that function, the data can be allocated statically in memory. The name's scope can be
    limited to the function or file that uses it (static) or it can be made global (extern).
         It is not quite that simple when you use threads. All threads within a process share the same
    address space, which means that any variable declared as static or extern, or in the process heap,
    may be read and written by all threads within the process. That has several important implications
    for code that wants to store "persistent" data between a series of function calls within a thread:
         ? The value in a static or extern variable, or in the heap, will be the value last written by
               any thread. In some cases this may be what you want, for example, to maintain the seed
               of a pseudorandom number sequence. In other cases, it may not be what you want.
         ? The only storage a thread has that's truly "private" are processor registers. Even stack
               addresses can be shared, although only if the "owner" deliberately exposes an address to
               another thread. In any event, neither registers nor "private" stack can replace uses of
               persistent static storage in nonthreaded code.
    So when you need a private variable, you must first decide whether all threads share the same
    value, or whether each thread should have its own value. If they share, then you can use static or
    extern data, just as you could in a single threaded program; however, you must synchronize access
    to the shared data across multiple threads, usually by adding one or more mutexes.
         If each thread needs its own value for a private variable, then you must store all the values
    somewhere, and each thread must be able to locate the proper value. In some cases you might be
    able to use static data, for example, a table where you can search for a value unique to each thread,
    such as the thread's pthread_t. In many interesting cases you cannot predict how many threads
    might call the function--imagine you were implementing a thread-safe library that could be called
    by arbitrary code, in any number of threads.
         The most general solution is to malloc some heap in each thread and store the values there,
    but your code will need to be able to find the proper private data in any thread. You could create a
    linked list of all the private values, storing the creating thread's identifier (pthread_t) so it could be
found again, but that will be slow if there are many threads. You need to search the list to find the
proper value, and it would be difficult to recover the storage that was allocated by terminated
threads--your function cannot know when a thread terminates.
      | New interfaces should not rely on implicit persistent storage!
      When you are designing new interfaces, there's a better solution. You should require the
caller to allocate the necessary persistent state, and tell you where it is. There are many advantages
to this model, including, most importantly:
        ? In many cases, you can avoid internal synchronization using this model, and, in rare
             cases where the caller wishes to share the persistent state between threads, the caller
             can supply the needed synchronization.
        ? The caller can instead choose to allocate more than one state buffer for use within a
             single thread. The result is several independent sequences of calls to your function
             within the same thread, with no conflict.
The problem is that you often need to support implicit persistent states. You may be making an
existing interface thread-safe, and cannot add an argument to the functions, or require that the
caller maintain a new data structure for your benefit. That's where thread-specific data comes in.
      Thread-specific data allows each thread to have a separate copy of a variable, as if each
thread has an array of thread-specific data values, which is indexed by a common "key" value.
Imagine that the bailing programmers are wearing their corporate ID badges, clipped to their shirt
pockets (Figure 5.2). While the information is different for each programmer, you can find the
information easily without already knowing which programmer you're examining.
      The program creates a key (sort of like posting a corporate regulation that employee
identification badges always be displayed clipped to the left breast pocket of the employee's shirt
or jacket) and each thread can then independently set or get its own value for that key (although
the badge is always on the left pocket, each employee has a unique badge number, and, in most
cases, a unique name). The key is the same for all threads, but each thread can associate its own
independent value with that shared key. Each thread can change its private value for a key at any
time, without affecting the key or any value other threads may have for the key.

                    FIGURE 5.2 Thread-specific data analogy

5.4.1 Creating thread-specific data
     pthread_key_t key;
     int pthread_key_create (pthread_key_t *key, void (*destructor)(void *));
     int pthread_key_delete (pthread_key_t key);

    A thread-specific data key is represented in your program by a variable of type pthread_key_t.
Like most Pthreads types, pthread_key_t is opaque and you should never make any assumptions
about the structure or content. The easiest way to create a thread-specific data key is to call
pthread_key_create before any threads try to use the key, for example early in the program's main
function.
     If you need to create a thread-specific data key later, you have to ensure that
pthread_key_create is called only once for each pthread_key_t variable. That's because if you
create a key twice, you are really creating two different keys. The second key will overwrite the
    first, which will be lost forever along with the values any threads might have set for the first key.
           When you can't add code to main, the easiest way to ensure that a threadspecific data key is
    created only once is to use pthread_once, the one-time initialization function, as shown in the
    following program, tsd_once.c.
7-10       The tsd_t structure is used to contain per-thread data. Each thread allocates a private tsd_t
    structure, and stores a pointer to that structure as its value for the thread-specific data key tsd_key.
    The thread_id member holds the thread's identifier (pthread_t), and the string member holds the
    pointer to a “name” string for the thread. The variable tsd_key holds the thread-specific data key
    used to access the tsd_t structures.
19-27 One-time initialization (pthread_once) is used to ensure that the key tsd_key is created before
    the first access.
33-56 The threads begin in the thread start function thread_routine. The argument (arg) is a pointer
    to a character string naming the thread. Each thread calls pthread_once to ensure that the
    thread-specific data key has been created. The thread then allocates a tsd_t structure, initializes the
    thread id member with the thread's identifier, and copies its argument to the string member.
           The thread gets the current thread-specific data value by calling pthread_getspecific, and
    prints a message using the thread's name. It then sleeps for a few seconds and prints another
    message to demonstrate that the thread-specific data value remains the same, even though another
    thread has assigned a different tsd_t structure address to the same thread-specific data key.

    tsd_once.c

          Pthreads allows you to destroy a thread-specific data key when your program no longer needs
    it, by calling pthread_key_delete. The Pthreads standard guarantees only 128 thread-specific data
    keys at any one time, so it may be useful to destroy a key that you know you aren't using and
    won't need again. The actual number of keys supported by your Pthreads system is specified by
    the value of the symbol PTHREAD_KEYS MAX defined in <limits. h>.
          When you destroy a thread-specific data key, it does not affect the current value of that key in
    any thread, not even in the calling thread. That means your code is completely responsible for
    freeing any memory that you have associated with the thread-specific data key, in all threads. Of
    course, any use of the deleted thread-specific data key (pthread_key_t) results in undefined
    behavior.
          | Delete thread-specific data keys only when you
          | are sure no thread has a value for that key!
          |
          | Or... don't destroy them at all.
          You should never destroy a key while some thread still has a value for that key. Some later
    call to pthread_key_create, for example, might reuse the pthread_key_t identifier that had been
    assigned to a deleted key. When an existing thread that had set a value for the old key requests the
    value of the new key, it will receive the old value. The program will likely react badly to receiving
    this incorrect data, so you should never delete a thread-specific data key until you are sure that no
    existing threads have a value for that key, for example, by maintaining a "reference count" for the
    key, as shown in the program tsd_destructor.c. in Section 5.4.3.
          Even better, don't destroy thread-specific data keys. There's rarely any need to do so, and if
you try you will almost certainly run into difficulties. Few programs will require even the
minimum Pthreads limit of 128 thread-specific data keys. Rarely will you use more than a few. In
general, each component that uses thread-specific data will have a small number of keys each
maintaining pointers to data structures that contain related data. It would take a lot of components
to exhaust the available keys!

5.4.2 Using thread-specific data
     int pthread_setspecific (pthread_key_t key, const void *value);
     void *pthread_getspecific (pthread_key_t key);

     You can use the pthread_getspecific function to determine the thread's current value for a key,
or pthread_setspecific to change the current value. Take a look at Section 7.3.1 for ideas on using
thread-specific data to adapt old libraries that rely on static data to be thread-safe.
     | A thread-specific data value of NULL means something special to
     | Pthreads--do not set a thread-specific data value of NULL unless you
     | really mean it,
     The initial value for any new key (in all threads) is NULL. Also, Pthreads sets the
thread-specific data value for a key to NULL before calling that key's destructor (passing the
previous value of the key) when a thread terminates.* If your thread-specific data value is the
address of heap storage, for example, and you want to free that storage in your destructor, you
must use the argument passed to the destructor rather than calling pthread_getspecific.

      *That is, unfortunately, not what the standard says. This is one of the problems with formal
standards--they say what they say, not what they were intended to say. Somehow, an error crept in,
and the sentence specifying that "the implementation clears the thread-specific data value before
calling the destructor" was deleted. Nobody noticed, and the standard was approved with the error.
So the standard says (by omission) that if you want to write a portable application using
thread-specific data, that will not hang on thread termination, you must call pthread_setspecific
within your destructor function to change the value to NULL. This would be silly, and any serious
implementation of Pthreads will violate the standard in this respect. Of course. the standard will be
fixed, probably by the 1003.1n amendment (assorted corrections to 1003. lc-1995), but that will
take a while.

     Pthreads will not call the destructor for a thread-specific data key if the terminating thread
has a value of NULL for that key. NULL is special, meaning "this key has no value." If you ever
use pthread_setspecific to set the value of a threadspecific data key to NULL, you need to
remember that you are not setting the value NULL, but rather stating that the key no longer has a
value in the current thread.
     | Destructor functions are called only when the thread terminates,
     | not when the value of a thread-specific data key is changed.
     Another important thing to remember is that thread-specific data key destructor functions are
not called when you replace an existing value for that key. That is, if you allocate a structure in
heap and assign a pointer to that structure as the value of a thread-specific data key, and then later
allocate a new structure and assign a pointer to that new structure to the same thread-specific data
key, in the same thread, you are responsible for freeing the old structure. Pthreads will not free the
old structure, nor will it call your destructor function with a pointer to the old structure.

5.4.3 Using destructor functions
      When a thread exits while it has a value defined for some thread-specific data key, you
usually need to do something about it. If your key's value is a pointer to heap memory, you will
need to free the memory to avoid a memory leak each time a thread terminates. Pthreads allows
you to define a destructor function when you create a thread-specific data key. When a thread
terminates with a non-NULL value for a thread-specific data key, the key's destructor (if any) is
called with the current value of the key.
      | Thread-specific data destructors are called in "unspecified order."
      Pthreads checks all thread-specific data keys in the process when a thread exits, and for each
thread-specific data key with a value that's not NULL, it sets the value to NULL and then calls the
key's destructor function. Going back to our analogy, someone might collect the identity badges of
all programmers by removing whatever is hanging from each programmer's left shirt pocket, safe
in the knowledge that it will always be the programmer's badge. Be careful, because the order in
which destructors are called is undefined. Try to make each destructor as independent as possible.
      Thread-specific data destructors can set a new value for the key for which a value is being
destroyed or for any other key. You should never do this directly but it can easily happen indirectly
if you call other functions from your destructor. For example, the ANSI C library's destructors
might be called before yours--and calling an ANSI C function, for example, using fprintf to write a
log message to a file, could cause a new value to be assigned to a thread-specific data key. The
system must recheck the list of thread-specific data values for you after all destructors have been
called.
      | If your thread-specific data destructor creates a new thread-specific
      | data value, you will get another chance. Maybe too many chances!
      The standard requires that a Pthreads implementation may recheck the list some fixed
number of times and then give up. When it gives up, the final threadspecific data value is not
destroyed. If the value is a pointer to heap memory the result may be a memory leak, so be careful.
The <limits. h> header defines _PTHREAD_DESTRUCTOR_ITERATIONS to the number of
times the system will check and the value must be at least 4. Alternately, the system is allowed to
keep checking forever, so a destructor function that always sets thread-specific data values may
cause an infinite loop.
      Usually, new thread-specific data values are set within a destructor only when subsystem 1
uses thread-specific data that depends on another independent subsystem 2 that also uses
thread-specific data. Because the order in which destructor functions run is unspecified, the two
may be called in the wrong order. If the subsystem 1 destructor needs to call into subsystem 2, it
may inadvertently result in allocating new thread-specific data for subsystem 2. Although the
subsystem 2 destructor will need to be called again to free the new data, the subsystem 1
thread-specific data remains NULL, so the loop will terminate.
      The following program, tsd_destructor.c, demonstrates using threadspecific data destructors
to release memory when a thread terminates. It also keeps track of how many threads are using the
thread-specific data, and deletes the thread-specific data key when the destructor is run for the
final thread. This program is similar in structure to tsd_once.c, from Section 5.3, so only the
    relevant differences will be annotated here.
12-14 In addition to the key value (identity_key}, the program maintains a count of threads that are
    using the key (identity_key_counter), which is protected by a mutex (identity_key_mutex).
22-42 The function identity_key_destructor is the thread-specific data key's destructor function. It
    begins by printing a message so we can observe when it runs in each thread. It frees the storage
    used to maintain thread-specific data, the private_t structure. Then it locks the mutex associated
    with the threadspecific data key (identity_key_mutex) and decreases the count of threads using the
    key. If the count reaches 0, it deletes the key and prints a message.
48-63 The function identity_key_get can be used anywhere (in this example, it is used only once
    per thread) to get the value of identity_key for the calling thread. If there is no current value (the
    value is NULL), then it allocates a new private_t structure and assigns it to the key for future
    reference.
68-78 The function thread_routine is the thread start function used by the exampie. It acquires a
    value for the key by calling identity_key_get, and sets the members of the structure. The string
    member is set to the thread's argument, creating a global "name" for the thread, which can be used
    for printing messages.
80-114 The main program creates the thread-specific data key tsd_key. Notice that, unlike tsd_once.c,
    this program does not bother to use pthread_once. As I mentioned in the annotation for that
    example, in a main program it is perfectly safe, and more efficient, to create the key inside main,
    before creating any threads.
101      The main program initializes the reference counter (identity_key_counter) to 3. It is critical
    that you define in advance how many threads will reference a key that will be deleted based on a
    reference count, as we intend to do. The counter must be set before any thread using the key can
    possibly terminate.
         You cannot, for example, code identity_key_get so that it dynamically increases the counter
    when it first assigns a thread-specific value for identity_key. That is because one thread might
    assign a thread-specific value for identity_key and then terminate before another thread using the
    key had a chance to start. If that happened, the first thread's destructor would find no remaining
    references to the key, and it would delete the key. Later threads would then fail when trying to set
    thread-specific data values.

    tsd_destructor.c

    5.5 Realtime scheduling
    "Well, it's no use your talking about waking him," said Tweedledum,
         "when you're only one of the things in his dream. You know
         very well you're not real."
    "I am real!" said Alice, and began to cry.
    "You wo'n't make yourself a bit realler by crying," Tweedledee remarked:
         "there's nothing to cry about."
         --Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

        Once upon a time, realtime programming was considered an arcane and rare art. Realtime
    programmers were doing unusual things, outside of the programming mainstream, like controlling
nuclear reactors or airplane navigational systems. But the POSIX. lb realtime extension defines
realtime as "the ability of the operating system to provide a required level of service in a bounded
response time." What applies to the operating system also applies to your application or library.
      "Bounded" response time does not necessarily mean "fast" response, but it does mean
"predictable" response. There must be some way to define a span of time during which a sequence
of operations is guaranteed to complete. A system controlling a nuclear reactor has more strict
response requirements than most programs you will write, and certainly the consequences of
failing to meet the reactor's response requirements are more severe. But a lot of code you write
will need to provide some "required level of service" within some "bounded response time."
Realtime programming just means that the software lives in the real world.
      Realtime programming covers such a vast area that it is common to divide it into two
separate categories. "Hard realtime" is the traditional sort most people think of. When your
nuclear reactor will go critical if a fuel rod adjustment is delayed by a microsecond or your
airplane will crash if the navigation system takes a haft second to respond to a wind sheer, that's
hard realtime. Hard realtime is unforgiving, because the required level of service and bounded
response time are defined by physics or something equally unyielding. "Soft realtime" means that
you need to meet your schedule most of the time, but the consequences of failing to meet the
schedule are not severe.
      Many systems that interact with humans should be designed according to soft realtime
principles. Although humans react slowly, in computer terms, they're sensitive to response time.
Make your users wait too often while the screen redraws before accepting the next mouse click,
and they'll be annoyed. Nobody likes a "busy cursor"--most people expect response to be at least
predictable, even when it cannot be fast.
      Threads are useful for all types of realtime programming, because coding for predictable
response is far easier when you can keep the operations separate. Your "user input function"
doesn't have to wait for your sort operation or for your screen update operation because it executes
independently.
      Achieving predictability requires a lot more than just separating operations into different
threads, however. For one thing, you need to make sure that the thread you need to run "soon"
won't be left sitting on a run queue somewhere while another thread uses the processor. Most
systems, by default, will try to distribute resources more or less fairly between threads. That's nice
for a lot of things--but realtime isn't fair. Realtime means carefully giving precedence to the parts
of the program that limit external response time.

5.5.1 POSIX realtime options
      The POSIX standards are flexible, because they're designed to be useful in a wide range of
environments. In particular, since traditional UNIX systems don't support any form of realtime
scheduling control, all of the tools for controlling realtime response are optional. The fact that a
given implementation of UNIX "conforms to 1003.lc-1995" does not mean you can write
predictable realtime programs.
      If the system defines _POSIX_THREAD_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING, it provides support
for assigning realtime scheduling priorities to threads. The POSIX priority scheduling model is a
little more complicated than the traditional UNIX priority model, but the principle is similar.
Priority scheduling allows the programmer to give the system an idea of how important any two
threads are, relative to each other. Whenever more than one thread is ready to execute, the system
will choose the thread with the highest priority.

5.5.2 Scheduling policies and priorities
     int sched_get_priority_max (int policy);
     int sched_get_priority_min (int policy);
     int pthread_attr_getinheritsched( const pthread_attr_t *attr, int *inheritsched);
     int pthread_attr_setinheritsched( pthread_attr_t *attr, int inheritsched);
     int pthread_attr_getschedparam (const pthread_attr_t *attr, struct sched_param *param);
     int pthread_attr_setschedparam ( pthread_attr_t *attr, const struct sched_param *param);
     int pthread_attr_getschedpolicy (const pthread_attr_t *attr, int *policy);
     int pthread_attr_setschedpolicy (pthread_attr_t *attr, int policy);
     int pthread_getschedparam (pthread_t thread, int *policy, struct sched_param *param);
     int pthread_setschedparam (pthread_t thread; int policy; const struct sched_param *param);

      A Pthreads system that supports _POSIX_THREAD_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING must
provide a definition of the struct sched_param structure that includes at least the member
sched_priority. The sched_priority member is the only scheduling parameter used by the standard
Pthreads scheduling policies, SCHED_FIFO and SCHED_RR. The minimum and maximum
priority values (sched_priority member) that are allowed for each scheduling policy can be
determined by calling sched_get_priority_min or sched_get_priority_max, respectively, for the
scheduling policy. Pthreads systems that support additional, nonstandard scheduling policies may
include additional members.
      The SCHED_FIFO (first in, first out) policy allows a thread to run until another thread with a
higher priority becomes ready, or until it blocks voluntarily. When a thread with SCHED_FIFO
scheduling policy becomes ready, it begins executing immediately unless a thread with equal or
higher priority is already executing.
      The SCHED_RR (round-robin) policy is much the same, except that if a thread with
SCHED_RR policy executes for more than a fixed period of time (the timeslice interval) without
blocking, and another thread with SCHED_RR or SCHED_FIFO policy and the same priority is
ready, the running thread will be preempted so the ready thread can be executed.
      When threads with SCHED_FIFO or SCHED_RR policy wait on a condition variable or wait
to lock a mutex, They will be awakened in priority order. That is, if a low-priority SCHED_FIFO
thread and a high-priority SCHED_FIFO thread are both waiting to lock the same mutex, the
high-priority thread will always be unblocked first when the mutex is unlocked.
      Pthreads defines the name of an additional scheduling policy, called SCHED_OTHER.
Pthreads, however, says nothing at all regarding what this scheduling policy does. This is an
illustration of an unofficial POSIX philosophy that has been termed "a standard way to be
nonstandard" (or, alternately, "a portable way to be non-portable"). That is, when you use any
implementation of Pthreads that supports the priority scheduling option, you can write a portable
program that creates threads running in SCHED_OTHER policy, but the behavior of that program
is non-portable. (The official explanation of SCHED_OTHER is that it provides a portable way
for a program to declare that it does not need a realtime scheduling policy.)
      The SCHED_OTHER policy may be an alias for SCHED_FIFO, or it may be SCHED_RR,
    or it may be something entirely different. The real problem with this ambiguity is not that you
    don't know what SCHED_OTHER does, but that you have no way of knowing what scheduling
    parameters it might require. Because the meaning of SCHED_OTHER is undefined, it does not
    necessarily use the sched_priority member of the struct sched_param structure, and it may require
    additional, nonstandard members that an implementation may add to the structure. If there's any
    point to this, it is simply that SCHED_OTHER is not portable. If you write any code that uses
    SCHED_OTHER you should be aware that the code is not portable--you are, by definition,
    depending on the SCHED_OTHER of the particular Pthreads implementation for which you wrote
    the code.
          The schedpolicy and schedparam attributes, set respectively by pthread_attr_setschedpolicy
    and pthread_attr_setschedparam, specify the explicit scheduling policy and parameters for the
    attributes object. Pthreads does not specify a default value for either of these attributes, which
    means that each implementation may choose some "appropriate" value. A realtime operating
    system intended for embedded controller applications, for example, might choose to create threads
    by default with SCHED_FTFO policy, and, perhaps, some medium-range priority.
          Most multi-user operating systems are more likely to use a nonstandard "timeshare"
    scheduling policy by default, causing threads to be scheduled more or less as processes have
    always been scheduled. The system may, for example, temporarily reduce the priority of "CPU
    hogs" so that they cannot prevent other threads from making progress.
          One example of a multi-user operating system is Digital UNIX, which supports two
    nonstandard timeshare scheduling policies. The foreground policy (SCHED_FG_NP), which is the
    default, is used for normal interactive activity, and corresponds to the way non-threaded processes
    are scheduled. The background policy (SCHED_BG_NP) can be used for less important support
    activities.
          | When you set the scheduling policy or priority attributes in an
          | attributes object, you must also set the inheritsched attribute!
          The inheritsched attribute, which you can set by calling pthread_attr_setinheritsched,
    controls whether a thread you create inherits scheduling information from the creating thread, or
    uses the explicit scheduling information in the schedpolicy and schedparam attributes. Pthreads
    does not specify a default value for inheritsched, either, so if you care about the policy and
    scheduling parameters of your thread, you must always set this attribute.
          Set the inheritsched attribute to PTHREAD_INHERIT_SCHED to cause a new thread to
    inherit the scheduling policy and parameters of the creating thread. Scheduling inheritance is
    useful when you're creating "helper" threads that are working on behalf of the creator--it generally
    makes sense for them to run at the same policy and priority. Whenever you need to control the
    scheduling policy or parameters of a thread you create, you must set the inheritsched attribute to
    PTHREAD_EXPLICIT_SCHED.
58-118 The following program, sched_attr.c, shows how to use an attributes object to create a thread
    with an explicit scheduling policy and priority. Notice that it uses conditional code to determine
    whether the priority scheduling feature of Pthreads is supported at compilation time. It will print a
    message if the option is not supported and continue, although the program in that case will not do
    much. (It creates a thread with default scheduling behavior, which can only say that it ran.)
          Although Solaris 2.5 defines POSIX_THREAD_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING, it does not
    support the POSIX realtime scheduling policies, and attempting to set the policy attribute to
    SCHED_RR would fail. This program treats Solaris as if it did not define the POSIX_THREAD_
    PRIORITY_SCHEDULING option.

    sched_attr.c

          The next program, sched_thread.c, shows how to modify the realtime scheduling policy and
    parameters7or a running thread. When changing the scheduling policy and parameters in a thread
    attributes object, remember, you use two separate operations: one to modify the scheduling policy
    and the other to modify the scheduling parameters.
          You cannot modify the scheduling policy of a running thread separately from the thread's
    parameters, because the policy and parameters must always be consistent for scheduling to operate
    correctly. Each scheduling policy may have a unique range of valid scheduling priorities, and a
    thread cannot operate at a priority that isn't valid for its current policy. To ensure consistency of
    the policy and parameters, they are set with a single call.
55        Unlike sched_attr.c, sched_thread.c does not check the compile-time feature macro _POSIX_
    THREAD_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING. That means it will probably not compile, and almost
    certainly won't run correctly, on a system that does not support the option. There's nothing wrong
    with writing a program that way--in fact, that's what you are likely to do most of the time. If you
    need priority scheduling, you would document that your application requires the _POSIX_
    THREAD_PRIORITY SCHEDULING option, and use it.
57-62 Solari 2.5, despite defining _POSIX_THREAD_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING, does not
    support realtime scheduling policies. For this reason, the ENOSYS from sched_get_priority_min
    is handled as a special case.

    sched_thread.c

    5.5.3 Contention scope and allocation domain
         int pthread_attr_getscope (const pthread_attr_t * attr, int *contentionscope);
         int pthread_attr_setscope (pthread_attr_t *attr, int contentionscope);

         Besides scheduling policy and parameters, two other controls are important in realtime
    scheduling. Unless you are writing a realtime application, they probably don't matter. If you are
    writing a realtime application, you will need to find out which settings of these controls are
    supported by a system.
         The first control is called contention scope. It is a description of how your threads compete
    for processor resources. System contention scope means that your thread competes for processor
    resources against threads outside your process. A high-priority system contention scope thread in
    your process can keep system contention scope threads in other processes from running (or vice
    versa). Process contention scope means that your threads compete only among themselves.
    Usually, process contention scope means that the operating system chooses a process to execute,
    possibly using only the traditional UNIX priority, and some additional scheduler within the
    process applies the POSIX scheduling rules to determine which thread to execute.
         Pthreads provides the thread scope attribute so that you can specify whether each thread you
    create should have process or system contention scope. A Pthreads system may choose to support
PTHREAD_SCOPE_PROCESS, PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM, or both. If you try to create a
thread with a scope that is not supported by the system, pthread_attr_setscope will return
ENOTSUP.
     The second control is allocation domain. An allocation domain is the set of processors within
the system for which threads may compete. A system may have one or more allocation domains,
each containing one or more processors. In a uniprocessor system, an allocation domain will
contain only one processor, but you may still have more than one allocation domain. On a
multiprocessor, each allocation domain may contain from one processor to the number of
processors in the system.
     There is no Pthreads interface to set a thread's allocation domain. The POSIX.14
(Multiprocessor Profile) working group considered proposing standard interfaces, but the effort
was halted by the prospect of dealing with the wide range of hardware architectures and existing
software interfaces. Despite the lack of a standard, any system supporting multiprocessors will
have interfaces to affect the allocation domain of a thread.
     Because there is no standard interface to control allocation domain, there is no way to
describe precisely all the effects of any particular hypothetical situation. Still, you may need to be
concerned about these things if you use a system that supports multiprocessors. A few things to
think about:
     1. How do system contention scope threads and process contention scope threads, within
          the same allocation domain, interact with each other? They are competing for resources
          in some manner, but the behavior is not defined by the standard.
     2. If the system supports "overlapping" allocation domains, in other words, if a processor
          can appear in more than one allocation domain within the system, and you have one
          system contention scope thread in each of two overlapping allocation domains, what
          happens?
     | System contention scope is predictable.
     | Process contention scope is cheap.
     On most systems, you will get better performance, and lower cost, by using only process
contention scope. Context switches between system contention scope threads usually require at
least one call into the kernel, and those calls are relatively expensive compared to the cost of
saving and restoring thread state in user mode. Each system contention scope thread will be
permanently associated with one "kernel entity," and the number of kernel entities is usually more
limited than the number of Pthreads threads. Process contention scope threads may share one
kernel entity, or some small number of kernel entities. On a given system configuration, for
example, you may be able to create thousands of process contention scope threads, but only
hundreds of system contention scope threads.
     On the other hand, process contention scope gives you no real control over the scheduling
priority of your thread--while a high priority may give it precedence over other threads in the
process, it has no advantage over threads in other processes with lower priority. System contention
scope gives you better predictability by allowing control, often to the extent of being able to make
your thread "more important" than threads running within the operating system kernel.
     | System contention scope is less predictable with an allocation domain
     | greater than one.
     When a thread is assigned to an allocation domain with more than a single processor, the
application can no longer rely on completely predictable scheduling behavior. Both high- and
low-priority threads may run at the same time, for example, because the scheduler will not allow
processors to be idle just because a high-priority thread is running. The uniprocessor behavior
would make little sense on a multiprocessor.
     When thread 1 awakens thread 2 by unlocking a mutex, and thread 2 has a higher priority
than thread 1, thread 2 will preempt thread 1 and begin running immediately. However, if thread 1
and thread 2 are running simultaneously in an allocation domain greater than one, and thread 1
awakens thread 3, which has lower priority than thread 1 but higher priority than thread 2, thread 3
may not immediately preempt thread 2. Thread 3 may remain ready until thread 2 blocks.
     For some applications, the predictability afforded by guaranteed preemption in the case
outlined in the previous paragraph may be important. In most cases, it is not that important as long
as thread 3 will eventually run. Although POSIX does not require any Pthreads system to
implement this type of "cross processor preemption," you are more likely to find it when you use
system contention scope threads. If predictability is critical, of course, you should be using system
contention scope anyway.

5.5.4 Problems with realtime scheduling
      One of the problems of relying on realtime scheduling is that it is not modular. In real
applications you will generally be working with libraries from a variety of sources, and those
libraries may rely on threads for important functions like network communication and resource
management. Now, it may seem reasonable to make "the most important thread" in your library
run with SCHED-FIFO policy and maximum priority. The resulting thread, however, isn't just the
most important thread for your library--it is (or, at least, behaves as) the most important thread in
the entire process, including the main program and any other libraries. Your high-priority thread
may prevent all other libraries, and in some cases even the operating system, from performing
work on which the application relies.
      Another problem, which really isn't a problem with priority scheduling, but with the way
many people think about priority scheduling, is that it doesn't do what many people expect. Many
people think that "realtime priority" threads somehow "go faster" than other threads, and that's not
true. Realtime priority threads may actually go slower, because there is more overhead involved in
making all of the required preemption checks at all the right times--especially on a multiprocessor.
      A more severe problem with fixed priority scheduling is called priority inversion. Priority
inversion is when a low-priority thread can prevent a high-priority thread from running--a nasty
interaction between scheduling and synchronization. Scheduling rules state that one thread should
run, but synchronization requires that another thread run, so that the priorities of the two threads
appear to be reversed.
      Priority inversion occurs when low-priority thread acquires a shared resource (such as a
mutex), and is preempted by a high-priority thread that then blocks on that same resource. With
only two threads, the low-priority thread would then be allowed to run, eventually (we assume)
releasing the mutex. However, if a third thread with a priority between those two is ready to run, it
can prevent the low-priority thread from running. Because the low-priority thread holds the mutex
that the high-priority thread needs, the middle-priority thread is also keeping the higher-priority
thread from running.
      There are a number of ways to prevent priority inversion. The simplest is to avoid using
realtime scheduling, but that's not always practical. Pthreads provides several mutex locking
protocols that help avoid priority inversion, priority ceiling and priority inheritance. These are
discussed in Section 5.5.5.
      | Most threaded programs do not need realtime scheduling.
      A final problem is that priority scheduling isn't completely portable. Pthreads defines the
priority scheduling features under an option, and many implementations that are not primarily
intended for realtime programming may choose not to support the option. Even if the option is
supported, there are many important aspects of priority scheduling that are not covered by the
standard. When you use system contention scope, for example, where your threads may compete
directly against threads within the operating system, setting a high priority on your threads might
prevent kernel I/O drivers from functioning on some systems.
      Pthreads does not specify a thread's default scheduling policy or priority, or how the standard
scheduling policies interact with nonstandard policies. So when you set the scheduling policy and
priority of your thread, using "portable" interfaces, the standard provides no way to predict how
that setting will affect any other threads in the process or the system itself.
      If you really need priority scheduling, then use it--and be aware that it has special
requirements beyond simply Pthreads. If you need priority scheduling, keep the following in mind
      1. Process contention scope is "nicer" than system contention scope, because you will not
           prevent a thread in another process, or in the kernel, from running.
      2. SCHED_RR is "nicer" than SCHED_FIFO, and slightly more portable, because
           SCHED_RR threads will be preempted at intervals to share the available processor time
           with other threads at the same priority.
      3. Lower priorities for SCHED_FIFO and SCHED_RR policies are nicer than higher
           priorities, because you are less likely to interfere with something else that's important.
      Unless your code really needs priority scheduling, avoid it. In most cases, introducing
priority scheduling will cause more problems than it will solve.

5.5.5 Priority-aware mutexes
     #if defined (_POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_PROTECT)
           || defined (_POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_INDERIT)
     int pthread_mutexattr_getprotocol (const pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int * protocol);
     int pthread_mutexattr_setprotrcol (pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int protocol);
     #endif
     #ifdef _POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_PROTECT
     int pthread_mutexattr_getprioceiling (const pthread_attr_t *attr, int *prioceiling);
     int pthread_mutexattr_setprioceiiing (pthread_mutexattr_t *attr, int prioceiling);
     int pthread_mutex_getprioceiling (const pthread_mutex_t *mutex, int *prioceiling);
     int pthread_mutex_setprioceiling (pthread_mutex_t *mutex,
                                  int prioceiling, int *old_ceiling);
     #endif

     Pthreads provides several special mutex attributes that can help to avoid priority inversion
deadlocks. Locking, or waiting for, a mutex with one of these attributes may change the priority of
the thread—or the priority of other threads--to ensure that the thread that owns the mutex cannot
be preempted by another thread that needs to lock the same mutex.
      These mutex attributes may not be supported by your implementation of Pthreads, because
they are optional features. If your code needs to function with or without these options, you can
conditionally compile references based on the feature test macros _POSIX_THREAD_PRIO
PROTECT or _POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_INHERIT, defined in <unistd. h>, or you can call
sysconf during program execution to check for _SC_THREAD_PRIO_PROTECT or _SC
THREAD_PRIO_INHERIT.
      Once you've created a mutex using one of these attributes, you can lock and unlock the mutex
exactly like any other mutex. As a consequence, you can easily convert any mutex you create by
changing the code that initializes the mutex. (You must call pthread_mutex_init, however, because
you cannot statically initialize a mutex with non-default attributes.)
      | "Priority ceiling" protocol means that while a thread owns the mutex, it
      | runs at the specified priority.
      If your system defines _POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_PROTECT then it supports the protocol
and prioceiling attributes. You set the protocol attribute by calling pthread_mutexattr_setprotocol.
If you set the protocol attribute to the value PTHREAD_PRIO_PROTECT, then you can also
specify the priority ceiling for mutexes created using the attributes object by setting the prioceiling
attribute.
      You set the prioceiling attribute by calling the function pthread_mutexattr_setprioceiling.
When any thread locks a mutex defined with such an attributes object, the thread's priority will be
set to the priority ceiling of the mutex, unless the thread's priority is already the same or higher,
Note that locking the mutex in a thread running at a priority above the priority ceiling of the mutex
breaks the protocol, removing the protection against priority inversion.
      | "Priority inheritance" means that when a thread waits on a mutex
      | owned by a lower-priority thread, the priority of the owner is increased
      | to that of the waiter.
      If your system defines _POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_INHERIT then it supports the protocol
attribute. If you set the protocol attribute to the value PTHREAD_PRIO_INHERIT, then no thread
holding the mutex can be preempted by another thread with a priority lower than that of any
thread waiting for the mutex. When any thread attempts to lock the mutex while a lower-priority
thread holds the mutex, the priority of the thread currently holding the mutex will be raised to the
priority of the waiter as long as it owns the mutex.
      If your system does not define either _POSIX_THREAD_PRIO_PROTECT or _POSIX_
THREAD_PRIO_INHERIT then the protocol attribute may not be defined. The default value of
the protocol attribute (or the effective value if the attribute isn't defined) is POSIX_PRIO_NONE,
which means that thread priorities are not modified by the act of locking (or waiting for) a mutex.

5.5.5.1      Priority ceiling mutexes
     The simplest of the two types of "priority aware" mutexes is the priority ceiling (or "priority
protection") protocol (Figure 5.3). When you create a mutex using a priority ceiling, you specify
the highest priority at which a thread will ever be running when it locks the mutex. Any thread
locking that mutex will have its priority automatically raised to that value, which will allow it to
finish with the mutex before it can be preempted by any other thread that might try to lock the
mutex. You can also examine or modify the priority ceiling of a mutex that was created with the
priority ceiling (protect) protocol.

                            FIGURE 5.3 Priority ceiling mutex operation

      A priority ceiling mutex is not useful within a library that can be called by threads you don't
control. If any thread that is running at a priority above the ceiling locks the priority ceiling mutex,
the protocol is broken. This doesn't necessarily guarantee a priority inversion, but it removes all
protection against priority inversion. Since the priority ceiling protocol adds overhead to each
mutex operation compared to a normal "unprotected" mutex, you may have wasted processor time
accomplishing nothing.
      Priority ceiling is perfect for an embedded realtime application where the developers control
all synchronization within the system. The priority ceiling can be safely determined when the code
is designed, and you can avoid priority inversion with a relatively small cost in performance
compared to more general solutions. Of course it is always most efficient to avoid priority
inversion, either by avoiding priority scheduling or by using any given mutex only within threads
of equal priority. Equally, of course, these alternatives rarely prove practical when you need them
most.
      You can use priority ceiling within almost any main program, even when you don't control
the code in libraries you use. That's because while it is common for threads that call into library
functions to lock library mutexes, it is not common for threads created by a library to call into
application code and lock application mutexes. If you use a library that has "callbacks" into your
code, you must either ensure that those callbacks (and any functions they call) don't use the
priority ceiling mutexes or that no thread in which the callback might be invoked will run at a
priority above the ceiling priority of the mutex.

5.5.5.2      Priority inheritance mutexes
     The other Pthreads mutex protocol is priority inheritance. In the priority inheritance protocol,
when a thread locks a mutex the thread's priority is controlled through the mutex (Figure 5.4).
When another thread needs to block on that mutex, it looks at the priority of the thread that owns
the mutex. If the thread that owns the mutex has a lower priority than the thread attempting to
block the mutex, the priority of the owner is raised to the priority of the blocking thread.
     The priority increase ensures that the thread that has the mutex locked cannot be preempted
unless the waiting thread would also have been preempted--in a sense, the thread owning the
mutex is working on behalf of the higher-priority thread. When the thread unlocks the mutex, the
thread's priority is automatically lowered to its normal priority and the highest-priority waiter is
awakened. If a second thread of even higher priority blocks on the mutex, the thread that has the
mutex blocked will again have its priority increased. The thread will still be returned to its original
priority when the mutex is unlocked.
     The priority inheritance protocol is more general and powerful than priority ceiling, but also
more complicated and expensive. If a library package must make use of priority scheduling, and
cannot avoid use of a mutex from threads of different priority, then priority inheritance is the only
currently available solution. If you are writing a main program, and know that none of your
mutexes can be locked by threads created within a library, then priority ceiling will accomplish the
same result as priority inheritance, and with less overhead.
                         FIGURE 5.4 Priority inheritance mutex operation

5.6 Threads and kernel entities
"Two lines? cried the Mock Turtle. "Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on:
     then, when you've cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way--"
“That generally takes some time," interrupted the Gryphon.
"--you advance twice--"
"Each with a lobster as a partner!" cried the Gryphon.
     --Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

      Pthreads deliberately says very little about implementation details. This leaves each vendor
free to make decisions based on the needs of their users and to allow the state of the art to advance
by permitting innovation. The standard places a few essential requirements on the implementation
--enough that you can write strictly conforming POSIX applications* that do useful work with
threads and will be able to run correctly on all conforming implementations of the standard.

     * Strictly conforming is used by POSIX to mean something quite specific: a strictly
conforming application is one that does not rely on any options or extensions to the standard and
requires only the specified minimum value for all implementation limits (but will work correctly
with any allowed value).

      Any Pthreads implementation must ensure that "system services invoked by one thread do
not suspend other threads" so that you do not need to worry that calling read might block all
threads in the process on some systems. On the other hand, this does not mean that your process
will always have the maximum possible level of concurrency.
      Nevertheless, when using a system it is often useful to understand the ways in which the
system may be implemented. When writing ANSI C expressions, for example, it is often helpful to
understand what the code generator, and even the hardware, will do with those expressions. With
that in mind, the following sections describe, briefly, a few of the main variations you're likely to
encounter.
      The important terms used in these sections are "Pthreads thread," "kernel entity," and
"processor.” “Pthreads thread" means a thread that you created by calling pthread_create,
represented by an identifier of type pthread_t. These are the threads that you control using
Pthreads interfaces. By "processor," I refer to the physical hardware, the particular thing of which
a "multiprocessor" has more than one.
      Most operating systems have at least one additional level of abstraction between "Pthreads
thread" and "processor" and I refer to that as a "kernel entity," because that is the term used by
Pthreads. In some systems, "kernel entity" may be a traditional UNIX process. It may be a Digital
UNIX Mach thread, or a Solaris 2.x LWP, or an IRIX sproc process. The exact meaning of "kernel
entity," and how it interacts with the Pthreads thread, is the crucial difference between the three
models described in the following sections.

5.6.1 Many-to-one (user level)
      The many-to-one method is also sometimes called a "library implementation.” In general,
"many-to-one" implementations are designed for operating systems with no support for threads.
Pthreads implementations that run on generic UNIX kernels usually fall into this category--for
example, the classic DCE threads reference implementation, or the SunOS 4.x LWP package (no
relation to the Solaris 2.x LWP, which is a kernel entity).
      Many-to-one implementations cannot take advantage of parallelism on a multiprocessor, and
any blocking system service, for example, a call to read, will block all threads in the process.
Some implementations may help you avoid this problem by using features such as UNIX
nonblocking I/O, or POSIX.lb asynchronous I/O, where available. However, these features have
limitations; for example, not all device drivers support nonblocking I/O, and traditional UNIX
disk file system response is usually considered "instantaneous" and will ignore the nonblocking
I/O mode.
      Some many-to-one implementations may not be tightly integrated with the ANSI C library's
support functions, and that can cause serious trouble. The stdio functions, for example, might
block the entire process (and all threads) while one thread waits for you to enter a command. Any
many-to-one implementation that conforms to the Pthreads standard, however, has gotten around
these problems, perhaps by including a special version of stdio and other functions.
      When you require concurrency but do not need parallelism, a many-to-one implementation
may provide the best thread creation performance, as well as the best context switch performance
for voluntary blocking using mutexes and condition variables. It is fast because the Pthreads
library saves and restores thread context entirely in user mode. You can, for example, create a lot
of threads and block most of them on condition variables (waiting for some external event) very
quickly, without involving the kernel at all.
      Figure 5.5 shows the mapping of Pthreads threads (left column) to the kernel entity (middle
column), which is a process, to physical processors (right column). In this case, the process has
four Pthreads threads, labeled "Pthread 1" through "Pthread 4." The Pthreads library schedules the
four threads onto the single process in user mode by swapping register state (SP, general registers,
and so forth). The library may use a timer to preempt a Pthreads thread that runs too long. The
kernel schedules the process onto one of the two physical processors, labeled "processor 1" and
"processor 2." The important characteristics of this model are shown in Table 5.2.

                               FIGURE 5.5 Many-to-one thread mapping

Advantages                               Disadvantages
Fastest context switch time.             Potentially long latency during system service blocking.
Simple; the implementation may           Single-process applications cannot take advantage of
even be (mostly) portable.*              multiprocessor hardware.
* The DCE threads user-mode scheduler can usually be ported to new operating systems in a few
days, involving primarily new assembly language for the register context switching routines. We
use the motto "Some Assembly Required."
                           TABLE 5.2 Many-to-one thread scheduling

5.6.2 One-to-one (kernel level)
     One-to-one thread mapping is also sometimes called a "kernel thread" implementation. The
Pthreads library assigns each thread to a kernel entity. It generally must use blocking kernel
functions to wait on mutexes and condition variables. While synchronization may occur either
within the kernel or in user mode, thread scheduling occurs within the kernel.
      Pthreads threads can take full advantage of multiprocessor hardware in a one-to-one
implementation without any extra effort on your part, for example, separating your code into
multiple processes. When a thread blocks in the kernel, it does not affect other threads any more
than the blocking of a normal UNIX process affects other processes. One thread can even process
a page fault without affecting other threads.
      One-to-one implementations suffer from two main problems. The first is that they do not
scale well. That is, each thread in your application is a kernel entity. Because kernel memory is
precious, kernel objects such as processes and threads are often limited by preallocated arrays, and
most implementations will limit the number of threads you can create. It will also limit the number
of threads that can be created on the entire system--so depending on what other processes are
doing, your process may not be able to reach its own limit.
      The second problem is that blocking on a mutex and waiting on a condition variable, which
happen frequently in many applications, are substantially more expensive on most one-to-one
implementations, because they require entering the machine's protected kernel mode. Note that
locking a mutex, when it was not already locked, or unlocking a mutex, when there are no waiting
threads, may be no more expensive than on a many-to-one implementation, because on most
systems those functions can be completed in user mode.
      A one-to-one implementation can be a good choice for CPU-bound applications, which don't
block very often. Many high-performance parallel applications begin by creating a worker thread
for each physical processor in the system, and once started, the threads run independently for a
substantial time period. Such applications will work well because they do not strain the kernel by
creating a lot of threads, and they don't require a lot of calls into the kernel to block and unblock
their threads.
      Figure 5.6 shows the mapping of Pthreads threads (left column) to kernel entities (middle
column) to physical processors (right column). In this case, the process has four Pthreads threads,
labeled "Pthread 1" through "Pthread 4.” Each Pthreads thread is permanently bound to the
corresponding kernel entity. The kernel schedules the four kernel entities (along with those from
other processes) onto the two physical processors, labeled "processor 1" and "processor 2.” The
important characteristics of this model are shown in Table 5.3.

                             FIGURE 5.6 One-to-one thread mapping

Advantages                                Disadvantages
Can take advantage of multiprocessor      Relatively slow thread context switch (calls into kernel).
hardware within a single process.
No latency during system service          Poor scaling when many threads are used, because each
blocking.                                 Pthreads thread takes kernel resources from the system.
                             TABLE 5.3 One-to-one thread scheduling

5.6.3 Many-to-few (two level)
     The many-to-few model tries to merge the advantages of both the many-to-one and
one-to-one models, while avoiding their disadvantages. This model requires cooperation between
the user-level Pthreads library and the kernel. They share scheduling responsibilities and may
communicate information about the threads between each other.
      When the Pthreads library needs to switch between two threads, it can do so directly, in user
mode. The new Pthreads thread runs on the same kernel entity without intervention from the
kernel. This gains the performance benefit of many-to-one implementations for the most common
cases, when a thread blocks on a mutex or condition variable, and when a thread terminates.
      When the kernel needs to block a thread, to wait for an I/O or other resource it does so. The
kernel may inform the Pthreads library, as in Digital UNIX 4.0, so that the library can preserve
process concurrency by immediately scheduling a new Pthreads thread, somewhat like the original
"scheduler activations" model proposed by the famous University of Washington research
[Anderson, 1991]. Or. the kernel may simply block the kernel entity, in which case it may allow
programmers to increase the number of kernel entities that are allocated to the process, as in
Solaris 2.5 otherwise the process could be stalled when all kernel entities have blocked, even
though other user threads are ready to run.
      Many-to-few implementations excel in most real-world applications, because in most
applications, threads perform a mixture of CPU-bound and I/O-bound operations, and block both
in I/O and in Pthreads synchronization. Most applications also create more threads than there are
physical processors, either directly or because an application that creates a few threads also uses a
parallel library that creates a few threads, and so forth.
      Figure 5.7 shows the mapping of Pthreads threads (left column) to kernel entities (middle
column) to physical processors (right column). In this case, the process has four Pthreads threads,
labeled "Pthread 1" through "Pthread 4." The Pthreads library creates some number of kernel
entities at initialization (and may create more later). Typically, the library will start with one kernel
entity (labeled "kernel entity 1" and "kernel entity 2") for each physical processor. The kernel
schedules these kernel entities (along with those from other processes) onto the two physical
processors, labeled "processor 1' and "processor 2." The important characteristics of this model are
shown in Table 5.4.

                             FIGURE 5.7 Many-to-few thread mapping

Advantages                                           Disadvantages
Can take advantage of multiprocessor hardware        More complicated than other models.
within a process.
Most context switches are in user mode (fast).       Programmers lose direct control over kernel
                                                     entities, since the thread's priority may be
                                                     meaningful only in user mode.
Scales well; a process may use one kernel
entity per physical processor, or "a few" more.
Little latency during system service blocking.
                             TABLE 5.4 Many-to-few thread scheduling
