6    POSIX adjusts to threads
"Who are you?" said the Caterpillar.
This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation.
Alice replied, rather shyly, "1--1 hardly know, Sir,
     just at present--at least I know who I was when I got up this morning, but
     I think I must have been changed several times since then."
     --Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

     Pthreads changes the meaning of a number of traditional POSIX process functions. Most of
the changes are obvious, and you'd probably expect them even if the standard hadn't added
specific wording. When a thread blocks for I/O, for example, only the calling thread blocks, while
other threads in the process can continue to run.
     But there's another class of POSIX functions that doesn't extend into the threaded world quite
so unambiguously. For example, when you fork a threaded process, what happens to the threads?
What does exec do in a threaded process? What happens when one of the threads in a threaded
process calls exit?

6.1 fork
      | Avoid using fork in a threaded program (if you can)
      | unless you intend to exec a new program immediately.
      When a threaded process calls fork to create a child process, Pthreads specifies that only the
thread calling fork exists in the child. Although only the calling thread exists on return from fork
in the child process, all other Pthreads states remain as they were at the time of the call to fork. In
the child process, the thread has the same thread state as in the parent. It owns the same mutexes,
has the same value for all thread-specific data keys, and so forth. All mutexes and condition
variables exist, although any threads that were waiting on a synchronization object at the time of
the fork are no longer waiting. (They don't exist in the child process, so how could they be
waiting?)
      Pthreads does not "terminate" the other threads in a forked process, as if they exited with
pthread_exit or even as if they were canceled. They simply cease to exist. That is, the threads do
not run thread-specific data destructors or cleanup handlers. This is not a problem if the child
process is about to call exec to run a new program, but if you use fork to clone a threaded program,
beware that you may lose access to memory, especially heap memory stored only as
thread-specific data values.
      | The state of mutexes is not affected by a fork. If it was locked in the
      | parent it is locked in the child!
      If a mutex was locked at the time of the call to fork, then it is still locked in the child.
Because a locked mutex is owned by the thread that locked it, the mutex can be unlocked in the
child only if the thread that locked the mutex was the one that called fork. This is important to
remember--if another thread has a mutex locked when you call fork, you will lose access to that
mutex and any data controlled by that mutex.
      Despite the complications, you can fork a child that continues running and even continues to
use Pthreads. You must use fork handlers carefully to protect your mutexes and the shared data
that the mutexes are protecting. Fork handlers are described in Section 6.1.1.
     Because thread-specific data destructors and cleanup handlers are not called. you may need to
worry about memory leaks. One possible solution would be to cancel threads created by your
subsystem in the prepare fork handler, and wait for them to terminate before allowing the fork to
continue (by returning), and then create new threads in the parent handler that is called after fork
completes. This could easily become messy, and I am not recommending it as a solution. Instead,
take another look at the warning back at the beginning of this section: Avoid using fork in
threaded code except where the child process will immediately exec a new program.
     POSIX specifies a small set of functions that may be called safely from within
signal-catching functions ("async-signal safe" functions), and fork is one of them. However, none
of the POSIX threads functions is async-signal safe (and there are good reasons for this, because
being async-signal safe generally makes a function substantially more expensive). With the
introduction of fork handlers, however, a call to fork is also a call to some set of fork handlers.
     The purpose of a fork handler is to allow threaded code to protect synchronization state and
data invariants across a fork, and in most cases that requires locking mutexes. But you cannot lock
mutexes from a signal-catching function. So while it is legal to call fork from within a
signal-catching function, doing so may (beyond the control or knowledge of the caller) require
performing other operations that cannot be performed within a signal-catching function.
     This is an inconsistency in the POSIX standard that will need to be fixed. Nobody yet knows
what the eventual solution will be. My advice is to avoid using fork in a signal-catching function.

6.1.1 Fork handlers
     int pthread_atferk (void (*prepare)(void), void (*parent) (void), void (*child)(void) );

     Pthreads added the pthread_atfork "fork handler" mechanism to allow your code to protect
data invariants across fork. This is somewhat analogous to atexit, which allows a program to
perform cleanup when a process terminates. With pthread_atfork you supply three separate
handler addresses. The prepare fork handler is called before the fork takes place in the parent
process. The parent fork handler is called after the fork in the parent process, and the child fork
handler is called after the fork in the child process.
     | If you write a subsystem that uses mutexes and does not establish
     | fork handlers, then that subsystem will not function correctly in a
     | child process after a fork,
     Normally a prepare fork handler locks all mutexes used by the associated code (for a library
or an application) in the correct order to prevent deadlocks. The thread calling fork will block in
the prepare fork handler until it has locked all the mutexes. That ensures that no other threads can
have the mutexes locked or be modifying data that the child might need. The parent fork handler
need only unlock all of those mutexes, allowing the parent process and all threads to continue
normally.
     The child fork handler may often be the same as the parent fork handler; but sometimes you'll
need to reset the program or library state. For example, if you use "daemon" threads to perform
functions in the background you'll need to either record the fact that those threads no longer exist
or create new threads to perform the same function in the child. You may need to reset counters,
free heap memory, and so forth.
     | Your fork handlers are only as good as everyone else's fork handlers.
          The system will run all prepare fork handlers declared in the process when any thread calls
    fork. If you code your prepare and child fork handlers correctly then, in principle, you will be able
    to continue operating in the child process. But what if someone else didn't supply fork handlers or
    didn't do it right? The ANSI C library on a threaded system, for example, must use a set of
    mutexes to synchronize internal data, such as stdio file streams.
          If you use an ANSI C library that doesn't supply fork handlers to prepare those mutexes
    properly for a fork, for example, then, sometimes, you may find that your child process hangs
    when it calls printf, because another thread in the parent process had the mutex locked when your
    thread called fork. There's often nothing you can do about this type of problem except to file a
    problem report against the system. These mutexes are usually private to the library, and aren't
    visible to your code--you can't lock them in your prepare handler or before calling fork.
          The program atfork.c shows the use of fork handlers. When run with no argument, or with a
    nonzero argument, the program will install fork handlers. When run with a zero argument, such as
    atfork 0, it will not.
          With fork handlers installed, the result will be two output lines reporting the result of the fork
    call and, in parentheses, the pid of the current process. Without fork handlers, the child process
    will be created while the initial thread owns the mutex. Because the initial thread does not exist in
    the child, the mutex cannot be unlocked, and the child process will hang--only the parent process
    will print its message.
13-25 Function fork_prepare is the prepare handler. This will be called by fork, in the parent
     process, before creating the child process. Any state changed by this function, in particular,
     mutexes that are locked, will be copied into the child process. The fork_prepare function locks
     the program's mutex.
31-42 Function fork_parent is the parent handler. This will be called by fork, in the parent process,
    after creating the child process. In general, a parent handler should undo whatever was done in the
    prepare handler, so that the parent process can continue normally. The fork_parent function
    unlocks the mutex that was locked by fork_prepare.
48-60 Function fork_child is the child handler. This will be called by fork, in the child process. In
    most cases, the child handler will need to do whatever was done in the fork_parent handler to
    "unlock" the state so that the child can continue. It may also need to perform additional cleanup,
    for example, fork_child sets the self_pid variable to the child process's pid as well as unlocking
    the process mutex.
65-91 After creating a child process, which will continue executing the thread_routine code, the
     thread_routine function locks the mutex. When run with fore handlers, the fork call will be
     blocked (when the prepare handler locks the mutex) until the mutex is available. Without fork
     handlers, the thread will fork before main unlocks the mutex, and the thread will hang in the child
     at this point.
99-106 The main program declares fork handlers unless the program is run with an argument of 0.
108-123 The main program locks the mutex before creating the thread that will fork. It then sleeps for
    several seconds, to ensure that the thread will be able to call fork while the mutex is locked, and
    then unlocks the mutex. The thread running thread_routine will always succeed in the parent
    process, because it will simply block until main releases the lock.
          However, without the fork handlers, the child process will be created while the mutex is
    locked. The thread (main) that locked the mutex does not exist in the child, and cannot unlock the
mutex in the child process. Mutexes can be unlocked in the child only if they were locked by the
thread that called fork--and fork handlers provide the best way to ensure that.

atfork.c

     Now, imagine you are writing a library that manages network server connections, and you
create a thread for each network connection that listens for service requests. In your prepare fork
handler you lock all of the library's mutexes to make sure the child's state is consistent and
recoverable. In your parent fork handler you unlock those mutexes and return. When designing the
child fork handler, you need to decide exactly what a fork means to your library. If you want to
retain all network connections in the child, then you would create a new listener thread for each
connection and record their identifiers in the appropriate data structures before releasing the
mutexes. If you want the child to begin with no open connections, then you would locate the
existing parent connection data structures and free them, closing the associated files that were
propagated by fork.

6.2 exec
     The exec function isn't affected much by the presence of threads. The function of exec is to
wipe out the current program context and replace it with a new program. A call to exec
immediately terminates all threads in the process except the thread calling exec. They do not
execute cleanup handlers or thread-specific data destructors--the threads simply cease to exist.
     All synchronization objects also vanish, except for pshared mutexes (mutexes created using
the PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED attribute value) and pshared condition variables, which
remain usable as long as the shared memory is mapped by some process. You should, however,
unlock any pshared mutexes that the current process may have locked--the system will not unlock
them for you.

6.3 Process exit
       In a non-threaded program, an explicit call to the exit function has the same effect as
returning from the program's main function. The process exits. Pthreads adds the pthread_exit
function, which can be used to cause a single thread to exit while the process continues. In a
threaded program, therefore, you call exit when you want the process to exit, or pthread_exit when
you want only the calling thread to exit.
       In a threaded program, main is effectively the "thread start function" for the process's initial
thread. Although returning from the start function of any other thread terminates that thread just as
if it had called pthread_exit, returning from main terminates the process. All memory (and threads)
associated with the process evaporate. Threads do not run cleanup handlers or thread-specific data
destructors. Calling exit has the same effect. When you don't want to make use of the initial thread
or make it wait for other threads to complete, you can exit from main by calling pthread_exit
rather than by returning or calling exit. Calling pthread_exit from main will terminate the initial
thread without affecting the other threads in the process, allowing them to continue and complete
normally.
       The exit function provides a simple way to shut down the entire process. For example, if a
thread determines that data has been severely corrupted by some error, it may be dangerous to
    allow the program to continue to operate on the data. When the program is somehow broken, it
    might be dangerous to attempt to shut down the application threads cleanly. In that case, you
    might call exit to stop all processing immediately.

    6.4 Stdio
         Pthreads specifies that the ANSI C standard I/O (stdio) functions are thread-safe. Because the
    stdio package requires static storage for output buffers and file state, stdio implementations will
    use synchronization, such as mutexes or semaphores.

    6.4.1 flockfile and funlockfile
         void flockfile (FILE *file);
         int ftrylockfile (FILE *file);
         void funlockfile (FILE *file);

          In some cases, it is important that a sequence of stdio operations occur in uninterrupted
    sequence; for example, a prompt followed by a read from the terminal, or two writes that need to
    appear together in the output file even if another thread attempts to write data between the two
    stdio calls. Therefore, Pthreads adds a mechanism to lock a file and specifies how file locking
    interacts with internal stdio locking. To write a prompt string to stdin and read a response from
    stdout without allowing another thread to read from stdin or write to stdout between the two, you
    would need to lock both stdin and stdout around the two calls as shown in the following program,
    flock.c.
19-20 This is the important part: Two separate calls to flockfile are made, one for each of the two
     file streams. To avoid possible deadlock problems within stdio, Pthreads recommends always
     locking input streams before output streams, when you must lock both. That's good advice, and
     I've taken it by locking stdin before stdout.
29-30 The two calls to funlockfile must, of course, be made in the opposite order. Despite the
     specialized call, you are effectively locking mutexes within the stdio library, and you should
     respect a consistent lock hierarchy.

    flock.c

          You can also use the flockfile and funlockfile functions to ensure that a series of writes is not
    interrupted by a file access from some other thread. The ftrylockfile function works like
    pthread_mutex_trylock in that it attempts to lock the file and, if the file is already locked, returns
    an error status instead of blocking.

    6.4.2 getchar_unlocked and putchar_unlocked
         int getc_unlocked (FILE *stream);
         int getchar_unlocked (void);
         int putc_unlocked (int c, FILE *stream);
         int putchar_unlocked (int c);

         ANSI C provides functions to get and put single characters efficiently into stdio buffers. The
    functions getchar and putchar operate on stdin and stdout, respectively, and getc and putc can be
    used on any stdio file stream. These are traditionally implemented as macros for maximum
    performance, directly reading or writing the file stream's data buffer. Pthreads, however, requires
    these functions to lock the stdio stream data, to prevent code from accidentally corrupting the stdio
    buffers.
         The overhead of locking and unlocking mutexes will probably vastly exceed the time spent
    performing the character copy, so these functions are no longer high performance. Pthreads could
    have defined new functions that provided the locked variety rather than redefining the existing
    functions; however, the result would be that existing code would be unsafe for use in threads. The
    working group decided that it was preferable to make existing code slower, rather than to make it
    incorrect.
         Pthreads adds new functions that replace the old high-performance macros with essentially
    the same implementation as the traditional macros. The functions getc_unlocked, putc_unlocked,
    getchar_unlocked, and putchar_unlocked do not perform any locking, so you must use flockfile
    and funlockfile around any sequence of these operations. If you want to read or write a single
    character you should usually use the locked variety rather than locking the file stream, calling the
    new unlocked get or put function, and then unlocking the file stream.
         If you want to perform a sequence of fast character accesses, where you would have
    previously used getchar and putchar, you can now use getchar_unlocked and putchar_unlocked.
    The following program, putchar.c, shows the difference between using putchar and using a
    sequence of putchar_unlocked calls within a file lock.
9-20 When the program is run with a nonzero argument or no argument at all, it creates threads
     running the lock_routine function. This function locks the stdout file stream, and then writes its
     argument (a string) to stdout one character at a time using putchar_unlocked.
29-37 When the program is run with a zero argument, it creates threads running the unlock_routine
    function. This function writes its argument to stdout one character at a time using putchar.
    Although putchar is internally synchronized to ensure that the stdio buffer is not corrupted, the
    individual characters may appear in any order.

    putchar.c

    6.5 Thread-safe functions
         Although ANSI C and POSIX 1003.1-1990 were not developed with threads in mind, most of
    the functions they define can be made thread-safe without changing the external interface. For
    example, although malloc and free must be changed to support threads, code calling these
    functions need not be aware of the changes. When you call malloc, it locks a mutex (or perhaps
    several mutexes) to perform the operation, or may use other equivalent synchronization
    mechanisms. But your code just calls malloc as it always has, and it does the same thing as
    always.
         In two main classes of functions, this is not true:
         ? Functions that traditionally return pointers to internal static buffers, for example,
              asctime. An internal mutex wouldn't help, since the caller will read the formatted time
              string some time after the function returns and, therefore, after the mutex has been
              unlocked.
     ?     Functions that require static context between a series of calls, for example, strtok, which
           stores the current position within the token string in a local static variable. Again, using
           a mutex within strtok wouldn't help, because other threads would be able to overwrite
           the current location between two calls.
      In these cases, Pthreads has defined variants of the existing functions that are thread-safe,
which are designated by the suffix "_r" at the end of the function name. These variants move
context outside the library, under the caller's control. When each thread uses a private buffer or
context, the functions are thread-safe. You can also share context between threads if you want--but
the caller must provide synchronization between the threads. If you want two threads to search a
directory in parallel, you must synchronize their use of the shared struct dirent passed to readdir_r.
      A few existing functions, such as ctermid, are already thread-safe as long as certain
restrictions are placed on parameters. These restrictions are noted in the following sections.

6.5.1 User and terminal identification
     int getlogin_r (char *name, size_t namesize);
     char *ctermid (char *s);
     int ttyname_r (int fildes, char *name, size_t namesize);

      These functions return data to a caller-specified buffer. For getlogin_r, name-size must be at
least LOGIN_NAME_MAX characters. For ttyname_r, name-size must be at least TTY_NAME_
MAX characters. Either function returns a value of 0 on success, or an error number on failure. In
addition to errors that might be returned by getlogin or ttyname, getlogin_r and ttyname_r may
return ERANGE to indicate that the name buffer is too small.
      Pthreads requires that when ctermid (which has not changed) is used in a threaded
environment, the s return argument must be specified as a pointer to a character buffer having at
least L_ctermid bytes. It was felt that this restriction was sufficient, without defining a new variant
to also specify the size of the buffer. Program getlogin.c shows how to call these functions. Notice
that these functions do not depend on threads, or <pthread.h>, in any way, and may even be
provided on systems that don't support threads.

getlogin.c

6.5.2 Directory searching
     int readdir_r (DIR *dirp, struct dirent *entry, struct dirent **result);

     This function performs essentially the same action as readdir. That is, it returns the next
directory entry in the directory stream specified by dirp. The difference is that instead of returning
a pointer to that entry, it copies the entry into the buffer specified by entry. On success, it returns 0
and sets the pointer specified by result to the buffer entry. On reaching the end of the directory
stream, it returns 0 and sets result to NULL. On failure, it returns an error number such as
EBADF.
     Refer to program pipe.c, in Section 4.1, for a demonstration of using readdir_r to allow your
threads to search multiple directories concurrently.
6.5.3 String token
     char *strtok_r (char *s, const char *sep, char **lasts);

     This function returns the next token in the string s. Unlike strtok, the context (the current
pointer within the original string) is maintained in lasts, which is specified by the caller, rather
than in a static pointer internal to the function.
     In the first call of a series, the argument s gives a pointer to the string. In subsequent calls to
return successive tokens of that string, s must be specified as NULL. The value lasts is set by
strtok_r to maintain the function's position within the string, and on each subsequent call you must
return that same value of lasts. The strtok_r function returns a pointer to the next token, or NULL
when there are no more tokens to be found in the original string.

6.5.4 Time representation
     char *asctime_r (const struct tm *tm, char *buf);
     char *ctime_r (const time_t *clock, char *buf);
     struct tm *gmtime_r (const time_t *clock, struct tm *result);
     struct tm *localtime_r (const time_t *clock, struct tm *result);

      The output buffers (buf and result) are supplied by the caller, instead of returning a pointer to
static storage internal to the functions. Otherwise, they are identical to the traditional variants. The
asctime_r and ctime_r routines, which return ASCII character representations of a system time,
both require that their buf argument point to a character string of at least 26 bytes.

6.5.5 Random number generation
     int rand_r (unsigned int *seed);

     The seed is maintained in caller-supplied storage (seed) rather than using static storage
internal to the function. The main problem with this interface is that it is not usually practical to
have a single seed shared by all application and library code within a program. As a result, the
application and each library generally have a separate "stream" of random numbers. Thus, a
program converted to use rand_r instead of rand is likely to generate different results, even if no
threads are created. (Creating threads would probably change the order of calls to rand, and
therefore change results anyway.)

6.5.6 Group and user database
     Group database:
         int getgrgid_r (gid_t gid, struct group *grp, char *buffer, size_t bufsize,
                    struct group **result);
         int getgrnam_r (const char *name, struct group *grp, char *buffer, size_t bufsize,
                    struch group **result);
     User database:
         int getpwuid_r (uid_t uid, struct passwd *pwd, char *buffer, size_t bufsize,
                         struct passwd **result);
         int getpwnam_r (const char *name, struct passwd *pwd, char *buffer,
                         size_t bufsize, struct passwd **result);

      These functions store a copy of the group or user record (grp or pwd, respectively) for the
specified group or user (gid, uid, or name) in a buffer designated by the arguments buffer and
bufsize. The function return value is in each case either 0 for success, or an error number (such as
ERANGF. when the buffer is too small) to designate an error. If the requested record is not present
in the group or passwd database, the functions may return success but store the value NULL into
the result pointer. If the record is found and the buffer is large enough, result becomes a pointer to
the struct group or struct passwd record within buffer.
      he maximum required size for buffer can be determined by calling sysconf with the argument
_SC_GETGR_R_SIZE_MAX (for group data) or with the argument _SC_GETPW_R_SIZE
_MAX (for user data).

6.6 Signals
Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
The frumious Bandersnatch!
     --Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

     The history of the Pthreads signal-handling model is the most convoluted and confusing part
of the standard. There were several different viewpoints, and it was difficult to devise a
compromise that would satisfy everyone in the working group (much less the larger and more
diverse balloting group). This isn't surprising, since signals are complicated anyway, and have a
widely divergent history in the industry.
     There were two primary conflicting goals:
     ? First, "signals should be completely compatible with traditional UNIX." That means
           signal handlers and masks should remain associated with the process. That makes them
           virtually useless with multiple threads, which is as it should be since signals have
           complicating semantics that make it difficult for signals and threads to coexist
           peacefully. Tasks should be accomplished synchronously using threads rather than
           asynchronously using signals.
     ? Second, "signals should be completely compatible with traditional UNIX." This time,
           "compatible" means signal handlers and masks should be completely thread-private.
           Most existing UNIX code would then function essentially the same running within a
           thread as it had within a process. Code migration would be simplified.
The problem is that the definitions of "compatible" were incompatible. Although many people
involved in the negotiation may not agree with the final result, nearly everyone would agree that
those who devised the compromise did an extraordinarily good job, and that they were quite
courageous to attempt the feat.
     | When writing threaded code, treat signals as Jabberwocks—
     | curious and potentially dangerous creatures to be
     | approached with caution, if at all.
     It is always best to avoid using signals in conjunction with threads. At the same time, it is
often not possible or practical to keep them separate. When signals and threads meet, beware. If at
all possible, use only pthread_sigmask to mask signals in the main thread, and sigwait to handle
signals synchronously within a single thread dedicated to that purpose. If you must use sigaction
(or equivalent) to handle synchronous signals (such as SIGSEGV) within threads, be especially
cautious. Do as little work as possible within the signal-catching function.

6.6.1 Signal actions
      All signal actions are process-wide. A program must coordinate any use of sigaction between
threads. This is non-modular, but also relatively simple, and signals have never been modular. A
function that dynamically modifies signal actions, for example, to catch or ignore SIGFPE while it
performs floating-point operations, or SIGPIPE while it performs network I/O, will be tricky to
code on a threaded system.
      While modifying the process signal action, for a signal number is itself thread-safe, there is
no protection against some other thread setting a new signal action immediately afterward. Even if
the code tries to be "good" by saving the original signal action and restoring it, it may be foiled by
another thread, as shown in Figure 6.1.
      Signals that are not "tied" to a specific hardware execution context are delivered to one
arbitrary thread within the process. That means a SIGCHLD raised by a child process termination,
for example, may not be delivered to the thread that created the child. Similarly, a call to kill
results in a signal that may be delivered to any thread.

Thread 1                 Thread 2                Comments
sigaction ( SIGFPE )                             Thread l's signal action active.
                         sigaction ( SIGFPE )    Thread 2's signal action active.
Generate SIGFPE                                  Thread 1 signal is handled by the thread 2 signal
                                                 action (but still in the context of thread 1).
Restore action                                   Thread 1 restores original signal action.
                         restore action          Thread 2 restores thread l's signal action--
                                                 original action is lost.

                          FIGURE 6.1 Non-modularity of signal actions

     The synchronous "hardware context" signals, including SIGFPE, SIGSEGV, and SIGTRAP,
are delivered to the thread that caused the hardware condition, never to another thread.
     | You cannot kill a thread by sending it a SIGKILL or stop a thread by
     | sending it o SIGSTOP.
     Any signal that affected a process still affects the process when multiple threads are active,
which means that sending a SIGKILL to a process or to any specific thread in the process (using
pthread_kil1, which we'll get to in Section 6.6.3) will terminate the process. Sending a SIGSTOP
will cause all threads to stop until a SIGCONT is received. This ensures that existing process
control functions continue to work--otherwise most threads in a process could continue running
when you stopped a command by sending a SIGSTOP. This also applies to the default action of
the other signals, for example, SIGSEGV, if not handled, will terminate the process and generate a
core file--it will not terminate only the thread that generated the SIGSEGV.
     What does this mean to a programmer? It has always been common wisdom that library code
should not change signal actions--that this is exclusively the province of the main program. This
philosophy becomes even more wise when you are programming with threads. Signal actions must
always be under the control of a single component, at least, and to assign that responsibility to the
main program makes the most sense in nearly all situations.

6.6.2 Signal masks
     int pthread_sigmask (int how, const sigset_t *set, sigset_t (oset);

     Each thread has its own private signal mask, which is modified by calling pthread_sigmask.
Pthreads does not specify what sigprocmask does within a threaded process--it may do nothing.
Portable threaded code does not call sigprocmask. A thread can block or unblock signals without
affecting the ability of other threads to handle the signal. This is particularly important for
synchronous signals. It would be awkward if thread A were unable to process a SIGFPF because
thread B was currently processing its own SIGFPE or, even worse, because thread C had blocked
SIGFPE. When a thread is created, it inherits the signal mask of the thread that created it--if you
want a signal to be masked everywhere, mask it first thing in main.

6.6.3 pthread_kill
     int pthread_kill (pthread_t thread, int sig);

      Within a process, one thread can send a signal to a specific thread (including itself) by calling
pthread_kill. When calling pthread_kill, you specify not only the signal number to be delivered,
but also the pthread_t identifier for the thread to which you want the signal sent. You cannot use
pthread_kill to send a signal to a thread in another process, however, because a thread identifier
(pthread_t) is meaningful only within the process that created it.
      The signal sent by pthread_kill is handled like any other signal. If the "target" thread has the
signal masked, it will be marked pending against that thread. If the thread is waiting for the signal
in sigwait (covered in Section 6.6.4), the thread will receive the signal. If the thread does not have
the signal masked, and is not blocked in sigwait, the current signal action will be taken.
      Remember that, aside from signal-catching functions, signal actions affect the process.
Sending the SIGKILL signal to a specific thread using pthread_kill will kill the process, not just
the specified thread. Use pthread_cancel to get rid of a particular thread (see Section 5.3). Sending
SIGSTOP to a thread will stop all threads in the process until a SIGCONT is sent by some other
process.
      The raise function specified by ANSI C has traditionally been mapped to a kill for the current
process. That is, raise (SIGABRT) is usually the same as kill(getpid (), SIGABRT).
      With multiple threads, code calling raise is most likely to intend that the signal be sent to the
calling thread, rather than to some arbitrary thread within the process. Pthreads specifies that raise
(SIGABRT) is the same as pthread_kill(pthread_self (), SIGABRT).
      The following program, susp.c, uses pthread_kill to implement a portable "suspend and
resume" (or, equivalently, "suspend and continue") capability much like that provided by the
Solaris "UI threads" interfaces thr_suspend and thr_continue.* You call the thd_suspend function
with the pthread_t of a thread, and when the function returns, the specified thread has been
    suspended from execution. The thread cannot execute until a later call to thd_continue is made
    with the same pthread_t.

    * The algorithm (and most of the code) for susp.c was developed by a coworker of mine, Brian
    Silver. The code shown here is a simplified version for demonstration purposes.

         A request to suspend a thread that is already suspended has no effect. Calling thd_continue a
   single time for a suspended thread will cause it to resume execution, even if it had been suspended
   by multiple calls to thd_suspend. Calling thd_continue for a thread that is not currently suspended
   has no effect.
         Suspend and resume are commonly used to solve some problems, for example, multithread
   garbage collectors, and may even work sometimes if the programmer is very careful. This
   emulation of suspend and resume may therefore be valuable to the few programmers who really
   need these functions. Beware, however, that should you suspend a thread while it holds some
   resource (such as a mutex), application deadlock can easily result.
6        The symbol ITERATIONS defines how many times the "target" threads will loop. If this
   value is set too small, some or all of the threads will terminate before the main thread has been
   able to suspend and continue them as it desires. If that happens, the program will fail with an error
   message--increase the value of ITERATIONS until the problem goes away.
12       The variable sentinel is used to synchronize between a signal-catching function and another
   thread. "Oh?" you may ask, incredulously. This mechanism is not perfect--the suspending thread
   (the one calling thd_suspend) waits in a loop, yielding the processor until this sentinel changes
   state. The volatile storage attribute ensures that the signal-catching function will write the value to
   memory.* Remember, you cannot use a mutex within a signal-catching function.

    *A semaphore, as described later in Section 6.6.6, would provide cleaner, and somewhat safer,
    synchronization, The thd_suspend would call sem_wait on a semaphore with an initial value of 0,
    and the signal-catching function would call sem_post to wake it.

22-40 The suspend_signal_handler function will be established as the signal-catching function for
    the "suspend" signal, SIGUSR1. It initializes a signal mask to block all signals except SIGUSR2,
    which is the "resume" signal, and then waits for that signal by calling sigsuspend. Just before
    suspending itself, it sets the sentinel variable to inform the suspending thread that it is no longer
    executing user code for most practical purposes, it is already suspended.
          The purpose for this synchronization between the signal-catching function and thd_suspend
    is that, to be most useful, the thread calling thd_suspend must be able to know when the target
    thread has been successfully suspended. Simply calling pthread_kill is not enough, because the
    system might not deliver the signal for a substantial period of time; we need to know when the
    signal has been received.
47-51 The resume_signal_handler function will be established as the signal-catching function for
    the "resume" signal, SlGUSR1. The function isn't important, since the signal is sent only to
    interrupt the call to sigsuspend in suspend_signal_handler.

    susp.c                                                        partl signal-catchingfunctions
          The suspend_init_routine function dynamically initializes the suspend/resume package when
    the first call to thd_suspend is made. It is actually called indirectly by pthread_once.
15-16 It allocates an initial array of thread identifiers, which is used to record the identifiers of all
     threads that have been suspended. This array is used to ensure that multiple calls to thd_suspend
     have no additional effect on the target thread, and that calling thd_continue for a thread that is not
     suspended has no effect.
21-35 It sets up signal actions for the SIGUSR1 and SIGUSR2 signals, which will be used,
    respectively, to suspend and resume threads.

    susp.c                                                                        part 2 initialization

9-40     The thd_suspend function suspends a thread, and returns when that thread has ceased to
    execute user code. It first ensures that the suspend/resume package is initialized by calling
    pthread_once. Under protection of a mutex, it searches for the target thread's identifier in the array
    of suspended thread identifiers. If the thread is already suspended, thd_suspend returns
    successfully.
47-60 Determine whether there is an empty entry in the array of suspended threads and, if not,
    realloc the array with an extra entry.
65-78 The sentinel variable is initialized to 0, to detect when the target thread suspension occurs.
    The thread is sent a SlGUSR1 signal by calling pthread_kill, and thd_suspend loops, calling
    sched_yield to avoid monopolizing a processor, until the target thread responds by setting sentinel.
    Finally, the suspended thread's identifier is stored in the array.

    susp.c                                                                        part 3 thd_suspend

23-26 The thd_continue function first checks whether the suspend/resume package has been
    initialized (inited is not 0). If it has not been initialized, then no threads are suspended, and
    thd_continue returns with success.
33-39 If the specified thread identifier is not found in the array of suspended threads, then it is not
    suspended--again, return with success.
45-51 Send the resume signal, SIGUSR2. There's no need to wait--the thread will resume whenever
    it can, and the thread calling thd_continue doesn't need to know.

    susp.c                                                                        part 4 thd_continue

2-25     The thread_routine function is the thread start routine for each of the "target" threads created
    by the program. It simply loops for a substantial period of time, periodically printing a status
    message. On each iteration, it yields to other threads to ensure that the processor time is
    apportioned "fairly" across all the threads.
         Notice that instead of calling printf, the function formats a message with sprintf and then
    displays it on stdout (file descriptor 1) by calling write. This illustrates one of the problems with
    using suspend and resume (thd_suspend and thd_continue) for synchronization. Suspend and
    resume are scheduling functions, not synchronization functions, and using scheduling and
    synchronization controls together can have severe consequences.
          | Incautious use of suspend and resume can deadlock your application.
          In this case, if a thread were suspended while modifying a stdio stream, all other threads that
    tried to modify that stdio stream might block, waiting for a mutex that is locked by the suspended
    thread. The write function, on the other hand, is usually a call to the kernel--the kernel is atomic
    with respect to signals, and therefore can't be suspended. Use of write, therefore, cannot cause a
    deadlock.
          In general, you cannot suspend a thread that may possibly hold any resource, if that resource
    may be required by some other thread before the suspended thread is resumed. In particular, the
    result is a deadlock if the thread that would resume the suspended thread first needs to acquire the
    resource. This prohibition includes, especially, mutexes used by libraries you call--such as the
    mutexes used by malloc and free, or the mutexes used by stdio.
36-42 Threads are created with an attributes object set to create threads detached, rather than
    joinable. The result is that threads will cease to exist as soon as they terminate, rather than
    remaining until main calls pthread_join. The pthread_kill function does not necessarily fail if you
    attempt to send a signal to a terminated thread (the standard is silent on this point), and you may
    be merely setting a pending signal in a thread that will never be able to act on it. If this were to
    occur, the thd_suspend routine would hang waiting for the thread to respond. Although
    pthread_kill may not fail when sending to a terminated thread, it will fail when sending to a thread
    that doesn't exist--so this attribute converts a possible hang, when the program is run with
    ITERATTONS set too low, into an abort with an error message.
51-85 The main thread sleeps for two seconds after creating the threads to allow them to reach a
    "steady state." It then loops through the first half of the threads, suspending each of them. It waits
    an additional two seconds and then resumes each of the threads it had suspended. It waits another
    two seconds, suspends each of the remaining threads (the second half), and then after another two
    seconds resumes them.
          By watching the status messages printed by the individual threads, you can see the pattern of
    output change as the threads are suspended and resumed.

    susp.c                                                                       part 5 sampleprogram

    6.6.4 sigwait and sigwaitinfo
         int sigwait (const siqset_t *set, int *siq);
         #ifdef _POSIX_REALTIME_SIGNALS
         int sigwaitinfo (const sigset_t *set, siginfo_t *info);
         int sigtimedwait (const sigset_t *set; siginfo_t* info, const struct timespec * timeout);
         #endif

         | Always use sigwait to work with asynchronous signals within threaded
         | code.
         Pthreads adds a function to allow threaded programs to deal with "asynchronous" signals
    synchronously. That is, instead of allowing a signal to interrupt a thread at some arbitrary point, a
    thread can choose to receive a signal synchronously. It does this by calling sigwait, or one of
    sigwait's siblings.
         | The signals for which you sigwait must be masked in the sigwaiting
         | thread, and should usually be masked in all threads.
         The sigwait function takes a signal set as its argument, and returns a signal number when any
    signal in that set occurs. You can create a thread that waits for some signal, for example, SIGINT,
    and causes some application activity when it occurs. The non-obvious rule is that the signals for
    which you wait must be masked before calling sigwait. In fact, you should ideally mask these
    signals in main, at the start of the program. Because signal masks are inherited by threads you
    create, all threads will (by default) have the signal masked. This ensures that the signal will never
    be delivered to any thread except the one that calls sigwait.
         Signals are delivered only once. If two threads are blocked in sigwait, only one of them will
    receive a signal that's sent to the process. This means you can't, for example, have two
    independent subsystems using sigwait that catch SIGINT. It also means that the signal will not be
    caught by sigwait in one thread and also delivered to some signal-catching function in another
    thread. That's not so bad, since you couldn't do that in the old non-threaded model either--only one
    signal action can be active at a time.
         While sigwait, a Pthreads function, reports errors by returning an error number, its siblings,
    sigwaitinfo and sigtimedwait, were added to POSIX prior to Pthreads, and use the older errno
    mechanism. This is confusing and awkward, and that is unfortunate. The problem is that they deal
    with the additional information supplied by the POSIX realtime signals option (<unistd.h> defines
    the symbol _POSIX_REALTIME_SIGNALS), and the POSIX realtime amendment, POSIX.lb,
    was completed before the Pthreads amendment.
         Both sigwaitinfo and sigtimedwait return the realtime signal information, siginfo_t, for
    signals received. In addition, sigtimedwait allows the caller to specify that sigtimedwait should
    return with the error EAGAIN in the event that none of the selected signals is received within the
    specified interval.
         The sigwait.c program creates a "sigwait thread" that handles SIGINT.
23-41 The signal_waiter thread repeatedly calls sigwait, waiting for a SIGINT signal. It counts five
    occurrences of SZGINT (printing a message each time), and then signals a condition variable on
    which main is waiting. At that time, main will exit.
61-65 The main program begins by masking SIGINT. Because all threads inherit their initial signal
    mask from their creator, SIGINT will be masked in all threads. This prevents SIGINT from being
    delivered at any time except when the signal_waiter thread is blocked in sigwait and ready to
    receive the signal.

    sigwait.c

    6.6.5 SIGEV_THREAD
         Some of the functions in the POSIX.lb realtime standard, which provide for asynchronous
    notification, allow the programmer to give specific instructions about how that notification is to be
    accomplished. For example, when initiating an asynchronous device read or write using aio_read
    or aio_write, the programmer specifies a struct aiocb, which contains, among other members, a
    struct sigevent. Other functions that accept a struct sigevent include timer_create (which creates a
    per-process timer) and sigqueue (which queues a signal to a process).
         The struct sigevent structure in POSIX.lb provides a "notification mechanism" that allows the
    programmer to specify whether a signal is to be generated, and, if so, what signal number should
    be used. Pthreads adds a new notification mechanism called SIGEV_THREAD. This new
    notification mechanism causes the signal notification function to be run as if it were the start
    routine of a thread.
          Pthreads adds several members to the POSIX.lb struct sigevent structure. The new members
    are sigev_notify_function, a pointer to a thread start function; and sigev_notify_attributes, a
    pointer to a thread attributes object (pthread_attr_t) containing the desired thread creation
    attributes. If sigev_notify_attributes is NULL, the notify thread is created as if the detachstate
    attribute was set to PTHREAD_CREATE_DETACHED. This avoids a memory leak--in general,
    the notify thread's identifier won't be available to any other thread. Furthermore, Pthreads says that
    the result of specifying an attributes object that has the detachstate attribute set to PTHREAD_
    CREATE_JOINABLE is "undefined." (Most likely, the result will be a memory leak because the
    thread cannot be joined--if you are lucky, the system may override your choice and create it
    detached anyway.)
          The SIGEV_THREAD notification function may not actually be run in a new
    thread--Pthreads carefully specifies that it behaves as if it were run in a new thread, just as I did a
    few paragraphs ago. The system may, for example, queue SIGEV_THREAD events and call the
    start routines, serially, in some internal "server thread." The difference is effectively
    indistinguishable to the application. A system that uses a server thread must be very careful about
    the attributes specified for the notification thread--for example, scheduling policy and priority,
    contention scope, and minimum stack size must all be taken into consideration.
          The SIGEV_THREAD feature is not available to any of the "traditional" signal generation
    mechanisms, such as setitimer, or for SIGCHLD, SIGINT, and so forth. Those who are
    programming using the POSIX.lb "realtime signal" interfaces, including timers and asynchronous
    I/O, may find this new capability useful.
          The following program, sigev_thread.c, shows how to use the SIGEV_THREAD notification
    mechanism for a POSIX.lb timer.
20-37 The function timer_thread is specified as the "notification function" (thread start routine) for
    the SIGEV_THREAD timer. The function will be called each time the timer expires. It counts
    expirations, and wakes the main thread after five. Notice that, unlike a signal-catching function,
    the SIGEV_THREAD notification function can make full use of Pthreads synchronization
    operations. This can be a substantial advantage in many situations.
45-51 Unfortunately, neither Solaris 2.5 nor Digital UNIX 4.0 correctly implemented SIGEV_
    THREAD. Thus, unlike all other examples in this book, this code will not compile on Solaris 2.5.
    This #ifdef block allows the code to compile, and to fail gracefully if the resulting program is run,
    with an error message. Although the program will compile on Digital UNIX 4.0, it will not run.
    The implementation of SIGEV_THREAD has been fixed in Digital UNIX 4.0D, which should be
    available by the time you read this, and it should also be fixed in Solaris 2.6.
56-59 These statements initialize the sigevent structure, which describes how the system should
    notify the application when an event occurs. In this case, we are telling it to call timer_thread
    when the timer expires, and to use default attributes.

    sigev_thread.c
6.6.6 Semaphores: synchronizing with a signal-catching function
     #ifdef _POSIX_SEMAPHORS
     int sem_init (sem_t *sem, int pshared, unsigned int value);
     int sem_destroy (sem_t *sem);
     int sem_wait (sem_t *sem);
     int sem_trymake (sem_t *sem);
     int sem_post (sem_t *sem);
     int sem_getvalue (sem_t *sem, int *sval);
     #endif

      Although mutexes and condition variables provide an ideal solution to most synchronization
needs, they cannot meet all needs. One example of this is a need to communicate between a
POSIX signal-catching function and a thread waiting for some asynchronous event. In new code,
it is best to use sigwait or sigwaitinfo rather than relying on a signal-catching function, and this
neatly avoids this problem. However, the use of asynchronous POSIX signal-catching functions is
well established and widespread, and most programmers working with threads and existing code
will probably encounter this situation.
      To awaken a thread from a POSIX signal-catching function, you need a mechanism that's
reentrant with respect to POSIX signals (async-signal safe). POSIX provides relatively few of
these functions, and none of the Pthreads functions is included. That's primarily because an
async-signal safe mutex lock operation would be many times slower than one that isn't
async-signal safe. Outside of the kernel, making a function async-signal safe usually requires that
the function mask (block) signals while it runs--and that is expensive.
      In case you're curious, here is the full list of POSIX 1003.1-1996 functions that are
async-signal safe (some of these functions exist only when certain POSIX options are defined,
such as _POSIX_ASYNCHRONOUS_IO or _POS IX_TIMERS):
      access              getoverrun          sigismember
      aio_error           getgroups           sigpending
      aio_return          getpgrp             sigprocmask
      aio_suspend         getpid              sigqueue
      alarm               getppid             sigsuspend
      cfgetispeed         getuid              sleep
      cfgetospeed         kill                stat
      cfsetispeed         link                sysconf
      cfsetospeed         lseek               tcdrain
      chdir               mkdir               tcflow
      chmod               mkfifo              tcflush
      chown               open                tcgetattr
      clock_gettime       pathconf            tcgetpgrp
      close               pause               tcsendbreak
      creat               pipe                tcsetattr
      dup2                read                tcsetpgrp
      dup                 rename              time
      execle              rmdir               timer_getoverrun
      execve              sem_post            timer_gettime
      exit                setgid              timer_settime
      cntl                setpgid             times
      fdatasync           setsid              umask
      fork                setuid              uname
      fstat               sigaction           unlink
      fsync               sigaddset           utime
      getegid             sigdelset           wait
      geteuid             sigemptyset         waitpid
      getgid              sigfillset          write
      POSIX.lb provides counting semaphores, and most systems that support Pthreads also
support POSIX.lb semaphores. You may notice that the sem_post function, which wakes threads
waiting on a semaphore, appears in the list of async-signal safe functions. If your system supports
POSIX semaphores (<unistd.h> defines the _POSIX_SEMAPHORES option), then Pthreads adds
the ability to use semaphores between threads within a process. That means you can post a
semaphore, from within a POSIX signal-catching function, to wake a thread in the same process
or in another process.
      A semaphore is a different kind of synchronization object--it is a little like a mutex, a little
like a condition variable. The differences can make semaphores a little harder to use for many
common tasks, but they make semaphores substantially easier to use for certain specialized
purposes. In particular, semaphores can be posted (unlocked or signaled) from a POSIX
signal-catching function.
      | Semaphores are a general synchronization mechanism.
      | We just have no reason to use them that way.
      I am emphasizing the use of semaphores to pass information from a signal-catching function,
rather than for general use, for a couple of reasons. One reason is that semaphores are part of a
different standard. As I said, most systems that support Pthreads will also support POSIX.lb, but
there is no such requirement anywhere in the standard. So you may well find yourself without
access to semaphores, and you shouldn't feel dependent on them. (Of course, you may also find
yourself with semaphores and without threads--but in that case, you should be reading a different
book.)
      Another reason for keeping semaphores here with signals is that, although semaphores are a
completely general synchronization mechanism, it can be more difficult to solve many problems
using semaphores--mutexes and condition variables are simpler. If you've got Pthreads, you only
need semaphores to handle this one specialized function--waking a waiting thread from a
signal-catching function. Just remember that you can use them for other things when they're
convenient and available.
      POSIX semaphores contain a count, but no "owner," so although they can be used essentially
as a lock, they can also be used to wait for events. The terminology used in the POSIX semaphore
operations stresses the "wait" behavior rather than the "lock" behavior. Don't be confused by the
names, though; there's no difference between "waiting" on a semaphore and "locking" the
semaphore.
      A thread waits on a semaphore (to lock a resource, or wait for an event) by calling sem_wait.
If the semaphore counter is greater than zero, sem_wait decrements the counter and returns
immediately. Otherwise, the thread blocks. A thread can post a semaphore (to unlock a resource,
or awaken a waiter) by calling sem_post. If one or more threads are waiting on the semaphore,
sem_post will wake one waiter (the highest priority, or earliest, waiter). If no threads are waiting,
the semaphore counter is incremented.
     The initial value of the semaphore counter is the distinction between a "lock" semaphore and
a "wait" semaphore. By creating a semaphore with an initial count of 1, you allow one thread to
complete a sem_wait operation without blocking--this "locks" the semaphore. By creating a
semaphore with an initial count of 0, you force all threads that call sem_wait to block until some
thread calls sem_post.
     The differences in how semaphores work give the semaphore two important advantages over
mutexes and condition variables that may be of use in threaded programs:
   1. Unlike mutexes, semaphores have no concept of an "owner." This means that any thread
       may release threads blocked on a semaphore, much as if any thread could unlock a mutex
       that some thread had locked. (Although this is usually not a good programming model,
       there are times when it is handy.)
   2. Unlike condition variables, semaphores can be independent of any external state. Condition
       variables depend on a shared predicate and a mutex for waiting--semaphores do not.
     A semaphore is represented in your program by a variable of type sem_t. You should never
make a copy of a sem_t variable--the result of using a copy of a sem_t variable in the sem_wait,
sem_trywait, sem_post, and sem_destroy functions is undefined. For our purposes, a sem_t
variable is initialized by calling the sem_init function. POSIX.lb provides other ways to create a
"named" semaphore that can be shared between processes without sharing memory, but there is no
need for this capability when using a semaphore within a single process.
     Unlike Pthreads functions, the POSIX semaphore functions use errno to report errors. That is,
success is designated by returning the value 0, and errors are designated by returning the value -1
and setting the variable errno to an error code.
     If you have a section of code in which you want up to two threads to execute simultaneously
while others wait, you can use a semaphore without any additional state. Initialize the semaphore
to the value 2; then put a sem_wait at the beginning of the code and a sem_post at the end. Two
threads can then wait on the semaphore without blocking, but a third thread will find the
semaphore's counter at 0, and block. As each thread exits the region of code it posts the semaphore,
releasing one waiter (if any) or restoring the counter.
     The sem_getvalue function returns the current value of the semaphore counter if there are no
threads waiting. If threads are waiting, sem_getvalue returns a negative number. The absolute
value of that number tells how many threads are waiting on the semaphore. Keep in mind that the
value it returns may already be incorrect--it can change at any time due to the action of some other
thread.
     The best use for sem_getvalue is as a way to wake multiple waiters, somewhat like a
condition variable broadcast. Without sem_getvalue, you have no way of knowing how many
threads might be blocked on a semaphore. To "broadcast” a semaphore, you could call
sem_getvalue and sem_post in a loop until sem_getvalue reports that there are no more waiters.
     But remember that other threads can call sem_post during this loop, and there is no
synchronization between the various concurrent calls to sero_post and sem_getvalue. You can
easily end up issuing one or more extra calls to sero_post, which will cause the next thread that
    calls sem_wait to find a value greater than 0, and return immediately without blocking.
          The program below, semaphore_signal.c, uses a semaphore to awaken threads from within a
    POSIX signal-catching function. Notice that the sem_init call sets the initial value to 0 so that
    each thread calling sem_wait will block. The main program then requests an interval timer, with a
    POSIX signal-catching function that will wake one waiting thread by calling sem_post. Each
    occurrence of the POSIX timer signal will awaken one waiting thread. The program will exit when
    each thread has been awakened five times.
32-35 Notice the code to check for EINTR return status from the sem_wait call. The POSIX timer
    signal in this program will always occur while one or more threads are blocked in sem_wait.
    When a signal occurs for a process (such as a timer signal), the system may deliver that signal
    within the context of any thread within the process. Likely "victims" include threads that the
    kernel knows to be waiting, for example, on a semaphore. So there is a fairly good chance that the
    sem_wait thread will be chosen, at least sometimes. If that occurs, the call to sem_wait will return
    with EINTR. The thread must then retry the call. Treating an EINTR return as "success" would
    make it appear that two threads had been awakened by each call to sem_post: the thread that was
    interrupted, and the thread that was awakened by the sem_post call.

    semaphore_signal.c
