7    "Real code"
"When we were still little," the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though still sobbing a little now and then, "we went to school in the sea.
The master was an old Turtle--we used to call him Tortoise---"
"Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?" Alice asked.
"We called him Tortoise because he taught us," said the
Mock Turtle angrily,
    --Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

     This section builds on most of the earlier sections of the book, but principally on the mutex
and condition variable sections. You should already understand how to create both types of
synchronization objects and how they work. I will demonstrate the design and construction of
barrier and read/write lock synchronization mechanisms that are built from mutexes, condition
variables, and a dash of data. Both barriers and read/write locks are in common use, and have been
proposed for standardization in the near future. I will follow up with a work queue server that lets
you parcel out tasks to a pool of threads.
     The purpose of all this is to teach you more about the subtleties of using all these new
threaded programming tools (that is, mutexes, condition variable and threads). The library
packages may be useful to you as is or as templates. Primarily, though, they are here to give me
something to talk about in this section and I have omitted some complication that may be valuable
in real code. The error detection and recovery code, for example, is fairly primitive.

7.1 Extended synchronization
     Mutexes and condition variables are flexible and efficient synchronization tools. You can
build just about any form of synchronization you need using those two things. But you shouldn’t
build them from scratch every time you need them. It is nice to start with a general, modular
implementation that doesn’t need to be debugged every time. This section shows some common
and useful tools that you won’t have to redesign every time you write an application that needs
them.
     First we’ll build a barrier. The function of a barrier is about what you might guess—it stops
threads. A barrier is initialized to stop a certain number of threads—when the required number of
threads have reached the barrier, all are allowed to continue.
     Then we’ll build something called a read/write lock. A read/write lock allows multiple
threads to read data simultaneously, but prevents any thread from modifying data that is being read
or modified by another thread.

7.1.1 Barriers
     A barrier is a way to keep the members of a group together. If our intrepid “bailing
programmers” washed up on a deserted island, for example, and they ventured into the jungle to
explore, they would want to remain together, for the illusion of safety in numbers, if for no other
reason (Figure 7.1). Any exploring programmer finding himself very far in front of the others
would therefore wait for them before continuing.

                                   FIGURE 7.1 Barrier analogy
      A barrier is usually employed to ensure that all threads cooperating in some parallel
algorithm reach a specific point in that algorithm before any can pass. This is especially common
in code that has been decomposed automatically by creating fine-grained parallelism within
compiled source code. All threads may execute the same code, with threads processing separate
portions of a shared data set (such as an array) in some areas and processing private data in
parallel in other areas. Still other areas must be executed by only one thread, such as setup or
cleanup for the parallel regions. The boundaries between these areas are often implemented using
barriers. Thus, threads completing a matrix computation may wait at a barrier until all have
finished. One may then perform setup for the next parallel segment while the others skip ahead to
another barrier. When the setup thread reaches that barrier, all threads begin the next parallel
region.
      Figure 7.2 shows the operation of a barrier being used to synchronize three threads, called
thread 1, thread 2, and thread 3. The figure is a sort of timing diagram, with time increasing from
left to right. Each of the lines beginning at the labels in the upper left designates the behavior of a
specific thread—solid for thread 1, dotted for thread 2, and dashed for thread 3. When the lines
drop within the rounded rectangle, they are interacting with the barrier. If the line drops below the
center line, it shows that the thread is blocked waiting for other threads to reach the barrier. The
line that stops above the center line represents the final thread to reach the barrier, awakening all
waiters.
      In this example, thread 1 and then thread 2 wait on the barrier. At a later time, thread 3 waits
on the barrier, finds that the barrier is now full, and awakens all the waiters. All three threads then
return from the barrier wait. The core of a barrier is a counter. The counter is initialized to the
number of threads in the “tour group,” the number of threads that must wait on a barrier before all
the waiters return. I’ll call that the “threshold,” to give it a simple one-word name. When each
thread reaches the barrier, it decreases the counter. If the value hasn’t reached 0, it waits. If the
value has reached 0, it wakes up the waiting threads.

                                   FIGURE 7.2 Barrier operation

     Because the counter will be modified by multiple threads, it has to be protected by a mutex.
Because threads will be waiting for some event (a counter value of 0), the barrier needs to have a
condition variable and a predicate expression. When the counter reaches 0 and the barrier drops
open, we need to reset the counter, which means the barrier must store the original threshold.
     The obvious predicate is to simply wait for the counter to reach 0, but that complicates the
process of resetting the barrier. When can we reset the count to the original value? We can’t reset it
when the counter reaches 0, because at that point most of the threads are waiting on the condition
variable. The counter must be 0 when they wake up, or they’ll continue waiting. Remember that
condition variable waits occur in loops that retest the predicate.
     The best solution is to add a separate variable for the predicate. We will use a “cycle”
variable that is logically inverted each time some thread determines that one cycle of the barrier is
complete. That is, whenever the counter value is reset, before broadcasting the condition variable,
the thread inverts the cycle flag. Threads wait in a loop as long as the cycle flag remains the same
as the value seen on entry, which means that each thread must save the initial value.
          The header file barrier.h and the C source file barrier.c demonstrate an implementation of
    barriers using standard Pthreads mutexes and condition variables. This is a portable
    implementation that is relatively easy to understand. One could, of course, create a much more
    efficient implementation for any specific system based on knowledge of non-portable hardware
    and operating system characteristics.
6-13      Part 1 shows the structure of a barrier, represented by the type barrier_t. You can see the
    mutex (mutex) and the condition variable (cv). The threshold member is the number of threads in
    the group, whereas counter is the number of threads that have yet to join the group at the barrier.
    And cycle is the flag discussed in the previous paragraph. It is used to ensure that a thread
    awakened from a barrier wait will immediately return to the caller, but will block in the barrier if it
    calls the wait operation again before all threads have resumed execution.
15        The BARRIER_VALID macro defines a “magic number,” which we store into the valid
    member and then check to determine whether an address passed to other barrier interfaces is
    “reasonably likely to be” a barrier. This is an easy, quick check that will catch the most common
    errors.*
    * I always like to define magic numbers using hexadecimal constants that can be pronounced as
    English words. For barriers, I invented my own restaurant called the “DB cafe,” or, in C syntax,
    0xdbcafe. Many interesting (or at least mildly amusing) English words can be spelled using only
    the letters a through f. There are even more possibilities if you allow the digit 1 to stand in for the
    letter l. and the digit 0 to stand in for the letter o. (Whether you like the results will depend a lot on
    the typeface in which you commonly read your code.)

    barrier.h                                                                            part 1 barrier_t

          Part 2 shows definitions and prototypes that allow you to do something with the barrier_t
    structure. First, you will want to initialize a new barrier.
4-6       You can initialize a static barrier at compile time by using the macro BARRIER_
    INITIALIZER. You can instead dynamically initialize a barrier by calling the function barrier_init.
11-13 Once you have initialized a barrier, you will want to be able to use it. and the main thing to
    be done with a barrier is to wait on it. When we’re done with a barrier, it would be nice to be able
    to destroy the barrier and reclaim the resources it used. We’ll call these operations barrier_init,
    barrier_wait, and barrier_destroy. All the operations need to specify upon which barrier they will
    operate. Because barriers are synchronization objects, and contain both a mutex and a condition
    variable (neither of which can be copied), we always pass a pointer to a barrier. Only the
    initialization operation requires a second parameter, the number of waiters required before the
    barrier opens.
          To be consistent with Pthreads conventions, the functions all return an integer value,
    representing an error number defined in <errno.h>. The value 0 represents success.

    barrier.h                                                                            part 2 interfaces

         Now that you know the interface definition, you could write a program using barriers. But
    then, the point of this section is not to tell you how to use barriers, but to help improve your
    understanding of threaded programming by showing how to build a barrier. The following
    examples show the functions provided by barrier.c, to implement the interfaces we’ve just seen in
    barrier.h.
          Part 1 shows barrier_init, which you would call to dynamically initialize a barrier, for
    example, if you allocate a barrier with malloc.
12        Both the counter and threshold are set to the same value. The counter is the “working
    counter” and will be reset to threshold for each barrier cycle.
14-16 If mutex initialization fails, barrier_init returns the failing status to the caller.
17-21 If condition variable (cv) initialization fails, barrier_init destroys the mutex it had already
    created and returns the failure status—the status of pthread_mutex_destroy is ignored because the
    failure to create the condition variable is more important than the failure to destroy the mutex.
22        The barrier is marked valid only after all initialization is complete. This does not completely
    guarantee that another thread erroneously trying to wait on that barrier will detect the invalid
    barrier rather than failing in some less easily diagnosable manner, but at least it is a token attempt.

    barrier.c                                                                          part 1 barrier_init

         Part 2 shows the barrier_destroy function, which destroys the mutex and condition variable
    (cv) in the barrier t structure. If we had allocated any additional resources for the barrier, we
    would need to release those resources also.
8-9      First check that the barrier appears to be valid, and initialized, by looking at the valid member.
    We don’t lock the mutex first, because that will fail, possibly with something nasty like a
    segmentation fault, if the mutex has been destroyed or hasn’t been initialized. Because we do not
    lock the mutex first, the validation check is not entirely reliable, but it is better than nothing, and
    will only fail to detect some race conditions where one thread attempts to destroy a barrier while
    another is initializing it, or where two threads attempt to destroy a barrier at nearly the same time.
19-22 If any thread is currently waiting on the barrier, return EBUSY.
24-27 At this point, the barrier is “destroyed”—all that’s left is cleanup. To minimize the chances of
    confusing errors should another thread try to wait on the barrier before we’re done, mark the
    barrier “not valid” by clearing valid, before changing any other state. Then, unlock the mutex,
    since we cannot destroy it while is locked.
33-35 Destroy the mutex and condition variable. If the mutex destruction fails return the status;
    otherwise, return the status of the condition variable destruction. Or, to put it another way, return
    an error status if either destruction failed otherwise, return success.

    barrier.c                                                                part 2 barrier_destroy

         Finally, part 3 shows the implementation of barrier_wait.
10-11 First we verify that the argument barrier appears to be a valid barrier_t. We perform this
    check before locking the mutex, so that barrier_destroy can safely destroy the mutex once it has
    cleared the valid member. This is a simple attempt to minimize the damage if one thread attempts
    to wait on a barrier while another thread is simultaneously either initializing or destroying that
    barrier.
         We cannot entirely avoid problems, since without the mutex, barrier_wait has no guarantee
    that it will see the correct (up-to-date) value of valid. The valid check may succeed when the
    barrier is being made invalid, or fail when the barrier is being made valid. Locking the mutex first
    would do no good, because the mutex may not exist if the barrier is not fully initialized, or if it is
    being destroyed. This isn’t a problem as long as you use the barrier correctly—that is, you
    initialize the barrier before any thread can possibly try to use it, and do not destroy the barrier until
    you are sure no thread will try to use it again.
17        Copy the current value of the barrier’s cycle into a local variable. The comparison of our
    local cycle against the barrier_t structure’s cycle member becomes our condition wait predicate.
    The predicate ensures that all currently waiting threads will return from barrier_wait when the last
    waiter broadcasts the condition variable, but that any thread that calls barrier_wait again will wait
    for the next broadcast. (This is the “tricky part” of correctly implementing a barrier.)
19-22 Now we decrease counter, which is the number of threads that are required but haven’t yet
    waited on the barrier. When counter reaches 0, no more threads are needed—they’re all here and
    waiting anxiously to continue to the next attraction. Now all we need to do is tell them to wake up.
    We advance to the next cycle, reset the counter, and broadcast the barrier’s condition variable.
28-29 Earlier, I mentioned that a program often needs one thread to perform some cleanup or setup
    between parallel regions. Each thread could lock a mutex and check a flag so that only one thread
    would perform the setup. However, the setup may not need additional synchronization, for
    example, because the other threads will wait at a barrier for the next parallel region, and, in that
    case, it would be nice to avoid locking an extra mutex.
          The barrier_wait function has this capability built into it. One and only one thread will return
    with the special value of -1 while the others return 0. In this particular implementation, the one
    that waits last and wakes the others will take the honor, but in principle it is “unspecified” which
    thread returns -1. The thread that receives -1 can perform the setup, while others race ahead. If you
    do not need the special return status, treat — 1 as another form of success. The proposed POSIX.lj
    standard has a similar capability—one (unspecified) thread completing a barrier will return the
    status BARRIER_SERIAL_THREAD.
95-?      Any threaded code that uses condition variables should always either support deferred
     cancellation or disable cancellation. Remember that there are two distinct types of cancellation:
     deferred and asynchronous. Code that deals with asynchronous cancellation is rare. In general it
     is difficult or impossible to support asynchronous cancellation in any code that acquires resources
     (including locking a mutex). Programmers can’t assume any function supports asynchronous
     cancellation unless its documentation specifically says so. Therefore we do not need to worry
     about asynchronous cancellation.
          We could code barrier_wait to deal with deferred cancellation, but that raises difficult
    questions. How, for example, will the barrier wait ever be satisfied if one of the threads has been
    canceled? And if it won’t be satisfied, what happens to all the other threads that have already
    waited (or are about to wait) on that barrier? There are various ways to answer these questions.
    One would be for barrier_wait to record the thread identifiers of all threads waiting on the barrier,
    and for any thread that’s canceled within the wait to cancel all other waiters.
          Or we might handle cancellation by setting some special error flag and broadcasting the
    condition variable, and modifying barrier wait to return a special error when awakened in that way.
    However, it makes little sense to cancel one thread that’s using a barrier. We’re going to disallow it,
    by disabling cancellation prior to the wait, and restoring the previous state of cancellation
    afterward. This is the same approach taken by the proposed POSIX.lj standard, by the
    way—barrier waits are not cancellation points.
95-103 If there are more threads that haven’t reached the barrier, we need to wait for them. We do
    that by waiting on the condition variable until the barrier has advanced to the next cycle—that is,
    the barrier’s cycle no longer matches the local copy.

    barrier.c                                                                          part 3 barrier_wait

          Finally, barrier_main.c is a simple program that uses barriers. Each thread loops on
    calculations within a private array.
35,47 At the beginning and end of each iteration, the threads, running function thread_routine, all
    wait on a barrier to synchronize the operation.
56-61 At the end of each iteration, the “lead thread” (the one receiving a -1 result from barrier_wait)
    will modify the data of all threads, preparing them for the next iteration. The others go directly to
    the top of the loop and wait on the barrier at line 35.

    barrier_main.c

    7.1.2 Read/write locks
          A read/write lock is a lot like a mutex. It is another way to prevent more than one thread from
    modifying shared data at the same time. But unlike a mutex it distinguishes between reading data
    and writing data. A mutex excludes all other threads, while a read/write lock allows more than one
    thread to read the data, as long as none of them needs to change it.
          Read/write locks are used to protect information that you need to read frequently but usually
    don’t need to modify. For example, when you build a cache of recently accessed information,
    many threads may simultaneously examine the cache without conflict. When a thread needs to
    update the cache, it must have exclusive access.
         When a thread locks a read/write lock, it chooses shared read access or exclusive write access.
    A thread that wants read access can’t continue while any thread currently has write access. A
    thread trying to gain write access can’t continue when another thread currently has either write
    access or read access.
          When both readers and writers are waiting for access at the same time, the readers are given
    precedence when the write lock is released. Read precedence favors concurrency because it
    potentially allows many threads to accomplish work simultaneously. Write precedence on the
    other hand would ensure that pending modifications to the shared data are completed before the
    data is used. There’s no absolute right or wrong policy, and if you don’t find the implementation
    here appropriate for you, it is easy to change.
          Figure 7.3 shows the operation of a read/write lock being used to synchronize three threads,
    called thread 1, thread 2, and thread 3. The figure is a sort of timing diagram, with time increasing
    from left to right. Each of the lines beginning at the labels in the upper left designates the behavior
    of a specific thread—solid for thread 1, dotted for thread 2, and dashed for thread 3. When the
    lines drop within the rounded rectangle, they are interacting with the read/write lock. If the line
    drops below the center line, it shows that the thread has the read/write lock locked, either for
    exclusive write or for shared read. Lines that hover above the center line represent threads waiting
    for the lock.
                                  FIGURE 7.3 Read/write lock operation

          In this example, thread 1 locks the read/write lock for exclusive write. Thread 2 tries to lock
    the read/write lock for shared read and, finding it already locked for exclusive write, blocks. When
    thread 1 releases the lock, it awakens thread 2, which then succeeds in locking the read/write lock
    for shared read. Thread 3 then tries to lock the read/write lock for shared read and, because the
    read/write lock is already locked for shared read, it succeeds immediately. Thread 1 then tries to
    lock the read/write lock again for exclusive write access, and blocks because the read/write lock is
    already locked for read access. When thread 3 unlocks the read/write lock, it cannot awaken thread
    1, because there is another reader. Only when thread 2 also unlocks the read/write lock, and the
    lock becomes unlocked, can thread 1 be awakened to lock the read/write lock for exclusive write
    access.
          The header file rwlock.h and the C source file rwlock.c demonstrate an implementation of
    read/write locks using standard Pthreads mutexes and condition variables. This is a portable
    implementation that is relatively easy to understand. One could, of course, create a much more
    efficient implementation for any specific system based on knowledge of non-portable hardware
    and operating system characteristics.
          The rest of this section shows the details of a read/write lock package. First, rwlock.h
    describes the interfaces, and then rwlock.c provides the implementation. Part 1 shows the structure
    of a read/write lock, represented by the type rwlock_t.
7-9 Of course, there’s a mutex to serialize access to the structure. We’ll use two separate condition
     variables, one to wait for read access (called read) and one to wait for write access (called,
     surprisingly, write).
10        The rwlock_t structure has a valid member to easily detect common usage errors, such as
    trying to lock a read/write lock that hasn’t been initialized. The member is set to a magic number
    when the read/write lock is initialized, just as in barrier_init.
11-12 To enable us to determine whether either condition variable has waiters, we’ll keep a count of
    active readers (r_active) and a flag to indicate an active writer (w_active).
13-14 We also keep a count of the number of threads waiting for read access (r_wait) and for write
    access (w_wait).
17        Finally, we need a “magic number” for our valid member. (See the footnote in Section 7.1.1
    if you missed this part of the barrier example.)

    rwlock.h                                                                         part 1 rwlock_t

        We could have saved some space and simplified the code by using a single condition variable,
    with readers and writers waiting using separate predicate expressions. We will use one condition
    variable for each predicate, because it is more efficient. This is a common trade-off. The main
    consideration is that when two predicates share a condition variable, you must always wake them
    using pthread_cond_broadcast, which would mean waking all waiters each time the read/write
    lock is unlocked.
         We keep track of a boolean variable for “writer active,” since there can only be one. There
    are also counters for “readers active,” “readers waiting,” and “writers waiting.” We could get by
    without counters for readers and writers waiting. All readers are awakened simultaneously using a
    broadcast, so it doesn’t matter how many there are. Writers are awakened only if there are no
    readers, so we could dispense with keeping track of whether there are any threads waiting to write
    (at the cost of an occasional wasted condition variable signal when there are no waiters).
          We count the number of threads waiting for read access because the condition variable waits
    might be canceled. Without cancellation, we could use a simple flag—“threads are waiting for
    read” or “no threads are waiting for read.” Each thread could set it before waiting, and we could
    clear it before broadcasting to wake all waiting readers. However, because we can’t count the
    threads waiting on a condition variable, we wouldn’t know whether to clear that flag when a
    waiting reader was canceled. This information is critical, because if there are no readers waiting
    when the read/write lock is unlocked, we must wake a writer—but we cannot wake a writer if
    there are waiting readers. A count of waiting readers, which we can decrease when a waiter is
    canceled, solves the problem.
          The consequences of “getting it wrong” are less important for writers than for readers.
    Because we check for readers first, we don’t really need to know whether there are writers. We
    could signal a “potential writer” anytime the read/write lock was released with no waiting readers.
    But counting waiting writers allows us to avoid a condition variable signal when no threads are
    waiting.
          Part 2 shows the rest of the definitions and the function prototypes.
4-6       The RWLOCK_INITIALIZER macro allows you to statically initialize a read/write lock.
11-18 Of course, you must also be able to initialize a read/write lock that you cannot allocate
    statically, so we provide rwl_init to initialize dynamically, and rwl_destroy to destroy a read/write
    lock once you’re done with it. In addition, there are functions to lock and unlock the read/write
    lock for either read or write access. You can “try to lock” a read/write lock, either for read or write
    access, by calling rwl_readtrylock or rwl_writetrylock., just as you can try to lock a mutex by
    calling pthread_mutex_trylock.

    rwlock.h                                                                           part 2 interfaces

          The file rwlock.c contains the implementation of read/write locks. The following examples
    break down each of the functions used to implement the rwlock.h interfaces.
          Part 1 shows rwl_init, which initializes a read/write lock. It initializes the Pthreads
    synchronization objects, initializes the counters and flags, and finally sets the valid sentinel to
    make the read/write lock recognizable to the other interfaces. If we are unable to initialize the read
    condition variable, we destroy the mutex that we’d already created. Similarly, if we are unable to
    initialize the write condition variable, we destroy both the mutex and the read condition variable.

    rwlock.c                                                                           part 1 rwl_init

         Part 2 shows the rwl_destroy function, which destroys a read/write lock.
8-9      We first try to verify that the read/write lock was properly initialized by checking the valid
    member. This is not a complete protection against incorrect usage, but it is cheap, and it will catch
    some of the most common errors. See the annotation for barrier.c, part 2, for more about how the
    valid member is used.
10-30 Check whether the read/write lock is in use. We look for threads that are using or waiting for
    either read or write access. Using two separate if statements makes the test slightly more readable,
    though there’s no other benefit.
36-39 As in barrier_destroy, we destroy all Pthreads synchronization objects, and store each status
    return. If any of the destruction calls fails, returning a nonzero value, rwl_destroy will return that
    status, and if they all succeed it will return 0 for success.

     rwlock.c                                                                         part 2 rwl_destroy

          Part 3 shows the code for rwl_readcleanup and rwl_writecleanup, two cancellation cleanup
     handlers used in locking the read/write lock for read and write access, respectively. As you may
     infer from this, read/write locks, unlike barriers, are cancellation points. When a wait is canceled,
     the waiter needs to decrease the count of threads waiting for either a read or write lock, as
     appropriate, and unlock the mutex.

     rwlock.c                                                                    part 3 cleanuphandlers

         Part 4 shows rwl_readlock, which locks a read/write lock for read access. If a writer is
    currently active (w_active is nonzero), we wait for it to broadcast the read condition variable. The
    r_wait member counts the number of threads waiting to read. This could be a simple boolean
    variable, except for one problem—when a waiter is canceled, we need to know whether there are
    any remaining waiters. Maintaining a count makes this easy, since the cleanup handler only needs
    to decrease the count.
         This is one of the places where the code must be changed to convert our read/write lock from
    “reader preference” to “writer preference,” should you choose to do that. To implement writer
    preference, a reader must block while there are waiting writers (w_wait > 0), not merely while
    there are active writers, as we do here.
15,21 Notice the use of the cleanup handler around the condition wait. Also, notice that we pass the
    argument 0 to pthread_cleanup_pop so that the cleanup code is called only if the wait is canceled.
    We need to perform slightly different actions when the wait is not canceled. If the wait is not
    canceled, we need to increase the count of active readers before unlocking the mutex.

     rwlock.c                                                                    part 4 rwl_readlock

          Part 5 shows rwl_readtrylock. This function is nearly identical to rwl_readlock, except that,
     instead of waiting for access if a writer is active, it returns EBUSY. It doesn’t need a cleanup
     handler, and has no need to increase the count of waiting readers.
          This function must also be modified to implement “writer preference” read/write locks, by
     returning EBUSY when a writer is waiting, not just when a writer is active.

     rwlock.c                                                                    part 5 rwl_readtrylock

13        Part 6 shows rwl_readunlock. This function essentially reverses the effect of rwl_readlock or
     rwl_tryreadlock, by decreasing the count of active readers (r_active).
14-15 If there are no more active readers, and at least one thread is waiting for write access, signal
    the write condition variable to unblock one. Note that there is a race here, and whether you should
    be concerned about it depends on your notion of what should happen. If another thread that is
    interested in read access calls rwl_readlock or rwl_tryreadlock before the awakened writer can run,
    the reader may “win,” despite the fact that we just selected a writer.
         Because our version of read/write locks has “reader preference,” this is what we usually want
    to happen—the writer will determine that it has failed and will resume waiting. (It received a
    spurious wakeup.) If the implementation changes to prefer writers, the spurious wakeup will not
    occur, because the potential reader would have to block. The waiter we just unblocked cannot
    decrease w_wait until it actually claims the lock.

     r lock.c                                                                  part 6 rwl_readunlock

13      Part 7 shows rwl_writelock. This function is much like rwl_readlock, except for the predicate
   condition on the condition variable wait. In part l, I explained that, to convert from “preferred
   read” to ‘preferred write,” a potential reader would have to wait until there were no active or
   waiting writers, whereas currently it waits only for active writers. The predicate in rwl_writelock
   is the converse of that condition. Because we support “preferred read,” in theory, we must wait
   here if there are any active or waiting readers. In fact, it is a bit simpler because if there are any
   active readers, there cannot be any waiting readers—the whole point of a read/write lock is that
   multiple threads can have read access at the same time. On the other hand, we do have to wait if
   there are any active writers, because we allow only one writer at a time.
25      Unlike r_active, which is a counter, w_active is treated as a boolean. Or is it a counter?
   There’s really no semantic difference, since the value of 1 can be con- sidered a boolean TRUE or
   a count of 1—there can be only one active writer at any time.

     rwlock.c                                                                   part 7 rwl_ writelock

          Part 8 shows rwl_writetrylock. This function is much like rwl_writelock, except that it
     returns EBUSY if the read/write lock is currently in us (either by a reader or by a writer) rather
     than waiting for it to become free.

     rwlock.c                                                                   part 8 rwl_writetrylock

         Finally, part 9 shows rwl_writeunlock. This function is called by a thread with a write lock, to
    release the lock.
13-19 When a writer releases the read/write lock, it is always free; if there are any threads waiting
    for access, we must wake one. Because we implement “preferred read” access, we first look for
    threads that are waiting for read access. If there are any, we broadcast the read condition variable
    to wake them all.
20-26 If there were no waiting readers, but there are one or more waiting writers, wake one of them
    by signaling the write condition variable.
         To implement a “preferred write” lock, you would reverse the two tests, waking a waiting
    writer, if any, before looking for waiting readers.
    rwlock.c                                                                   part 9 rwl_writeunlock

          Now that we have all the pieces, rwlock_main.c shows a program that uses read/write locks.
11-17 Each thread is described by a structure of type thread_t. The thread_num member is the
    thread’s index within the array of thread t structures. The thread_id member is the pthread_t
    (thread identifier) returned by pthread_create when the thread was created. The updates and reads
    members are counts of the number of read lock and write lock operations performed by the thread.
    The interval member is generated randomly as each thread is created, to determine how many
    iterations the thread will read before it performs a write.
22-26 The threads cycle through an array of data_t elements. Each element has a read/write lock, a
    data element, and a count of how many times some thread has updated the element.
48-56 The program creates a set of threads running the thread_routine function. Each thread loops
    ITERATIONS times, practicing use of the read/write lock. It cycles through the array of data
    elements in sequence, resetting the index (element) to 0 when it reaches the end. At intervals
    specified by each thread’s interval member, the thread will modify the current data element instead
    of reading it. The thread locks the read/write lock for write access, stores its thread_num as the
    new data value, and increases the updates counter.
59-73 On all other iterations, thread_routine reads the current data element, locking the read/write
    lock for read access. It compares the data value against its thread_num to determine whether it
    was the most recent thread to update that data element, and, if so, it increments a counter.
95-103 On Solaris systems, increase the thread concurrency level to generate more interesting
    activity. Without time-slicing of user threads, each thread would tend to execute sequentially
    otherwise.

    rwlock_main.c

    7.2 Work queue manager
         I’ve already briefly outlined the various models of thread cooperation. These include
    pipelines, work crews, client/servers, and so forth. In this section, I present the development of a
    “work queue,” a set of threads that accepts work requests from a common queue, processing them
    (potentially) in parallel.
         The work queue manager could also be considered a work crew manager, depending on your
    reference point. If you think of it as a way to feed work to a set of threads, then “work crew”
    might be more appropriate. I prefer to think of it as a queue that magically does work for you in
    the background, since the presence of the work crew is almost completely invisible to the caller.
         When you create the work queue, you can specify the maximum level of parallelism that you
    need. The work queue manager interprets that as the maximum number of “engine” threads that it
    may create to process your requests. Threads will be started and stopped as required by the
    amount of work. A thread that finds nothing to do will wait a short time and then terminate. The
    optimal “short time” depends on how expensive it is to create a new thread on your system, the
    cost in system resources to keep a thread going that’s not doing anything, and how likely it is that
    you’ll need the thread again soon. I’ve chosen two seconds, which is probably much too long.
         The header file workq.h and the C source file workq.c demonstrate an implementation of a
    work queue manager. Part 1 shows the two structure types used by the work queue package. The
    workq_t type is the external representation of a work queue, and the workq_ele_t is an internal
    representation of work items that have been queued.
6-9       The workq_ele_t structure is used to maintain a linked list of work items. It has a link
    element (called next) and a data value, which is stored when the work item is queued and passed
    to the caller's "engine function" with no interpretation.
14-16 Of course, there's a mutex to serialize access to the workq_t, and a condition variable (cv) on
    which the engine threads wait for work to be queued.
17        The attr member is a thread attributes object, used when creating new engine threads. The
    attributes object could instead have been a static variable within workq.c, but I chose to add a little
    memory overhead to each work queue, rather than add the minor complexity of one-time
    initialization of a static data item.
18        The first member points to the first item on the work queue. As an optimization to make it
    easier to queue new items at the end of the queue, the last member points to the last item on the
    queue.
19-24 These members record assorted information about the work queue. The valid member is a
    magic number that's set when the work queue is initialized, as we've seen before in barriers and
    read/write locks. (In this case, the magic number is the month and year of my daughter's birthday.)
    The quit member is a flag that allows the "work queue manager" to tell engine threads to terminate
    as soon as the queue is empty. The parallelism member records how many threads the creator
    chose to allow the work queue to utilize, counter records the number of threads created, and idle
    records the current number of threads that are waiting for work. The engine member is the user's
    "engine function," supplied when the work queue was created. As you can see, the engine function
    takes an "untyped" (void *) argument, and has no return value.

    workq.h                                                                            part 1 workq_t

          Part 2 shows the interfaces we'll create for our work queue. We need to create and destroy
    work queue managers, so we'll define workq_init and workq_destroy. Both take a pointer to a
    workq_t structure. In addition, the initializer needs the maximum number of threads the manager
    is allowed to create to service the queue, and the engine function. Finally, the program needs to be
    able to queue work items for processing--we'll call the interface for this workq_add. It takes a
    pointer to the workq_t and the argument that should be passed to the engine function.

    workq.h                                                                            part 2 interfaces

         The file workq.c contains the implementation of our work queue. The following examples
    break down each of the functions used to implement the workq.h interfaces.
         Part 1 shows the workq_init function, which initializes a work queue. We create the Pthreads
    synchronization objects that we need, and fill in the remaining members.
14-22 Initialize the thread attributes object attr so that the engine threads we create will run
    detached. That means we do not need to keep track of their thread identifier values, or worry about
    joining with them.
34-40 We're not ready to quit yet (we've hardly started!), so clear the quit flag. The parallelism
    member records the maximum number of threads we are allowed to create, which is the
    workq_init parameter threads. The counter member will record the current number of active
    engine threads, initially 0, and idle will record the number of active threads waiting for more work.
    And of course, finally, we set the valid member.

    workq.c                                                                          part 1 workq_init

          Part 2 shows the workq_destroy function. The procedure for shutting down a work queue is a
    little different than the others we've seen. Remember that the Pthreads mutex and condition
    variable destroy function fail, returning EBUSY, when you try to destroy an object that is in use.
    We used the same model for barriers and read/write locks. But we cannot do the same for work
    queues--the calling program cannot know whether the work queue is in use, because the caller
    only queues requests that are processed asynchronously.
          The work queue manager will accept a request to shut down at any time, but it will wait for
    all existing engine threads to complete their work and terminate. Only when the last work queue
    element has been processed and the last engine thread has exited will workq_destroy return
    successfully.
24        If the work queue has no threads, either it was never used or all threads have timed out and
    shut down since it was last used. That makes things easy, and we can skip all the shutdown
    complication.
25-33 If there are engine threads, they are asked to shut down by setting the quit flag in the workq_t
    structure and broadcasting the condition variable to awaken any waiting (idle) engine threads.
    Each engine thread will eventually run and see this flag. When they see it and find no more work,
    they'll shut themselves down.
44-50 The last thread to shut down will wake up the thread that's waiting in workq_destroy, and the
    shutdown will complete. Instead of creating a condition variable that's used only to wake up
    workq_destroy, the last thread will signal the same condition variable used to inform idle engine
    threads of new work. At this point, all waiters have already been awakened by a broadcast, and
    they won't wait again because the quit flag is set. Shutdown occurs only once during the life of the
    work queue manager, so there's little point to creating a separate condition variable for this
    purpose.

    workq.c                                                                     part 2 workq_destroy

         Part 3 shows workq_add, which accepts work for the queue manager system.
16-35 It allocates a new work queue element and initializes it from the parameters. It queues the
    element, updating the first and last pointers as necessary.
40-45 If there are idle engine threads, which were created but ran out of work, signal the condition
    variable to wake one.
46-59 If there are no idle engine threads, and the value of parallelism allows for more, create a new
    engine thread. If there are no idle threads and it can't create a new engine thread, workq_add
    returns, leaving the new element for the next thread that finishes its current assignment.

    workq.c                                                                          part 3 workq_add
           That takes care of all the external interfaces, but we will need one more function, the start
    function for the engine threads. The function, shown in part 4, is called workq_server. Although
    we could start a thread running the caller's engine with the appropriate argument for each request,
    this is more efficient. The workq_server function will dequeue the next request and pass it to the
    engine function, then look for new work. It will wait if necessary and shut down only when a
    certain period of time passes without any new work appearing, or when told to shut down by
    workq_destroy.
           Notice that the server begins by locking the work queue mutex, and the "matching" unlock
    does not occur until the engine thread is ready to terminate. Despite this, the thread spends most of
    its life with the mutex unlocked, either waiting for work in the condition variable wait or within
    the caller's engine function.
29-62 When a thread completes the condition wait loop, either there is work to be done or the work
    queue is shutting down (wq->quit is nonzero).
67-80 First, we check for work and process the work queue element if there is one. There could still
    be work queued when workq_destroy is called, and it must all be processed before any engine
    thread terminates.
           The user's engine function is called with the mutex unlocked, so that the user's engine can run
    a long time, or block, without affecting the execution of other engine threads. That does not
    necessarily mean that engine functions can run in parallel--the caller-supplied engine function is
    responsible for ensuring whatever synchronization is needed to allow the desired level of
    concurrency or parallelism. Ideal engine functions would require little or no synchronization and
    would run in parallel.
86-104 When there is no more work and the queue is being shut down, the thread terminates,
    awakening workq_destroy if this was the last engine thread to shut down.
110-114 Finally we check whether the engine thread timed out looking for work, which would mean
    the engine has waited long enough. If there's still no work to be found, the engine thread exits.

    workq.c                                                                      part 4 workq_server

         Finally, workq_main.c is a sample program that uses our work queue manager. Two threads
    queue work elements to the work queue in parallel. The engine function is designed to gather
    some statistics about engine usage. To accomplish this, it uses thread-specific data. When the
    sample run completes, main collects all of the thread-specific data and reports some statistics.
15-19 Each engine thread has an engine_t structure associated with the thread-specific data key
    engine_key. The engine function gets the calling thread's value of this key, and if the current value
    is NULL, creates a new engine t structure and assigns it to the key. The calls member of engine_t
    structure-records the number of calls to the engine function within each thread.
29-37 The thread-specific data key's destructor function, destructor, adds the terminating thread's
    engine_t to a list (engine_list_head), where main can find it later to generate the final report.
43-68 The engine function's work is relatively boring. The argument is a pointer to a power_t
    structure, containing the members value and power. It uses a trivial loop to multiply value by itself
    power times. The result is discarded in this example, and the power_t structure is freed.
73-98 A thread is started, by main, running the thread_routine function. In addition, main calls
thread_routine. The thread_routine function loops for some number of iterations, determined by
the macro ITERATIONS, creating and queuing work queue elements. The value and power
members of the power t structure are determined semi-randomly using rand_r. The function sleeps
for a random period of time, from zero to four seconds, to occasionally allow engine threads to
time out and terminate. Typically when you run this program you would expect to see summary
messages reporting some small number of engine threads, each of which processed some number
of calls--which total 50 calls (25 each from the two threads).

workq_main. c

7.3 But what about existing libraries?
"The great art of riding, as I was saying is--
     to keep your balance properly. Like this, you know--"
He let go the bridle, and stretched out both his arms to
     show Alice what he meant, and this time he fell flat on
     his back, right under the horse's feet.
     --Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

     When you create a new library, all it takes is careful design to ensure that the library will be
thread-safe. As you decide what state is needed for the function, you can determine which state
needs to be shared between threads, which state should be managed by the caller through external
context handles, which state can be kept in local variables within a function, and so forth. You can
define the interfaces to the functions to support that state in the most efficient manner. But when
you're modifying an existing library to work with threads, you usually don't have that luxury. And
when you are using someone else's library, you may need simply to "make do."

7.3.1 Modifying libraries to be thread-safe
     Many functions rely on static storage across a sequence of calls, for example, strtok or
getpwd. Others depend on returning a pointer to static storage, for example, asctime. This section
points out some techniques that can help when you need to make "legacy" libraries thread-safe,
using some well-known examples in the ANSI C run-time library.
     The simplest technique is to assign a mutex to each subsystem. At any call into the subsystem
you lock the mutex; at any exit from the subsystem you unlock the mutex. Because this single
mutex covers the entire subsystem, we often refer to such a mechanism as a "big mutex" (see
Section 3.2.4). The mutex prevents more than one thread from executing within the subsystem at a
time. Note that this fixes only synchronization races, not sequence races (Section 8.1.2 describes
the distinction between the two). The best candidates for this approach are functions that do little
except maintain some internal database. That includes functions such as malloc and free that
manage an internal resource pool but grant limited (or no) external visibility into that pool.
     One problem with using the "big mutex" approach is that you have to be careful about your
definition of "subsystem." You need to include all functions that share data or that call each other.
If malloc and free have one mutex while realloc uses another, then you've got a race as soon as
one thread calls realloc while another thread is in malloc or free.
     And what if realloc is implemented to call malloc, copy data, and then call free on the old
pointer? The realloc function would lock the heap mutex and call malloc. The malloc function
would immediately try to lock the heap mutex itself, resulting in a deadlock. There are several
ways to solve this. One is to carefully separate each of the external interfaces into an internal
"engine" function that does the actual work and an external entry point that locks the subsystem
mutex and calls the engine. Other entry points within the subsystem that need the same engine
function would call it directly rather than using the normal entry point. That's often the most
efficient solution, but it is also harder to do. Another possibility is to construct a "recursive" mutex
that allows the subsystem to relock its own mutex without deadlock.* Now malloc and free are
allowed to relock the mutex held by realloc? but another thread trying to call any of them will be
blocked until realloc completely unlocks the recursive mutex.

* It is easy to construct a "recursive" mutex using a mutex, a condition variable, the pthread_t
value of the current owner (if any), and a count of the owner's "recursion depth." The depth is 0
when the recursive mutex is not locked, and greater than 0 when it is locked. The mutex protects
access to the depth and owner members, and the condition variable is used to wait for the depth to
become 0, should a thread wish to lock the recursive mutex while another thread has it locked.

      Most functions with persistent state require more substantial changes than just a "big mutex,"
especially to avoid altering the interface. The asctime function, for example, returns a pointer to
the character string representation of a binary time. Traditionally, the string is formatted into a
static buffer declared within the asctime function, and the function returns a pointer to that buffer.
      Locking a mutex within asctime isn't enough to protect the data. In fact, it is not even
particularly useful. After asctime returns, the mutex has been unlocked. The caller needs to read
the buffer, and there is nothing to prevent another thread from calling asctime (and "corrupting"
the first thread's result) before the first thread has finished reading or copying it. To solve this
problem using a mutex, the caller would need to lock a mutex before calling asctime, and then
unlock it only after it had finished with the data or copied the returned buffer somewhere "safe."
      The problem can instead be fixed by recoding asctime to allocate a heap buffer using malloc,
formatting the time string into that buffer, and returning its address. The function can use a
thread-specific data key to keep track of the heap address so that it can be reused on the next call
within that thread. When the thread terminates, a destructor function can free the storage.
      It would be more efficient to avoid using malloc and thread-specific data, but that requires
changing the interface to asctime. Pthreads adds a new thread-safe alternative to asctime, called
asctime_r, which requires the caller to pass the address and length of a buffer. The asctime_r
function formats the time string into the caller's buffer. This allows the caller to manage the buffer
in any way that's convenient. It can be on the thread's stack, in heap, or can even be shared
between threads. Although in a way this is "giving up" on the existing function and defining a new
function, it is often the best way (and sometimes the only practical way) to make a function
thread-safe.

7.3.2 Living with legacy libraries
    Sometimes you have to work with code you didn't write, and can't change. A lot of code is
now being made thread-safe, and most operating systems that support threads can be expected to
supply thread-safe implementations of the common bundled library packages. The "inner circle"
of thread-safe libraries will gradually increase to become the rule rather than the exception as
more application and library developers demand thread-safety.
      But inevitably you'll find that a library you need hasn't been made thread-safe, for example,
an older version of the X Windows windowing system, or a database engine, or a simulation
package. And you won't have source code. Of course you'll immediately complain to the supplier
of the library and convince them to make the next version fully thread-safe. But what can you do
until the new version arrives?
      If you really need the library, the answer is "use it anyway." There are a number of techniques
you can use, from simple to complex. The appropriate level of complexity required depends
entirely on the library's interface and how (as well as how much) you use the library in your code.
      | Make the unsafe library into a server thread.
      In some cases, you may find it convenient to restrict use of the library to one thread, making
that thread a “server" for the capabilities provided by the unsafe library. This technique is
commonly applied, for example, when using versions of the X11 protocol client library that are
not thread-safe. The main thread or some other thread created for the purpose processes queued
X11 requests on behalf of other threads. Only the server thread makes calls into the X11 library, so
it does not matter whether X11 is thread-safe.
      | Write your own "big mutex" wrappers around the interfaces.
      If the function you need has a "thread-safe interface" but not a "thread-safe implementation,"
then you may be able to encapsulate each call inside a wrapper function (or a macro) that locks a
mutex, calls the function, and then unlocks the mutex. This is just an external version of the "big
mutex" approach. By “thread-safe interface" I mean that the function relies on the static state, but
that any data returned to the caller isn't subject to alteration by later calls. For example, malloc fits
that category. The allocation of memory involves static data that needs to be protected, but once a
block has been allocated and returned to a caller, that address (and the memory to which it points)
will not be affected by later calls to malloc. The external "big mutex" is not a good solution for
libraries that may block for substantial periods of time---like X11 or any other network protocol.
While the result may be safe, it will be very inefficient unless you rarely use the library, because
other threads may be locked out for long periods of time while remote operations are taking place.
      | Extend the implementation with external state.
      A big mutex won't fix a function like asctime that writes data into a static buffer and returns
the address: The returned data must be protected until the caller is finished using it, and the data is
used outside the wrapper. For a function like strtok the data is in use until the entire sequence of
tokens has been parsed. In general, functions that have persistent static data are more difficult to
encapsulate.
      A function like as asctime can be encapsulated by creating a wrapper function that locks a
mutex, calls the function, copies the return value into a thread-safe buffer, unlocks the mutex, and
then returns. The thread-safe buffer can be dynamically allocated by the wrapper function using
realloc, for instance. You can require the caller to free the buffer when done, which changes the
interface, or you can make the wrapper keep track of a per-thread buffer using thread-specific
data.
      Alternatively, you could invent a new interface that requires the caller to supply a buffer. The
caller can use a stack buffer, or a buffer in heap, or, if properly synchronized (by the caller), it can
share the buffer between threads. Remember that if the wrapper uses thread-specific data to keep
track of a per-thread heap buffer, the wrapper can be made compatible with the original interface.
The other variants require interface changes: The caller must supply different inputs or it must be
aware of the need to free the returned buffer.
      A function that keeps persistent state across a sequence of calls is more difficult to
encapsulate neatly. The static data must be protected throughout. The easiest way to do this is
simply to change the caller to lock a mutex before the first call and keep it locked until after the
final call of a sequence. But remember that no other thread can use the function until the mutex is
unlocked. If the caller does a substantial amount of processing between calls, a major processing
bottleneck can occur. Of course, this may also be difficult or impossible to integrate into a simple
wrapper--the wrapper would have to be able to recognize the first and last of any series of calls.
      A better, but harder, way is to find some way to encapsulate the function (or a set of related
functions) into a new thread-safe interface. There is no general model for this transformation, and
in many cases it may be impossible. But often you just need to be creative, and possibly apply
some constraints. While the library function may not be easy to encapsulate, you may be able to
encapsulate "special cases" that you use. While strtok, for example, allows you to alter the token
delimiters at each call, most code does not take advantage of this flexibility. Without the
complication of varying delimiters, you could define a new token parsing model on top of strtok
where all tokens in a string are found by a thread-safe setup function and stored where they can be
retrieved one by one without calling strtok again. Thus, while the setup function would lock a
common mutex and serialize access across all threads, the information retrieval function could run
without any serialization.
