8    Hints to avoid debugging
"Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and capes!
But we've got our brave Captain to thank"
(So the crew would protest) "that he's bought us the best m
A perfect and absolute blank!"
     --Lewis Carroll, The Hunting of the Snark

      Writing a complicated threaded program is a lot harder than writing a simple synchronous
program, but once you learn the rules it is not much harder than writing a complicated
synchronous program. Writing a threaded program to perform a complicated asynchronous
function will usually be easier than writing the same program using more traditional asynchronous
programming techniques.
      The complications begin when you need to debug or analyze your threaded program. That's
not so much because using threads is hard, but rather because the tools for debugging and
analyzing threaded code are less well developed and understood than the programming interfaces.
You may feel as if you are navigating from a blank map. That doesn't mean you can't utilize the
power of threaded programming right now, but it does mean that you need to be careful, and
maybe a little more creative, in avoiding the rocks and shoals of the uncharted waters.
      Although this chapter mentions some thread debugging and analysis tools and suggests what
you can accomplish with them, my goal isn't to tell you about tools you can use to solve problems.
Instead, I will describe some of the common problems that you may encounter and impart
something resembling "sage advice" on avoiding those problems before you have to debug
them--or, perhaps more realistically, how to recognize which problems you may be encountering.
      | Check your assumptions at the door.
      Threaded programming is probably new to you. Asynchronous programming may be new to
you. If so, you'll need to be careful about your assumptions. You've crossed a bridge, and behavior
that's acceptable--or even required--in Synchronous Land can be dangerous across the river in
Asynchronous Land. You can learn the new rules without a lot of trouble, and with practice you'll
probably even feel comfortable with them. But you have to start by being constantly aware that
something's changed.

8.1 Avoiding incorrect code
"For instance, now," she went on, sticking a large piece of plaster on her fin-
     get as she spoke, "there's the King's Messenger. He's in prison now,
     being punished: and the trial doesn't even begin till next Wednesday:
     and of course the crime comes last of all."
"Suppose he never commits the crime?" said Alice.
"That would be all the better, wouldn't it?" the Queen said, as she bound the
     plaster round her finger with a bit of ribbon.
     --Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

     Pthreads doesn't provide much assistance in debugging your threaded code. That is not
surprising, since POSIX does not recognize the concept of debugging at all, even in explaining
why the nearly universal SIGTRAP signal is not included in the standard. There is no standard
way to interact with your program or observe its behavior as it runs, although every threaded
system will provide some form of debugging tool. Even in the unlikely event that the developers
of the system had no concern for you, the poor programmer, they needed to debug their own code.
      A vendor that provides threads with an operating system will provide at least a basic thread
"observation window" in a debugging utility. You should expect at minimum the ability to display
a list of the running threads and their current state, the state of mutexes and condition variables,
and the stack trace of all threads. You should also be able to set breakpoints in specified threads
and specify a "current thread" to examine registers, variables, and stack traces.
      Because implementations of Pthreads are likely to maintain a lot of state in user mode, within
the process, debugging using traditional UNIX mechanisms such as ptrace or the proc file system
can be difficult. A common solution is to provide a special library that is called by the debugger,
which knows how to search through the address space of the process being debugged to find the
state of threads and synchronization objects. Solaris, for example, provides the libthread_db.so
shared library, and Digital UNIX provides libpthreaddebug.so.
      A thread package placed on top of an operating system by a third party will not be able to
provide much integration with a debugger. For example, the portable "DCE threads" library
provides a built-in debug command parser that you can invoke from the debugger using the print
or call command to report the state of threads and synchronization objects within the process.*
This limited debugging support is at best inconvenient--you can't analyze thread state within a
core file after a program has failed, and it cannot understand (or report) the symbolic names of
program variables.

* For historical reasons, the function is called cma_debug. Should you find yourself stuck with
DCE threads code, try calling it, and enter the help command for a list of additional commands.

     The following sections describe some of the most common classes of threaded programming
errors, with the intention of helping you to avoid these problems while designing, as well as
possibly making it easier to recognize them while debugging.

8.1.1 Avoid relying on "thread inertia"
     Always, always, remember that threads are asynchronous. That's especially important to keep
in mind when you develop code on uniprocessor systems where threads may be "slightly
synchronous." Nothing happens simultaneously on a uniprocessor, where ready threads are serially
timesliced at relatively predictable intervals. When you create a new thread on a uniprocessor or
unblock a thread waiting for a mutex or condition variable, it cannot run immediately unless it has
a higher priority than the creator or waker.
     The same phenomenon may occur even on a multiprocessor, if you have reached the
"concurrency limit" of the process, for example, when you have more ready threads than there are
processors. The creator, or the thread waking another thread, given equal priority, will continue
running until it blocks or until the next timeslice (which may be many nanoseconds away).
     This means that the thread that currently has a processor has an advantage. It tends to remain
in motion, exhibiting behavior vaguely akin to physical inertia. As a result, you may get away with
errors that will cause your code to break in mysterious ways when the newly created or awakened
thread is able to run immediately--when there are free processors. The following program,
    inertia.c, demonstrates how this phenomenon can disrupt your program.
27-41 The question is one of whether the thread function printer_thread will see the value of
    stringPtr that was set before the call to pthread_create, or the value set after the call to
    pthread_create. The desired value is "After value." This is a very common class of programming
    error. Of course, in most cases the problem is less obvious than in this simple example. Often, the
    variable is uninitialized, not set to some benign value, and the result may be data corruption or a
    segmentation fault.
39        Now, notice the delay loop. Even on a multiprocessor, this program won't break all the time.
    The program will usually be able to change stringPtr before the new thread can begin executing--it
    takes time for a newly created thread to get into your code, after all, and the "window of
    opportunity" in this particular program is only a few instructions. The loop allows me to
    demonstrate the problem by delaying the main thread long enough to give the printer thread time
    to start. If you make this loop long enough, you will see the problem even on a uniprocessor, if
    main is eventually timesliced.

    inertia.c

          The way to fix inertia.c is to set the "After value," the one you want the threads to see, before
    creating the thread. That's not so hard, is it? There may still be a "Before value," whether it is
    uninitialized storage or a value that was previously used for some other purpose, but the thread
    you create can't see it. By the memory visibility rules given in Section 3.4, the new thread sees all
    memory writes that occurred prior to the call into pthread_create. Always design your code so that
    threads aren't started until after all the resources they need have been created and initialized
    exactly the way you want the thread to see them.
          | Never assume that a thread you create will wait for you.
          You can cause yourself as many problems by assuming a thread will run "soon" as by
    assuming it won't run "too soon." Creating a thread that relies on "temporary storage" in the
    creator thread is almost always a bad idea. I have seen code that creates a series of threads, passing
    a pointer to the same local structure to each, changing the structure member values each time. The
    problem is that you can't assume threads will start in any specific order. All of those threads may
    start after your last creation call, in which case they all get the last value of the data. Or the threads
    might start a little bit out of order, so that the first and second thread get the same data, but the
    others get what you intended them to get.
          Thread inertia is a special case of thread races. Although thread races are covered much more
    extensively in Section 8.1.2, thread inertia is a subtle effect, and many people do not recognize it
    as a race. So test your code thoroughly on a multiprocessor, if at all possible. Do this as early as
    possible during development, and continuously throughout development. Do this despite the fact
    that, especially without a perfect threaded debugger, testing on a multiprocessor will be more
    difficult than debugging on a uniprocessor. And, of course, you should carefully read the
    following section.

    8.1.2 Never bet your mortgage on a thread race
         A race occurs when two or more threads try to get someplace or do something at the same
    time. Only one can win. Which thread wins is determined by a lot of factors, not all of which are
under your control. The outcome may be affected by how many processors are on the system, how
many other processes are running, how much network overhead the system is handling, and other
things like that. That's a nondeterministic race. It probably won't come out the same if you run the
same program twice in a row. You don't want to bet on races like that.*
     | When you write threaded code, assume that at any arbitrary point,
     | within any statement of your program, each thread may go to deep for
     | an unbounded period of time.

* My daughter had this figured out by the time she was three--when she wanted to race, she
told me ahead of time whether my job was to win or lose. There's really no point to leaving these
important things to chance!

      Processors may execute your threads at differing rates, depending on processor load,
interrupts, and so forth. Time-slicing on a processor may interrupt a thread at any point for an
unspecified duration. During the time that a thread isn't running, any other thread may run and do
anything that synchronization protocols in your code don't specifically prevent it from doing,
which means that between any two instructions a thread may find an entirely different picture of
memory, with an entirely different set of threads active. The way to protect a thread's view of the
world from surprises is to rely only on explicit synchronization between threads.
      Most synchronization problems will probably show up pretty quickly if you're debugging on
a multiprocessor. Threads with insufficient synchronization will compete for the honor of reaching
memory last. It is a minor irony of thread races that the "loser" generally wins because the
memory system will keep the last value written to an address. Sometimes, you won't notice a race
at all. But sometimes you'll get a mystifying wrong result, and sometimes you'll get a
segmentation fault.
      Races are usually difficult to diagnose. The problem often won't occur at all on a
uniprocessor system because races require concurrent execution. The level of concurrency on a
uniprocessor, even with time-slicing, is fairly low, and often an unsynchronized sequence of writes
will complete before another thread gets a chance to read the inconsistent data. Even on a
multiprocessor, races may be difficult to reproduce, and they often refuse to reveal themselves to a
debugger. Races depend on the relative timing of thread execution--something a debugger is likely
to change.
      Some races have more to do with memory visibility than with synchronization of multiple
writes. Remember the basic rules of memory visibility (see Section 3.4): A thread can always see
changes to memory that were performed by a thread previously running on the same processor. On
a uniprocessor all threads run on the same processor, which makes it difficult to detect memory
visibility problems during debugging. On a multiprocessor, you may see visibility races only when
the threads are scheduled on different processors while executing specific vulnerable sections of
code.
      | No ordering exists between threads
      | unless you cause ordering.
      | Bill Gallmeister's corollary:
      | "Threads will run in the most evil order possible."
      You don't want to find yourself debugging thread races. You may never see the same outcome
twice. The symptoms will change when you try to debug the code--possibly by masquerading as
an entirely different kind of problem, not just as the same problem in a different place. Even worse,
the problem may never occur at all until a customer runs the code, and then it may fail every time,
but only in the customer's immense, monolithic application, and only after it has been running for
days. It will be running on a secured system with no network access, they will be unable to show
you the proprietary code, and will be unable to reproduce the problem with a simple test program.
      | "Scheduling" is not the same as "synchronization."
      It may appear at first that setting a thread to the SCHED_FIFO scheduling policy and
maximum priority would allow you to avoid using expensive synchronization mechanisms by
guaranteeing that no other thread can run until the thread blocks itself or lowers its priority. There
are several problems with this, but the main problem is that it won't work on a multiprocessor. The
SCHED_FIFO policy prevents preemption by another thread, but on a multiprocessor other
threads can run without any form of preemption.
      Scheduling exists to tell the system how important a specific job (thread) is to your
application so it can schedule the job you need the most. Synchronization exists to tell the system
that no other thread can be allowed into the critical section until the calling thread is done.
      In real life, a deterministic race, where the winner is guaranteed from the beginning, isn't
very exciting (except to a three year old). But a deterministic race represents a substantially safer
bet, and that's the kind of race you want to design into your programs. A deterministic race, as you
can guess, isn't much of a race at all. It is more like waiting in line--nice, organized, and
predictable. Excitement is overrated, especially when it comes to debugging complicated threaded
applications.
      The simplest form of race is when more than one thread tries to write shared state without
proper synchronization, for example, when two threads increment a shared counter. The two
threads may fetch the same value from memory, increment it independently, and store the same
result into memory; the counter has been incremented by one rather than by two, and both threads
have the same result value.
      A slightly more subtle race occurs when one thread is writing some set of shared data while
another thread reads that data. If the reads occur in a different order, or if the reader catches up to
the writer, then the reader may get inconsistent results. For example, one thread increments a
shared array index and then writes data into the array element at that index. Another thread fetches
the shared index before the writer has filled in the entire element and reads that element. The
reader finds inconsistent data because the element hasn't been completely set up yet. It may take
an unexpected code path because of something it sees there or it may follow a bad pointer.
      Always design and code assuming that threads are more asynchronous than you can imagine.
Anyone who's written a lot of code knows that computers have little creatures that enjoy annoying
you. Remember that when you code with threads there are lots of them loose at the same time.
Take no chances, make no assumptions. Make sure any shared state is set up and visible before
creating the thread that will use it; or create it using static mutexes or pthread_once. Use a mutex
to ensure that threads can't read inconsistent data. If you must share stack data between threads, be
sure all threads that use the data have terminated before returning from the function that allocated
the storage.
      "Sequence races" may occur when you assume some ordering of events, but that ordering
isn't coded into the application. Sequence races can occur even when you carefully apply
synchronization control to ensure data consistency. You can only avoid this kind of race by
ensuring that ordering isn't important, or by adding code that forces everything to happen in the
order it needs to happen.
      For example, imagine that three threads share a counter variable. Each will store a private
copy of the current value and increment the shared counter. If the three threads are performing the
same function, and none of them cares which value of the counter they get, then it is enough to
lock a mutex around the fetch and increment operation. The mutex guarantees that each thread
gets a distinct value, and no values are skipped. There's no race because none of the threads cares
who wins.
      But if it matters which value each thread receives, that simple code will not do the job. For
example, you might imagine that threads are guaranteed to start in the order in which they are
created, so that the first thread gets the value 1, the second gets the value 2, and so forth. Once in a
while (probably while you're debugging), the threads will get the value you expect, and everything
will work, and at other times, the threads will happen to run in a different order.
      There are several ways to solve this. For example, you could assign each of the threads the
proper value to begin with, by incrementing the counter in the thread that creates them and passing
the appropriate value to each thread in a data structure. The best solution, though, is to avoid the
problem by designing the code so that startup order doesn't matter. The more symmetrical your
threads are, and the fewer assumptions they make about their environment, the less chance that
this kind of race will happen.
      Races aren't always way down there at the level of memory address references, though. They
can be anywhere. The traditional ANSI C library, for example, allows a number of sequence races
when you use certain functions in an application with multiple threads. The readdir function, for
example, relies on static storage within the function to maintain context across a series of identical
calls to readdir. If one thread calls readdir while another thread is in the middle of a sequence of its
own calls to readdir, the static storage will be overwritten with a new context.
      | "Sequence races" can occur even when all your code uses mutexes to
      | protect shared data!
      This race occurs even if readdir is "thread aware" and locks a mutex to protect the static
storage. It is not a synchronization race, it is a sequence race. Thread A might call readdir to scan
directory/usr/bin, for example, which locks the mutex, returns the first entry, and then unlocks the
mutex. Thread B might then call readdir to scan directory /usr/include, which also locks the mutex,
returns the first entry, and then unlocks the mutex. Now thread A calls readdir again expecting the
second entry in /usr/bin; but instead it gets the second entry in /usr/include. No interface has
behaved improperly, but the end result is wrong. The interface to readdir simply is not appropriate
for use by threads.
      That's why Pthreads specifies a set of new reentrant functions, including readdir_r, which has
an additional argument that is used to maintain context across calls. The additional argument
solves the sequence race by avoiding any need for shared data. The call to readdir_r in thread A
returns the first entry from/usr/bin in thread A's buffer, and the-call to readdir r in thread B returns
the first entry from /usr/include in thread B's buffer ... and the second call in thread A returns the
second entry from /usr/bin in thread A's buffer. Refer to pipe.c, in Section 4.1, for a program that
uses readdir_r.
      Sequence races can also be found at higher levels of coding. File descriptors in a process, for
example, are shared across all threads. If two threads attempt to getc from the same file, each
character in the file can go to only one thread. Even though getc itself is thread-safe, the sequence
of characters seen by each thread is not deterministic--it depends on the ordering of each thread's
independent calls to getc. They may alternate, each getting every second character throughout the
file. Or one may get 2 or 100 characters in a row and then the other might get 1 character before
being preempted for some reason.
      There are a number of ways you can resolve the getc race. You can open the file under two
separate file descriptors and assign one to each thread. In that way, each thread sees every
character, in order. That solves the race by removing the dependency on ordering. Or you can lock
the file across the entire sequence of gets operations in each thread, which solves the race by
enforcing the desired order. The program putchar.c, back in Section 6.4.2, shows a similar
situation.
      Usually a program that doesn't care about ordering will run more efficiently than a program
that enforces some particular ordering, first, because enforcing the ordering will always introduce
computational overhead that's not directly related to getting the job done. Remember Amdahl’s
law. "Unordered" programs are more efficient because the greatest power of threaded
programming is that things can happen concurrently, and synchronization prevents concurrency.
Running an application on a multiprocessor system doesn't help much if most processors spend
their time waiting for one to finish something.

8.1.3 Cooperate to avoid deadlocks
       Like races, deadlocks are the result of synchronization problems in a program. While races
are resource conflicts caused by insufficient synchronization, deadlocks are usually conflicts in the
use of synchronization. A deadlock can happen when any two threads share resources. Essentially
a deadlock occurs when thread A has resource 1 and can't continue until it has resource 2, while
thread B has resource 2 and can't continue until it has resource 1.
       The most common type of deadlock in a Pthreads program is mutex deadlock, where both
resources are mutexes. There is one really important advantage of a deadlock over a race: It is
much easier to debug the problem. In a race, the threads do something incorrectly and move on.
The problem shows up sometime later, usually as a side effect. But in a deadlock the threads are
still there waiting, and always will be--if they could go anywhere, it wouldn't be a deadlock. So
when you attach to the process with the debugger or look at a crash dump, you can see what
resources are involved. With a little detective work you can often determine why it happened.
       The most likely cause is a resource ordering inconsistency. The study of deadlocks goes way
back to the early days of operating system design. Anyone who's taken computer science courses
has probably run into the classic dining philosophers problem. Some philosophers sit at a round
table with plates of spaghetti; each alternately eats and discusses philosophy. Although no utensils
are required to discuss philosophy, each philosopher requires two forks to eat. The table is set with
a single fork between each pair. The philosophers need to synchronize their eating and discussion
to prevent deadlock. The most obvious form of deadlock is when all philosophers simultaneously
pick up one fork each and refuse to put it down.
      There's always a way to make sure that your philosophers can all eat, eventually. For example,
a philosopher can take the fork to her right, and then look to her left. If the fork is available, she
can take it and eat. If not, she should return the fork she's holding to the table and chat awhile.
(That is the mutex backoff strategy discussed in Section 3.2.5.1.) Since the philosophers are all in
a good mood and none has recently published papers severely critical of adjoining colleagues,
those who get to eat will in reasonably short order return both of their forks to the table so that
their colleagues on each side can proceed.
      A more reliable (and more sanitary) solution is to skip the spaghetti and serve a dish that can
be eaten with one fork. Mutex deadlocks can't happen if each thread has only one mutex locked at
a time. It is a good idea to avoid calling functions with a mutex locked. First, if that function (or
something it calls) locks another mutex, you could end up with a deadlock. Second, it is a good
idea to lock mutexes for as short a time as possible (remember, locking a mutex prevents another
thread from "eating"--that is, executing---concurrently). Calling printf, though, isn't likely to cause
a deadlock in your code, because you don't lock any ANSI C library mutexes, and the ANSI C
library doesn't lock any of your mutexes. If the call is into your own code, or if you call a library
that may call back into your code, be careful.
      If you need to lock more than one mutex at a time, avoid deadlocks by using a strict
hierarchy or a backoff algorithm. The main disadvantage of mutex backoff is that the backoff loop
can run a long time if there are lots of other threads locking the mutexes, even if they do so
without any possibility of a deadlock. The backoff algorithm assumes that other threads may lock
the first mutex after having locked one or more of the other mutexes. If all threads always lock
mutexes in the order they're locked by the backoff loop, then you've got a fixed locking hierarchy
and you don't need the backoff algorithm.
      When a program has hung because of a deadlock, you require two important capabilities of
your threaded debugger. First, it allows you to run your program in a mode where mutex
ownership is recorded, and may be displayed using debugger commands. Finding a thread that is
blocked on some mutex while it owns other mutexes is a good indication that you may have a
deadlock. Second, you would like to be able to examine the call stack of threads that own mutexes
to determine why the mutexes have remained locked.
      The call stack may not always be sufficient, though. One common cause of a deadlock is that
some thread has returned from a function without unlocking a mutex. In this case, you may need a
more sophisticated tool to trace the synchronization behavior of the program. Such a tool would
allow you to examine the data and determine, for example, that function bad_lock locked a mutex
and failed to unlock that mutex.

8.1.4 Beware of priority inversion
      "Priority inversion" is a problem unique to applications (or libraries) that rely on realtime
priority scheduling. Priority inversion involves at least three threads of differing priority. The
differing priorities are important--priority inversion is a conflict between synchronization and
scheduling requirements. Priority inversion allows a low-priority thread to indefinitely prevent a
higher-priority thread from running. The result usually is not a deadlock (though it can be), but it
is always a severe problem. See Section 5.5.4 for more about priority inversion.
      Most commonly, a priority inversion results from three threads of differing priority sharing
resources. One example of a priority inversion is when a low-priority thread locks a mutex, and is
preempted by a high-priority thread, which then blocks on the mutex currently locked by the
low-priority thread. Normally, the low-priority thread would resume, allowing it to unlock the
mutex, which would unblock the high-priority thread to continue. However, if a medium-priority
thread was awakened (possibly by some action of the high-priority thread), it might prevent the
lower-priority thread from running. The medium-priority thread (or other threads it awakens) may
indefinitely prevent the low-priority thread from releasing the mutex, so a high-priority thread is
blocked by the action of a lower-priority thread.
     If the medium-priority thread blocks, the low-priority thread will be allowed to resume and
release the mutex, at which point operation resumes. Because of this, many priority inversion
deadlocks resolve themselves after a short time. If all priority inversion problems in a program
reliably resolve themselves within a short time, the priority inversion may become a performance
issue rather than a correctness issue. In either case, priority inversion can be a severe problem.
     Here are a few ideas to avoid priority inversion:
       Avoid realtime scheduling entirely. That clearly is not practical in many realtime
           applications, however.
       Design your threads so that threads of differing priority do not need to use the same
           mutexes. This may be impractical, too; many ANSI C functions, for example, use
           mutexes.
       Use priority ceiling mutexes (Section 5.5.5.1) or priority inheritance (Section 5.5.5.2).
           These are optional features of Pthreads and will not be available everywhere. Also, you
           cannot set the mutex priority protocol for mutexes you do not create, including those
           used by ANSI C functions.
       Avoid calling functions that may lock mutexes you didn't create in any thread with
           elevated priority.

8.1.5 Never share condition variables between predicates
     our code will usually be cleaner and more efficient if you avoid using a single condition
variable to manage more than one predicate condition. You should not, for example, define a
single "queue" condition variable that is used to awaken threads waiting for the queue to become
empty and also threads waiting for an element to be added to the queue.
     But this isn't just a performance issue (or it would be in another section). If you use
pthread_cond_signal to wake threads waiting on these shared condition variables, the program
may hang with threads waiting on the condition variable and nobody left to wake them up.
     Why? Because you can only signal a condition variable when you know that a single thread
needs to be awakened, and that any thread waiting on the condition variable may be chosen. When
multiple predicates share a condition variable, you can never be sure that the awakened thread was
waiting for the predicate you set. If it was not, then it will see a spurious wakeup and wait again.
Your signal has been lost, because no thread waiting for your predicate had a chance to see that it
had changed.
     It is not enough for a thread to resignal the condition variable when it gets a spurious wakeup,
either. Threads may not wake up in the order they waited, especially when you use priority
scheduling. "Resignaling" might result in an infinite loop with a few high-priority threads (all with
the wrong predicate) alternately waking each other up.
     The best solution, when you really want to share a condition variable between predicates, is
always to use pthread_cond_broadcast. But when you broadcast, all waiting threads wake up to
reevaluate their predicates. You always know that one set or the other cannot proceed--so why
make them all wake up to find out? If 1 thread is waiting for write access, for example, and 100
are waiting for read access, all 101 threads must wake up when the broadcast means that it is now
OK to write, but only the one writer can proceed--the other 100 threads must wait again. The
result of this imprecision is a lot of wasted context switches, and there are more useful ways to
keep your computer busy.

8.1.6 Sharing stacks and related memory corrupters
      There's nothing wrong with sharing stack memory between threads. That is, it is legal and
sometimes reasonable for a thread to allocate some variable on its own stack and communicate
that address to one or more other threads. A correctly written program can share stack addresses
with no risk at all; however (this may come as a surprise), not every program is written correctly,
even when you want it to be correct. Sharing stack addresses can make small programming errors
catastrophic, and these errors can be very difficult to isolate.
      | Returning from the function that allocates shared stack memory, when
      | other threads may still use that data, will result in undesirable behavior.
      If you share stack memory, you must ensure that it is never possible for the thread that owns
the stack to "pop" that shared memory from the stack until all other threads have forever ceased to
make use of the shared data. Should the owning thread return from a stack frame containing the
data, for example, the owning thread may call another function and thereby reallocate the space
occupied by the shared variable. One or both of the following possible outcomes will eventually
be observed:
      1. Data written by another thread will be overwritten with saved register values, a return PC,
            or whatever. The shared data has been corrupted.
      2. Saved register values, return PC, or whatever will be overwritten by another thread
            modifying the shared data. The owning thread's call frame has been corrupted.
      Having carefully ensured that there is no possible way for the owning thread to pop the stack
data while other threads are using the shared data, are you safe? Maybe not. We're stretching the
point a little, but remember, we're talking about a programming error--maybe a silly thing like
failing to initialize a pointer variable declared with auto storage class, for example. A pointer to
the shared data must be stored somewhere to be useful---other threads have no other way to find
the proper stack address. At some point, the pointer is likely to appear in various locations on the
stack of every thread that uses the data. None of these pointers will necessarily be erased when the
thread ceases to make use of the stack.
      Writes through uninitialized pointers are a common programming error, regardless of threads,
so to some extent this is nothing new or different. However, in the presence of threads and shared
stack data, each thread has an opportunity to corrupt data used by some other thread
asynchronously. The symptoms of that corruption may not appear until some time later, which can
pose a particularly difficult debugging task.
      If, in your program, sharing stack data seems convenient, then by all means take advantage of
the capability. But if something unexpected happens during debugging, start by examining the
code that shares stack data particularly carefully. If you routinely use an analysis tool that reports
use of uninitialized variables (such as Third Degree on Digital UNIX), you may not need to worry
about this class of problem--or many others.

8.2 Avoiding performance problems
"Well, in our country," said Alice, still panting a little, "you'd generally
     get to somewhere else--if you ran very fast for a long time as we've
     been doing."
“A slow sort of country?” said the Queen. "Now, here, you see, it takes all the
     running you can do, to keep in the same place. If you want to get some-
     where else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!"
     --Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass

     Sometimes, once a program works, it is "done." At least, until you want to make it do
something else. In many cases, though, "working" isn't good enough. The program needs to meet
performance goals. Sometimes the performance goals are clear: "must perform so many
transactions in this period of time." Other times, the goals are looser: "must be very fast."
     This section gives pointers on determining how fast you're going, what's slowing you up, and
how to tell (maybe) when you're going as fast as you can go. There are some very good tools to
help you, and there will be a lot more as the industry adjusts to supporting eager and outspoken
thread programmers. But there are no portable standards for threaded analysis tools. If your
vendor supports threads, you'll probably find at least a thread-safe version of prof, which is a
nearly universal UNIX tool. Each system will probably require different switches and
environments to use it safely for threads, and the output will differ.
     Performance tuning requires more than just answering the traditional question, "How much
time does the application spend in each function?" You have to analyze contention on mutexes, for
example. Mutexes with high contention may need to be split into several mutexes controlling
more specialized data (finer-grain concurrency), which can improve performance by increasing
concurrency. If finer grain mutexes have low contention, combining them may improve
performance by reducing locking overhead.

8.2.1 Beware of concurrent serialization
     The ideal parallel code is a set of tasks that is completely compute-bound. They never
synchronize, they never block--they just "think." If you start with a program that calls three
compute-bound functions in series, and change it to create three threads each running one of those
functions, the program will run (nearly) three times faster. At least, it should do so if you're
running on a multiprocessor with at least three CPUs that are, at that moment, allocated for your
use.
     The ideal concurrent code is a set of tasks that is completely I/O-bound. They never
synchronize, and do little computation--they just issue I/O requests and wait for them. If you start
with a program that writes chunks of data to three separate files (ideally, on three separate disks,
with separate controllers), and change it to create three threads, each writing one of those chunks
of data, all three I/O operations can progress simultaneously.
     But what if you've gone to all that trouble to write a set of compute-bound parallel or
I/O-bound concurrent threads and it turns out that you've just converted a straight-line serialized
program into a multithreaded serialized program? The result will be a slower program that
accomplishes the same result with substantially more overhead. Most likely, that is not what you
intended. How could that have happened?
     Let's say that your compute-bound operations call malloc and free in their work. Those
functions modify the static process state, so they need to perform some type of synchronization.
Most likely, they lock a mutex. If your threads run in a loop calling malloc and free, such that a
substantial amount of their total time may be spent within those functions, you may find that
there's very little real parallelism. The threads will spend a lot of time blocked on the mutex while
one thread or another allocates or frees memory.
     Similarly, the concurrent I/O threads may be using serialized resources. If the threads
perform "concurrent" I/O using the same stdio FILE stream, for example, they will be locking
mutexes to update the stream's shared buffer. Even if the threads are using separate files, if they
are on the same disk there will be locking within the file system to synchronize the file cache and
so forth. Even when using separate disks, true concurrency may be subject to limitations in the I/O
bus or disk controller subsystems.
     The point of all this is that writing a program that uses threads doesn't magically grant
parallelism or even concurrency to your application. When you're analyzing performance, be
aware that your program can be affected by factors that aren't within your control. You may not
even be able to see what's happening in the file system, but what you can't see can hurt you.

8.2.2 Use the right number of mutexes
      The first step in making a library thread-safe may be to create a "big mutex" that protects all
entries into the library. If only one thread can execute within the library at a time, then most
functions will be thread-safe. At least, no static data will be corrupted. If the library has no
persistent state that needs to remain consistent across a series of calls, the big mutex may seem to
be enough. Many libraries are left in this state. The standard X11 client library (Xlib) provides
limited support for this big mutex approach to thread-safety, and has for years.
      But thread-safety isn't enough anymore--now you want the library to perform well with
threads. In most cases, that will require redesigning the library so that multiple threads can use it
at the same time. The big mutex serializes all operations in the library, so you are getting no
concurrency or parallelization within the library. If use of that library is the primary function of
your threads, the program would run faster with a single thread and no synchronization. That big
mutex in Xlib, remember, keeps all other threads from using any Xlib function until the first
thread has received its response from the server, and that might take quite a while.
      Map out your library functions, and determine what operations can reasonably run in parallel.
A common strategy is to create a separate mutex for each data structure, and use those mutexes to
serialize access to the shared data, rather than using the "big mutex" to serialize access to the
library.
      With a profiler that supports threads, you can determine that you have too much mutex
activity, by looking for hot spots within calls to pthread_mutex_lock, pthread_mutex_unlock, and
pthread_mutex_trylock. However, this data will not be conclusive, and it may be very difficult to
determine whether the high activity is due to too much mutex contention or too much locking
without contention. You need more specific information on mutex contention and that requires
special tools. Some thread development systems provide detailed visual tracing information that
shows synchronization costs. Others provide "metering" information on individual mutexes to tell
how many times the mutex was locked, and how often threads found the mutex already locked.

8.2.2.1      Too many mutexes will not help
     Beware, too, of exchanging a "big" mutex for lots of "tiny" mutexes. You may make matters
worse. Remember, it takes time to lock a mutex, and more time to unlock that mutex. Even if you
increase parallelism by designing a locking hierarchy that has very little contention, your threads
may spend so much time locking and unlocking all those mutexes that they get less real work
done.
     Locking a mutex also affects the memory subsystem. In addition to the time you spend
locking and unlocking, you may decrease the efficiency of the memory system by excessive
locking. Locking a mutex, for example, might invalidate a block of cache on all processors. It
might stall all bus activity within some range of physical addresses.
     So find out where you really need mutexes. For example, in the previous section I suggested
creating a separate mutex for each data structure. Yet, if two data structures are usually used
together, or if one thread will hardly ever need to use one data structure while another thread is
using the second data structure, the extra mutex may decrease your overall performance.

8.2.3 Never fight over cache lines
      No modern computer reads data directly from main memory. Memory that is fast enough to
keep up with the computer is too expensive for that to be practical. Instead, data is fetched by the
memory management unit into a fast local cache array. When the computer writes data, that, too,
goes into the local cache array. The modified data may also be written to main memory
immediately or may be "flushed" to memory only when needed.
      So if one processor in a multiprocessor system needs to read a value that another processor
has in its cache, there must be some "cache coherency" mechanism to ensure that it can find the
correct data. More importantly, when one processor writes data to some location, all other
processors that have older copies of that location in cache need to copy the new data, or record
that the old data is invalid.
      Computer systems commonly cache data in relatively large blocks of 64 or 128 bytes. That
can improve efficiency by optimizing the references to slow main memory. It also means that,
when the same 64- or 128-byte block is cached by multiple processors, and one processor writes
to any part of that block, all processors caching the block must throw away the entire block.
      This has serious implications for high-performance parallel computation. If two threads
access different data within the same cache block, no thread will be able to take advantage of the
(fast) cached copy on the processor it is using. Each read will require a new cache fill from main
memory, slowing down the program.
      Cache behavior may vary widely even on different computer systems using the same
microprocessor chip. It is not possible to write code that is guaranteed to be optimal on all possible
systems. You can substantially improve your chances, however, by being very careful to align and
separate any performance-critical data used by multiple threads.
      You can optimize your code for a particular computer system by determining the cache
characteristics of that system, and designing your code so that no two threads will ever need to
write to the same cache block within performance-critical parallel loops. About the best you can
hope to do without optimizing for a particular system would be to ensure that each thread has a
private, page-aligned, segment of data. It is highly unlikely that any system would use a cache
block as large as a page, because a page includes far too much varied data to provide any
performance advantage in the memory management unit.
