                                    Preface

Our aim in this book is to provide an introduction to the principles of algorithm
design using a purely functional approach. Our language of choice is Haskell and all
the algorithms we design will be expressed as Haskell functions. Haskell has many
features for structuring function definitions, but we will use only a small subset of
them.
   Using functions, rather than loops and assignment statements, to express algo-
rithms changes everything. First of all, an algorithm expressed as a function is
composed of other, more basic functions that can be studied separately and reused
in other algorithms. For instance, a sorting algorithm may be specified in terms of
building a tree of some kind and then flattening it in some way. Functions that build
trees can be studied separately from functions that consume trees. Furthermore, the
properties of each of these basic functions and their relationship to others can be
captured with simple equational properties. As a result, one can talk and reason
about the ‘deep’ structure of an algorithm in a way that is not easily possible with
imperative code. To be sure, one can reason formally about imperative programs by
formulating their specifications in the predicate calculus, and using loop invariants
to prove they are correct. But, and this is the nub, one cannot easily reason about
the properties of an imperative program directly in terms of the language of its
code. Consequently, books on formal program design have a quite different tone
from those on algorithm design: they demand fluency in both the predicate calculus
and the necessary imperative dictions. In contrast, many texts on algorithm design
traditionally present algorithms with a step-by-step commentary, and use informally
stated loop invariants to help one understand why the algorithm is correct.
   With a functional approach there are no longer two separate languages to think
about, and one can happily calculate better versions of algorithms, or parts of
algorithms, by the straightforward process of equational reasoning. That, perhaps, is
the main contribution of this book. Although it contains a fair amount of equational
reasoning, we have tried to maintain a light touch. The plain fact of the matter is
xiv                                     Preface

that calculation is fun to do but boring to read – well, too much of it is. Although it
does not matter very much whether imperative algorithms are expressed in C or Java
or pseudo-code, the situation changes completely when algorithms are expressed
functionally.
   Many of the problems considered in this book, especially in the later parts, begin
with a specification of the task in hand, expressed as a composition of standard
functions such as maps, filters, and folds, as well as other functions such as perms for
computing all the permutations of a list, parts for computing all the partitions, and
mktrees for building all the trees of a particular kind. These component functions
are then combined, or fused, in various ways to construct a final algorithm with the
required time complexity. A final sorting algorithm may not refer to the underlying
tree, but the tree is still there in the structure of the algorithm. The notion of fusion
dominates the technical and mathematical aspects of the design process and is really
the driving force of the book.
   The disadvantage for any author of taking a functional approach is that, be-
cause functional languages such as Haskell are not so well known as mainstream
procedural languages, one has to spend some time explaining them. That would
add substantially to the length of the book. The simple solution to this problem
is just to assume the necessary knowledge. There is a growing range of textbooks
on languages like Haskell, including our own Thinking Functionally with Haskell
(Cambridge University Press, 2014), and we will just assume the reader is familiar
with the necessary material. Indeed, the present book was designed as a companion
volume to the earlier book. A brief summary of what we do assume, and an even
briefer reprise of some essential ideas, is given in the first chapter, but you will
probably not be able to learn enough about Haskell there to understand the rest
of the book. Even if you do know something about functional programming, but
not about how equational reasoning enters the picture (some books on functional
programming simply don’t mention equational reasoning), you will probably still
have to refer to our earlier book. In any case, the mathematics involved in equational
reasoning is neither new nor difficult.
   Books on algorithm design traditionally cover three broad areas: a collection of
design principles, a study of useful data structures, and a number of interesting and
intriguing algorithms that have been discovered over the centuries. Sometimes the
books are arranged by principles, sometimes by topic (such as graph algorithms, or
text algorithms), and sometimes by a mixture of both. This book mostly takes the
first approach. It is devoted to five main design strategies underlying many effective
algorithms: divide and conquer, greedy algorithms, thinning algorithms, dynamic
programming, and exhaustive search. These are the design strategies that every
serious programmer should know. The middle strategy, on thinning algorithms,
is new, and serves in many problems as an alternative to dynamic programming.
                                        Preface                                      xv

Each design strategy is allocated a part to itself, and the chapters on each strategy
cover a variety of algorithms from the well-known to the new. There is only a
little material on data structures – only as much as we need. In the first part of the
book we do discuss some basic data structures, but we will also rely on some of
Haskell’s libraries of other useful ways of structuring data. One reason for doing so
is that we wanted the book not to be too voluminous; another reason is that there
does exist one text, Chris Okasaki’s Purely Functional Data Structures (Cambridge
University Press, 1998), that covers a lot of the material. Other books on functional
data structures have been published since we began writing this book, and more are
beginning to appear.
    Another feature of this book is that, as well as some firm favourites, it describes a
number of algorithms that do not usually appear in books on algorithm design. Some
of these algorithms have been adapted, elaborated, and simplified from yet another
book published by Cambridge University Press: Pearls of Functional Algorithm
Design (2010). The reason for this novelty is simply to make the book entertaining
as well as instructive. Books on algorithm design are read, broadly speaking, by
three kinds of people: academics who need reference material, undergraduate or
graduate students on a course, and professional programmers simply for interest
and enjoyment. Most professional programmers do not design algorithms but just
take them from a library. Yet they too are a target audience for this book, because
sometimes professional programmers want to know more about what goes into a
good algorithm and how to think about them.
    Algorithms in real life are a good deal more intricate than the ones presented in
this book. The shortest-path algorithm in a satellite navigation system is a good
deal more complicated than a shortest-path algorithm as presented in a textbook
on algorithm design. Real-life algorithms have to cope with the problems of scale,
with the effective use of a computer’s hardware, with user interfaces, and with many
other things that go into a well-designed and useful product. None of these aspects
is covered in the present book, nor indeed in most books devoted solely to the
principles of algorithm design.
    There is another feature of this book that deserves mention: all exercises are
answered, if sometimes somewhat briefly. The exercises form an integral part of
the text, and the questions and answers should be read even if the exercises are not
attempted. Rather than have a complete bibliography at the end of the book, each
chapter ends with references to (some of) the books and articles pertinent to the
chapter.
    Most of the major programs in this book are available on the web site

                www.cs.ox.ac.uk/publications/books/adwh
xvi                                     Preface

You can also use this site to see a list of all known errors, as well as report new ones.
We also welcome suggestions for improvement, including ideas for new exercises.

                                 Acknowledgements
Preparation of this book has benefited enormously from careful reading by Sue
Gibbons, Hsiang-Shang Ko, and Nicolas Wu. The manuscript was prepared using
the lhs2TEX system of Ralf Hinze and Andres Löh, which pretty-prints the Haskell
code and also allows it to be extracted and type-checked. The extracted code was
then tested using the wonderful QuickCheck tool developed by Koen Claessen and
John Hughes. Type-checking and QuickChecking the code has saved us from many
infelicities; any errors that remain are, of course, our own responsibility.
   We also thank David Tranah and the team at Cambridge University Press for their
advice and hard work in the generation of the final version of the text.

                                                                         Richard Bird
                                                                      Jeremy Gibbons
