PART ONE

 BASICS

What makes a good algorithm? There are as many answers to this question as there
are to the question of what makes a good cookbook recipe. Is the recipe clear and
easy to follow? Does the recipe use standard and well-understood techniques? Does
it use widely available ingredients? Is the preparation time reasonably short? Does it
involve many pots and pans and a lot of kitchen space? And so on and so on. Some
people when asked this question say that what is most important about a recipe
is whether the dish is attractive or not, a point we will try to bear in mind when
expressing our functional algorithms.
   In the first three chapters we review the ingredients we need for designing good
recipes for attractive algorithms in a functional kitchen, and describe the tools we
need for analysing their efficiency. Our functional language of choice is Haskell,
and the ingredients are Haskell functions. These ingredients and the techniques for
combining them are reviewed in the first chapter. Be aware that the chapter is not
an introduction to Haskell; its main purpose is to outline what should be familiar
territory to the reader, or at least territory that the reader should feel comfortable
travelling in.
   The second chapter concerns efficiency, specifically the running time of algo-
rithms. We will ignore completely the question of space efficiency, for the plain
fact of the matter is that executing a functional program can take up quite a lot of
kitchen space. There are methods for controlling the space used in evaluating a
functional expression, but we refer the reader to other books for their elaboration.
That chapter reviews asymptotic notation for stating running times, and explores
how recurrence relations, which are essentially recursive functions for determining
the running times of recursive functions, can be solved to give asymptotic estimates.
The chapter also introduces, albeit fairly briefly, the notion of amortised running
times because it will be needed later in the book.
   The final chapter in this part introduces a small number of basic data structures
that will be needed at one or two places in the rest of the book. These are symmetric
lists, random-access lists, and purely functional arrays. Mostly we postpone discus-
sion of any data structure required to make an algorithm efficient until the algorithm
itself is introduced, but these three form a coherent group that can be discussed
without having specific applications in mind.
