    PART TWO

DIVIDE AND CONQUER

Divide and conquer (from the Latin divide et impera, and more accurately translated
as divide and rule) is the first algorithm design technique we will study in depth.
Given a problem to solve, either solve it directly if its size is sufficiently small and
it is easy to do so, or else divide it into one or more subproblems, solve each of
these subproblems, and then combine the solutions to give a solution to the original
problem. Such a strategy covers pretty much everything about problem solving
in computer science, or mathematics, or life for that matter, but the feature that
makes it into a simple and effective computational tool is that each subproblem is
simply the original problem on an input of smaller size. Hence each subproblem is
solved by the same strategy. A divide-and-conquer algorithm is therefore essentially
recursive in nature.
   Phrased this way, every functional algorithm that depends on explicit recursion
can be thought of as a divide-and-conquer algorithm. After all, one possible de-
composition of a problem of size n > 0 is to divide it into a problem of size n − 1
and a problem of size 1. For instance, an algorithm expressed as a foldr has essen-
tially this decomposition. But in a truly divide-and-conquer algorithm there are
two other important aspects. One is that each subproblem should have a size that
is some fraction of the input size, a fraction like n/2 or n/4. In many cases the
subproblems will have equal size, or as close to equal size as possible. A problem
of size n might therefore be divided into two subproblems each of size n/2, a very
common form of decomposition that we will meet later on. There are also examples
of divide-and-conquer algorithms in which the subproblems have different sizes, for
example one of size n/5 and the other of size 7 × n/10. We will encounter such an
example in Chapter 6. The second important aspect is that the subproblems should
be independent of each other, so the work done in solving them is not duplicated.
Problems in which the subproblems overlap and have many sub-subproblems in
common can be tackled by the dynamic programming strategy, a topic we will take
up in Part Five.
   Finally, because the subproblems are independent and can be solved concurrently
as well as sequentially, divide-and-conquer algorithms are highly suited to exploiting
parallelism. We will not pursue parallel programming in this book, but see Simon
Marlow’s book Parallel and Concurrent Programming in Haskell (O’Reilly, 2013),
for an excellent coverage of the topic.
