   PART THREE

GREEDY ALGORITHMS

Many computational problems involve selecting some best candidate from a set of
possible candidates. Candidates can be lists, trees, layouts of a document, routes
in a network of roads, and so on. The best candidate may be the shortest list, the
least wasteful paragraph, or the quickest route. Even sorting can be regarded as
an optimisation problem; after all, the aim of a sorting algorithm is to find some
permutation of the input that minimises the number of out-of-order elements. Greedy
sorting algorithms will be our first topic in Chapter 7. In general there may be more
than one best candidate and the task is to find just one of them.
   The input to such problems is normally not the set of candidates but a list of
components out of which the candidates can be built. For example, the raw materials
may be a list of words that constitute the paragraph, a list of numbers that form
the fringe of a tree, or a list of towns and roads in a shortest-path algorithm. A
greedy algorithm solves such a problem in a step-by-step fashion by constructing a
single best partial candidate at each step. A partial candidate may be a fully formed
candidate for the components used so far in its construction, but it may be something
more general. The idea of a step-by-step algorithm is easy to grasp intuitively but
not so easy to formalise, especially in a purely functional language. For example, a
divide-and-conquer algorithm for sorting will minimise the number of out-of-order
elements but it is not, conceptually at least, a step-by-step algorithm. Finally, in most
of our examples a best candidate is one that minimises some notion of cost, so the
word ‘greedy’ may seem a little inappropriate. Perhaps ‘frugal’ or ‘parsimonious’
would be better adjectives. However, the name ‘greedy’ has become the standard
way of referring to these algorithms.
   The idea of maintaining a single best candidate at each step will not always lead
to a best final candidate. Suppose you are out walking on a hillside and wish to
climb to the highest point. If you are in a mist and cannot see where to go, you may
decide on the strategy of choosing to walk along a path of steepest ascent at each
step. That may work, but it may also lead to the top of a little hillock when there is
a much bigger hill in the background. The same is true of greedy algorithms (which
have also been called hillclimbing algorithms): you may get to a locally optimal
solution that is not globally optimal. We will say that a greedy algorithm works if it
does lead to a globally optimal solution.
   Greedy algorithms can be tricky things. The trickiness is not in the algorithm
itself, which is usually quite short and easy to understand, but in the proof that
it does produce a best solution. With a greedy algorithm the correctness of the
program is less obvious than with, say, a sorting algorithm; after all we did not
spend any time in previous chapters on proving that the various sorting algorithms
actually did sort. The main difficulty with proving that a greedy algorithm works is
that for many problems equational reasoning is simply not up to the task and has

to be replaced by reasoning about refinement. We will see what this entails in due
course.
   In the following chapters we consider a number of greedy algorithms. Rather
than just giving the algorithm and proving it works, we will take a more struc-
tured approach, one that will pay dividends when we come to discuss dynamic
programming and exhaustive search algorithms. First we show how to define a
function candidates that generates the set of all possible candidates. This function
may be defined recursively or by using a suitable higher-order function such as
foldr, until, or apply (a function that applies another function a given number of
times). Sometimes more than one style is available, each leading to an equally
clear definition, so it is a free choice as to which one to employ. Next we define
the selection criterion explicitly. This can also sometimes be done in various ways
because a given greedy algorithm may work for more than one cost function. The
choice of how the candidates are generated and how the cost function is defined can
have a significant effect on the ease with which the correctness of the algorithm is
proved. Finally, the generation and selection functions are combined, or fused, into
one function. When candidates is defined as an instance of a standard higher-order
function such as foldr we can appeal to standard fusion conditions to carry out
the fusion step. We have already seen this two-stage process with sorting, when
algorithms were described in terms of building a tree and then flattening it. The
deep structure of an algorithm is revealed by expressing it in terms of more basic
components and then combining them.
