                                   Chapter 9

                    Greedy algorithms on graphs

In this chapter we consider two problems for which the candidates are graphs, in fact
special forms of graph called spanning trees. The first problem is about computing
a spanning tree with minimum cost for a connected graph, while the second is about
computing a spanning tree for a directed graph whose edges determine a shortest
path from a given starting vertex to all other vertices. All these terms are made
precise below. The shortest-paths algorithm is then used to solve another problem,
called the jogger’s problem, for computing a cyclic path with minimum total cost.

                          9.1 Graphs and spanning trees
We start with some terminology. There are two kinds of graph, a directed graph, also
called a digraph, and an undirected graph, just called a graph. Certain definitions
are slightly different for digraphs and graphs, so it is best to consider them as
separate though closely related species. The minimum-cost spanning tree problem
deals with graphs, while the shortest-paths problem deals with digraphs.
   By definition, a digraph D is a pair (V, E), where V is a set of vertices, also called
nodes, and E is a set of edges. An edge consists of a pair of vertices (u, v), where u
is the source of the edge and v is the target. Such an edge is directed from u to v. In
a digraph it is possible to have loops – edges of the form (u, u). Because E is a set it
cannot contain an edge more than once, so there is at most one edge with the same
source and target. It follows that a digraph of n vertices cannot have more that n2
edges, or n (n − 1) edges if there are no loops.
   A graph G is also given by a pair (V, E) of vertices and edges, but this time each
edge is a set {u, v} of exactly two vertices. It follows that graphs cannot have loops.
For the purposes of representation we write (u, v) for this set of two vertices, but
(u, v) and (v, u) are considered to be the same edge. A graph of n vertices cannot
have more than n (n − 1)/2 edges. In a sparse graph or digraph with n vertices and
e edges we have e = O(n), while in a dense graph or digraph we have e = Ω(n2 ).

Certain algorithms are better tailored for sparse graphs, while others are better for
dense graphs.
   For the purposes of this chapter we will need labelled graphs and digraphs.
By definition, a labelled graph or digraph is a graph in which each edge carries a
label, usually called its weight. For simplicity, weights are assumed to be integers.
The weight of an edge is recorded along with the edge, so both for graphs and for
digraphs the relevant type declarations are:
      type Graph = ([Vertex], [Edge])
      type Edge = (Vertex, Vertex, Weight)
      type Vertex = Int
      type Weight = Int
We will also fix on the definitions
      nodes (vs, es) = vs
      edges (vs, es) = es
      source (u, v, w) = u
      target (u, v, w) = v
      weight (u, v, w) = w
The representation of a graph as lists of vertices and edges mirrors the mathematical
definition and is acceptable for many problems. For other problems an alternative
representation is superior. This is to view a graph as an adjacency function of type
Vertex → [(Vertex, Weight)]. The domain of this function is the set of vertices, and
for each vertex u the value of the function applied to u is a set of pairs (v, w) such
that (u, v, w) is a labelled edge. Assuming that vertices are named by integers in the
range 1 to n for some n, a simple implementation of the adjacency function is by an
array, so an alternative description of a graph is
      type AdjArray = Array Vertex [(Vertex, Weight)]
We leave it as an exercise to convert between the two descriptions. The adjacency
array representation of a graph is used for some of the problems in Part Six.
   A path in a graph or digraph is a sequence [v0 , v1 , ..., vk ] of vertices such that
(vj , vj+1 ) is an edge (directed from vj to vj+1 in the case of digraphs) for 0 ⩽ j < k.
Such a path connects v0 and vk . A cycle in a graph or digraph is a path [v0 , v1 , ..., v0 ]
whose edges and vertices are all distinct apart from the two endpoints. In a graph
the path [v0 , v1 , v0 ] is not a cycle because (v0 , v1 ) and (v1 , v0 ) are the same edge;
consequently, cycles in a graph have lengths greater than two. A graph or digraph
is acyclic if there are no cycles; a graph is connected if there is a path from every
vertex to every other vertex. In an acyclic graph there can be at most one path
between any two vertices.
   A connected acyclic graph is called a tree, and a set of trees is called a forest:
                                     9.1 Graphs and spanning trees                207

       type Tree = Graph
       type Forest = [Tree]
Trees are therefore not a data type in the sense used in previous chapters, but merely
a synonym for a special kind of graph. Every graph can be decomposed into the set
of its connected components.
   A spanning forest of a graph G = (V, E) is a disjoint set of trees
       (V1 , E1 ), (V2 , E2 ), ..., (Vk , Ek )
with V = 1⩽i⩽k Vi and whose combined edges E? = 1⩽i⩽k Ei constitute a maximal
subset of E in the sense that no further edge of G can be added to E? without creating
a cycle. If G is connected, then a spanning forest consists of a single spanning
tree. A spanning tree of a connected graph with n vertices has exactly n − 1 edges
(why?). Finally, a minimum-cost spanning tree (MCST) of a connected graph G
is a spanning tree T of G in which the sum of the weights of the edges in T is as
small as possible. Our aim in this section is to find efficient methods for computing
a MCST of a connected graph. It is left as an exercise to generalise the solutions to
compute a minimum-cost spanning forest of a graph that is not connected.
   To add some life to these definitions, consider a country with a given network of
towns and roads. The towns are the vertices and each road is an edge connecting
two towns. Each road can be travelled in either direction, so the graph is undirected.
We suppose there is at most one road connecting two given towns and the weight
associated with a road is its length. The network may be connected in that there is a
route (a path) between every two towns, but it may not. For instance, the country may
consist of several islands not connected by bridges. If all the towns are connected
by road, then a MCST is a network of roads with no cyclic routes1 and of minimum
total cost connecting all the towns.
   Finding a MCST does not help with planning shortest routes. The path between
two towns in a MCST is not necessarily the shortest route between the two towns.
We will consider the problem of planning shortest routes in Section 9.5. Finding a
MCST also does not help with a superficially similar problem in which one is given a
connected graph and a subset T of vertices, with the aim of finding a minimum-cost
tree that includes every vertex in T. This problem, called the Steiner tree problem,
is much more challenging and beyond the scope of this book.
   Here is a specification of the MCST problem, expressed in our standard way:
       mcst :: Graph → Tree
       mcst ← MinWith cost · spats
The function cost returns the sum of the weights of the edges of the tree:
1   Though routes for cyclists are certainly allowed.

      cost :: Tree → Int
      cost = sum · map weight · edges
The function spats (short for ‘spanning trees’) generates all the spanning trees of a
given connected graph. For a graph (V, E) with n vertices, that means finding all
subsets of E of size n − 1 which are both acyclic and connected. One way to define
spats is to add edges one by one into an initially empty set, ensuring at each step
that the set of edges is acyclic, that is, a forest. Only at the final step when the last
edge is added is the forest guaranteed to coalesce into a single tree (provided of
course that the graph is connected). Another way is also to add edges one by one,
but to ensure at each step that the set of edges is both acyclic and connected, that is,
a tree. These two methods for generating spanning trees lead to two different greedy
algorithms, known respectively as Kruskal’s algorithm and Prim’s algorithm. Let us
examine each in turn.

                                 9.2 Kruskal’s algorithm
In Kruskal’s algorithm, the definition of spats is very similar to the definition of
mktrees in Huffman’s algorithm, except that it works on a list of states rather than
a list of trees. Each state is a pair consisting of a forest and the list of edges from
which the next edge can be chosen:
      type State = (Forest, [Edge])
      spats :: Graph → [Tree]
      spats = map extract · until (all done) (concatMap steps) · wrap · start
      extract :: State → Tree
      extract ([t ], ) = t
      done :: State → Bool
      done = single · fst
      start :: Graph → State
      start g = ([([v], [ ]) | v ← nodes g], edges g)
The starting state consists of a forest of trees, each of which is a graph with a
single vertex and no edges, and the full set of edges of the graph. A final state is a
pair consisting of a singleton tree and the list of edges not used in its construction.
The function extract takes a final state, discards the unused edges, and extracts the
spanning tree.
   That leaves us with the definition of steps :: State → [State], which takes a forest
and a list of edges and selects every possible edge that can be added to the forest
without creating a cycle. An edge can be so added if its endpoints belong to different
                                 9.2 Kruskal’s algorithm                          209

trees. The result is a forest in which the two trees are combined into one larger tree.
Hence we define
     steps :: State → [State]
     steps (ts, es) = [(add e ts, es? ) | (e, es? ) ← picks es, safeEdge e ts]
Recall that the function picks :: [a] → [(a, [a])] picks an element of a nonempty list
in all possible ways, returning both the element and the remaining list. The function
safeEdge is defined by
     safeEdge :: Edge → Forest → Bool
     safeEdge e ts = find ts (source e) = find ts (target e)
     find :: Forest → Vertex → Tree
     find ts v = head [t | t ← ts, any (== v) (nodes t)]
The value find ts v is the unique tree in the forest ts that contains v as one of its
vertices. Each find operation can take Θ(n) steps in the worst case, since every vertex
of the graph may have to be inspected. A more efficient definition is given later on.
Finally, the function add combines two trees and adds the result to the forest:
     add :: Edge → Forest → Forest
     add e ts = (nodes t1 ++ nodes t2 , e : edges t1 ++ edges t2 ) : rest
                where t1 = find ts (source e)
                      t2 = find ts (target e)
                      rest = [t | t ← ts, t = t1 ∧ t = t2 ]
It follows that each add operation, like find, takes O(n) steps (ignoring tree compar-
isons). Again, a more efficient definition is given later on.
   The greedy algorithm for computing a minimum-cost spanning tree is obtained
by following the path mapped out by the theory in the previous chapter. First, define
     MCC = MinWith cost · map extract · until (all done) (concatMap steps) · wrap
Recall that we have
     extract (until done gstep sx) ← MCC sx
for all states sx, provided two conditions are satisfied. The first one is
     done sx ⇒ extract sx ← MCC sx
This condition follows from the definition of MCC, since
     extract ([t ], es) = t ← MCC ([t ], es)
The second condition is the greedy condition: there exists a tree t such that
     t ← MCC (gstep sx) ∧ t ← MCC sx
To verify the greedy condition we have to choose a definition of gstep. The obvious
choice is to define gstep to select a safe edge of minimum weight. Assuming the list
of edges is in ascending order of weight, we can define gstep by

      gstep :: State → State
      gstep (ts, e : es) = if t1 = t2 then (ts? , es) else gstep (ts, es)
        where t1 = find ts (source e)
                 t2 = find ts (target e)
                 ts? = (nodes t1 ++ nodes t2 , e : edges t1 ++ edges t2 ) : rest
                 rest = [t | t ← ts, t = t1 ∧ t = t2 ]

The function gstep selects the first edge whose endpoints are in different trees t1
and t2 , and combines t1 and t2 into one tree.
   Now, to verify the greedy condition, consider a state sx = (ts, es) consisting of a
forest ts and a list es of unused edges. Let e be an element of es of lightest weight that
is a safe edge for ts. Suppose t ← MCC sx. If t contains the edge e, then t can always
be constructed by choosing e as a first step. Hence t ← MCC (gstep sx) and the
greedy condition is satisfied. Otherwise, t does not contain e, and adding e to t would
create a (unique) cycle. Remove any edge e? in the cycle and replace it with e. The
result is another spanning tree t? with cost t? ⩽ cost t, because weight e ⩽ weight e? .
Furthermore, since t? contains e and t? can be constructed by choosing e as a first
step, we can take t = t? to satisfy the greedy condition.
   Hence one way to formulate Kruskal’s algorithm is as follows:

      kruskal :: Graph → Tree
      kruskal = extract · until done gstep · start
      start g = ([([v], [ ]) | v ← nodes g], sortOn weight (edges g))

The function sortOn in the Haskell library Data.List appeared in Exercise 5.12.
There is another way to formulate the algorithm, which is to write

      kruskal :: Graph → Tree
      kruskal g = extract (apply (n − 1) gstep (start g))
        where n = length (nodes g)

Given a connected graph with n vertices, we know that gstep will be applied exactly
n − 1 times.
   It remains to time the program. Suppose the graph has n vertices and e edges. As
the graph is assumed to be connected and there is at most one edge between any
two vertices, we have n − 1 ⩽ e ⩽ n (n − 1)/2. Sorting the edges takes O(e log e)
steps. As we have seen, each find and add operation takes O(n) steps. In the worst
case, all e edges may have to be considered, so there are 2 e calls of find and n − 1
calls of add, for a total running time of O(e log e + e n + n2 ) = O(e n) steps.
   The bottleneck in this algorithm is the time complexity of find and add. A faster
implementation of these functions makes use of a special data structure for comput-
ing with disjoint sets. We turn to this topic next.
                    9.3 Disjoint sets and the union–find algorithm                     211

                  9.3 Disjoint sets and the union–find algorithm
The computationally expensive part of Kruskal’s algorithm lies in the maintenance
of a collection of disjoint sets, the vertices of the trees in the forest. Initially, each
vertex is in a set by itself. Each union operation reduces the number of disjoint
sets by one. The function find has to discover which set in the collection contains a
given vertex. Rather than returning the whole set, we can define find to return the
name of the set. The name of a set is some designated vertex in the set. Let DS be
some data type for maintaining disjoint sets of vertices v in the range 1 ⩽ v ⩽ n for
some n. What we need are the following three operations on DS, in which Name is
a synonym for Vertex:
     startDS :: Nat → DS
     findDS :: DS → Vertex → Name
     unionDS :: Name → Name → DS → DS
The function startDS takes a positive integer n and returns a collection of n singleton
sets, each containing a unique vertex v in the range 1 ⩽ v ⩽ n. The function findDS
takes a vertex v and returns the name of the set in the collection that contains v. The
function unionDS takes two different names and replaces the two named sets in the
collection by a single set with an appropriately chosen name, in fact the name of the
larger set.
   Here is the implementation of Kruskal’s algorithm that uses these three functions.
The disjoint sets of vertices are separated out from the trees in the forest, and all the
tree edges are combined into one set. Thus we change the state to read
     type State = (DS, [Edge], [Edge])
Then we can define
     kruskal :: Graph → Tree
     kruskal g = extract (apply (n − 1) gstep s)
                  where extract ( , es, ) = (nodes g, es)
                        n = length (nodes g)
                        s = (startDS n, [ ], sortOn weight (edges g))
The revised definition of gstep is
     gstep :: State → State
     gstep (ds, fs, e : es) = if n1 = n2 then (unionDS n1 n2 ds, e : fs, es)
                                         else gstep (ds, fs, es)
                              where n1 = findDS ds (source e)
                                     n2 = findDS ds (target e)
In the simple implementation of Kruskal’s algorithm described above, the three
operations startDS, findDS, and unionDS can each be implemented to take O(n)

steps. But we can do better with two other implementations, which we will call
implementations A and B. In implementation A, the function findDS takes O(log n)
steps in the worst case, while unionDS takes O(n) steps. Recalling that Kruskal’s
algorithm may require 2 e calls of findDS and n − 1 calls of unionDS, that means
a total running time of O(e log n + n2 ) steps, a significant improvement on O(e n)
steps. In implementation B, the function findDS takes O(log2 n) steps, but unionDS
takes only O(log n) steps. That means a total running time of O(e log2 n + n log n)
steps, again an improvement on O(e n) steps.
   These timing bounds are not the best that can be achieved: one can construct
implementations of findDS and unionDS so that a sequence of O(e) find operations
and up to n − 1 union operations takes O(e log n) steps. However, this implemen-
tation seems impossible to achieve in a purely functional setting because it relies
on mutable arrays with a constant-time update function. Although mutable data
structures can be handled with monadic programming, we choose not to do so. The
so-called Union–Find problem is a well-known example of a problem in which the
complexity of the best purely functional solution seems to be inferior to that of the
best imperative one.
   Implementation A of DS also uses an array, but the array is an immutable one.
Recall the following three functions from Section 3.3:
      listArray :: Ix i ⇒ (i, i) → [e] → Array i e
      (!)       :: Ix i ⇒ Array i e → i → e
      (//)      :: Ix i ⇒ Array i e → [(i, e)] → Array i e
The first function constructs an array from a pair of bounds and a list of values
in index order, the second is the array lookup function, and the third is an update
function. Building an array takes linear time, a lookup takes constant time, but an
update takes linear time even for an update at a single position. We will use the
following tailored versions of the three operations above:
      fromList :: [a] → Array Vertex a
      fromList xs = listArray (1, length xs) xs
      index :: Array Vertex a → Vertex → a
      index a v = a ! v
      update :: Vertex → a → Array Vertex a → Array Vertex a
      update v x a = a // [(v, x)]
Here is the definition of DS based on arrays:
      type Size = Nat
      data DS = DS {names :: Array Vertex Vertex, sizes :: Array Vertex Size}
The implementation consists of just two arrays, one for naming the sets in the
collection, and one for computing their sizes. The sets themselves can be determined
                    9.3 Disjoint sets and the union–find algorithm                     213

from the fact that two elements have the same name if and only if they are in the
same set.
   The definition of startDS is
     startDS :: Nat → DS
     startDS n = DS (fromList [1 . . n]) (fromList (replicate n 1))
Recall that we assume vertices are labelled from 1 to n for some n. Initially every
set is a singleton set of size 1. The name of a set is the value of its sole occupant. In
the general case, the name of a set is a value k such that
     index (names ds) k = k
Each entry in the names array is either a name or a vertex whose entry is either a
name or another vertex with the same property. Thus we can find the name of the
set containing a specified vertex by tracing back in the names array until an entry is
found that points to itself. That gives us the definition of findDS:
     findDS :: DS → Vertex → Name
     findDS ds x = if x == y then x else findDS ds y
                  where y = index (names ds) x
The time complexity of this operation depends on how far away a vertex is from
the name of the set containing it. We will show how this distance is kept small in a
moment. Finally, unionDS is defined by
     unionDS :: Name → Name → DS → DS
     unionDS n1 n2 ds = DS ns ss
       where (ns, ss) =
                 if s1 < s2
                 then (update n1 n2 (names ds), update n2 (s1 + s2 ) (sizes ds))
                 else (update n2 n1 (names ds), update n1 (s1 + s2 ) (sizes ds))
              s1 = index (sizes ds) n1
              s2 = index (sizes ds) n2
The first two arguments of unionDS are different names, not arbitrary vertices. The
sizes of the sets corresponding to the two names are computed, and the smaller
set is absorbed into the larger by renaming the smaller set with the name of the
larger. Finally, the size of the larger set is increased accordingly. The sole but critical
purpose of maintaining size information is to ensure that the number of findDS
operations used in looking up the name of a set is as small as possible. If the first
lookup does not yield the name of a set, it is because the set has been absorbed into
a larger one. A set of size 1 is absorbed into a set of size at least 1, which in turn is
absorbed into a set of size at least 2, which in turn is absorbed into a set of size 4,
and so on. It follows that, if there are k lookups in a search for the name of a set S,
then S has size at least 2k−1 . That gives us the bound k ⩽ log n? + 1.
214                            Greedy algorithms on graphs
                                        1   2    3   4   5   6   7
                        startDS 7       1   2    3   4   5   6   7
                                        1   1    1   1   1   1   1
                        unionDS 1 2     1   1    3   4   5   6   7
                                        2   1    1   1   1   1   1
                        unionDS 6 7     1   1    3   4   5   6   6
                                        2   1    1   1   1   2   1
                        unionDS 3 6     1   1    6   4   5   6   6
                                        2   1    1   1   1   3   1
                        unionDS 1 6     6   1    6   4   5   6   6
                                        2   1    1   1   1   5   1

Figure 9.1 An example of Union–Find with seven vertices. After each operation,
      the two rows show the resulting names and sizes.

   An example of the use of these operations is given in Figure 9.1. Observe that the
second rows show the size correctly only for the name of the set; for example, after
unionDS 1 2 the set with name 1 has the correct size 2, but the size associated with
2 (which is no longer a name) remains 1. At the end of the four union operations we
have
      map (findDS ds) [1 . . 7] = [6, 6, 6, 4, 5, 6, 6]
Thus the set of disjoint sets is reduced to three sets: {1, 2, 3, 6, 7} with name 6 and
two singleton sets {4} and {5} with names 4 and 5, respectively. In particular, to
find the name of the set containing 2 we have to evaluate findDS three times:
      findDS ds 2 = findDS ds 1 = findDS ds 6 = 6
But the set containing 2 is a set of size 5, and log 5? + 1 = 3, which is just what
the bound above predicts.
  The second implementation, implementation B, of DS uses the data structure of
random-access lists from Chapter 3. This time we have
      data DS = DS {names :: RAList Vertex, sizes :: RAList Size}
The definition of startDS is
      startDS :: Nat → DS
      startDS n = DS (toRA [1 . . n]) (toRA (replicate n 1))
      toRA :: [a] → RAList a
      toRA = foldr consRA nilRA
The definitions of findDS and unionDS remain the same, except for the changes
                                   9.4 Prim’s algorithm                              215

     index xs x      = lookupRA (x − 1) xs
     update n1 n2 xs = updateRA (n1 − 1) n2 xs
because positions in random-access lists are indexed from 0 rather than 1.
   Now we can restate the various running times. The implementation of unionDS
involves two lookups and two updates, for a total of O(n) steps for implementa-
tion A, and O(log n) steps for implementation B. Implementation A of findDS takes
O(log n) steps, whereas implementation B takes O(log2 n) steps. With implemen-
tation A the total running time of Kruskal’s algorithm is O(n2 ) steps on a sparse
graph and O(n2 log n) steps on a dense graph. With implementation B the times
are O(n log2 n) steps for a sparse graph and O(n2 log2 n) steps for a dense graph. It
follows that implementation B is better for sparse graphs, while implementation A
is better for dense graphs.

                                  9.4 Prim’s algorithm
The only difference between Prim’s algorithm and Kruskal’s algorithm is that a tree
is constructed at each step rather than a forest. Here is the revised definition of states
and spats:
     type State = (Tree, [Edge])
     spats :: Graph → [Tree]
     spats g = map fst (until (all done) (concatMap steps) [start g])
                where done (t, es) = (length (nodes t) == length (nodes g))
     start g = (([head (nodes g)], [ ]), edges g)
This time the starting state is defined by arbitrarily selecting the first vertex of g as
the initial tree. The function steps is virtually the same as in Kruskal’s algorithm,
namely
     steps :: State → [State]
     steps (t, es) = [(add e t, es? ) | (e, es? ) ← picks es, safeEdge e t ]
except for different definitions of add and safeEdge. This time, safeEdge determines
whether an edge has exactly one endpoint in the tree:
     safeEdge :: Edge → Tree → Bool
     safeEdge e t = elem (source e) (nodes t) = elem (target e) (nodes t)
The function add adds an edge to a tree:
     add :: Edge → Tree → Tree
     add e (vs, es) = if elem (source e) vs then (target e : vs, e : es)
                                            else (source e : vs, e : es)
The greedy algorithm is derived in the same way as Kruskal’s algorithm. First of all,
define

      MCC = MinWith cost · map fst · until (all done) (concatMap steps) · wrap
We then have
      extract (until done gstep sx) ← MCC sx
provided we can show that there exists a tree t for which
      t ← MCC (gstep sx) ∧ t ← MCC sx
As before, we can establish the greedy condition by defining gstep to select a safe
edge of minimum weight. Assuming the list of edges is in ascending order of weight,
that means
      gstep (t, e : es) = if safeEdge e t then (add e t, es) else keep e (gstep (t, es))
                          where keep e (t, es) = (t, e : es)
The function keep is needed because, unlike Kruskal’s algorithm, an edge that
cannot be added to a tree at one step could still be added at a later step when the
tree has grown some more.
   The proof of the greedy condition is also very similar to that for Kruskal, but
it is worth spelling out the details. Consider an incomplete state sx = (t1 , es), so
more edges can be added to t1 , and let e be an element of es of lightest weight that
is a safe edge for t1 . Without loss of generality, suppose source e is a vertex of t1
and target e is not. Now let t2 ← MCC sx. If t2 contains the edge e, then t2 can be
constructed by choosing e as a first step. Hence t2 ← MCC (gstep sx) and we can
choose t = t2 to satisfy the greedy condition. Otherwise, t2 does not contain e and
adding e to t2 would create a (unique) cycle. This time we have to be more careful
in selecting an edge of t2 that can be replaced by e. Observe that among the edges of
the cycle there has to be an edge e? such that source e? is a vertex in t1 and target e?
is not. If this were not the case, then e would not be a safe edge for t1 . Replacing e?
by e in t2 gives another tree t3 whose cost is no greater than cost t2 . And now we
can take t = t3 to satisfy the greedy condition.
   The greedy algorithm can be expressed in almost the same way as the first version
of Kruskal’s algorithm:
      prim :: Graph → Tree
      prim g = fst (until done gstep (start g))
                where done (t, es) = (length (nodes t) == length (nodes g))
As an alternative we can write
      prim g = fst (apply (n − 1) gstep (start g))
               where n = length (nodes g)
with a somewhat more efficient definition of the termination condition. However,
the main problem with this version of Prim’s algorithm is that it is not very efficient.
At step k, when the tree has k vertices and k − 1 edges, the number of edges that
                                 9.4 Prim’s algorithm                                217

may have to be checked before finding a safe edge is O(e − k). That means gstep
takes O(k (e − k)) steps, because safeEdge takes O(k) steps. Summing over all steps
gives a running time of
     n−1                 n−1
      ∑ O(k (e − k)) = ∑ O(k e) = O(e n2 )
     k=1                 k=1
steps for Prim’s algorithm, compared with O(e n) steps for the first version of
Kruskal’s algorithm. The bound can be improved by using an efficient implemen-
tation of sets with a membership test that takes logarithmic time. That reduces
the times for safeEdge and add to O(log k) steps, and the total time to O(e n log n)
steps. But the result is still worse than Kruskal’s algorithm.
   In fact, we can reduce the running time of Prim’s algorithm to O(n2 ) steps by
reducing the number of edges that have to be considered at each step. The idea is to
maintain for each vertex v off the tree at most one edge, that edge being one of least
weight that connects v to some tree vertex. When the tree is updated with a new
vertex, the candidate edges for the next step can be updated as well. The number
of candidate edges is therefore O(n) at each stage. The result will be a version of
Prim’s algorithm that takes O(n2 ) steps both for sparse and for dense graphs, which
is better than the O(e log n + n2 ) bound for Kruskal’s algorithm.
   To implement the idea we need two arrays. First we suppose that vertices are
named by integers in the range 1 to n for some n, so they can be used as array
indices. States are redefined to be
     type State = (Links, [Vertex])
     type Links = Array Vertex (Vertex, Weight)
The first component of a state is now an array rather than a tree. The entry for a
vertex v not in the tree is a pair (u, w) for which the edge (u, v, w) is a lightest edge
linking v to any vertex u on the tree. The vertex u is called the parent of v. We
therefore define
     parent :: Links → Vertex → Vertex
     parent ls v = fst (ls ! v)
     weight :: Links → Vertex → Weight
     weight ls v = snd (ls ! v)
If there is no edge connecting v to a tree vertex, then the parent of v is v itself and
the associated weight is infinitely large. Apart from the root, the parent of a vertex v
in the tree is the vertex of the tree to which v was linked when it was added to the
tree.
   The second component of a state is a list of vertices, not edges. These are the
fresh vertices, vertices not yet on the tree. For example, in the following state the
tree vertices are [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] while [6, 7, 8] are fresh:
                                  15                 4                5
                             1          3                     5               7

                         7                  11

                             2          4                     6               8
                                                     2

The dashed line connecting 4 and 6 indicates that the lightest edge connecting the
vertex 6 to the tree is the edge (4, 6, 2); similarly, the lightest edge connecting 7 to
the tree is (5, 7, 5). Vertex 8 has no edges connecting it to the tree. In this state the
first component is the array
                                   1   2         3       4        5   6   7       8
                       parent      1   1     1           3        3   4   5       8
                       weight      0   7     15          11       4   2   5       ∞
The second array is a fixed one and is needed simply to be able to determine the
weight of an edge in constant time rather than having to search through the edges
each time:
      type Weights = Array (Vertex, Vertex) Weight
We will leave the definition of weights :: Graph → Weights as Exercise 9.9. The final
version of Prim’s algorithm can now be expressed as follows:
      prim :: Graph → Tree
      prim g = extract (apply (n − 1) (gstep wa) (start n))
                where n = length (nodes g)
                      wa = weights g
In the initial state, all vertices are fresh and all except vertex 1 have infinite weights:
      start :: Nat → State
      start n = (array (1, n) ((1, (1, 0)) : [(v, (v, maxInt)) | v ← [2 . . n]]), [1 . . n])
      maxInt :: Int
      maxInt = maxBound
The value maxInt, the largest possible element of Int, represents an infinite weight.
Vertex 1 has zero weight and the default parent vertex for each entry is the vertex
itself. The function gstep is defined by
      gstep :: Weights → State → State
      gstep wa (ls, vs) = (ls? , vs? )
        where ( , v) = minimum [(weight ls v, v) | v ← vs]
                vs? = filter (= v) vs
                ls?    = accum better ls [(u, (v, wa ! (u, v))) | u ← vs? ]
                better (v1 , w1 ) (v2 , w2 ) = if w1 ⩽ w2 then (v1 , w1 ) else (v2 , w2 )
                           9.5 Single-source shortest paths                          219

The function gstep selects a fresh vertex v closest to the tree and updates the links by
replacing each parent of a fresh vertex u with v and the weight of the edge (u, v) if
the replacement yields a lighter link to the tree. Finally, the function extract extracts
the final tree from the final state:
     extract :: State → Tree
     extract (ls, ) = (indices ls, [(u, v, w) | (v, (u, w)) ← assocs ls, v = 1])
Each gstep operation takes O(n) steps, so the revised definition of prim therefore
takes O(n2 ) steps. As we will see in the following section, essentially the same
algorithm can be used for computing shortest paths on a directed graph.

                          9.5 Single-source shortest paths
We turn now to directed graphs and shortest paths. The notion of getting from one
point to another involves a direction of travel, so graphs with directed edges are an
appropriate basis for studying shortest routes. There is no loss in moving to digraphs
because a graph can always be modelled as a digraph by representing each edge
as two directed edges, each with the same weight. Typical of the problems we can
solve using a shortest-paths algorithm is: given a network of streets in a city that
may include one-way streets, what is the shortest route by car from one address to
another?
   Normally, the cost of a route is the sum of the lengths (that is, the weights) of
the edges along the route, but there are examples where other aggregation functions
are required. For instance, if you are a hiker and the routes are footpaths, the best
route may be one with the shallowest uphill climb. Each footpath is associated
with a measure of its gradient and the cost of a route is the maximum of the
individual gradients along the path. In such a case, the best route for an unfit walker
is one that minimises this cost. As a dual example, some roads may have height
restrictions owing to bridges over the roads. Here the best route for the driver of a
high-sided vehicle is one that maximises the minimum of the heights of the bridges
along a route. In what follows we will focus on distances and their sums, but the
algorithm we will describe, a version of Dijkstra’s algorithm, is easily adapted to
other situations.
   Finding a shortest path P from A to B necessarily involves finding a shortest path
from A to every node along P: shortest paths have shortest sub-paths. In the worst
case, the route to B may be discovered only after finding the routes from A to all
other nodes in the network. In other words, the algorithm may have to compute a
shortest-paths spanning tree (SPST) rooted at A. Note that a SPST is a different
animal from a MCST. In this section we will concentrate on finding a SPST for any
digraph for which there is a path from the given source vertex to every other vertex.

The algorithm can be modified to terminate as soon as the shortest path to a given
destination is discovered.
   Until now we have assumed nothing about edge weights except that, for simplicity,
they were integers. But from now on we need the assumption that no weight is
negative. With negative weights there is the possibility of having cycles with negative
costs, and that allows paths with infinite negative costs. Some algorithms can cope
with negative weights (as long as there are no cycles with negative costs), but not
the algorithm we describe. We will see why we need this assumption later on.
   Another feature of the problem is that, unlike the case of a MCST, the optimality
of a SPST rooted at A cannot be expressed in terms of a single numerical value.
The cost of a tree depends on the path costs from A to all other vertices on the tree.
The obvious way to state that one tree is no worse than another is to require that
the distances to every vertex in the first tree are no greater than the corresponding
distances in the second. This requirement defines a preorder on trees but not a total
preorder.
   A final point to bear in mind is that the algorithm we will discuss is not the one
found in a car navigation system for computing real-life shortest routes. Actual road
networks are based on real distances, and adjacent towns in the network are more or
less closer than towns separated by long routes. That means certain heuristics can
be employed for finding shortest routes quickly. The resulting algorithm, called the
A* search algorithm, will be discussed in Chapter 16.

                              9.6 Dijkstra’s algorithm
Our shortest-paths spanning tree algorithm, a version of Dijkstra’s algorithm, uses
essentially the same definition of states as in the final version of Prim’s algorithm,
except that edge weights in the links array are replaced by distances, where the
distance from the source vertex 1 to vertex v is the sum of the weights of the edges
along the path from 1 to v:

      type State    = (Links, [Vertex])
      type Links    = Array Vertex (Vertex, Distance)
      type Distance = Int
      parent :: Links → Vertex → Vertex
      parent ls v = fst (ls ! v)
      distance :: Links → Vertex → Distance
      distance ls v = snd (ls ! v)

For example, the state
                                    9.6 Dijkstra’s algorithm                          221

                                 1         10        3        4        5
                                           2                  1
                                7                    11                1
                                       2
                                                              1
                                 2                   4                 6
                                           9                  6

Figure 9.2 An example digraph

                                15                   4                 5
                           1               3                  5             7

                       7                       11

                           2               4                  6             8
                                                     2

in which the fresh vertices are [6, 7, 8] is represented by the array
                                 1     2        3        4        5    6    7    8
                  parent         1     1         1        3        3    4    5   8
                  distance       0     7        15       26       19   28   24   ∞
In particular, the fresh vertex closest to the tree is vertex 7, with a distance from
vertex 1 of 15 + 4 + 5 = 24.
   Except for one or two small changes, Dijkstra’s algorithm is identical to Prim’s
algorithm:
     dijkstra :: Graph → Tree
     dijkstra g = extract (apply (n − 1) (gstep wa) (start n))
                   where n = length (nodes g)
                         wa = weights g
The function weights has to be defined differently from how it was in Prim’s
algorithm because we are now dealing with a directed graph (see Exercise 9.9). The
functions start and extract are exactly the same as in Prim’s algorithm, and gstep is
defined by
     gstep :: Weights → State → State
     gstep wa (ls, vs) = (ls? , vs? )
       where (d, v) = minimum [(distance ls v, v) | v ← vs]
               vs? = filter (= v) vs
               ls? = accum better ls [(u, (v, sum d (wa ! (v, u)))) | u ← vs? ]
                       where sum d w = if w == maxInt then maxInt else d + w
               better (v1 , d1 ) (v2 , d2 ) = if d1 ⩽ d2 then (v1 , d1 ) else (v2 , d2 )
222                             Greedy algorithms on graphs
                          vertex    1    2   3    4    5      6
                            1       1   2    3    4    5      6
                                    0   ∞    ∞    ∞    ∞      ∞
                            2       1    1    1   4    5      6
                                    0    7   10   ∞    ∞      ∞
                            3       1    1   2     2   5      6
                                    0    7   9    16   ∞      ∞
                            6       1    1   2     2    3      3
                                    0    7   9    16   13     10
                            5       1    1   2     2    6      3
                                    0    7   9    16   11     10
                            4       1    1   2     5    6      3
                                    0    7   9    12   11     10

Figure 9.3 A sequence of five greedy steps

Each application of gstep selects a fresh vertex v of minimum distance from the
source vertex 1. There are n − 1 fresh vertices, so gstep is applied n − 1 times. After
selecting v, the function gstep updates the parents and distances for each fresh vertex
u whenever there is a path to u going through v that is shorter. For instance, in the
example above, adding 7 as a new tree node, with distance 24, we may find an edge
(7, 6, 1), so the distance from 1 to the fresh vertex 6 can be reduced to 24 + 1, which
is better than the current best distance 28. Note the necessity for the function sum
in the definition of gstep. The reason is that if (v, u) is not an edge, so its weight is
maxInt, then the new distance of u from the source vertex should also be maxInt.
That requires d + maxInt = maxInt for any finite distance d, an equation that does
not hold in Haskell.
   The function extract extracts the spanning tree as a graph, but a better result is to
return the actual paths from the source node to each other vertex:
      type Path = ([Vertex], Distance)
      extract :: State → [Path]
      extract (ls, ) = [(reverse (getPath ls v), distance ls v) | v ← indices ls]
      getPath ls v = if u == v then [u] else v : getPath ls u
                        where u = parent ls v
   Let us walk through an example to show how Dijkstra’s algorithm works out in
practice. Consider the digraph of Figure 9.2 in which n = 6. There is a path from the
source vertex 1 to every other vertex, so it is possible to construct a SPST rooted at
vertex 1. Figure 9.3 shows the sequence of n − 1 greedy steps. The vertex on the left
is the vertex found at the beginning of each step. The final distances in Figure 9.3 are
                                 9.6 Dijkstra’s algorithm                           223

                              1             3             5
                                                  1
                             7        2                     1
                                                  1
                              2             4             6

Figure 9.4 The shortest-paths spanning tree from vertex 1

the costs of the shortest paths from the source vertex 1 to all vertices. In particular,
the shortest route to vertex 4 has cost 12 and is along the path [1, 2, 3, 6, 5, 4]. The
spanning tree is shown in Figure 9.4.
   It remains to prove that Dijkstra’s algorithm works correctly. We did not give a
definition of the list of all shortest-paths spanning trees, so a proof based on the
generic greedy condition of the previous chapter is not available to us. Instead, we
give a direct proof. We show that, at each step, the distance recorded in the state for
every vertex on the tree is indeed the shortest distance from the source. In symbols,
if
     (ls, vs) = apply k (gstep wa) (start n)
then for all tree vertices v (those not in vs), we have
     distance ls v = shortest g v
where shortest g v is the cost of the shortest path in the graph g from the source
vertex to v. The proof of the claim is by induction on k. The base case k = 0 is
immediate since the only tree vertex is the source vertex 1 and the shortest path is
the empty path with distance 0. For the induction step, let v be the vertex selected
by gstep and let P be a path of shortest distance in the graph from the source vertex
to v. Such a path has to contain a fresh vertex because v itself is fresh. Suppose that
(x, y, w) is the first edge in P for which y is fresh. Since x is a tree vertex, and the
distances to tree vertices are never changed once they are set, we have by induction
that
     distance ls x = shortest g x
After selecting x, the function gstep updates the distances to each fresh vertex,
including y, and, since such distances are never increased, we have
     distance ls y ⩽ distance ls x + w = shortest g x + w = shortest g y
Hence, since computed distances are never shorter than the shortest possible distance,
we have distance ls y = shortest g y.
  We can now reason

       distance ls v
      ⩽ { definition of v as a closest fresh vertex as y is fresh }
       distance ls y
      = { above }
       shortest g y
      ⩽ { since P passes through y }
       shortest g v

So, by the same argument as before, distance ls v = shortest g v. Note that it is in
the very last step that we exploit the fact that edge weights are not negative, so the
initial section of the path P to y cannot cost more than P itself.
   We have introduced Dijkstra’s algorithm as a variant of Prim’s algorithm, but
there is another way of formulating Dijkstra’s algorithm, namely as a version of
breadth-first search, a topic we will take up in Part Six (see Chapter 16 for details).

                             9.7 The jogger’s problem
Finally, here is one application of Dijkstra’s algorithm. Consider the plight of a
reluctant jogger who, while willing to undertake exercise, wishes to suffer as little
unpleasantness as possible. The jogger is confronted with a network of footpaths,
each of which possesses some nonnegative measure of undesirability, say its length.
Beginning at some specified point, called ‘home’, the jogger wishes to plan a circular
route, no footpath being traversed more than once, of minimum total undesirability.
We will suppose that the undesirability of a footpath is independent of the direction
of travel, so we are dealing with an undirected network of footpaths. Such a route
will be a cycle in the network, that is, a circular path consisting of distinct vertices
(footpath junctions) as well as distinct edges (why?).
   Abstractly put, the problem is to determine, given a graph G = (V, E) and a
specified home vertex a, a cycle that begins and ends at a and is of minimum total
cost, where the cost of each individual footpath is some given positive value. Since
no footpath can be travelled more than once, there must be at least three different
edges in the cycle. In what follows we assume G is a connected graph and that such
a cycle exists. For example, the graph

                                     1           3

                                     2           4
                                     9.7 The jogger’s problem                      225

has five possible cycles from the source node 1, each of which can be travelled in
either direction: 1231, 12341, 1241, 12431, 1341.
   A simple method for computing a minimum jog J in a graph G is to observe that
the path P defined by J from a to the last vertex, say x, before returning to a via the
edge (x, a) has to be a shortest path from a to x in a modified graph G(x) in which
the edge between a and x is removed. If there were a shorter path, then there would
be a shorter cycle. That means Dijkstra’s algorithm can be used on G(x) to find P,
provided that each undirected edge in G is replaced by two directed edges with the
same weight. A best possible jog can then be found by running Dijkstra’s algorithm
on all graphs G(x) for which x is incident on a. Since Dijkstra’s algorithm can take
Θ(n2 ) steps, this method can take Θ(n3 ) steps if there are Θ(n) edges incident on a.
The algorithm works equally well for both graphs and digraphs. Nevertheless, there
seems to be a lot of duplicated effort in the method, so it is sensible to ask whether
there is a way of using Dijkstra’s algorithm just once to solve the jogger’s problem.
The answer is yes, as we will now see.
   Let T be a shortest-path spanning tree of a graph G rooted at vertex a. We are
going to show that there is some minimum jog J of G with the property that all the
constituent edges of J are in T except one. There has to be at least one such edge
since T is acyclic. This property is called the single-edge property.
   Let J be a minimum jog with the fewest number of non-T edges. Suppose x is
the first vertex in J such that the edge from x is not in T, and let y be the last vertex
such that the edge to y is not in T. The case x = a is not excluded, nor is y = a, but
x and y have to be different vertices. Since the graph is undirected, the roles of x
and y are dual. Here is a picture in which solid lines are paths in T:

                                                  a

                                         x              y

   Our aim is to show that the dashed line is a single non-T edge. Using the notation
(u · · · v)G to mean a path from u to v with vertices and edges in G, we have
     J = (a · · · x)T (x · · · y)J (y · · · a)T
Since J is a cycle in which no vertex, apart from a, is repeated, x and y have no
common ancestor in T apart from a; in symbols,
     (a · · · x)T ∩ (y · · · a)T = (a)

We now show that the assumption that there is some intermediate vertex z on the
path (x · · · y)J leads to a contradiction. Suppose such a z exists. Here is the picture:

                                                     a

                                           x         z        y

  Consider the jog J ? , defined by
      J ? = (a · · · x)T (x · · · z)J (z · · · a)T
The jog J ? has fewer non-T edges than J. Furthermore, since T is a shortest-paths
spanning tree of an undirected graph, we have
      cost | (z · · · a)T |⩽ cost (z · · · y)J (y · · · a)T
Hence
      cost J ? = cost (a · · · x)T + cost (x · · · z)J + cost (z · · · a)T
               ⩽ cost (a · · · x)T + cost (x · · · z)J + cost (z · · · y)T + cost (y · · · a)T
               ⩽ cost J
This contradicts the assumption that J is a shortest jog with the fewest non-T edges.
So no such vertex z exists.
   Now we are ready to describe the algorithm. Suppose, as usual, that the home
vertex is vertex 1 and let T be a shortest-paths spanning tree with source vertex 1. It
follows from the single-edge property that we have to find an edge e = (x, y), with
x < y, such that: (i) e is not an edge of T; (ii) e creates a cycle containing vertex 1
when added to T; and (iii) e minimises the sum of the distance in T from vertex 1
to vertex x, the weight of e, and the distance in T from vertex y to vertex 1 (which,
since the graph is undirected, is the same as the distance from 1 to y). In fact it is
not necessary to insist that (x, y) is a real edge, because if it is not then its weight
is infinite and cannot minimise the sum. Call any pair (x, y) satisfying the first two
properties a candidate pair.
   We can identify a candidate pair by considering two cases. In the first case x = 1,
so y cannot be connected directly to vertex 1 in T; that is, the parent of y in T cannot
be 1. In the second case, neither x nor y is vertex 1. In this case define the subtrees
of T to be those trees that result from deleting all edges of T incident on vertex 1.
In this case, (x, y) is a candidate pair if x and y belong to different subtrees. Call
the root of the subtree to which x belongs the root of x. Then a pair of vertices is a
candidate pair in the second case if they have different roots.
                                9.7 The jogger’s problem                                227

  For example, in the spanning tree

                                1            3            5

                                2            4            6

the roots of the two subtrees are 2 and 3, and the candidate pairs are (1, 4), (1, 5),
(1, 6), (2, 3), (2, 4), (2, 5), and (2, 6). However, none of the pairs (3, 6), (4, 5), (5, 6)
is a candidate, because these pairs have the same root, namely 3. The root of a vertex
can be computed from the links array constructed by Dijkstra’s algorithm:
     root :: Links → Vertex → Vertex
     root ls v = if p == 1 then v else root ls p
                 where p = parent ls v
A better method, left as an exercise, is to install a third component in the links
array, one that computes the root associated with each vertex, and to update this
component when processing vertices. In this way we can ensure that evaluation of
root takes constant time. Now we can define
     candidate :: Links → (Vertex, Vertex) → Bool
     candidate ls (x, y) = if x == 1 then parent ls y = 1 else root ls x = root ls y
The jogger’s problem can now be solved by defining
     jog :: Graph → [Edge]
     jog g = getPath ls wa (bestEdge ls wa)
              where ls = fst (apply (n − 1) (gstep wa) (start n))
                    wa = weights g
                    n = length (nodes g)
The functions gstep and start are the same as in Dijkstra’s algorithm, while weights
is the same as in Prim’s algorithm because the graph is undirected. The function
bestEdge is defined by
     bestEdge :: Links → Weights → (Vertex, Vertex)
     bestEdge ls wa =
       minWith cost [(x, y) | x ← [1 . . n], y ← [x + 1 . . n], candidate ls (x, y)]
       where n = snd (bounds ls)
              cost (x, y) = if w == maxInt then maxInt
                            else distance ls x + w + distance ls y
                            where w = wa ! (x, y)
If (x, y) is not an edge, so its weight is maxInt, then cost (x, y) should also be maxInt.
The function getPath is defined by

      getPath :: Links → Weights → (Vertex, Vertex) → [Edge]
      getPath ls wa (x, y) =
        reverse (path x) ++ [(x, y, wa ! (x, y))] ++ [(v, u, w) | (u, v, w) ← path y]
        where path x = if x == 1 then [ ] else (p, x, wa ! (p, x)) : path p
                          where p = parent ls x
Building the array and determining the best candidate edge takes O(n2 ) steps, so
the jogger’s problem can be solved in this time.

                                   9.8 Chapter notes
For an interesting history of the minimum-cost spanning tree problem, see [4]. The
four proofs of Cayley’s formula (see Answer 9.3) can be found in [1]. The Steiner
tree problem mentioned in the introduction is studied in [7].
   A fast Union–Find algorithm is presented and analysed in [8]. Kruskal’s algorithm
was described in [5] and Prim’s algorithm in [6]. Prim’s algorithm should perhaps
be called Jarnı́k’s algorithm because it was invented earlier by Vojtěch Jarnı́k in
1930 and rediscovered by Prim in 1957, and again by Dijkstra in 1959. Alternative
descriptions of these algorithms can be found in most textbooks on algorithm design.
Dijkstra’s shortest-paths algorithm was described in a short article in [3]. The
jogger’s problem is taken from [2], where a second version involving digraphs is
also discussed.

                                       References
[1]   Martin Aigner and Günter M. Ziegler. Proofs from The Book. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
      third edition, 2004.
[2]   Richard S. Bird. The jogger’s problem. Information Processing Letters,
      13(2):114–117, 1981.
[3]   Edsger W. Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische
      Mathematik, 1(1):269–271, 1959.
[4]   Ronald L. Graham and Pavol Hell. On the history of the minimum spanning tree
      problem. Annals of the History of Computing, 7(1):43–57, 1985.
[5]   Joseph B. Kruskal. On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling
      salesman problem. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 7(1):48–50,
      1956.
[6]   Robert C. Prim. Shortest connection networks and some generalizations. Bell Systems
      Technical Journal, 36(6):1389–1401, 1957.
[7]   Hans Jürgen Prömel and Angelika Steger. The Steiner Tree Problem. Springer-Verlag,
      Berlin, 2002.
[8]   Robert E. Tarjan. Efficiency of a good but not linear set union algorithm. Journal of
      the ACM, 22(2):215–225, 1975.
                                      Exercises                                 229

                                      Exercises
Exercise 9.1 Some quick questions on graphs and digraphs:
1. Why can a digraph of n vertices contain up to n2 edges, while a graph can contain
   no more than n (n − 1)/2 edges?
2. Can a digraph have a cycle of length two?
3. Why is it the case that in an acyclic graph there is at most one path between any
   two vertices? Is this true of acyclic digraphs?
4. Can a labelled graph have more than one edge between two vertices?
5. Why is a spanning forest of a connected graph necessarily a spanning tree?
6. Why does a spanning tree of a connected graph of n vertices have exactly n − 1
   edges?
7. What is the maximum number of edges in a longest possible cycle of a graph of
   n vertices?
Exercise 9.2 Assuming vertices are labelled from 1 to n, define functions
     toAdj :: Graph → AdjArray
     toGraph :: AdjArray → Graph
for converting a digraph into its adjacency representation and vice versa.
Exercise 9.3 Draw all the spanning trees for the following graph:

Exercise 9.4 Assign weights to the edges AB and CD in the following graph to
show that the path from A to D in a MCST is not necessarily the shortest path from
A to D.

                             A           B
                                                  5
                                           2
                                  3
                                         C            D

Exercise 9.5 Here is a possible divide-and-conquer algorithm for computing a
MCST. Divide the vertices V of the graph into two sets V1 and V2 that differ in size
by at most one. Let Ei be the set of edges whose endpoints are in Vi . Recursively
find a MCST for G1 = (V1 , E1 ) and G2 = (V2 , E2 ). Finally, select a lightest edge,
one of whose endpoints is in V1 and the other in V2 , and add it to the two MCSTs to
form a single MCST. Does this algorithm work?

Exercise 9.6 The function steps in the specification of Kruskal’s algorithm does
not discard an edge if it creates a cycle in a given forest, even though it will also
create a cycle in any subsequent forest. Write down a version of steps that does
discard such edges.
Exercise 9.7 What is the output of Kruskal’s algorithm if the input is not a con-
nected graph? Adapt the algorithm to find the minimum-cost spanning forest of an
unconnected graph.
Exercise 9.8 Why is the test t1 = t2 in the specification of Kruskal’s algorithm
sufficient to determine whether two trees in a forest are different? After all, the trees
t1 = ([1, 2], [(1, 2, 3)] and t2 = ([2, 1], [(1, 2, 3)] are the same tree but the test t1 = t2
returns True. As a supplementary question, can the test be made more efficient?
Exercise 9.9 Construct the function weights as used in Prim’s algorithm when the
input is an undirected graph. What is the definition when the input is a directed
graph?
Exercise 9.10 Consider the problem of finding a maximum-cost spanning tree. Is
there a greedy algorithm for this problem?
Exercise 9.11 Here is the specification of a shortest-paths spanning tree:
      spst ← MinWith cost · spats
The function spats returns all spanning trees of a directed graph. Give a definition of
spats. To define cost, we need to compute the path from the source vertex to every
other vertex in the tree. Define a function
      pathsFrom :: Vertex → Tree → [Path]
where Path is a synonym for [Edge], such that pathsFrom 1 t returns the paths from
the source vertex 1 to every other vertex in the tree. Finally, define
      cost :: Tree → [Distance]
so that cost t = [d2 , ..., dn ], where dv is the distance from the source vertex 1 to
vertex v.
Exercise 9.12 To find the shortest path between A and B, suppose we simultane-
ously compute shortest routes from A to various towns, and shortest routes from
various towns to B, stopping when some intermediate town C has been found in
both directions. Does this idea work?
Exercise 9.13 Give an example to show that Dijkstra’s algorithm does not work
with negative lengths even if there are no negative-length cycles.
Exercise 9.14 How would you modify Dijkstra’s algorithm to stop as soon as the
shortest path to a given vertex is found?
                                           Answers                                           231

Exercise 9.15 In the jogger’s problem we can install a third component in the links
array to represent the root associated with each vertex:
     type Links = Array Vertex (Vertex, Vertex, Distance)
     type State = (Links, [Vertex])
     parent :: Links → Vertex → Vertex
     parent ls v = u where (u, , ) = ls ! v
     root :: Links → Vertex → Vertex
     root ls v = r where ( , r, ) = ls ! v
     distance :: Links → Vertex → Distance
     distance ls v = d where ( , , d) = ls ! v
The starting state is then given by
     start :: Nat → State
     start n =
        (array (1, n) ((1, (1, 1, 0)) : [(v, (v, v, maxInt)) | v ← [2 . . n]]), [1 . . n])
Give the modified definition of gstep :: Weights → State → State.

                                           Answers
Answer 9.1 Some quick answers:
1. Because in a digraph every vertex may contain an edge to every vertex, including
   itself, while in a graph there are no edges from a vertex to itself, and at most one
   edge between two vertices.
2. Yes, if the digraph contains both the edges (u, v) and (v, u).
3. Suppose there were two different paths between u and v. Let these two paths first
   meet at some vertex w after u, where w could be v. The two paths P and Q from
   u to w contain no edge in common, so the path P followed by the reverse of Q
   creates a cycle. In an acyclic digraph there can be many paths that connect two
   vertices.
4. It is certainly possible to have both (u, v, w1 ) and (u, v, w2 ) as labelled edges
   when w1 = w2 .
5. Because if the forest consisted of two trees there would be a vertex in each tree
   connected by an edge (or the graph would not be connected), and so the edges in
   the forest would not be a maximal set.
6. Because a tree with n nodes has exactly n − 1 edges, a result that is easily proved
   by induction.
7. A maximum-length cycle will pass through every vertex once apart from the two
   endpoints, which gives a total number of n edges.

Answer 9.2 For a directed graph g we can define
      toAdj :: Graph → AdjArray
      toAdj g = accumArray (flip (:)) [ ] (1, n) [(u, (v, w)) | (u, v, w) ← edges g]
                 where n = length (nodes g)
      toGraph :: AdjArray → Graph
      toGraph a = (indices a, [(u, v, w) | (u, vws) ← assocs a, (v, w) ← vws])
For an undirected graph the last argument to accumArray has to be replaced by
      [(u, (v, w)) | (u, v, w) ← edges g] ++ [(v, (u, w)) | (u, v, w) ← edges g]

Answer 9.3 There are 16 spanning trees:

In fact, the number of possible spanning trees for n vertices is given by Cayley’s
formula nn−2 . Four proofs of this remarkable result are given in [1].
Answer 9.4 One fully labelled graph is as follows:
                                        4
                                 A               B
                                                          5
                                                  2
                                      3
                                              C               D
                                                      6

The shortest path from A to D has total length 9, while the path in the MCST has
length 10.
Answer 9.5 No. Take a triangle
                                              1
                                       A              B

                                                      10
                                             2
                                                      C

Let V1 = [A] and V2 = [B, C ]. The divide-and-conquer algorithm returns the edges
AB and BC with cost 11, but the MCST has edges AB and AC with cost 3.
Answer 9.6 Simply change the definition of steps to read
      steps :: State → [State]
      steps (ts, es) = [(add e ts, es? ) | e : es? ← tails es, safeEdge e ts]
                                        Answers                                       233

Answer 9.7 Kruskal’s algorithm will return an error because it attempts to take the
head of an empty list. The algorithm for finding a minimum-cost spanning forest
(MCSF) is as follows:
     mcsf :: Graph → Forest
     mcsf g = fst (until (null · snd) gstep s)
       where s = ([([v], [ ]) | v ← nodes g], sortOn weight (edges g))
This time the algorithm searches all the unused edges and terminates when this list
is empty.
Answer 9.8 Because the test t1 = t2 is applied only to two identical trees or to two
trees with disjoint sets of nodes. If, however, the two trees are identical, the test will
take linear time in the size of the trees. A faster definition is
     notEqual t1 t2 = head (nodes t1 ) = head (nodes t2 )

Answer 9.9 One method is to set up an array with infinite weights and then update
the array with the actual edge weights:
     weights g = listArray ((1, 1), (n, n)) (repeat maxInt)
                 // [((u, v), w) | (u, v, w) ← edges g]
                 // [((v, u), w) | (u, v, w) ← edges g]
                 where n = length (nodes g)
When the graph is directed the definition simplifies to
     weights :: Graph → Array (Vertex, Vertex) Weight
     weights g = listArray ((1, 1), (n, n)) (repeat maxInt)
                  // [((u, v), w) | (u, v, w) ← edges g]
                  where n = length (nodes g)

Answer 9.10 Yes, both Kruskal’s and Prim’s algorithm can be adapted by negating
all the edge weights. In symbols,
     maxWith cost = minWith newcost
where the new cost newcost is defined by
     newcost :: Tree → Int
     newcost = sum · map (negate · weight) · edges
With Kruskal’s algorithm that means edges are listed in decreasing order of weight.
Answer 9.11 The definition of spats is exactly the same as in Prim’s algorithm but
with a modified definition of add and safeEdge to take account of the fact that edges
are directed:

      spats :: Graph → [Tree]
      spats g = map fst (apply (n − 1) (concatMap steps) [s])
                 where n = length (nodes g)
                       s = (([head (nodes g)], [ ]), edges g)
      steps :: (Tree, [Edge]) → [(Tree, [Edge])]
      steps (t, es) = [(add e t, es? ) | (e, es? ) ← picks es, safeEdge e t ]
      add :: Edge → Tree → Tree
      add e (vs, es) = (target e : vs, e : es)
      safeEdge :: Edge → Tree → Bool
      safeEdge e t = elem (source e) ns ∧ not (elem (target e) ns)
                     where ns = nodes t
The definition of pathsFrom is
      pathsFrom u t =
        [ ] : [(u, v, w) : es | (u? , v, w) ← edges t, u? == u, es ← pathsFrom v t ]
Finally, cost is defined by
      cost = map (sum · map weight) · sortOn (target · last) · tail · pathsFrom 1

Answer 9.12 Not obviously. For example, consider the graph
                                        5            5
                                 A               C         B

                                                               2
                                       2
                                                 D         E
                                                     4

The closest vertex from A is D with cost 2. The closest vertex to B is E with cost 2.
The next closest vertex from A is C with cost 5, and the next closest vertex to B is C
with cost 5. That gives the answer ACB with cost 10, but the path ADEB has cost 8.
Answer 9.13 A good example is the following digraph:
                                        2            1
                                 1               2         4
                                            −4
                                       5              1
                                                 3

The distances from 1 to the vertices [1, 2, 3, 4] are [0, 1, 5, 2], but the greedy algo-
rithm returns the following distances after three greedy steps (the parent array is not
shown):
                                        Answers                                     235

                                         1    2    3    4
                             start       0    ∞   ∞    ∞
                             update 1    0    2    5   ∞
                             update 2    0    2    5    3
                             update 4    0    2    5    3
The distances to vertices 2 and 4 are incorrectly calculated as 2 and 3.
Answer 9.14 Change the main definition to
     dijkstra :: Graph → Vertex → Path
     dijkstra g v = path (until done (gstep wa) (start n))
                    where path (ls, vs) = (reverse (getPath ls v), distance ls v)
                           done (ls, vs) = v ∈
                                             / vs
                           n = length (nodes g)
                           wa = weights g

Answer 9.15 The modified definition is
     gstep :: Weights → State → State
     gstep wa (ls, vs) = (ls? , vs? ) where
       (d, v) = minimum [(distance ls v, v) | v ← vs]
       vs? = filter (= v) vs
       ls? = accum better ls [(u, (v, new u, sum d (wa ! (v, u)))) | u ← vs? ]
              where sum d w = if w == maxInt then maxInt else d + w
       better (v1 , r1 , d1 ) (v2 , r2 , d2 ) =
              if d1 ⩽ d2 then (v1 , r1 , d1 ) else (v2 , r2 , d2 )
       new u = if v == 1 then u else root ls v
