    PART FOUR

THINNING ALGORITHMS

We turn now to a powerful strategy for solving an optimisation problem when a
greedy algorithm is not possible. The strategy is called thinning, and an algorithm
that employs it a thinning algorithm.
   The principle at work behind thinning is really quite simple: if maintaining a
single best candidate at each step is not guaranteed to deliver a best candidate
overall, then maybe one can get away with maintaining a subset of the candidates.
Provided we can quickly identify those partial candidates that can never grow into
fully fledged best candidates, we can remove them from further consideration. The
key factor in the success of the enterprise is the size of the set that remains. When
the set of all possible candidates is exponential in the length of the input, we want
a subset that is much smaller, say one of linear or quadratic size. We have already
encountered one simple instance of thinning in the computation of externs in the
TEX problem of Chapter 7. There we thinned an infinite set of candidates into a
finite one simply in order to make externs a computable function.
   Thinning algorithms therefore sit between the extremes of greedy algorithms
and exhaustive search algorithms. However, with some exceptions, thinning has
not traditionally been suggested as a separate design technique in the algorithms
literature. Instead, problems that are susceptible to thinning have more often been
solved by a related technique, called dynamic programming, a topic we will pursue
in Part Five. As we will see, dynamic programming can be thought of as a gener-
alisation of the divide-and-conquer strategy. Although the parentage of thinning
algorithms and dynamic programming algorithms is different, both techniques can
often be applied to one and the same problem. What makes thinning important is
that many algorithms traditionally regarded as paradigms of dynamic programming
can be formulated, often more effectively, as thinning algorithms.
