     PART FIVE

DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING

The term Dynamic Programming was coined by Richard Bellman in 1950 to de-
 scribe his research into multi-stage decision processes. The word programming was
 chosen as a synonym for planning to mean the process of determining the sequence
 of decisions that have to be made, while dynamic suggested the evolution of the
 system over time. These days, dynamic programming as a technique of algorithm
 design means something much more specific. It involves a two-stage process in
which a problem, usually but not necessarily an optimisation problem, is formulated
 in recursive terms and then some efficient way of computing the solution is found.
 Unlike a divide-and-conquer problem, the subproblems generated by the recursive
 solution can overlap, so naive execution of the recursive algorithm will involve
 solving the same subproblem many times over, possibly an exponential number of
 times.
    One way to understand the problem of overlap is to look at the dependency
 graph associated with a recursive function. This is a directed graph whose vertices
 represent function calls and whose directed edges show the dependency of each call
 on recursive calls. While the dependency graph of a divide-and-conquer algorithm
 is a tree of some kind with no shared vertices, the graph of a dynamic programming
 algorithm is an acyclic directed graph, possibly with many shared vertices. A vertex
 is shared if there is more than one incoming edge to the vertex.
    The first job in solving an optimisation problem by dynamic programming is
 simply to obtain a recursive solution. As with thinning algorithms, the key step
 is to exploit a suitable monotonicity condition. This condition enables an optimal
 solution to a problem to be expressed in terms of optimal sub-solutions. When the
 shape of the recursion is inductive, a thinning algorithm is appropriate; when it is
 not, the techniques of dynamic programming come into play.
    Having obtained a recursive description of the solution, there are basically two
ways to ensure that sub-solutions are not computed more than once. One is called
 memoisation. Here the recursive, top-down structure of the computation is preserved
 but sub-solutions are remembered and stored in a table for subsequent retrieval.
Thus at each recursive call one first checks to see whether the call has been made
 before, in which case the solution is retrieved from the table; otherwise the solution
 is computed recursively and the result is stored.
    The second method, and the one we will focus on, is called tabulation. Here,
 the computation switches to a bottom-up scheme in which, by careful planning (or
‘programming’), the simplest partial results are computed first, and then solutions to
 larger subproblems are computed in an appropriate order until the complete solution
 is obtained. For some problems, installing a tabulation can be viewed as the problem
 of finding a shortest path in a suitable layered network derived from the dependency
 graph. We considered the layered network problem in Chapter 10, and we will look
 at it again in the following chapter.

   Each approach, the top-down and bottom-up methods, has its advantages and dis-
advantages. Memoisation is in principle easy to install but does require a systematic
way of coding the arguments of the recursive function so that they can be used as
indices in a table, usually an array of some kind. These arguments also have to be
testable for equality. A top-down approach ensures that only those values actually
needed for the full computation are computed. Tabulation requires a more wholesale
change to the structure of the solution but, if the tabulation scheme is chosen well,
each solution can be determined easily from the solutions to the associated subprob-
lems. On the other hand, some simple tabulation schemes may involve computing
the solutions to subproblems not actually required for the full solution.
   The aim of the next two chapters is to look at a number of problems for which
dynamic programming is a viable technique, and to examine the various kinds
of tabulation scheme that can arise. In imperative programming most tabulation
schemes involve arrays of various kinds, but in functional programming other
representations can prove superior.
