    PART SIX

EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH

Sometimes there seems to be no better approach than to examine every possible
candidate in order to find one with a particular property or to show that none exists.
That, in essence, is exhaustive search. Many of the algorithms we have met so far
started life as exhaustive search algorithms. By exploiting various monotonicity
conditions they were then transformed into more efficient alternatives – greedy,
thinning, or dynamic-programming algorithms, algorithms whose running times
were typically a low-order polynomial in the size of the input.
   However, for many problems, even quite simply stated ones, no algorithm with
a guaranteed polynomial running time is known. For example, there is no known
algorithm for determining the factors of a positive integer that takes polynomial time
in the number of its digits. There is such an algorithm for determining whether an
integer is prime or not, but the method is non-constructive and gives no hint of what
the potential divisors might be. The problems tackled in the remainder of this book
fall into a similar category of ignorance, and the algorithms we will describe all take
greater than polynomial time in the worst case. In fact most will take exponential
time.
   The main problem with an exponential-time algorithm is that it severely limits
the sizes of problem instances that can be solved. Take, say, an algorithm whose
running time is Θ(2n ) in the worst case. If we can improve the algorithm to one with
a thousand-fold increase in speed, then the size of problem that can be tackled in
the same allotted time increases from n to n + 10, while a quadratic-time algorithm
allows an increase in problem size from n to about 30 n. That is a big difference.
   Even when faced with a potentially exhaustive search, there are still a number of
ways in which to squeeze as much efficiency as possible out of the process. One
avenue of attack is to arrange the generation of candidates in such a way that the
transition from one candidate to the next is as fast as possible. It may be possible
to postpone exploration of less likely paths in favour of those paths that some
heuristic deems to be more likely to lead to a solution. The choice of representation
of the candidates can be tuned to minimise the total amount of space required by
an exhaustive search. Finally, low-level implementations of the basic steps can
sometimes be found to make them as fast as possible. Functional languages are at a
disadvantage as far as the last two aspects are concerned because the use of space is
difficult to control in a purely functional setting, and implementations that depend
on low-level memory operations often cannot be described without introducing
procedural features such as mutable arrays into the language.
   Most of the problems we will discuss in the following two chapters deal with
games and puzzles of various kinds. Apart from being intriguing and fun to study,
puzzles provide a fertile ground for looking at exhaustive search, if only for the
reason that a good puzzle should be one in which there is no obvious route to a
solution.
