                FORE WORD TO THE
                 SECOND EDITION

When I started in cybersecurity over 27 years ago, I learned my trade pri-
marily by finding and exploiting unsafe memory handling in C programs—
a class of vulnerability that, even at the time, was over 20 years old. In my
career at BlackBerry, as I waded through torrents of code review, I saw first-
hand how dangerous C could be to the improperly initiated. Now, as a chief
technology officer for the UK’s National Cyber Security Centre, I see the
consequences of poorly written C code on our connected society every day
at a national level.
      Today we still face numerous challenges in writing secure and profes-
sional C. The many innovations in compiler- and operating system–level
mitigations can be and are regularly undermined. And even while we see
advanced innovations in other modern languages and hardware, there is
still a growing demand for C, particularly in Internet of Things (IoT) or
other highly resource-constrained environments, while it also sustains what
we have. Professional C coupled with hardware-level architectures such as
CHERI is how we secure the environments that will never migrate to other
languages.
      Robert is the authority on how to program professionally and securely
in C. For over a decade, I have recommended his material to customers and
internal teams alike. There is no better person to teach how to code C in a
professional and, among other things, secure manner.
                           Writing professional C today means writing code that is performant,
                       safe, and secure. By doing so, you will be able to contribute to our con-
                       nected society without increasing its technical debt.
                           This book will help those with little or no C experience quickly develop
                       the knowledge and skills to become professional C programmers and will
                       provide a strong foundation for developing systems that are performant,
                       safe, and secure.

                                                                               Ollie Whitehouse
                                           CTO, National Cyber Security Centre, United Kingdom

xviii   Foreword to the Second Edition
