                FORE WORD TO THE
                  FIRST EDITION

The first time I came across Robert Seacord’s name was in 2008. Robert
was already well known in the C programming galaxy for his work on The
CERT® C Coding Standard and Annex K of the C standard. But in 2008, it
had been only a few years since—young and foolish—I had embarked on
the Frama-C project to guarantee the absence of undefined behavior in
C programs. At some point, a CERT Vulnerability Note about how C com-
pilers (and GCC in particular) removed certain pointer-arithmetic over-
flow checks piqued my interest. The compilers had reason to eliminate the
checks; naively written, they invoked undefined behavior when the overflow
was present.
     The C compilers were also allowed to tell the programmer nothing
about what they had done wrong, even at the maximum warning level.
Undefined behavior in C can be harsh. I had set out to solve this exact prob-
lem. Robert was one of the authors of that note.
     Effective C will teach you C programming for the modern era. It will
help you establish good habits to keep you from using undefined behavior,
whether voluntarily or through negligence. Let the reader be warned: in
large C programs, avoiding ordinary programming errors alone may not
suffice for dodging undefined behavior caused by arbitrary inputs!
                             This book’s emphasis on the security aspects of C programming is
                        unmatched. My personal recommendation is that, after reading it, you use
                        all of the available tools it presents to avoid undefined behavior in the
                        C programs you write.

                                                                                        Pascal Cuoq
                                                                        Chief scientist, TrustInSoft

xx   Foreword to the First Edition
              ACKNOW LEDGMENT S

I would like to acknowledge the contributions of all the folks who made this
possible. I’ll start with Bill Pollock at No Starch Press, who doggedly pur-
sued me to write a C book.
     I would like to thank Ollie Whitehouse and Pascal Cuoq for the excel-
lent forewords.
     Aaron Ballman has been a valuable partner for the duration of this
effort. In addition to contributing two chapters, he reviewed everything
(often multiple times) and helped me solve problems from the profound to
the mundane.
     Douglas Gwyn, emeritus at the US Army Research Laboratory and an
emeritus member of the C standards committee, helped review all the chap-
ters. When my writing was not up to his standards, he guided me in the
right direction.
     Martin Sebor served as the official technical reviewer for the first edi-
tion and Vincent Mailhol for the second edition of this book.
     In addition to Aaron, Doug, and Martin, several other distinguished
members of the C and C++ standards committee reviewed chapters, includ-
ing Jim Thomas, Thomas Köppe, Niall Douglas, Tom Honermann, and
JeanHeyd Meneide. Technical reviewers among my colleagues at Woven
by Toyota include J.F. Bastien, Carlos Ramirez, and Jørgen Kvalsvik.
Technical reviewers among my former colleagues at NCC Group include
Nick Dunn, Jonathan Lindsay, Tomasz Kramkowski, Alex Donisthorpe,
                     Joshua Dow, Catalin Visinescu, Aaron Adams, and Simon Harraghy.
                     Technical reviewers outside these organizations include Geoff Clare, David
                     LeBlanc, David Goldblatt, Nicholas Winter, John McFarlane, and Scott
                     Aloisio.
                         I would also like to thank the following professionals at No Starch
                     who ensured a quality product: Jill Franklin, Jennifer Kepler, Elizabeth
                     Chadwick, Frances Saux, Zach Lebowski, Annie Choi, Barbara Yien,
                     Katrina Taylor, Natalie Gleason, Derek Yee, Laurel Chun, Gina Redman,
                     Sharon Wilkey, Emelie Battaglia, Dapinder Dosanjh, Lisa McCoy, Morgan
                     Vega Gomez, and Sabrina Plomitallo-González. Finally, I would like to
                     thank Michael Goldstein for preparing the index.

xxii   Acknowledgments
