                    INTRODUCTION

             C was developed as a system programming
             language in the 1970s, and even after all
            this time, it remains incredibly popular.
         System languages are designed for perfor-
mance and ease of access to the underlying hardware
while providing high-level programming features.
While other languages may offer newer language
features, their compilers and libraries are typically
written in C.
     Carl Sagan once said, “If you wish to make an apple pie from scratch,
you must first invent the universe.” The inventors of C did not invent the
universe; they designed C to work with a variety of computing hardware and
architectures that, in turn, were constrained by physics and mathematics.
C is layered directly on top of computing hardware, making it more sensi-
tive to evolving hardware features, such as vectorized instructions, than
higher-level languages that typically rely on C for their efficiency.
                            According to the TIOBE index (https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/)—whose
                       rankings are based on the number of skilled engineers, courses, and third-
                       party vendors for each language—C has been either the most popular pro-
                       gramming language or second most popular since 2001. The popularity of
                       the C programming language can most likely be attributed to several tenets
                       of the language referred to as the spirit of C:
                       •   Trust the programmer. The C language assumes you know what you’re
                           doing and lets you. This isn’t always a good thing (for example, if you
                           don’t know what you’re doing).
                       •   Don’t prevent the programmer from doing what needs to be done.
                           Because C is a system programming language, it needs to handle a vari-
                           ety of low-level tasks.
                       •   Keep the language small and simple. The language is designed to be
                           close to the hardware and to have a small footprint.
                       •   Provide only one way to do an operation. Also known as conservation of
                           mechanism, the C language tries to limit the introduction of duplicate
                           mechanisms.
                       •   Make it fast, even if it isn’t guaranteed to be portable. Allowing you to
                           write optimally efficient code is the top priority. The responsibility of
                           ensuring that code is portable, safe, and secure is delegated to you, the
                           programmer.
                            C is used as a target language for compilers to build operating systems,
                       to teach fundamentals of computing, and for embedded and general-­
                       purpose programming.
                            There is a large amount of legacy code written in C. The C standards
                       committee is extremely careful not to break existing code, providing a
                       smooth pass for modernizing this code to take advantage of modern lan-
                       guage features.
                            C is often used in embedded systems because it is a small and efficient
                       language. Embedded systems are small computers that are embedded in
                       other devices, such as cars, appliances, and medical devices.
                            Your favorite programming language and library are written in C (or
                       were at one time). There are many libraries available for C. This makes it
                       easy to find libraries that can be used to perform common tasks.
                            Overall, C is a powerful and versatile language that is still widely used
                       today. It is a good choice for programmers who need a fast, efficient, and
                       portable language.

       A Brief History of C
                       The C programming language was developed in the early 1970s at Bell Labs
                       as a system implementation language for the nascent Unix operating system
                       and remains incredibly popular today (Ritchie 1993). System languages are
                       designed for performance and ease of access to the underlying hardware
                       while providing high-level programming features. While other languages

xxiv    Introduction
       may offer newer language features, their compilers and libraries are typi-
       cally written in C. It serves as a lingua franca for translating between vari-
       ous systems and languages.
            C was first described in 1978 by Kernighan and Ritchie in the book The
       C Programming Language (Kernighan and Ritchie 1988). It is now defined
       by revisions of the ISO/IEC 9899 standard (ISO/IEC 2024) and other
       technical specifications. The C standards committee is the steward of the
       C programming language, working with the broader community to main-
       tain and evolve the C language. In 1983, the American National Standards
       Institute (ANSI) formed the X3J11 committee to establish a standard C
       specification, and in 1989, the C standard was ratified as ANSI X3.159-1989,
       “Programming Language C.” This 1989 version of the language is referred
       to as ANSI C or C89.
            In 1990, the ANSI C standard was adopted (unchanged) by a joint techni-
       cal committee of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
       and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and published as
       the first edition of the C standard, C90 (ISO/IEC 9899:1990). The second
       edition of the C standard, C99, was published in 1999 (ISO/IEC 9899:1999),
       and a third edition, C11, in 2011 (ISO/IEC 9899:2011). The fourth version,
       published in 2018 as C17 (ISO/IEC 9899:2018), repairs defects in C11. The
       latest version of the C standard (as of this writing) is the fifth version, pub-
       lished in 2024 as C23 (ISO/IEC 9899:2024). As of September 2023, I am the
       convenor of ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG14, the international standardization
       working group for the programming language C.
            In the 20 years the TIOBE Programming Community index has tracked
       programming language popularity, C has remained in first or second place
       (TIOBE Index 2022).

The C Standard
       The C standard (ISO/IEC 9899:2024) defines the language and is the final
       authority on language behavior. While the standard can be obscure to
       impenetrable, you need to understand it if you intend to write code that’s
       portable, safe, and secure. The C standard provides a substantial degree of
       latitude to implementations to allow them to be optimally efficient on vari-
       ous hardware platforms. Implementations is the term the C standard uses to
       refer to compilers and is defined as follows:
           A particular set of software, running in a particular translation environ-
           ment under particular control options, that performs translation of
           ­programs for, and supports execution of functions in, a particular exe­
            cution environment.

           This definition indicates that each compiler with a particular set of
       command line flags, along with the C standard library, is considered a sepa-
       rate implementation, and different implementations can have significantly
       different implementation-defined behavior. This is noticeable in GNU Compiler
       Collection (GCC), which uses the -std= flag to determine the language

                                                                             Introduction   xxv
                       standard. Possible values for this option include c89, c90, c99, c11, c17, and
                       c23. The default depends on the version of the compiler. If no C language
                       dialect options are given, the default for GCC 13 is -std=gnu17, which pro-
                       vides extensions to the C language. For portability, specify the standard
                       you’re using. For access to new language features, specify a recent standard.
                       C23 features have been available since GCC 11. To enable C23 support, add
                       the compiler option -std=c23 (or possibly -std=c2x). All the examples in this
                       book are written for C23.
                            Because implementations have such a range of behaviors, and because
                       some of these behaviors are undefined, you can’t understand the C language
                       by just writing simple test programs to examine the behavior. (If you want to
                       try this, the Compiler Explorer is an excellent tool; see https://godbolt.org.) The
                       behavior of the code can vary when compiled by a different implementation
                       on different platforms or even the same implementation using a different
                       set of flags or a different C standard library implementation. Code behavior
                       can even vary between versions of a compiler. The C standard specifies which
                       behaviors are guaranteed for all implementations and where you need to
                       plan for variability. This is mostly a concern when developing portable code
                       but can also affect the security and safety of your code.

       The CERT C Coding Standard
                       The CERT® C Coding Standard: 98 Rules for Developing Safe, Reliable, and
                       Secure Systems, 2nd edition (Addison-Wesley Professional, 2014), is a refer-
                       ence book I wrote while managing the secure coding team at the Software
                       Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon University. The book contains
                       examples of common C programming mistakes and how to correct them.
                       Throughout this book, we reference some of those rules as a source for
                       detailed information on specific C language programming topics.

       Common Weakness Enumeration
                       MITRE’s Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) is a list of common
                       hardware and software weaknesses that can be used to identify weaknesses
                       in source code and operational systems. The CWE list is maintained by a
                       community project with the goals of understanding flaws in software and
                       hardware and creating automated tools that can be used to identify, fix,
                       and prevent those flaws. Occasionally, we will reference specific CWEs in
                       this book when discussing classes of defects that can lead to security vulner-
                       abilities. For more information on CWE, see https://cwe.mitre.org.

       Who This Book Is For
                       This book is an introduction to the C language. It is written to be as acces-
                       sible as possible to anyone who wants to learn C programming, without
                       dumbing it down. In other words, we didn’t overly simplify C programming
                       in the way many other introductory books and courses might. These overly

xxvi    Introduction
        simplified references will teach you how to compile and run code, but the
        code might still be wrong. Developers who learn how to program C from such
        sources will typically develop substandard, flawed, insecure code that will
        eventually need to be rewritten (often sooner than later). Hopefully, these
        developers will eventually benefit from senior developers in their organiza-
        tions who will help them unlearn these harmful misconceptions about pro-
        gramming in C and help them start developing professional-quality C code.
        On the other hand, this book will quickly teach you how to develop correct,
        portable, professional-quality code; build a foundation for developing security-
        critical and safety-critical systems; and perhaps teach you some things that
        even the senior developers at your organization don’t know.
             Effective C: An Introduction to Professional C Programming, 2nd edition,
        is a concise introduction to essential C language programming that will
        soon have you writing programs, solving problems, and building working
        systems. The code examples are idiomatic and straightforward. You’ll also
        learn about good software engineering practices for developing correct,
        secure C code.
             In this book, you’ll learn about essential programming concepts in C
        and practice writing high-quality code with exercises for each topic. Code
        listings from this book and additional materials can be found on GitHub
        at https://github.com/rcseacord/effective-c. Go to this book’s page at https://nostarch​
        .com/effective-c-2nd-edition or to http://www.robertseacord.com to check for
        updates and additional material, or contact me if you have additional ques-
        tions or are interested in training.

What’s in This Book
        This book starts with an introductory chapter that covers just enough mate-
        rial to get you programming right from the start. After that, we circle back
        and examine the basic building blocks of the language. The book culmi-
        nates with two chapters that will show you how to compose real-world sys-
        tems from these basic building blocks and how to debug, test, and analyze
        the code you’ve written. The chapters are as follows:
            Chapter 1: Getting Started with C ​  ​You’ll write a simple C program to
            become familiar with using the main function. You’ll also look at a few
            options for editors and compilers.
            Chapter 2: Objects, Functions, and Types ​  ​This chapter explores
            basics like declaring variables and functions. You’ll also investigate the
            principles of using basic types.
            Chapter 3: Arithmetic Types ​  ​You’ll learn about the integer and
            floating-point arithmetic data types.
            Chapter 4: Expressions and Operators ​  ​You’ll learn about operators
            and how to write simple expressions to perform operations on various
            object types.
            Chapter 5: Control Flow ​  ​You’ll learn how to control the order in
            which individual statements are evaluated. We’ll introduce expression

                                                                               Introduction   xxvii
                           and compound statements that define the work to be performed. We’ll
                           then cover the control statements that determine which code blocks are
                           executed and in what order: selection, iteration, and jump statements.
                           Chapter 6: Dynamically Allocated Memory ​  ​You’ll learn about
                           dynamically allocated memory, which is allocated from the heap at run-
                           time. Dynamically allocated memory is useful when the exact storage
                           requirements for a program are unknown before runtime.
                           Chapter 7: Characters and Strings ​  ​This chapter covers the various
                           character sets, including ASCII and Unicode, that can be used to com-
                           pose strings. You’ll learn how strings are represented and manipulated
                           using the legacy functions from the C standard library, the bounds-
                           checking interfaces, and POSIX and Windows application program-
                           ming interfaces (APIs).
                           Chapter 8: Input/Output ​  ​This chapter will teach you how to perform
                           input/output (I/O) operations to read data from, or write data to, ter-
                           minals and filesystems. I/O involves all the ways information enters or
                           exits a program. We’ll cover techniques that make use of C standard
                           streams and POSIX file descriptors.
                           Chapter 9: Preprocessor ​  ​You’ll learn how to use the preprocessor to
                           include files, define object- and function-like macros, and conditionally
                           include code based on implementation-specific features.
                           Chapter 10: Program Structure ​  ​You’ll learn how to structure your
                           program into multiple translation units consisting of both source and
                           include files. You’ll also learn how to link multiple object files together
                           to create libraries and executable files.
                           Chapter 11: Debugging, Testing, and Analysis ​  ​This chapter describes
                           tools and techniques for producing error-free programs, including
                           compile-time and runtime assertions, debugging, testing, static analy-
                           sis, and dynamic analysis. The chapter also discusses which compiler
                           flags are recommended for use in different phases of the software
                           development process.
                           Appendix: The Fifth Edition of the C Standard (C23) ​  ​This appendix
                           enumerates some of the additions and changes in C23. It’s a convenient
                           way to learn what’s new in C and to identify changes from the previous
                           C standard (C17).This book is updated from the previous edition to
                           cover the features and behaviors of C23. According to 2022 polling data
                           from JetBrains (https://­www​.­jetbrains​.­com​/­lp​/­devecosystem​-­2022​/­c​/ ), 44 per-
                           cent of C programmers use C99, 33 percent use C11, 16 percent use
                           C17, and 15 percent use an embedded version of C.
                           You’re about to embark on a journey from which you will emerge a
                        newly minted but professional C developer.

xxviii   Introduction
