                                            1
                     G E T T I N G S TA R T E D W I T H C

                           In this chapter, you’ll develop your first C
                           program: the traditional “Hello, world!”
                          program. We’ll examine the various aspects
                       of this simple C program, compile it, and run
             it. Then I’ll review some editor and compiler options
             and lay out common portability issues you’ll quickly
             become familiar with as you code in C.

Developing Your First C Program
             The most effective way to learn C programming is to start writing C programs,
             and the traditional program to start with is “Hello, world!” Open your
             favorite text editor and enter the program in Listing 1-1.

   hello.c   #include <stdio.h>
             #include <stdlib.h>
                int main() {
                  puts("Hello, world!");
                  return EXIT_SUCCESS;
                }

Listing 1-1: The “Hello, world!” program

                     The first two lines use the #include preprocessor directive, which
                behaves as if you replaced it with the contents of the specified file at the
                exact same location. In this program, <stdio.h> and <stdlib.h> are both
                headers. A header is a source file that, by convention, contains the defini-
                tions, function declarations, and constant definitions required by the users
                of the corresponding source file. As the filenames suggest, <stdio.h> defines
                the interface for C standard input/output (I/O) functions, and <stdlib.h>
                declares several general utility types and functions and defines several macros.
                You need to include the declarations for any library functions that you use
                in your program. (You’ll learn more about the appropriate use of headers in
                Chapter 9.)
                     Here, we include <stdio.h> to access the declaration of the puts function
                called by the main function. We include the <stdlib.h> to access the defini-
                tion of the EXIT_SUCCESS macro, which is used in the return statement.
                     This line defines the main function that’s called at program startup:

                int main() {

                    The main function defines the entry point for the program that’s
                executed in a hosted environment when the program is invoked from the
                command line or from another program. C defines two possible execution
                environments: freestanding and hosted. A freestanding environment may not
                provide an operating system and is typically used in embedded program-
                ming. These implementations provide a minimal set of library functions,
                and the name and type of the function called at program startup are imple-
                mentation defined. Most of the examples in this book work on the assump-
                tion that the main function is the one and only entry point.
                    Like other procedural languages, C programs contain functions that
                can accept arguments and return values. Each function is a reusable unit
                of work that you can invoke as often as required in your program. The puts
                function is invoked from the main function to print out the line Hello, world!:

                  puts("Hello, world!");

                     The puts function is a C standard library function that writes a string
                argument to the stdout stream and appends a newline character to the out-
                put. The stdout stream typically represents the console or terminal window.
                "Hello, world!" is a string literal that behaves like a read-only string. This
                function invocation outputs Hello, world! to the terminal.
                     Once your program has completed, you’ll want it to exit. The return
                statement will exit main and return an integer value to the host environment
                or invocation script:

          return EXIT_SUCCESS;

            EXIT_SUCCESS is an object-like macro that may be defined as follows:

        #define EXIT_SUCCESS 0

             Each occurrence of EXIT_SUCCESS is replaced by a 0, which is then
        returned to the host environment from the call to main. The script that
        invokes the program can then check its status to determine whether the
        invocation was successful. A return from the initial call to the main function
        is equivalent to calling the C standard library exit function with the value
        returned by the main function as its argument.
             The final line of this program consists of a closing brace (}), which
        closes the code block we opened with the declaration of the main function:

        int main() {
          // --snip--
        }

            You can place the opening brace on the same line as the declaration or
        on its own line, as follows:

        int main()
        {
          // --snip--
        }

             This decision is strictly a stylistic one, because whitespace characters
        (including newlines) are generally not syntactically meaningful. In this
        book, I usually place the opening brace on the line with the function decla-
        ration because it’s stylistically more compact.
             For now, save this file as hello.c. The file extension .c indicates that the
        file contains C language source code.

 NOTE   If you’ve purchased an ebook, cut and paste the program into the editor. Using cut
        and paste can reduce transcription errors.

Compiling and Running a Program
        Next, you need to compile and run the program, which involves two steps.
        The command to compile the program depends on which compiler you’re
        using. On Linux and other Unix-like operating systems, enter cc on the
        command line followed by the name of the file you want to compile:

        $ cc hello.c

           If you enter the program correctly, the compile command will create a
        new file called a.out in the same directory as your source code.

        NOTE    Compilers are invoked differently on other operating systems such as Windows or
                macOS. Refer to the documentation for your specific compiler.

                    Inspect your directory with the following command:

                $ ls
                a.out   hello.c

                   The a.out file in the output is the executable program, which you can
                now run on the command line:

                $ ./a.out
                Hello, world!

                    If everything goes right, the program should print Hello, world! to the
                terminal window. If it doesn’t, compare the program text from Listing 1-1
                to your program and make sure they are the same.
                    The cc command accepts numerous compiler options. The -o file
                compiler option, for example, lets you give the executable file a memorable
                name instead of a.out. The following compiler invocation names the execut-
                able hello:

                $ cc -o hello hello.c
                $ ./hello
                Hello, world!

                    We’ll introduce other compiler and linker options (aka flags) through-
                out the book and dedicate a section to them in Chapter 11.

                Function Return Values
                Functions will often return a value that’s the result of a computation or that
                signifies whether the function successfully completed its task. For example,
                the puts function we used in our “Hello, world!” program takes a string to
                print and returns a value of type int. The puts function returns the value
                of the macro EOF (a negative integer) if a write error occurs; otherwise, it
                returns a nonnegative integer value.
                     Although it’s unlikely that the puts function will fail and return EOF
                for our simple program, it’s possible. Because the call to puts can fail and
                return EOF, it means that your first C program has a bug or, at least, can be
                improved as follows:

                #include <stdio.h>
                #include <stdlib.h>
                int main() {
                  if (puts("Hello, world!") == EOF) {
                    return EXIT_FAILURE;
                    // code here never executes
                  }

    return EXIT_SUCCESS;
    // code here never executes
}

     This revised version of the “Hello, world!” program checks whether
the puts call returns the value EOF, indicating a write error. If the func-
tion returns EOF, the program returns the value of the EXIT_FAILURE macro
(which evaluates to a nonzero value). Otherwise, the function succeeds,
and the program returns EXIT_SUCCESS. The script that invokes the program
can check its status to determine whether it was successful. Code following
a return statement is dead code that never executes. This is indicated by a
single-line comment in the revised program. Everything following // is
disregarded by the compiler.

Formatted Output
The puts function is a simple way to write a string to stdout, but to print
arguments other than strings, you’ll need the printf function. The printf
function takes a format string that defines how the output is formatted,
followed by a variable number of arguments that are the actual values you
want to print. For example, if you want to use the printf function to print
out Hello, world!, you could write it like this:

printf("%s\n", "Hello, world!");

    The first argument is the format string "%s\n". The %s is a conversion
specification that instructs the printf function to read the second argu-
ment (a string literal) and print it to stdout. The \n is an alphabetic escape
sequence used to represent nongraphic characters and tells the function to
include a new line after the string. Without the newline sequence, the next
characters printed (likely the command prompt) would appear on the same
line. This function call outputs the following:

Hello, world!

     Take care not to pass user-supplied data as part of the first argument to
the printf function, because doing so can result in a formatted output secu-
rity vulnerability (Seacord 2013).
     The simplest way to output a string is to use the puts function, as previ-
ously shown. If you use printf instead of puts in the revised version of the
“Hello, world!” program, however, you’ll find it no longer works because
the printf function returns the status differently than the puts function.
The printf function returns the number of characters printed when success-
ful, or a negative value if an output or encoding error occurred. Try modi-
fying the “Hello, world!” program to use the printf function as an exercise.

    Editors and Integrated Development Environments
                You can use a variety of editors and integrated development environments
                (IDEs) to develop your C programs. Figure 1-1 shows the most used
                editors, according to a 2023 JetBrains survey (https://www.jetbrains.com/lp​/
                devecosystem-2023/c/).

                  Embedded
                  General
                                             34% Visual Studio Code
                                             35%
                                             20% CLion
                                             20%
                                             14% Vi/Vim
                                             12%
                                              9% Visual Studio
                                             12%
                                               1% Code::Blocks
                                               3%
                                               3% Emacs
                                               3%
                                               4% Eclipse CDT
                                               2%
                                               1% NetBeans
                                               2%
                                               3% Sublime
                                               2%
                                                — Atom
                                               2%
                                                — Xcode
                                               2%
                                               1% AppCode
                                               1%
                                               9% Other
                                               5%

Figure 1-1: Popular IDEs and editors

                    The exact tools available depend on which system you’re using.
                    For Microsoft Windows, Microsoft’s Visual Studio IDE (https://­visual​
                studio​.­microsoft​.com) is an obvious choice. Visual Studio comes in three
                editions: Community, Professional, and Enterprise. The Community edition
                has the advantage of being free, while the other editions add features at a
                cost. For this book, you’ll need only the Community edition.
                    For Linux, the choice is less obvious as there are a variety of options. A
                popular choice is Visual Studio Code (VS Code). VS Code is a streamlined
                code editor with support for development operations such as debugging,
                task running, and version control (covered in Chapter 11). It provides just
                the tools a developer needs for a quick code-build-debug cycle. VS Code
                runs on macOS, Linux, and Windows and is free for private or commercial

       use. Installation instructions are available for Linux and other platforms
       (https://­code​.­visualstudio​.com).
            Figure 1-2 shows VS Code being used to develop the “Hello, world!”
       program on Ubuntu. The debug console shows that the program exited
       with status code 0 as expected.

Figure 1-2: Visual Studio Code running on Ubuntu

           Vim is the editor of choice for many developers and power users. It is a
       text editor based on the vi editor written by Bill Joy in the 1970s for a ver-
       sion of Unix. It inherits the key bindings of vi but also adds functionality
       and extensibility that are missing from the original vi. You can optionally
       install Vim plug-ins such as YouCompleteMe (https://github.com/ycm-core/
       YouCompleteMe) or deoplete (https://­g ithub​.­com​/­Shougo​/­deoplete​.nvim) that pro-
       vide native semantic code completion for C programming.
           GNU Emacs is an extensible, customizable, and free text editor. At its
       core, it’s an interpreter for Emacs Lisp, a dialect of the Lisp programming
       language with extensions to support text editing—although I’ve never
       found this to be a problem. Full disclosure: Almost all the production C
       code I’ve developed was edited in Emacs.

Compilers
       Many C compilers are available, so I won’t discuss them all here. Different
       compilers implement different versions of the C standard. Many compilers
       for embedded systems support only C89/C90. Popular compilers for Linux
       and Windows work harder to support modern versions of the C standard,
       up to and including support for C23.

                GNU Compiler Collection
                The GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) includes frontends for C, C++, and
                Objective-C, as well as other languages (https://­gcc​.­g nu​.org). GCC follows a
                well-defined development plan under the guidance of the GCC steering
                committee.
                     GCC has been adopted as the standard compiler for Linux systems,
                although versions are also available for Microsoft Windows, macOS, and
                other platforms. Installing GCC on Linux is easy. The following command,
                for example, should install GCC on Ubuntu:

                $ sudo apt-get install gcc

                   You can test the version of GCC you’re using with the following
                command:

                $ gcc --version

                    The output will display the version and copyright information for the
                installed GCC version.

                Clang
                Another popular compiler is Clang (https://clang.llvm.org). Installing Clang
                on Linux is also easy. You can use the following command to install Clang
                on Ubuntu:

                $ sudo apt-get install clang

                   You can test the version of Clang you’re using with the following
                command:

                $ clang --version

                    This displays the installed Clang version.

                Microsoft Visual Studio
                As previously mentioned, the most popular development environment for
                Windows is Microsoft Visual Studio, which includes both the IDE and the
                compiler. Visual Studio (https://­visualstudio​.­microsoft​.­com​/­downloads​/ ) is bun-
                dled with Visual C++ 2022, which includes both the C and C++ compilers.
                    You can set options for Visual Studio on the Project Property pages. On
                the Advanced tab under C/C++, make sure you compile as C code by using
                the Compile as C Code (/TC) option and not the Compile as C++ Code (/TP)
                option. By default, when you name a file with a .c extension, it’s compiled
                with /TC. If the file is named with .cpp, .cxx, or a few other extensions, it’s
                compiled with /TP.

Portability
         Every C compiler implementation is a little different. Compilers continually
         evolve—so, for example, a compiler like GCC might provide full support
         for C17 but be working toward support for C23, in which case it might have
         some C23 features implemented but not others. Consequently, compilers
         support a full spectrum of C standard versions (including in-between ver-
         sions). The overall evolution of C implementations is slow, with many com-
         pilers significantly lagging behind the C standard.
              Programs written for C can be considered strictly conforming if they use
         only those features of the language and library specified in the standard.
         These programs are intended to be maximally portable. However, because
         of the range of implementation behaviors, no real-world C program is
         strictly conforming, nor will it ever be (and probably shouldn’t be). Instead,
         the C standard allows you to write conforming programs that may depend on
         nonportable language and library features.
              It’s common practice to write code for a single reference implementa-
         tion, or sometimes several implementations, depending on the platforms
         to which you plan to deploy your code. The C standard ensures that these
         implementations don’t differ too much, and it allows you to target several at
         once without having to learn a new language each time.
              Five kinds of portability issues are enumerated in Annex J of the C stan-
         dard documents:
         •    Implementation-defined behavior
         •    Unspecified behavior
         •    Undefined behavior
         •    Locale-specific behavior
         •    Common extensions
             As you learn about the C language, you’ll encounter examples of all five
         kinds of behaviors, so it’s important to understand precisely what these are.

         Implementation-Defined Behavior
         Implementation-defined behavior is program behavior that’s not specified by
         the C standard and that may produce different results between implemen-
         tations but has consistent, documented behavior within an implementation.
         An example of implementation-defined behavior is the number of bits in
         a byte.
              Implementation-defined behaviors are mostly harmless but can cause
         defects when porting to different implementations. Whenever possible,
         avoid writing code that depends on implementation-defined behaviors
         that vary among the C implementations you plan to compile your code
         with. A complete list of implementation-defined behaviors is enumerated
         in Annex J.3 of the C standard. You can document your dependencies on
         these implementation-defined behaviors by using a static_assert declara-
         tion, as discussed in Chapter 11.

                 Unspecified Behavior
                 Unspecified behavior is program behavior for which the standard provides
                 two or more options but doesn’t mandate which option is chosen in any
                 instance. Each execution of a given expression may yield different results or
                 produce a different value than a previous execution of the same expression.
                 An example of unspecified behavior is function parameter storage layout,
                 which can vary among function invocations within the same program.
                 Unspecified behaviors are enumerated in Annex J.1 of the C standard.

                 Undefined Behavior
                 Undefined behavior is behavior that isn’t defined by the C standard or, less
                 circularly, “behavior, upon use of a nonportable or erroneous program
                 construct or of erroneous data, for which the standard imposes no require-
                 ments” (ISO/IEC 9899:2024). Examples of undefined behavior include
                 signed integer overflow and dereferencing an invalid pointer value. Code
                 that has undefined behavior is often incorrect, but not always. Undefined
                 behaviors are identified in the standard as follows:
                 •   When a “shall” or “shall not” requirement is violated and that require-
                     ment appears outside a constraint, behavior is undefined.
                 •   When behavior is explicitly specified by the words “undefined
                     behavior.”
                 •   By the omission of any explicit definition of behavior.
                      The first two kinds of undefined behavior are frequently referred to
                 as explicit undefined behaviors, while the third kind is referred to as implicit
                 undefined behavior. There is no difference in emphasis among these three;
                 they all describe behavior that is undefined. The C standard Annex J.2,
                 “Undefined behavior,” lists the explicit undefined behaviors in C.
                      Developers often misconstrue undefined behaviors as errors or omis-
                 sions in the C standard, but the decision to classify a behavior as undefined
                 is intentional and considered. Behaviors are classified as undefined by the C
                 standards committee for one of the following reasons:
                 •   Give the implementer license not to catch program errors that are dif-
                     ficult to diagnose
                 •   Avoid defining obscure corner cases that would favor one implementa-
                     tion strategy over another
                 •   Identify areas of possible conforming language extension in which the
                     implementer may augment the language by providing a definition of
                     the officially undefined behavior
                       These three reasons are quite different but are all considered portabil-
                 ity issues. We’ll examine examples of all three as they come up over the
                 course of this book. Upon encountering undefined behavior, compilers
                 have the latitude to do the following:

      •   Ignore undefined behavior completely, giving unpredictable results
      •   Behave in a documented manner characteristic of the environment
          (with or without issuing a diagnostic)
      •   Terminate a translation or execution (and issue a diagnostic)
          None of these options are great (particularly the first), so it’s best to
      avoid undefined behaviors except when the compiler specifies that these
      behaviors are defined to allow you to invoke a language augmentation.
      Compilers sometimes have a pedantic mode that can help notify the pro-
      grammer of these portability issues.

      Locale-Specific Behavior and Common Extensions
      Locale-specific behavior depends on local conventions of nationality, culture,
      and language that each implementation documents. Common extensions are
      widely used in many systems but are not portable to all implementations.

Summary
      In this chapter, you learned how to write a simple C language program,
      compile it, and run it. We looked at several editors and integrated develop-
      ment environments as well as a few compilers that you can use to develop
      C programs on Windows, Linux, and macOS systems. You should use newer
      versions of the compilers and other tools, as they tend to support newer
      features of the C programming language and provide better diagnostics
      and optimizations. However, you may not want to use newer versions of
      compilers if they break your existing code or if you’re getting ready to
      deploy your code to avoid introducing unnecessary changes into your
      already tested application. We concluded this chapter with a discussion
      of the portability of C language programs.
          Subsequent chapters will examine specific features of the C language
      and library, starting with objects, functions, and types in the next chapter.

