                              3
               ARITHMETIC T YPES

              In this chapter, you’ll learn about the two
              kinds of arithmetic types: integers and float-
            ing types. Most operators in C operate on
          arithmetic types. Because C is a system-level
language, performing arithmetic operations correctly
can be difficult, resulting in frequent defects. This is
partially because arithmetic operations in digital sys-
tems with limited range and precision do not always
produce the same result as they would in ordinary
mathematics. Performing basic arithmetic correctly is
an essential foundation to becoming a professional
C programmer.
    We’ll dive deep into how arithmetic works in the C language so that you
have a firm grasp of these fundamental concepts. We’ll also look at how to
                 convert one arithmetic type to another, which is necessary for performing
                 operations on mixed types.

     Integers
                 As mentioned in Chapter 2, each integer type represents a finite range of
                 integers. Signed integer types represent values that can be negative, zero,
                 or positive; unsigned integers represent values that can be only zero or posi-
                 tive. The range of values that each integer type can represent depends on
                 your implementation.
                      The value of an integer object is the ordinary mathematical value stored
                 in the object. The representation of a value for an integer object is the partic-
                 ular encoding of the value in the bits of the object’s allocated storage. We’ll
                 look at the representation in more detail later.

                 Padding, Width, and Precision
                 All integer types except char, signed char, and unsigned char may contain
                 unused bits, called padding, that allow implementations to accommodate
                 hardware quirks (such as skipping over a sign bit in the middle of a multiple-
                 word representation) or to optimally align with a target architecture. The
                 number of bits used to represent a value of a given type, excluding padding
                 but including the sign, is called the width and is often denoted by N. The
                 precision is the number of bits used to represent values, excluding sign and
                 padding bits.

                 Integer Ranges
                 A representable value is a value that can be represented in the number of
                 bits available to an object of a particular type. Values that cannot be repre-
                 sented will be diagnosed by the compiler or converted to a representable
                 but different (incorrect) value. The <limits.h> header file defines object-like
                 macros that expand to various limits and parameters of the standard inte-
                 ger types. To write portable code, you should use these macros rather than
                 integer literals such as +2147483647 (the maximum value representable as a
                 32-bit integer) that represent a specific limit and may change when porting
                 to a different implementation.
                      The C standard imposes only three constraints on integer sizes. First,
                 storage for every data type occupies an integral number of adjacent unsigned
                 char objects (which may include padding). Second, each integer type must
                 support a minimum range of values, allowing you to depend on a portable
                 range of values across any implementation. Third, smaller types cannot be
                 wider than larger types. So, for example, short cannot be wider than int,
                 but both types may have the same width.

Integer Declarations
Unless declared as unsigned, integer types are assumed to be signed (except
for char, which the implementation can define as either a signed or unsigned
integer type). The following are valid declarations of unsigned integers:

unsigned int ui; // unsigned is required
unsigned u; // int can be omitted
unsigned long long ull2; // int can be omitted
unsigned char uc; // unsigned is required

    When declaring signed integer types, you can omit the signed keyword—
except for signed char, which requires the keyword to distinguish signed char
from plain char.
    You can also omit int when declaring variables of type short, long, or
long long. For example:

int i; // signed can be omitted
long long int sll; // signed can be omitted
long long sll2; // signed and int can be omitted
signed char sc; // signed is required

These are all valid signed integer declarations.

Unsigned Integers
Unsigned integers have ranges that start at 0, and their upper bound is greater
than that of the corresponding signed integer type. Unsigned integers
are frequently used for counting items that may have large, nonnegative
quantities.

Representation
Unsigned integer types are easier to understand and to use than signed inte-
ger types. They represent values using a pure binary system with no offset:
the least significant bit has the weight 20, the next least significant has the
weight 21, and so forth. The value of the binary number is the sum of all
the weights of the set bits. Table 3-1 shows some examples of unsigned val-
ues using an unpadded 8-bit representation.

Table 3-1: 8-Bit Unsigned Values
 Decimal              Binary            Hexadecimal
 0                    0b00000000        0x00
 1                    0b00000001        0x01
 42                   0b00101010        0x2A
 255                  0b11111111        0xFF

                      Unsigned integer types do not have a sign bit, allowing for 1-bit greater
                 precision than the corresponding signed integer types. Unsigned integer
                 values range from 0 to a maximum value that depends on the width of the
                 type. This maximum value is 2N – 1, where N is the width. For example,
                 most x86 architectures use 32-bit integers with no padding bits, so an object
                 of type unsigned int has a range of 0 to 232 – 1 (4,294,967,295). The constant
                 expression UINT_MAX from <limits.h> specifies the implementation-defined
                 upper range for this type. Table 3-2 shows the constant expressions from
                 <limits.h> for each unsigned type and the minimum magnitude required by
                 the standard.

Table 3-2: Unsigned Integer Minimum Magnitudes
                  Constant                                                  Maximum value for
                  expression       Minimum magnitude                        an object of type
                  UCHAR_MAX        255 // 28 – 1                            unsigned char
                  USHRT_MAX        65,535 // 2 – 1
                                               16
                                                                            unsigned short int
                  UINT_MAX         65,535 // 2 – 1
                                               16
                                                                            unsigned int
                  ULONG_MAX        4,294,967,295 // 232 – 1                 unsigned long int
                  ULLONG_MAX       18,446,744,073,709,551,615 // 264
                                                                       –1   unsigned long long int

                    Your compiler will replace these values with implementation-defined
                 magnitudes.

                 Wraparound
                 C23 defines wraparound as “the process by which a value is reduced mod-
                 ulo 2N , where N is the width of the resulting type.” Wraparound occurs
                 when you perform arithmetic operations that result in values too small (less
                 than 0) or too large (greater than 2N – 1) to be represented as a particular
                 unsigned integer type. In this case, the value is reduced modulo the num-
                 ber that is one greater than the largest value that can be represented in
                 the resulting type. Wraparound is well-defined behavior in the C language.
                 Whether it is a defect in your code depends on the context. If you are
                 counting something and the value wraps, it is likely to be an error. However,
                 the use of wraparound in certain algorithms is intentional.
                     The code in Listing 3-1 illustrates wraparound by initializing an unsigned
                 integer value ui to its maximum value and incrementing it.

                 unsigned int ui = UINT_MAX; // 4,294,967,295 on x86
                 ui++;
                 printf("ui = %u\n", ui); // ui is 0
                 ui--;
                 printf("ui = %u\n", ui); // ui is 4,294,967,295

Listing 3-1: Unsigned integer wraparound

    The resulting value cannot be represented as an unsigned int, so it
wraps around to 0. If the resulting value is decremented, it falls outside the
range again and will wrap around back to UINT_MAX.
    Because of wraparound, an unsigned integer expression can never eval-
uate to less than 0. It’s easy to lose track of this and implement comparisons
that are always true or always false. For example, the i in the following for
loop can never take on a negative value, so this loop will never terminate:

for (unsigned int i = n; i >= 0; --i)

     This behavior has caused some notable real-world bugs. For example,
all six power-generating systems on a Boeing 787 are managed by a cor-
responding generator control unit. Boeing’s laboratory testing discovered
that an internal software counter in the generator control unit wraps
around after running continuously for 248 days (see the Federal Aviation
Administration Rule at https://­www​.­federalregister​.­gov​/­documents​/­2015​/­05​/­01​/
2015​-­10066​/­airworthiness​-­directives​-­the​-­boeing​-­company​- airplanes). This defect
causes all six generator control units on the engine-mounted generators to
enter fail-safe mode at the same time.
     To avoid unplanned behavior (such as having your airplane fall from
the sky), it’s important to check for wraparound by using the limits from
<limits.h>. Be careful when implementing these checks because it’s easy to
make mistakes. For example, the following code contains a defect, as sum + ui
can never be larger than UINT_MAX:

extern unsigned int ui, sum;
// assign values to ui and sum
if (sum + ui > UINT_MAX)
  too_big();
else
  sum = sum + ui;

     If the result of adding sum and ui is larger than UINT_MAX, it is reduced
modulo UINT_MAX + 1. Therefore, the test is useless, and the generated code
will unconditionally perform the summation. Quality compilers might issue a
warning pointing this out, but not all do so. To remedy this, you can subtract
sum from both sides of the inequality to form the following effective test:

extern unsigned int ui, sum;
// assign values to ui and sum
if (ui > UINT_MAX - sum)
  too_big();
else
  sum = sum + ui;

     The UINT_MAX macro is the largest representable unsigned int value, and
sum is a value between 0 and UINT_MAX. If sum is equal to UINT_MAX, the result of
the subtraction is 0, and if sum is equal to 0, the result of the subtraction is
UINT_MAX. Because the result of this operation will always fall in the allowable
range of 0 to UINT_MAX, it can never wrap around.

                      The same problem occurs when checking the result of an arithmetic
                   operation against 0, the minimum unsigned value:

                   extern unsigned int i, j;
                   // assign values to i and j
                   if (i - j < 0) // cannot happen
                     negative();
                   else
                     i = i - j;

                        Because unsigned integer values can never be negative, the subtraction
                   will be performed unconditionally. Quality compilers may warn about this
                   mistake as well. Instead of this useless test, you can check for wraparound
                   by testing whether j is greater than i:

                   if (j > i) // correct
                     negative();
                   else
                     i = i - j;

                        If j > i, the difference would wrap around, so the possibility of wrap-
                   around is prevented. By eliminating the subtraction from the test, the pos-
                   sibility of wraparound is also eliminated.

     W A R N I N G 	?Keep in mind that the width used during wraparound depends on the implementa-
                   tion, which means you can obtain different results on different platforms. Your code
                   won’t be portable if you fail to account for this.

                   Signed Integers
                   Each unsigned integer type (excluding bool) has a corresponding signed
                   integer type that occupies the same amount of storage. Use signed integers
                   to represent negative, zero, and positive values, the range of which depends
                   on the number of bits allocated to the type and the representation.

                   Representation
                   Representing signed integer types is more complicated than representing
                   unsigned integer types. Historically, the C language has supported three
                   different schemes for representing negative numbers: sign and magnitude,
                   one’s complement, and two’s complement.
                       Starting with C23, only two’s-complement representation is supported.
                   In two’s complement representation, the sign bit is given the weight −(2N − 1),
                   and the other value bits have the same weights as for unsigned. The remain-
                   der of this book assumes the two’s complement representation.
                       Signed two’s-complement integer types with a width of N can repre-
                   sent any integer value in the range of –2N – 1 to 2N – 1 – 1. This means, for
                   example, that an 8-bit value of type signed char has a range of –128 to 127.
                   Compared to other signed integer representations, two’s complement can

represent an additional most negative value. The most negative value for an
8-bit signed char is –128, and its absolute value |–128| cannot be represented
as this type. This leads to some interesting edge cases, which we’ll soon
examine in more detail.
     Table 3-3 shows the constant expressions from <limits.h> for each signed
type and the minimum magnitudes required by the standard. Your compiler
will replace these values with implementation-defined magnitudes.

Table 3-3: Signed Integer Minimum Magnitudes
 Constant
 expression       Minimum magnitude                                                 Type
 SCHAR_MIN        –128 // –2      7
                                                                                    signed char
 SCHAR_MAX        +127 // 2 – 1
                              7
                                                                                    signed char
 SHRT_MIN         –32,768 // –215                                                   short int
 SHRT_MAX         +32,767 // 2 – 1    15
                                                                                    short int
 INT_MIN          –32,768 // –2        15
                                                                                    int
 INT_MAX          +32,767 // 2 – 1    15
                                                                                    int
 LONG_MIN         –2,147,483,648 // –231                                            long int
 LONG_MAX         +2,147,483,647 // 2               31
                                                         –1                         long int
 LLONG_MIN        –9,223,372,036,854,775,808 // –2                        63
                                                                                    long long int
 LLONG_MAX        +9,223,372,036,854,775,807 // 2                     63
                                                                           –1       long long int

    To negate a value in two’s-complement representation, simply toggle
each nonpadding bit and then add 1 (with carries as necessary), as shown in
Figure 3-1.

 0   0    1   0   1   0   0   1                          0    0   1   0         1   0     0   1

 1   1    0   1   0   1   1   0       +     1       =    1    1   0   1         0   1     1   1

Figure 3-1: Negating an 8-bit value in two’s-complement representation

    Table 3-4 shows the binary and decimal representations for an 8-bit
two’s-complement signed integer type with no padding (that is, N = 8).

Table 3-4: 8-Bit Two’s-Complement Values
 Binary           Decimal                       Weighting                                            Constant
 00000000         0                             0
 00000001         1                             20
 01111110         126                           26 + 25 + 24 + 23 + 22 + 21
 01111111         127                           28 − 1 – 1                                           SCHAR_MAX

                                                                                                           (continued)

Table 3-4: 8-Bit Two’s-Complement Values (continued)
                  Binary            Decimal        Weighting                       Constant
                  10000000          −128           −(2     )+0
                                                       8 − 1
                                                                                   SCHAR_MIN
                  10000001          −127           −(28 − 1) + 1
                  11111110          −2             −(28 − 1) + 126
                  11111111          −1             −(28 − 1) + 127

                      It is not necessary to know the binary representations of numbers, but
                 as a C programmer, you will likely find it useful.

                 Integer Overflow
                 Integer overflow occurs when a signed integer operation results in a value that
                 cannot be represented in the resulting type. Signed integer overflow and
                 unsigned integer wraparound are often confused. The primary difference is
                 that signed integer overflow is undefined behavior, while unsigned integer
                 wraparound is well-defined behavior. Unsigned integers cannot overflow.
                      Consider the following function-like macro that returns the absolute
                 value of an arithmetic operand:

                 // undefined or wrong for the most-negative value
                 #define ABS(i) ((i) < 0 ? –(i) : (i))

                      We’ll examine macros in detail in Chapter 9. For now, think of function-
                 like macros as functions that operate on generic types. On the surface, this
                 macro appears to correctly implement the absolute value function by return-
                 ing the nonnegative value of i without regard to its sign. We use the condi-
                 tional (? :) operator (which I’ll cover in more detail in the next chapter) to
                 test whether the value of i is negative. If so, i is negated to -(i); otherwise,
                 it evaluates to the unmodified value (i).
                      Because we’ve implemented ABS as a function-like macro, it can take an
                 argument of any type. This macro can overflow when passed a signed inte-
                 ger argument of type int or a larger signed integer type. Of course, invoking
                 this macro with an unsigned integer is pointless because unsigned integers
                 can never be negative, so the macro’s output would just reproduce the argu-
                 ment. Let’s explore the behavior of the ABS macro when passed a signed
                 integer argument:

                 signed int si = -25;
                 signed int abs_si = ABS(si);
                 printf("%d\n", abs_si); // prints 25

                     In this example, we pass an object of type signed int with the value -25
                 as an argument to the ABS macro. This invocation expands to the following:

                 signed int si = -25;
                 signed int abs_si = ((si) < 0 ? –(si) : (si));
                 printf("%d\n", abs_si); // prints 25

    The macro correctly returned the absolute value of 25. So far, so good.
The problem is that the negative of the two’s-complement most negative
value for a given type cannot be represented in that type, so this use of
the ABS macro results in signed integer overflow. Consequently, this imple-
mentation of ABS is defective and can do anything, including unexpectedly
returning a negative value:

signed int si = INT_MIN;
signed int abs_si = ABS(si);   // undefined behavior
printf("%d\n", abs_si);

     What should ABS(INT_MIN) return to fix this behavior? Signed integer
overflow is undefined behavior in C, allowing implementations to silently
wrap around (the most common behavior), trap, or both (for example,
some operations wrap around while other operations trap). Traps interrupt
execution of the program so that no further operations are performed.
Common architectures like x86 do a combination of both. Because the
behavior is undefined, no universally correct solution to this problem exists,
but we can at least test for the possibility of undefined behavior before it
occurs and take appropriate action.
     To make the absolute-value macro useful for a variety of types, we’ll
add a type-dependent flag argument to it. The flag represents the *_MIN
macro, which matches the type of the first argument. This value is returned
in the following problematic case:

#define ABSM(i, flag) ((i) >= 0 ? (i) : ((i)==(flag) ? (flag) : -(i)))
signed int si = -25; // try INT_MIN to trigger the undefined behavior
signed int abs_si = ABSM(si, INT_MIN);
if (abs_si == INT_MIN)
  overflow(); // handle special case
else
  printf("%d\n", abs_si); // prints 25

     The ABSM macro tests for the most negative value and simply returns it
if found instead of triggering the undefined behavior by negating it.
     On some systems, the C standard library implements the following int-
only absolute-value function to avoid overflow when the function is passed
INT_MIN as an argument:

int abs(int i) {
  return (i >= 0) ? i : -(unsigned)i;   // avoids overflow
}

    In this case, i is converted to an unsigned int and negated. (I’ll discuss
conversions in more detail later in this chapter.)
    Perhaps surprisingly, the unary minus (-) operator is defined for
unsigned integer types. The resulting unsigned integer value is reduced
modulo the number that is one greater than the largest value that the
resulting type can represent. Finally, i is implicitly converted back to

                 signed int as required by the return statement. Because -INT_MIN can’t be
                 represented as a signed int, the result is implementation defined, which is
                 why this implementation is used only on some systems, and even on these
                 systems, the abs function returns an incorrect value.
                      The ABS and ABSM function-like macros evaluate their parameters more
                 than once, which can cause surprises when their arguments change the
                 program state. These are called side effects (covered in detail in Chapter 4).
                 Function calls, on the other hand, evaluate each argument only once.
                      Unsigned integers have well-defined wraparound behavior. Signed inte-
                 ger overflow, or the possibility of it, should always be considered a defect.

                 Bit-Precise Integer Types
                 As noted in Chapter 2, bit-precise integer types accept an operand specify-
                 ing the width of the integer, so a _BitInt(32) is a signed 32-bit integer and
                 unsigned _BitInt(32) is an unsigned 32-bit integer. Bit-precise integer types
                 can have any width up to BITINT_MAXWIDTH. Bit-precise integer types are use-
                 ful in application domains, such as using 256-bit integer values in cryp-
                 tographic symmetric ciphers like Advanced Encryption Standard (AES),
                 calculating Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA)-256 hashes, representing a 24-bit
                 color space, or describing the layout of network or serial protocols.
                      Bit-precise integer types are also very useful when programming field-
                 programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). FPGAs are integrated circuits often
                 sold off-the-shelf that provide customers with the ability to reconfigure the
                 hardware to meet specific use-case requirements after the manufactur-
                 ing process. In the case of FPGA hardware, using normal integer types for
                 small value ranges where the full bit-width isn’t used is extremely wasteful
                 and creates severe performance and space concerns. At the other extreme,
                 FPGAs can support wide integers, essentially providing arbitrary precision,
                 and existing FPGA applications make use of large integers—for example,
                 up to 2,031 bits. Prior to C23, programmers must pick an integer data type
                 of the next larger size and manually perform mask and shifting operations.
                 However, this is error prone because integer widths are implementation
                 defined.
                      A bit-precise signed integer type is designated as _BitInt(N), where N is
                 an integer constant expression that specifies the width of the type. Because
                 bit-precise integer types are specified including the sign bit, a signed
                 _BitInt(1) is invalid because it has one sign bit and no value bits. Unsigned
                 bit-precise integer types do not include a sign bit, so the correct way to spec-
                 ify a 1-bit integer is unsigned _BitInt(1).
                      The _BitInt types follow the usual C standard integer conversion ranks,
                 as detailed in the “Integer Conversion Rank” section on page 65. The usual
                 arithmetic conversions also work the same, where the smaller ranked inte-
                 ger is converted to the larger. However, _BitInt types are excepted from
                 integer promotions.
                      Overflow occurs when a value exceeds the allowable range of a given
                 data type. For example, (_BitInt(3))7 + (_BitInt(3))2 overflows, and the
                 result is undefined as with other signed integer types. To avoid the overflow,

the operation type can be widened to 4 bits by casting one of the operands
to _BitInt(4). Unsigned _BitInt wraparound is well-defined, and the value
wraps around with two’s complement semantics.
     To avoid overflow, you can cast one of the operands to a sufficient width
to represent all possible values. For example, the following function casts
one of the operands to 32 bits:

_BitInt(32) multiply(_BitInt(8) a8, _BitInt(24) a24) {
  _BitInt(32) a32 = a8 * (_BitInt(32))a24;
  return a32;
}

This guarantees that the product can be represented.

Integer Constants
Integer constants (or integer literals) introduce integer values into a program. For
example, you might use them in a declaration to initialize a counter to 0.
C has four kinds of integer constants that use different number systems: deci-
mal constants, binary constants, octal constants, and hexadecimal constants.
     Decimal constants always begin with a nonzero digit. For example, the
following code uses two decimal constants:

unsigned int ui = 71;
int si;
si = -12;

     In this example code, we initialize ui to the decimal constant 71 and
assign si the decimal constant value -12. (Formally, -12 is the negation
operator [-] followed by an integer constant [12]. However, the expression
-12 is usable as an integer constant expression and therefore effectively
indistinguishable from an integer constant whose value is –12.) Use decimal
constants when introducing regular integer values into your code.
     If a constant starts with a 0, optionally followed by digits 0 through 7, it
is an octal constant. Here’s an example:

int agent = 007;
int permissions = 0777;

    In this example, 007 octal equals 7 decimal, and the octal constant 0777
equals the decimal value 511. Octal constants are convenient when dealing
with 3-bit fields such as POSIX file permissions.
    You can also create a hexadecimal constant by prefixing a sequence of
decimal digits and the letters a (or A) through f (or F) with 0x or 0X. For
example:

int burger = 0xDEADBEEF;

                     Use hexadecimal constants when the constant you are introducing is
                 meant to represent a bit pattern more than a particular value—for example,
                 when representing an address. Idiomatically, most hexadecimal constants
                 are written like 0xDEADBEEF because it resembles a typical hex dump. It’s prob-
                 ably a good idea for you to write all your hexadecimal constants like this.
                     Starting with C23, you can also specify a binary constant by appending
                 a sequence of 1 and 0 decimal digits to 0b. For example:

                 int mask = 0b110011;

                      Binary constants can be more readable than octal or hexadecimal con-
                 stants, especially when the value is used as a bitmask.
                      You can also append a suffix to your constant to specify its type. Without
                 a suffix, a decimal constant is given the int type if it can be represented as a
                 value in that type. If it can’t be represented as an int, it will be represented
                 as a long int or long long int. The L suffix specifies the long type, and LL spec-
                 ifies the long long type. You can combine these suffixes with U for unsigned.
                 For example, the ULL suffix specifies the unsigned long long type. Here are
                 some examples:

                 unsigned int ui = 71U;
                 signed long int sli = 9223372036854775807L;
                 unsigned long long int ui = 18446744073709551615ULL;

                       These suffixes can be either uppercase or lowercase. Uppercase is gen-
                 erally preferred for readability, as a lowercase letter l might be mistaken for
                 the number 1.
                       Bit-precise constants were added in C23 to specify _BitInt literals. The
                 ­suffixes wb and uwb designate a constant of type _BitInt(N) and unsigned
                  _BitInt(N), respectively. The width N is the smallest N greater than 1 that can
                  accommodate the value and the sign bit (when present).
                       The wb suffix results in a _BitInt that includes space for the sign bit even
                  if the value of the constant is positive or was specified in binary, octal, or
                  hexadecimal notation:
                     -3wb ​  ​Y ields a _BitInt(3) that is then negated; two value bits, one
                     sign bit
                     -0x3wb ​  ​Y ields a _BitInt(3) that is then negated; two value bits, one
                     sign bit
                     3wb ​  ​Y ields a _BitInt(3); two value bits, one sign bit
                     3ub ​  ​Y ields an unsigned _BitInt(2)
                     -3uwb ​  ​Y ields an unsigned _BitInt(2) that is then negated, resulting in
                     wraparound
                     If we don’t use a suffix and the integer constant isn’t of the required
                 type, it may be implicitly converted. (We’ll discuss implicit conversion in the
                 “Arithmetic Conversion” section on page 64.) This may result in a surpris-
                 ing conversion or a compiler diagnostic, so it’s best to specify an integer

        constant of an appropriate type. Section 6.4.4.1 of the C standard contains
        more information on integer constants (ISO/IEC 2024).

Floating-Point Representation
        Floating-point representation is the most common digital representation of
        real numbers. Floating-point representation is a technique that uses scien-
        tific notation to represent numbers with a mantissa and an exponent for a
        given base. For example, the decimal number 123.456 can be represented
        as 1.23456 × 102, while the binary number 0b10100.11 can be represented as
        1.010011 × 24.
             The C standard defines a general floating-point model for floating-
        point numbers. However, it does not require all implementations to use the
        same representation schemes or formats, and it allows implementations
        to provide values that are not in the C model. To keep things simple, we’ll
        assume conformance to Annex F. Annex F includes the most common
        floating-point formats specified in IEC 60559. You can test the value of the
        __STDC_IEC_559__ macro, or of the __STDC_IEC_60559_BFP__ macro in newer com-
        pilers, to determine whether the implementation conforms to Annex F.
             This section explains floating types, arithmetic, values, and constants,
        so you will know how and when to use them to emulate math on real num-
        bers and when to avoid them.

        Floating Types and Encodings
        C has three standard floating types: float, double, and long double.
            The float type can be used for floating-point data and results that can
        be adequately represented with the precision and exponent range of the
        type. Using float arithmetic to compute float results from float data is par-
        ticularly vulnerable to roundoff error. The common IEC 60559 float type
        encodes values using 1 sign bit, 8 exponent bits, and 23 significand bits. The
        value has a 24-bit significand, which is encoded in 23 bits (with help from
        the exponent field to determine the implicit leading bit).
            The double type provides greater precision and exponent range but
        requires additional storage. Arithmetic with the double type greatly increases
        the reliability of computation of float results from float data. The IEC 60559
        double type encodes values using 1 sign bit, 11 exponent bits, and 52 signifi-
        cand bits. The value has a 53-bit significand, which is encoded in 52 bits
        (with help from the exponent field to determine the implicit leading bit).
            These encodings for float and double are illustrated in Figure 3-2.

                 s   exp               significand

                 1    8                     23

                                  32 bits

                 s     exp                                     significand

                 1        11                                              52

                                                         64 bits

Figure 3-2: The float and double types

                     Let’s illustrate with an example encoding in type float:

                                   1        1000 0001       011 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000

                      The sign bit is 1, the exponent field is 1000 0001, and the significand
                 field is 011 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000. The sign bit encodes the sign of the
                 number, where 0 is used for a positive sign and 1 is used for a negative
                 sign. Consequently, the number represented in this example has a nega-
                 tive sign.
                      Because the exponent field is neither all 0s nor all 1s, the bits in the
                 significand field are interpreted as bits to the right of a binary point where
                 an implicit 1 bit is to the left of the binary point. In this example, the
                 significand of the encoded number is 1.011 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 = 1 +
                 2–2 + 2–3 = 1.375.
                      Putting this all together produces the following real number:
                 –22(1 + 2–2 + 2–3) = –5.

                 C Floating-Point Model
                 The following formula represents a number in the float type using the
                 C model:

                                                                   24
                                                        xf = s2e   ∑ f2
                                                                   k =1
                                                                          k
                                                                               –k

                                                        –125 ≤ e ≤ +128

                      The s is the sign, which may be 1 or –1. The e is the exponent, and f 1
                 through f 24 are the significand bits. Note that the exponent in the C model
                 representation is 1 greater than the exponent we determined from the
                 encoding because the C model places the (explicit) leading bit to the right
                 of the binary point, while the encoding has the (implicit) leading bit to the
                 left of the binary point.

       The following formula represents a number in the double type:

                                              53
                                   xd = s2e   ∑ f2
                                              k =1
                                                     k
                                                         –k

                                  –1021 ≤ e ≤ +1024

     In general, the C model defines floating-point numbers in each float-
ing type by the parameters b, p, e min, and e max. The parameter b is the radix
(the base for the exponent and the significand digits). The radix b for all
the standard floating types is represented by the FLT_RADIX macro defined
in <float.h>. For Annex F, the value of FLT_RADIX is 2. The parameter p is the
number of base- b digits in the floating-point significand. The e min parameter
is the minimum negative integer such that b raised to one less than that
power is a normalized floating-point number. Finally, the e max parameter is
the maximum integer such that b raised to one less than that power is a rep-
resentable finite floating-point number, provided that representable finite
floating-point number is normalized (as it will be for all IEC 60559 types).
Table 3-5 shows the actual macro names.

Table 3-5: Standard Type Characterization Macros in <float.h>
Parameter          float               double                 long double
p                  FLT_MANT_DIG        DBL_MANT_DIG           LDBL_MANT_DIG
emin               FLT_MIN_EXP         DBL_MIN_EXP            LDBL_MIN_EXP
emax               FLT_MAX_EXP         DBL_MAX_EXP            LDBL_MAX_EXP

    Each implementation assigns the long double type one of the following
formats:
•      IEC 60559 quadruple (or binary128) format (IEC 60559 added
       binary128 to its basic formats in the 2011 revision)
•      IEC 60559 binary64-extended format
•      A non-IEC 60559 extended format
•      IEC 60559 double (or binary64) format
    Recommended practice for compiler implementers is to match the long
double type with the IEC 60559 binary128 format or an IEC 60559 binary64-
extended format. IEC 60559 binary64-extended formats include the com-
mon 80-bit IEC 60559 format.
     Arithmetic with the long double type should be considered for com-
putations whose reliability might benefit from the maximum range and
precision that the implementation provides for a standard floating type.
However, the extra range and precision in the long double type (compared
with double) varies considerably among implementations, as does the perfor-
mance (speed) of long double arithmetic. Consequently, the long double type
is unsuitable for data interchange or reproducible results (across implemen-
tations) or for portable high performance.

                      Larger types have greater precision but require more storage. Any value
                 that can be represented as a float can also be represented as a double, and
                 any value that can be represented as a double can be represented as a long
                 double. The header <float.h> defines several macros that define the charac-
                 teristics of floating types.
                      Annex H of C23 specifies additional floating types that have the arith-
                 metic interchange and extended floating-point formats specified in IEC
                 60559. These include a sequence of types with unbounded precision and
                 range and a 16-bit type. Future versions of C may include other floating
                 types.

                 Floating-Point Arithmetic
                 Floating-point arithmetic is similar to, and used to model, the arithmetic
                 of real numbers. However, there are differences to consider. Unlike in real
                 number arithmetic, floating-point numbers are bounded in magnitude and
                 have finite precision. Addition and multiplication operations are not asso-
                 ciative; the distributive property doesn’t hold, nor do many other properties
                 of real numbers.
                      Floating types cannot represent all real numbers exactly, even when
                 they can be represented in a small number of decimal digits. For example,
                 common decimal constants such as 0.1 can’t be represented exactly as
                 binary floating-point numbers. Floating types may lack the necessary preci-
                 sion for various applications such as loop counters or performing financial
                 calculations. See CERT C rule FLP30-C (do not use floating-point variables
                 as loop counters) for more information.

                 Floating-Point Values
                 A floating-point representation whose significand is 0 (all f k = 0) represents
                 a floating-point zero. Zeros are signed according to the sign (s), and there
                 are two floating-point zero values: +0 and –0. They are equal but behave
                 differently in a few operations. A notable example is 1.0/0.0 yields positive
                 infinity and 1.0/(-0.0) yields negative infinity.
                      There are no leading zeros in the significand of a normalized floating-
                 point number (f 1 = 1); leading zeros are removed by adjusting the exponent.
                 These are normal numbers, and they use the full precision of the significand.
                 Therefore, float has 24 significant bits of precision, double has 53 significant
                 bits of precision, and long double has 113 significant bits of precision (assum-
                 ing the IEC 60559 binary128 format).
                      Subnormal numbers are positive and negative numbers (but not 0) of
                 very small magnitude whose normalized representation would result in an
                 exponent that is less than the smallest exponent for the type. Their repre-
                 sentations have exponent e = e min and leading significand bit f 1 = 0. Figure 3-3
                 is a number line showing the range of subnormal values around 0. The pre-
                 cision of subnormal numbers is less than that of normalized numbers.

         -FLT_MIN   0    FLT_MIN

Figure 3-3: The domain of subnormal numbers

     Floating types can also represent values that are not floating-point
numbers, such as negative and positive infinity and not-a-number (NaN)
values. NaNs are values that do not represent a number.
     Having infinity available as a specific value allows operations to con-
tinue past overflow and divide-by-zero situations and produce a useful
result without requiring special treatment. Dividing any nonzero number
by (positive or negative) zero yields an infinity. Operations with infinite val-
ues are well-defined in the IEEE floating-point standard.
     A quiet NaN propagates through almost every arithmetic operation with-
out raising a floating-point exception and is typically tested after a selected
sequence of operations. An arithmetic operation with a signaling NaN oper-
and generally raises a floating-point exception immediately. Floating-point
exceptions are an advanced topic not covered here. For more information,
refer to Annex F of the C standard.
     In C23, the NAN and INFINITY macros in <float.h> and the nan functions in
<math.h> provide designations for IEC 60559 quiet NaNs and infinities. The
FLT_SNAN, DBL_SNAN, and LDBL_SNAN macros in <float.h> provide designations
for IEC 60559 signaling NaNs. C Annex F doesn’t require full support for
signaling NaNs.
     You can identify the class of a floating-point value using the fpclassify
function-like macro, which classifies its argument value as NaN, infinite,
normal, subnormal, or zero:

#include <math.h>
int fpclassify(real-floating x);

    In Listing 3-2, we use the fpclassify macro in the show_classification
function to determine whether a floating-point value of type double is a nor-
mal value, subnormal value, zero, infinity, or NaN.

const char *show_classification(double x) {
  switch(fpclassify(x)) {
    case FP_INFINITE: return "Inf";
    case FP_NAN:       return "NaN";
    case FP_NORMAL:    return "normal";
    case FP_SUBNORMAL: return "subnormal";
    case FP_ZERO:      return "zero";
    default:           return "unknown";
  }

Listing 3-2: The fpclassify macro

                     The function argument x (a double in this example) is passed to the
                 fpclassify macro, which switches on the return value. The show_classification
                 function returns a string corresponding to the class of value stored in x.
                     There are also a variety of other classification macros including isinf,
                 isnan, isnormal, issubnormal, iszero, and so forth that may be more useful
                 than the fpclassify macro in many applications.

                 Floating Constants
                 A floating constant is a decimal or hexadecimal number that represents a
                 real number. You should use floating-point constants to represent floating-
                 point values that cannot be changed. The following are some examples of
                 floating-point constants:

                 15.75
                 1.575E1    /* 15.75 */
                 1575e-2    /* 15.75 */
                 25E-4      /* 0.0025 */

                      The following illustrates constants defined two ways: with a decimal
                 floating constant and with a hexadecimal floating constant. The hexadeci-
                 mal constants have values that can be represented exactly in their (binary)
                 type. The decimal constants require conversion to binary and might be
                 slightly affected by rounding direction modes and evaluation methods.
                 (Rounding modes and evaluation methods are not covered in this book.)
                 Hexadecimal constants should be used in such cases if you want a specific
                 (to the last bit) value.

                 DBL_EPSILON 2.2204460492503131E-16 // decimal constant
                 DBL_EPSILON 0X1P-52                // hex constant
                 DBL_MIN 2.2250738585072014E-308    // decimal constant
                 DBL_MIN 0X1P-1022                  // hex constant
                 DBL_MAX 1.7976931348623157E+308    // decimal constant
                 DBL_MAX 0X1.fffffffffffffP1023     // hex constant

                      All floating-point constants have a type. The type is double if unsuffixed,
                 float if suffixed by the letter f or F, or long double if suffixed by the letter l
                 or L, as shown here:

                 10.0F   /* type float */
                 10.0    /* type double */
                 10.0L   /* type long double */

                     The decimal point is mandatory in these examples, but the trailing
                 zero is not.

     Arithmetic Conversion
                 Frequently, a value represented in one type (for example, float) must be
                 represented in a different type (for example, int). This might occur when

you have an object of type float and need to pass it as an argument to a
function that accepts an object of type int. When such conversions are nec-
essary, you should always ensure that the value is adequately representable
in the new type. I’ll discuss this further in “Safe Conversions” on page 70.
     Values can be implicitly or explicitly converted from one arithmetic
type to another. You can use the cast operator to perform explicit conver-
sions. Listing 3-3 shows two examples of casts.

int si = 5;
short ss = 8;
long sl = (long)si;
unsigned short us = (unsigned short)(ss + sl);

Listing 3-3: Cast operators

     To perform a cast, place a type name in parentheses just before the
expression. The cast converts the expression to the unqualified version of
the type name in parentheses. Here, we cast the value of si to the type long.
Because si is of type int, this cast is guaranteed to be safe because the value
can always be represented in a larger integer type of the same signedness.
     The second cast in this example casts the result of the expression (ss + sl)
to type unsigned short. Because the value is converted to an unsigned type
(unsigned short) with less precision, the result of the conversion might not be
equal to the original value. (Some compilers might warn about this; others
won’t.) In this example, the result of the expression (13) can be correctly rep-
resented in the resulting type.
     Implicit conversion, also known as coercion, occurs automatically in
expressions as required. Values are coerced, for example, when opera-
tions are performed on mixed types. In Listing 3-3, implicit conversions
are used to convert ss to the type of sl so that the addition ss + sl can be
performed on a common type. The rules concerning which values are
implicitly converted to which types are somewhat complicated and involve
three concepts: integer conversion rank, integer promotions, and the usual
arithmetic conversions.

Integer Conversion Rank
Integer conversion rank is a standard rank ordering of integer types used to
determine a common type for computations. Every integer type has an inte-
ger conversion rank that determines when and how conversions are implic-
itly performed.
     The C standard, section 6.3.1.1, paragraph 1 (ISO/IEC 9899:2024),
states that every integer type has an integer conversion rank where the fol-
lowing applies:
•    No two signed integer types have the same rank, even if they have the
     same representation.
•    The rank of a signed integer type is greater than the rank of any signed
     integer type with less precision.

                 •   The rank of long long int is greater than the rank of long int, which is
                     greater than the rank of int, which is greater than the rank of short int,
                     which is greater than the rank of signed char.
                 •   The rank of a bit-precise signed integer type is greater than the rank of
                     any standard integer type with less width or any bit-precise integer type
                     with less width.
                 •   The rank of any unsigned integer type equals the rank of the corre-
                     sponding signed integer type, if any.
                 •   The rank of any standard integer type is greater than the rank of any
                     extended integer type with the same width or bit-precise integer type
                     with the same width.
                 •   The rank of any bit-precise integer type relative to an extended integer
                     type of the same width is implementation defined.
                 •   The rank of char equals the rank of signed char and unsigned char.
                 •   The rank of bool is less than the rank of all other standard integer types.
                 •   The rank of any enumerated type equals the rank of the compatible
                     integer type. Each enumerated type is compatible with char, a signed
                     integer type, or an unsigned integer type.
                     The rank of any extended signed integer type relative to another
                 extended signed integer type with the same precision is implementation
                 defined but still subject to the other rules for determining the integer con-
                 version rank.

                 Integer Promotions
                 A small type is an integer with a lower conversion rank than int or unsigned int.
                 Integer promotion is the process of converting values of small types to an int
                 or unsigned int. Integer promotions allow you to use an expression of a small
                 type in any expression where an int or unsigned int may be used. For example,
                 you could use a lower-ranked integer type—typically, char or short—on the
                 right-hand side of an assignment or as an argument to a function.
                      Integer promotions serve two primary purposes. First, they encourage
                 operations to be performed in a natural size (int) for the architecture, which
                 improves performance. Second, they help avoid arithmetic errors from the
                 overflow of intermediate values, for example:

                 signed char cresult, c1, c2, c3;
                 c1 = 100; c2 = 3; c3 = 4;
                 cresult = c1 * c2 / c3;

                     Without integer promotion, c1 * c2 would result in an overflow of the
                 signed char type on platforms where signed char is represented by an 8-bit
                 two’s-complement value. This is because 300 is outside the range of values
                 (–128 to 127) that can be represented by an object of this type. However,
                 because of integer promotion, c1, c2, and c3 are implicitly converted to
                 objects of type signed int, and the multiplication and division operations

take place in this size. There is no possibility of overflow while performing
these operations because the resulting values can be represented by this
wider type. In this specific example, the result of the entire expression is 75,
which is within range of the signed char type, so the value is preserved when
stored in cresult.
     Prior to the first C standard, compilers used one of two approaches
for integer promotions: the unsigned-preserving approach or the value-
preserving approach. In the unsigned-preserving approach, the compiler pro-
motes small, unsigned types to unsigned int. In the value-preserving approach,
if all values of the original type can be represented as an int, the value
of the original small type is converted to int. Otherwise, it’s converted to
unsigned int. When developing the original version of the standard (C89),
the C standards committee decided on value-preserving rules, because
they produce incorrect results less often than the unsigned-preserving
approach. If necessary, you can override this behavior by using explicit type
casts, as in Listing 3-3.
     The result of promoting small unsigned types depends on the precision
of the integer types, which is implementation defined. For example, the
x86-32 and x86-64 architectures have an 8-bit char type, a 16-bit short type,
and a 32-bit int type. For implementations that target one of these architec-
tures, values of both unsigned char and unsigned short are promoted to signed
int, because all the values that can be represented in these smaller types
can be represented as a signed int. However, 16-bit architectures, such as
Intel 8086/8088 and the IBM Series/1, have an 8-bit char type, a 16-bit short
type, and a 16-bit int type. For implementations that target these architec-
tures, values of type unsigned char are promoted to signed int, while values
of type unsigned short are promoted to unsigned int. This is because all the
values that can be represented as an 8-bit unsigned char type can be repre-
sented as a 16-bit signed int, but some values that can be represented as a
16-bit unsigned short cannot be represented as a 16-bit signed int.
     The _BitInt types are exempt from integer promotions. Integer pro-
motions might inflate the size of required hardware on some platforms,
so _BitInt types aren’t subject to the integer promotion rules. For example,
in a binary expression involving a _BitInt(12) and an unsigned _BitInt(3),
the usual arithmetic conversions would not promote either operand to an
int before determining the common type. Because one type is signed and
one is unsigned and because the signed type has greater rank than the
unsigned type (due to the bit-widths of the types), the unsigned _BitInt(3)
will be converted to _BitInt(12) as the common type.

Usual Arithmetic Conversions
The usual arithmetic conversions are rules for yielding a common real type for the
operands and result of an arithmetic operation. Ignoring complex or imagi-
nary types, each operand is converted to the common real type. Many opera-
tors that accept integer operands (including *, /, %, +, -, <, >, <=, >=, ==, != , &, ^,
|, and ? :) perform conversions using the usual arithmetic conversions. The
usual arithmetic conversions are applied to the promoted operands.

                     The usual arithmetic conversions first check whether one of the oper-
                 ands in the balancing conversion is a floating type. If so, it applies the fol-
                 lowing rules:

                  1. If one type of either operand is long double, the other operand is con-
                     verted to long double.
                  2. Otherwise, if one type of either operand is double, the other operand is
                     converted to double.
                  3. Otherwise, if the type of either operand is float, the other operand is
                     converted to float.
                  4. Otherwise, the integer promotions are performed on both operands.

                       If one operand has the type double and the other operand has the
                 type int, for example, the operand of type int is converted to an object of
                 type double. If one operand has the type float and the other operand has
                 the type double, the operand of type float is converted to an object of type
                 d­ ouble. Particularly notable is the case of int and float, which converts the
                  int operand to float, although int typically has greater precision than float.
                       If neither operand is a floating type, the following usual arithmetic con-
                  version rules are applied to the promoted integer operands:

                  1. If both operands have the same type, no further conversion is needed.
                  2. Otherwise, if both operands have signed integer types or both have
                     unsigned integer types, the operand with the type that has the lesser
                     integer conversion rank is converted to the type of the operand with
                     greater rank. If one operand has the type int and the other operand
                     has the type long, for example, the operand of type int is converted to
                     an object of type long.
                  3. Otherwise, if the operand that has the unsigned integer type has a rank
                     greater than or equal to the rank of the other operand’s type, then the
                     operand with the signed integer type is converted to the type of the oper-
                     and with the unsigned integer type. For example, if one operand has the
                     type signed int and the other operand has the type unsigned int, the oper-
                     and of type signed int is converted to an object of type unsigned int.
                  4. Otherwise, if the type of the operand with the signed integer type can
                     represent all the values of the type of the operand with unsigned inte-
                     ger type, then the operand with unsigned integer type is converted to
                     the type of the operand with signed integer type. For example, if one
                     operand has the type unsigned int and the other operand has the type
                     signed long long and the signed long long type can represent all the
                     values of the unsigned int type, then the operand of type unsigned int
                     is converted to an object of type signed long long. This is the case for
                     implementations with a 32-bit int type and a 64-bit long long type, such
                     as x86-32 and x86-64.
                  5. Otherwise, both operands are converted to the unsigned integer type
                     corresponding to the type of the operand with signed integer type.

    One consequence of _BitInt being exempt from the integer promotion
rules is that a _BitInt operand of a binary operator is not always promoted
to an int or unsigned int as part of the usual arithmetic conversions. Instead,
a lower-ranked operand is converted to the higher-rank operand type, and
the result of the operation is the higher-ranked type. For example, given
the following declarations

_BitInt(2) a2 = 1;
_BitInt(3) a3 = 2;
_BitInt(33) a33 = 1;
signed char c = 3;

the a2 operand in the following expression is converted to _BitInt(3) as part
of the multiplication, and the resulting type is _BitInt(3):

a2 * a3;

    As part of the following multiplication, c is promoted to int, a2 is con-
verted to int, and the resulting type is int:

a2 * c;

    Finally, as part of the following multiplication, c is promoted to int.
Then, provided the width of int is not greater than 32, it is converted to
_BitInt(33) and the resulting type is _BitInt(33):

a33 * c;

    These conversion rules, which evolved as new types were added, take
some getting used to. The irregularities in these patterns resulted from
varying architectural properties (notably, the PDP-11’s automatic promo-
tion of char to int) coupled with a desire to avoid changing the behavior of
existing programs and (subject to those constraints) a desire for uniformity.
When in doubt, use type casts to explicitly force the conversions that you
intend. That said, try not to overuse explicit conversions because casts can
disable important diagnostics.

An Example of Implicit Conversion
The following example illustrates the use of integer conversion rank, inte-
ger promotions, and the usual arithmetic conversions. This code compares
the signed char value c for equality with the unsigned int value ui. We’ll
assume this code is being compiled for the x86 architecture:

unsigned int ui = UINT_MAX;
signed char c = -1;
if (c == ui) {
  printf("%d equals %u\n", c, ui);
}

                      The variable c is of type signed char. Because signed char has a lower
                 integer conversion rank than int or unsigned int, the value stored in c is pro-
                 moted to an object of type signed int when used in the comparison. This is
                 accomplished by sign-extending the original value of 0xFF to 0xFFFFFFFF. Sign
                 extension is used to convert a signed value to a larger-width object. The sign
                 bit is copied into each bit position of the expanded object. This operation
                 preserves the sign and magnitude when converting a value from a smaller
                 to a larger signed integer type.
                      Next, the usual arithmetic conversions are applied. Because the oper-
                 ands to the equal (==) operator have different signedness and equal rank,
                 the operand with the signed integer type is converted to the type of the
                 operand with the unsigned integer type. The comparison is then per-
                 formed as a 32-bit unsigned operation. Because UINT_MAX has the same val-
                 ues as the promoted and converted value of c, the comparison yields 1, and
                 the code snippet prints the following:

                 -1 equals 4294967295

                     This result should no longer be surprising.

                 Safe Conversions
                 Both implicit and explicit conversions (the result of a cast operation) can
                 produce values that can’t be represented in the resulting type. It’s prefera-
                 ble to perform operations on objects of the same type to avoid conversions.
                 However, conversions are unavoidable when a function returns or accepts
                 an object of a different type. In those cases, we must ensure that the conver-
                 sion is performed correctly.

                 Integer Conversions
                 Integer conversions occur when a value of an integer type is converted to a dif-
                 ferent integer type. Conversions to larger types of the same signedness are
                 always safe and don’t need to be checked. Most other conversions can pro-
                 duce unexpected results if the resulting value cannot be represented in the
                 resulting type. To perform these conversions correctly, you must test that
                 the value stored in the original integer type is within the range of values
                 that can be represented in the resulting integer type. As an example, the
                 do_stuff function shown in Listing 3-4 accepts a signed long argument value
                 that needs to be used in a context in which only a signed char is appropriate.

                 #include <errno.h>
                 #include <limits.h>

                 errno_t do_stuff(signed long value) {
                   if ((value < SCHAR_MIN) || (value > SCHAR_MAX)) {
                     return ERANGE;
                   }

    signed char sc = (signed char)value; // cast quiets warning
    // --snip--
}

Listing 3-4: Safe conversion

    To perform this conversion safely, the function checks that value can be
represented as a signed char in the range [SCHAR_MIN, SCHAR_MAX] and returns
an error if it cannot.
    The specific range tests vary based on the conversion. See CERT C rule
INT31-C (“Ensure that integer conversions do not result in lost or misinter-
preted data”) for more information.

Integer-Type to Floating-Type Conversions
Floating types that conform to Annex F support positive and negative
infinities, so all integer values are in range. The usual IEC 60559 conversion
rules apply. See CERT C rule FLP36-C (“Preserve precision when convert-
ing integral values to floating type”) for more information.

Floating-Type to Integer-Type Conversions
When a finite value of a floating type is converted to an integer type (other
than bool), the fractional part is discarded. If the value of the integral
part cannot be represented by the integer type, Annex F specifies that the
“invalid” floating-point exception is raised, and the result is unspecified.

Floating-Type Demotions
Converting a floating-point value to a larger floating type is always safe.
Demoting a floating-point value (that is, converting to a smaller floating
type) is like converting an integer value to a floating type. Floating types
that conform to Annex F support positive and negative infinities. Demoting
values of floating types for these implementations will always succeed
because any out-of-range values are converted to infinities. See CERT C
rule FLP34-C (“Ensure that floating-point conversions are within range of
the new type”) for more information on floating-point conversions.

                                       E X ERCISES

      1.	 Write a main function that calls the show_classification function from
          Listing 3-2 with different values of type double. Try to exercise all the
          switch cases.
      2.	 Find an example where a conversion from int to float results in a loss of
          precision.

     Summary
                 In this chapter, you learned about integers and floating types. You also
                 learned about implicit and explicit conversions, integer conversion rank,
                 integer promotions, and the usual arithmetic conversions.
                      The use of these basic types, particularly integers, is unavoidable and
                 ubiquitous in C programming. Even the “Hello, world!” program returns an
                 int and prints a string—an array of type char—which, of course, is an inte-
                 ger type. Because integer types are used so often, you can’t simply reread
                 this chapter each time you need to use them. You must understand their
                 behavior so you can program effectively.
                      In the next chapter, you’ll learn about operators and how to write sim-
                 ple expressions to perform operations on these arithmetic types as well as
                 other object types.

