Preface

In the decade since the first edition, this book has become a staple of undergraduate
and graduate courses at universities around the world. It has also found a home on
the bookshelves of practitioners at companies large and small. The audience for the
book has, in turn, advanced the state of the art in multiprocessor programming. In
this second edition, we aim to continue this “virtuous cycle” by providing new and
updated content. Our goal is the same as with the first edition: to provide a textbook
for a senior-level undergraduate course and a reference for practitioners.

Organization
The first part of this book covers the principles of concurrent programming, show-
ing how to think as a concurrent programmer, developing fundamental skills such
as understanding when operations “happen,” considering all possible interleavings,
and identifying impediments to progress. Like many skills—driving a car, cooking
a meal, or appreciating caviar—thinking concurrently must be cultivated, and it can
be learned with moderate effort. Readers who want to start programming right away
may skip most of this section but should still read Chapters 2 and 3, which cover the
basic ideas necessary to understand the rest of the book.
    We first look at the classic mutual exclusion problem (Chapter 2). This chapter
is essential for understanding why concurrent programming is a challenge. It covers
basic concepts such as fairness and deadlock. We then ask what it means for a con-
current program to be correct (Chapter 3). We consider several alternative conditions
and the circumstances under which one might want to use each one. We examine
the properties of shared memory essential to concurrent computation (Chapter 4),
and we look at the kinds of synchronization primitives needed to implement highly
concurrent data structures (Chapters 5 and 6).
    We think it is essential that anyone who wants to become truly skilled in the art
of multiprocessor programming spend time solving the problems presented in the
first part of this book. Although these problems are idealized, they distill the kind
of thinking necessary to write effective multiprocessor programs. Most importantly,
they distill the style of thinking necessary to avoid the common mistakes committed
by nearly all novice programmers when they first encounter concurrency.
    The second part of the book describes the practice of concurrent programming.
For most of this part, we give examples in Java to avoid getting mired in low-level
details. However, we have expanded this edition to include discussion of some low-
level issues that are essential to understanding multiprocessor systems and how to
program them effectively. We use examples in C++ to illustrate these issues.

                                                                                         xv
xvi   Preface

          Each chapter has a secondary theme, illustrating either a particular programming
      pattern or an algorithmic technique. Chapter 7 covers spin locks and contention,
      and introduces the importance of the underlying architecture: spin lock performance
      cannot be understood without understanding the multiprocessor memory hierarchy.
      Chapter 8 covers monitor locks and waiting, a common synchronization idiom.
          Several chapters cover concurrent data structures. Linked lists, which illustrate
      different kinds of synchronization patterns, from coarse-grained locking to fine-
      grained locking to lock-free structures, are covered in Chapter 9. This chapter should
      be read before the remaining chapters, which depend on it. First-in-first-out (FIFO)
      queues illustrate the “ABA problem” that arises when using atomic synchronization
      primitives (Chapter 10); stacks illustrate an important synchronization pattern called
      elimination (Chapter 11); hash maps show how an algorithm can exploit natural paral-
      lelism (Chapter 13); skip lists illustrate efficient parallel search (Chapter 14); priority
      queues illustrate how one can sometimes relax correctness guarantees to enhance
      performance (Chapter 15).
          We also consider other fundamental problems in concurrent computing. Chap-
      ter 12 describes counting and sorting, two classic problems with nuanced concurrent
      solutions. Breaking a program into parallelizable tasks and organizing their execu-
      tion is an essential skill for concurrent programming, and we consider several ways
      to do this, including work stealing and distribution (Chapter 16), data parallelism
      (Chapter 17), barriers (Chapter 18), and transactional programming (Chapter 20).
      Memory management is another fundamental challenge for concurrent programs, and
      we discuss how to manually reclaim memory in Chapter 19. Because Java provides
      automatic memory management, we use C++ to illustrate these issues.
          Much of these latter chapters are new to this edition: Chapters 17 and 19 are com-
      pletely new, and Chapters 16 and 20 have been substantially updated from the first
      edition. In particular, Chapter 20 now covers hardware primitives for transactional
      programming as well as software strategies, and the examples have been recast in
      C++ to allow us to focus on lower-level mechanisms.

         In theory, there is no difference between theory and practice. In practice, there is.

          Although the origin of this quote is uncertain, it is relevant to the subject of this
      book. For the greatest benefit, a reader must supplement learning the conceptual ma-
      terial presented in this book with actual experience programming real multiprocessor
      systems.

      Prerequisites
      The prerequisites for the second edition are largely the same as for the first. To un-
      derstand the algorithms and their properties, readers will need some knowledge of
      discrete mathematics, especially “big-O” notation and what it means for a problem
      to be NP-complete, and data structures such as stacks, queues, lists, balanced trees,
                                                                            Preface     xvii

and hash tables. It is also helpful to be familiar with elementary computer architec-
ture and system constructs such as processors, threads, and caches. While a course
on operating systems or computer organization would suffice, neither is necessary;
dozens of universities have used this book successfully without either prerequisite.
    A basic understanding of Java or C++ is needed to follow the examples. When we
require advanced language features or advanced understanding of hardware, we pro-
vide an explanation first. More details about programming language constructs and
multiprocessor hardware architectures are covered in Appendix A and Appendix B,
respectively.
Acknowledgments

We would like to thank our colleagues, students, and friends, who provided guid-
ance, comments, and suggestions during the writing of this book: Yehuda Afek,
Shai Ber, Hans Boehm, Martin Buchholz, Vladimir Budovsky, Christian Cachin,
Cliff Click, Yoav Cohen, Tom Cormen, Michael Coulombe, Dave Dice, Alexan-
dra Fedorova, Pascal Felber, Christof Fetzer, Rati Gelasvili, Mohsen Ghaffari, Brian
Goetz, Shafi Goldwasser, Rachid Guerraoui, Tim Harris, Will Hasenplaugh, Steve
Heller, Danny Hendler, Maor Hizkiev, Alex Kogan, Justin Kopinsky, Hank Korth,
Eric Koskinen, Christos Kozyrakis, Edya Ladan, Doug Lea, Oren Lederman, Will
Leiserson, Pierre Leone, Yossi Lev, Wei Lu, Virendra Marathe, Kevin Marth, Alex
Matveev, John Mellor-Crummey, Mark Moir, Adam Morrison, Dan Nussbaum,
Roberto Palmieri, Kiran Pamnany, Ben Pere, Radia Perlman, Torvald Riegel, Ron
Rivest, Vijay Saraswat, Bill Scherer, Warren Schudy, Michael Scott, Ori Shalev, Marc
Shapiro, Michael Sipser, Yotam Soen, Ralf Suckow, Seth Syberg, Joseph Tassarotti,
John Tristan, George Varghese, Alex Weiss, Kelly Zhang, and Zhenyuan Zhao. We
apologize for any names inadvertently omitted.
    We also extend our appreciation to the many people who have sent us errata to im-
prove the book, including: Matthew Allen, Rajeev Alur, Karolos Antoniadis, Liran
Barsisa, Cristina Basescu, Igor Berman, Konstantin Boudnik, Bjoern Brandenburg,
Kyle Cackett, Mario Calha, Michael Champigny, Neill Clift, Eran Cohen, Daniel B.
Curtis, Gil Danziger, Venkat Dhinakaran, Wan Fokkink, David Fort, Robert P. God-
dard, Enes Goktas, Bart Golsteijn, K. Gopinath, Jason T. Greene, Dan Grossman, Tim
Halloran, Muhammad Amber Hassaan, Matt Hayes, Francis Hools, Ben Horowitz,
Barak Itkin, Paulo Janotti, Kyungho Jeon, Irena Karlinsky, Ahmed Khademzadeh,
Habib Khan, Omar Khan, Namhyung Kim, Guy Korland, Sergey Kotov, Jonathan
Lawrence, Adam MacBeth, Mike Maloney, Tim McIver, Sergejs Melderis, Bar-
tosz Milewski, Jose Pedro Oliveira, Dale Parson, Jonathan Perry, Amir Pnueli, Pat
Quillen, Sudarshan Raghunathan, Binoy Ravindran, Roei Raviv, Jean-Paul Rigault,
Michael Rueppel, Mohamed M. Saad, Assaf Schuster, Konrad Schwarz, Nathar Shah,
Huang-Ti Shih, Joseph P. Skudlarek, James Stout, Mark Summerfield, Deqing Sun,
Fuad Tabba, Binil Thomas, John A Trono, Menno Vermeulen, Thomas Weibel, Adam
Weinstock, Chong Xing, Jaeheon Yi, and Ruiwen Zuo.
    We are also grateful to Beula Christopher, Beth LoGiudice, Steve Merken, and the
staff at Morgan Kaufmann for their patience and assistance throughout the process of
bringing this book to print.

                                                                                        xix
Suggested ways to teach the art of
multiprocessor programming

Here are three alternative tracks for teaching a multiprocessor programming course
using the material in the book.
   The first track is a short course for practitioners, focusing on techniques that can
be applied directly to problems at hand.
   The second track is a longer course for students who are not Computer Science
majors but who want to learn the basics of multiprocessor programming as well as
techniques likely to be useful in their own areas.
   The third track is a semester-long course for Computer Science majors, either
upper-level undergraduates or graduate students.

Practitioner track
Cover Chapter 1, emphasizing Amdahl’s law and its implications. In Chapter 2, cover
Sections 2.1 to 2.4 and Section 2.7. Mention the implications of the impossibility
proofs in Section 2.9. In Chapter 3, skip Sections 3.5 and 3.6.
    Cover Chapter 7, except for Sections 7.7, 7.8, and 7.9. Chapter 8, which deals with
monitors and reentrant locks, may be familiar to some practitioners. Skip Section 8.5
on semaphores.
    Cover Chapters 9 and 10, except for Section 10.7, and cover Sections 11.1
and 11.2. Skip the material in Chapter 11 from Section 11.3 and onwards. Skip Chap-
ter 12.
    Cover Chapters 13 and 14. Skip Chapter 15. Cover Chapter 16, except for Sec-
tion 16.5. Chapter 17 is optional. In Chapter 18, teach Sections 18.1 to 18.3. For
practitioners who focus on C++, Chapter 19 is essential and can be covered at any
point after Chapter 9 and Section 10.6. Chapter 20 is optional.

Non-CS Major track
Cover Chapter 1, emphasizing Amdahl’s law and its implications. In Chapter 2, cover
Sections 2.1 to 2.4, 2.6, and 2.7. Mention the implications of the impossibility proofs
in Section 2.9. In Chapter 3, skip Section 3.6.
    Cover the material in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 and Chapter 5. Mention the universality
of consensus, but skip Chapter 6.
    Cover Chapter 7, except for Sections 7.7, 7.8, and 7.9. Cover Chapter 8.

                                                                                          xxi
xxii   Suggested ways to teach the art of multiprocessor programming

           Cover Chapters 9 and 10, except for Section 10.7, and cover Chapter 11. Skip
       Chapter 12.
           Cover Chapters 13 and 14. Skip Chapter 15. Cover Chapters 16 and 17. In Chap-
       ter 18, teach Sections 18.1 to 18.3. For practitioners who focus on C++, Chapter 19 is
       essential and can be covered at any point after Chapter 9 and Section 10.6. Chapter 20
       is optional. In Chapter 20, cover up to Section 20.3.

       CS Major track
       The slides on the companion website were developed for a semester-long course.
           Cover Chapters 1 and 2 (Section 2.8 is optional) and Chapter 3 (Section 3.6 is
       optional). Cover Chapters 4, 5, and 6. Before starting Chapter 7, it may be useful to
       review basic multiprocessor architecture (Appendix B).
           Cover Chapter 7 (Sections 7.7, 7.8, and 7.9 are optional). Cover Chapter 8 if your
       students are unfamiliar with Java monitors and have not taken a course on operating
       systems. Cover Chapters 9 and 10 (Section 10.7 is optional). Cover Chapters 11, 12
       (Sections 12.7, 12.8, and 12.9 are optional), 13, and 14.
           The remainder of the book should be covered as needed for degree requirements.
       For Math or Computer Science majors, Chapter 15 should come next, followed by
       Chapters 16 and 17. For Data Science majors, Chapter 15 can be skipped so that more
       emphasis can be placed on Chapters 16, 17, and 18. For Computer Engineering ma-
       jors, emphasis should be placed on Chapters 18, 19, and 20. In the end, the instructor
       should of course take into account students’ interests and backgrounds.
