                                                                                            CHAPTER

Introduction
                                                                                             1
At the dawn of the twenty-first century, the computer industry underwent yet an-
other revolution. The major chip manufacturers had increasingly been unable to make
processor chips both smaller and faster. As Moore’s law approached the end of its
50-year reign, manufacturers turned to “multicore” architectures, in which multiple
processors (cores) on a single chip communicate directly through shared hardware
caches. Multicore chips make computing more effective by exploiting parallelism:
harnessing multiple circuits to work on a single task.
    The spread of multiprocessor architectures has had a pervasive effect on how we
develop software. During the twentieth century, advances in technology brought reg-
ular increases in clock speed, so software would effectively “speed up” by itself over
time. In this century, however, that “free ride” has come to an end. Today, advances in
technology bring regular increases in parallelism, but only minor increases in clock
speed. Exploiting that parallelism is one of the outstanding challenges of modern
computer science.
    This book focuses on how to program multiprocessors that communicate via
a shared memory. Such systems are often called shared-memory multiprocessors
or, more recently, multicores. Programming challenges arise at all scales of multi-
processor systems—at a very small scale, processors within a single chip need to
coordinate access to a shared memory location, and on a large scale, processors in a
supercomputer need to coordinate the routing of data. Multiprocessor programming
is challenging because modern computer systems are inherently asynchronous: ac-
tivities can be halted or delayed without warning by interrupts, preemption, cache
misses, failures, and other events. These delays are inherently unpredictable, and can
vary enormously in scale: a cache miss might delay a processor for fewer than ten
instructions, a page fault for a few million instructions, and operating system pre-
emption for hundreds of millions of instructions.
    We approach multiprocessor programming from two complementary directions:
principles and practice. In the principles part of this book, we focus on computability:
figuring out what can be computed in an asynchronous concurrent environment. We
use an idealized model of computation in which multiple concurrent threads manip-
ulate a set of shared objects. The sequence of the thread operations on the objects is
called the concurrent program or concurrent algorithm. This model is essentially the
model presented by threads in Java, C#, and C++.
    Surprisingly, there are easy-to-specify shared objects that cannot be implemented
by any concurrent algorithm. It is therefore important to understand what not to try,
The Art of Multiprocessor Programming. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-415950-1.00009-4
Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                      1

    before proceeding to write multiprocessor programs. Many of the issues that will land
    multiprocessor programmers in trouble are consequences of fundamental limitations
    of the computational model, so we view the acquisition of a basic understanding of
    concurrent shared-memory computability as a necessary step. The chapters dealing
    with principles take the reader through a quick tour of asynchronous computabil-
    ity, attempting to expose various computability issues, and how they are addressed
    through the use of hardware and software mechanisms.
        An important step in the understanding of computability is the specification and
    verification of what a given program actually does. This is perhaps best described
    as program correctness. The correctness of multiprocessor programs, by their very
    nature, is more complex than that of their sequential counterparts, and requires a
    different set of tools, even for the purpose of “informal reasoning” (which, of course,
    is what most programmers actually do).
        Sequential correctness is mostly concerned with safety properties. A safety prop-
    erty states that some “bad thing” never happens. For example, a traffic light never
    displays green in all directions, even if the power fails. Naturally, concurrent correct-
    ness is also concerned with safety, but the problem is much, much harder, because
    safety must be ensured despite the vast number of ways that the steps of concurrent
    threads can be interleaved. Equally important, concurrent correctness encompasses
    a variety of liveness properties that have no counterparts in the sequential world. A
    liveness property states that a particular good thing will happen. For example, a red
    traffic light will eventually turn green.
        A final goal of the part of the book dealing with principles is to introduce a variety
    of metrics and approaches for reasoning about concurrent programs, which will later
    serve us when discussing the correctness of real-world objects and programs.
        The second part of the book deals with the practice of multiprocessor program-
    ming, and focuses on performance. Analyzing the performance of multiprocessor
    algorithms is also different in flavor from analyzing the performance of sequential
    programs. Sequential programming is based on a collection of well-established and
    well-understood abstractions. When we write a sequential program, we can often ig-
    nore that underneath it all, pages are being swapped from disk to memory, and smaller
    units of memory are being moved in and out of a hierarchy of processor caches. This
    complex memory hierarchy is essentially invisible, hiding behind a simple program-
    ming abstraction.
        In the multiprocessor context, this abstraction breaks down, at least from a perfor-
    mance perspective. To achieve adequate performance, programmers must sometimes
    “outwit” the underlying memory system, writing programs that would seem bizarre
    to someone unfamiliar with multiprocessor architectures. Someday, perhaps, concur-
    rent architectures will provide the same degree of efficient abstraction as sequential
    architectures, but in the meantime, programmers should beware.
        The practice part of the book presents a progressive collection of shared objects
    and programming tools. Every object and tool is interesting in its own right, and we
    use each one to expose the reader to higher-level issues: spin locks illustrate con-
    tention, linked lists illustrate the role of locking in data structure design, and so on.
                                            1.1 Shared objects and synchronization            3

    Each of these issues has important consequences for program performance. We hope
    that readers will understand the issue in a way that will later allow them to apply the
    lessons learned to specific multiprocessor systems. We culminate with a discussion
    of state-of-the-art technologies such as transactional memory.
        For most of this book, we present code in the Java programming language, which
    provides automatic memory management. However, memory management is an im-
    portant aspect of programming, especially concurrent programming. So, in the last
    two chapters, we switch to C++. In some cases, the code presented is simplified
    by omitting nonessential details. Complete code for all the examples is available
    on the book’s companion website at https:/ / textbooks.elsevier.com/ web/ product_
    details.aspx?isbn=978124159501.
        There are, of course, other languages which would have worked as well. In the
    appendix, we explain how the concepts expressed here in Java or C++ can be ex-
    pressed in some other popular languages or libraries. We also provide a primer on
    multiprocessor hardware.
        Throughout the book, we avoid presenting specific performance numbers for pro-
    grams and algorithms, instead focusing on general trends. There is a good reason
    why: multiprocessors vary greatly, and what works well on one machine may work
    significantly less well on another. We focus on general trends to ensure that observa-
    tions are not tied to specific platforms at specific times.
        Each chapter has suggestions for further reading, along with exercises suitable for
    Sunday morning entertainment.

    1.1 Shared objects and synchronization
    On the first day of your new job, your boss asks you to find all primes between 1 and
    1010 (never mind why) using a parallel machine that supports ten concurrent threads.
    This machine is rented by the minute, so the longer your program takes, the more it
    costs. You want to make a good impression. What do you do?
       As a first attempt, you might consider giving each thread an equal share of the
    input domain. Each thread might check 109 numbers, as shown in Fig. 1.1. This

1   void primePrint {
2     int i = ThreadID . get ();   // thread IDs are in {0..9}
3     long block = power (10 , 9);
4     for ( long j = ( i * block ) + 1; j <= ( i + 1) * block ; j ++) {
5       if ( isPrime (j ))
6         print ( j );
7     }
8   }

    FIGURE 1.1
    Balancing the work load by dividing up the input domain. Each thread in {0..9} gets an
    equal subset of the range.

    1    Counter counter = new Counter (1);             // shared by all threads
    2    void primePrint {
    3      long i = 0;
    4      long limit = power (10 , 10);
    5      while ( i < limit ) {                        // loop until all numbers taken
    6        i = counter . getAndIncrement ();          // take next untaken number
    7        if ( isPrime (i ))
    8          print ( i );
    9      }
    10   }

         FIGURE 1.2
         Balancing the work load using a shared counter. Each thread is given a dynamically
         determined number of numbers to test.

    1    public class Counter {
    2      private long value ;             // initialized by constructor
    3      public Counter ( long i) {
    4        value = i ;
    5      }
    6      public long getAndIncrement () { // increment , returning prior value
    7        return value ++;
    8      }
    9    }

         FIGURE 1.3
         An implementation of the shared counter.

         approach fails to distribute the work evenly for an elementary but important reason:
         Equal ranges of inputs do not produce equal amounts of work. Primes do not occur
         uniformly; there are more primes between 1 and 109 than between 9 · 109 and 1010 .
         To make matters worse, the computation time per prime is not the same in all ranges:
         it usually takes longer to test whether a large number is prime than a small number.
         In short, there is no reason to believe that the work will be divided equally among the
         threads, and it is not clear even which threads will have the most work.
             A more promising way to split the work among the threads is to assign each thread
         one integer at a time (Fig. 1.2). When a thread is finished testing an integer, it asks
         for another. To this end, we introduce a shared counter, an object that encapsulates
         an integer value, and that provides a getAndIncrement() method, which increments
         the counter’s value and returns the counter’s prior value.
             Fig. 1.3 shows a naïve implementation of Counter in Java. This counter implemen-
         tation works well when used by a single thread, but it fails when shared by multiple
         threads. The problem is that the expression
         return value ++;
                                            1.1 Shared objects and synchronization                     5

is in effect an abbreviation of the following, more complex code:
long temp = value ;
value = temp + 1;
return temp ;

In this code fragment, value is a field of the Counter object, and is shared among all
the threads. Each thread, however, has its own copy of temp, which is a local variable
to each thread.
    Now imagine that two threads call the counter’s getAndIncrement() method at
about the same time, so that they both read 1 from value. In this case, each thread
would set its local temp variables to 1, set value to 2, and return 1. This behavior is
not what we intended: we expect concurrent calls to the counter’s getAndIncrement()
to return distinct values. It could be worse: after one thread reads 1 from value, but
before it sets value to 2, another thread could go through the increment loop several
times, reading 1 and writing 2, then reading 2 and writing 3. When the first thread fi-
nally completes its operation and sets value to 2, it will actually be setting the counter
back from 3 to 2.
    The heart of the problem is that incrementing the counter’s value requires two
distinct operations on the shared variable: reading the value field into a temporary
variable and writing it back to the Counter object.
    Something similar happens when you try to pass someone approaching you head-
on in a corridor. You may find yourself veering right and then left several times to
avoid the other person doing exactly the same thing. Sometimes you manage to avoid
bumping into them and sometimes you do not. In fact, as we will see in the later
chapters, such collisions are provably unavoidable.1 On an intuitive level, what is go-
ing on is that each of you is performing two distinct steps: looking at (“reading”) the
other’s current position, and moving (“writing”) to one side or the other. The prob-
lem is, when you read the other’s position, you have no way of knowing whether they
have decided to stay or move. In the same way that you and the annoying stranger
must decide on which side to pass each other, threads accessing a shared Counter
must decide who goes first and who goes second.
    As we discuss in Chapter 5, modern multiprocessor hardware provides special
read–modify–write instructions that allow threads to read, modify, and write a value
to memory in one atomic (that is, indivisible) hardware step. For the Counter object,
we can use such hardware to increment the counter atomically.
    We can also ensure atomic behavior by guaranteeing in software (using only read
and write instructions) that only one thread executes the read-and-write sequence at a
time. The problem of ensuring that only one thread can execute a particular block of
code at a time, called the mutual exclusion problem, is one of the classic coordination
problems in multiprocessor programming.

1 A preventive approach such as “always sidestep to the right” does not work because the approaching
person may be British.

        As a practical matter, you are unlikely ever to find yourself having to design your
    own mutual exclusion algorithm (you would probably call on a library). Nevertheless,
    understanding how to implement mutual exclusion from the basics is an essential
    condition for understanding concurrent computation in general. There is no more
    effective way to learn how to reason about essential and ubiquitous issues such as
    mutual exclusion, deadlock, bounded fairness, and blocking versus nonblocking syn-
    chronization.

    1.2 A fable
    Instead of treating coordination problems (such as mutual exclusion) as programming
    exercises, we prefer to frame concurrent coordination problems as interpersonal prob-
    lems. In the next few sections, we present a sequence of fables, illustrating some of
    the basic problems. Like most authors of fables, we retell stories mostly invented by
    others (see the chapter notes at the end of this chapter).
        Alice and Bob are neighbors, and they share a yard. Alice owns a cat and Bob
    owns a dog. Both pets like to run around in the yard, but (naturally) they do not
    get along. After some unfortunate experiences, Alice and Bob agree that they should
    coordinate to make sure that both pets are never in the yard at the same time. Of
    course, they rule out trivial solutions that do not allow either pet into an empty yard,
    or that reserve the yard exclusively to one pet or the other.
        How should they do it? Alice and Bob need to agree on mutually compatible pro-
    cedures for deciding what to do. We call such an agreement a coordination protocol
    (or just a protocol, for short).
        The yard is large, so Alice cannot simply look out of the window to check whether
    Bob’s dog is present. She could perhaps walk over to Bob’s house and knock on the
    door, but that takes a long time, and what if it rains? Alice might lean out the window
    and shout “Hey Bob! Can I let the cat out?” The problem is that Bob might not hear
    her. He could be watching TV, visiting his girlfriend, or out shopping for dog food.
    They could try to coordinate by cell phone, but the same difficulties arise if Bob is in
    the shower, driving through a tunnel, or recharging his phone’s batteries.
        Alice has a clever idea. She sets up one or more empty beer cans on Bob’s win-
    dowsill (Fig. 1.4), ties a string around each one, and runs the string back to her house.
    Bob does the same. When she wants to send a signal to Bob, she yanks the string to
    knock over one of the cans. When Bob notices a can has been knocked over, he resets
    the can.
        Up-ending beer cans by remote control may seem like a creative idea, but it does
    not solve this problem. The problem is that Alice can place only a limited number
    of cans on Bob’s windowsill, and sooner or later, she is going to run out of cans to
    knock over. Granted, Bob resets a can as soon as he notices it has been knocked over,
    but what if he goes to Cancún for spring break? As long as Alice relies on Bob to
    reset the beer cans, sooner or later, she might run out.
                                                                          1.2 A fable       7

FIGURE 1.4
Communicating with cans.

    So Alice and Bob try a different approach. Each one sets up a flagpole, easily
visible to the other. When Alice wants to release her cat, she does the following:
1. She raises her flag.
2. When Bob’s flag is lowered, she releases her cat.
3. When her cat comes back, she lowers her flag.
   When Bob wants to release his dog, his behavior is a little more complicated:
1. He raises his flag.
2. While Alice’s flag is raised
   a. Bob lowers his flag,
   b. Bob waits until Alice’s flag is lowered,
   c. Bob raises his flag.
3. As soon as his flag is raised and hers is down, he releases his dog.
4. When his dog comes back, he lowers his flag.
    This protocol rewards further study as a solution to Alice and Bob’s problem. On
an intuitive level, it works because of the following flag principle: If Alice and Bob
each
1. raises his or her own flag, and then
2. looks at the other’s flag,
then at least one will see the other’s flag raised (clearly, the last one to look will
see the other’s flag raised) and will not let his or her pet enter the yard. However,
this observation does not prove that the pets will never be in the yard together. What
if, for example, Alice lets her cat in and out of the yard several times while Bob is
looking?
     To prove that the pets will never be in the yard together, assume by way of contra-
diction that there is a way the pets could end up in the yard together. Consider the last

    time Alice and Bob each raised their flag and looked at the other’s flag before sending
    the pet into the yard. When Alice last looked, her flag was already fully raised. She
    must have not seen Bob’s flag, or she would not have released the cat, so Bob must
    have not completed raising his flag before Alice started looking. It follows that when
    Bob looked for the last time, after raising his flag for the last time, it must have been
    after Alice started looking, so he must have seen Alice’s flag raised and would not
    have released his dog, a contradiction.
        This kind of argument by contradiction shows up over and over again, and it is
    worth spending some time understanding why this claim is true. It is important to
    note that we never assumed that “raising my flag” or “looking at your flag” happens
    instantaneously, nor did we make any assumptions about how long such activities
    take. All we care about is when these activities start or end.

    1.2.1 Properties of a mutual exclusion protocol
    To show that the flag protocol is a correct solution to Alice and Bob’s problem, we
    must understand what properties a solution requires, and then show that the protocol
    meets them.
        We already proved that the pets are excluded from being in the yard at the same
    time, a property we call mutual exclusion.
        Mutual exclusion is only one of several properties of interest. After all, a protocol
    in which Alice and Bob never release a pet satisfies the mutual exclusion property,
    but it is unlikely to satisfy their pets.
        Here is another property of central importance: If only one pet wants to enter
    the yard, then it eventually succeeds. In addition, if both pets want to enter the yard,
    then eventually at least one of them succeeds. We consider this deadlock-freedom
    property to be essential. Note that whereas mutual exclusion is a safety property,
    deadlock-freedom is a liveness property.
        We claim that Alice and Bob’s protocol is deadlock-free. Suppose both pets want
    to use the yard. Alice and Bob both raise their flags. Bob eventually notices that
    Alice’s flag is raised, and defers to her by lowering his flag, allowing Alice’s cat into
    the yard.
        Another property of interest is starvation-freedom (sometimes called lockout-
    freedom): If a pet wants to enter the yard, will it eventually succeed? Here, Alice and
    Bob’s protocol performs poorly. Whenever Alice and Bob are in conflict, Bob defers
    to Alice, so it is possible that Alice’s cat can use the yard over and over again, while
    Bob’s dog becomes increasingly uncomfortable. Later on, we consider protocols that
    prevent starvation.
        The last property of interest concerns waiting. Imagine that Alice raises her flag,
    and is then suddenly stricken with appendicitis. She (and the cat) are taken to the
    hospital, and after a successful operation, she spends the next week under observation
    at the hospital. Although Bob is relieved that Alice is well, his dog cannot use the yard
    for an entire week until Alice returns. The problem is that the protocol states that Bob
    (and his dog) must wait for Alice to lower her flag. If Alice is delayed (even for a
    good reason), then Bob is also delayed (for no apparently good reason).
                                        1.3 The producer–consumer problem                 9

   The question of waiting is important as an example of fault-tolerance. Normally,
we expect Alice and Bob to respond to each other in a reasonable amount of time,
but what if they do not do so? The mutual exclusion problem, by its very essence,
requires waiting: No mutual exclusion protocol, no matter how clever, can avoid it.
Nevertheless, we will see that many other coordination problems can be solved with-
out waiting, sometimes in unexpected ways.

1.2.2 The moral
Having reviewed the strengths and weaknesses of Alice and Bob’s protocol, we now
turn our attention back to computer science.
    First, we examine why shouting across the yard and placing cell phone calls does
not work. Two kinds of communication occur naturally in concurrent systems:
• Transient communication requires both parties to participate at the same time.
  Shouting, gestures, or cell phone calls are examples of transient communication.
• Persistent communication allows the sender and receiver to participate at different
  times. Posting letters, sending email, or leaving notes under rocks are all examples
  of persistent communication.
Mutual exclusion requires persistent communication. The problem with shouting
across the yard or placing cell phone calls is that it may or may not be okay for Bob
to release his dog, but if Alice does not respond to messages, he will never know.
     The can-and-string protocol might seem somewhat contrived, but it corresponds
accurately to a common communication protocol in concurrent systems: interrupts.
In modern operating systems, one common way for one thread to get the attention
of another is to send it an interrupt. More precisely, thread A interrupts thread B by
setting a bit at a location periodically checked by B. Sooner or later, B notices the
bit has been set and reacts. After reacting, B typically resets the bit (A cannot reset
the bit). Even though interrupts cannot solve the mutual exclusion problem, they can
still be very useful. For example, interrupt communication is the basis of the Java
language’s wait() and notifyAll() calls.
     On a more positive note, the fable shows that mutual exclusion between two
threads can be solved (however imperfectly) using only two one-bit variables, each
of which can be written by one thread and read by the other.

1.3 The producer–consumer problem
Mutual exclusion is not the only problem worth investigating. Eventually, Alice and
Bob fall in love and marry. Eventually, they divorce. (What were they thinking?) The
judge gives Alice custody of the pets, and tells Bob to feed them. The pets now get
along with one another, but they side with Alice, and attack Bob whenever they see
him. As a result, Alice and Bob need to devise a protocol for Bob to deliver food to
the pets without Bob and the pets being in the yard together. Moreover, the protocol

     should not waste anyone’s time: Alice does not want to release her pets into the yard
     unless there is food there, and Bob does not want to enter the yard unless the pets have
     consumed all the food. This problem is known as the producer–consumer problem.
        Surprisingly perhaps, the can-and-string protocol we rejected for mutual exclu-
     sion does exactly what we need for the producer–consumer problem. Bob places a
     can standing up on Alice’s windowsill, ties one end of his string around the can, and
     puts the other end of the string in his living room. He then puts food in the yard and
     knocks the can down. When Alice wants to release the pets, she does the following:
     1. She waits until the can is down.
     2. She releases the pets.
     3. When the pets return, Alice checks whether they finished the food. If so, she
        resets the can.
        Bob does the following:
     1. He waits until the can is up.
     2. He puts food in the yard.
     3. He pulls the string and knocks the can down.
     The state of the can thus reflects the state of the yard. If the can is down, it means
     there is food and the pets can eat, and if the can is up, it means the food is gone and
     Bob can put some more out. We check the following three properties:
     • Mutual exclusion: Bob and the pets are never in the yard together.
     • Starvation-freedom: If Bob is always willing to feed, and the pets are hungry, then
       the pets will eventually eat.
     • Producer–consumer: The pets will not enter the yard unless there is food, and Bob
       will never provide more food if there is unconsumed food.
         Both this producer–consumer protocol and the earlier mutual exclusion protocol
     ensure that Alice and Bob are never in the yard at the same time. However, Alice
     and Bob cannot use this producer–consumer protocol for mutual exclusion, and it
     is important to understand why: The mutual exclusion problem requires deadlock-
     freedom: Each person must be able to enter the yard if it is empty (and the other is not
     trying to enter). By contrast, the producer–consumer protocol’s starvation-freedom
     property assumes continuous cooperation from both parties.
         Here is how we reason about this protocol:
     • Mutual exclusion: Instead of a proof by contradiction, as we used earlier, we use
       an inductive “state machine”-based proof. Think of the stringed can as a machine
       that repeatedly transitions between two states, up and down. To show that mutual
       exclusion always holds, we must check that it holds initially, and continues to hold
       when transitioning from one state to the other.
       Initially, the yard is empty, so mutual exclusion holds whether the can is up or
       down. Next, we check that mutual exclusion, once established, continues to hold
       when the state changes. Suppose the can is down. Bob is not in the yard, and from
                                               1.4 The readers–writers problem             11

  the protocol we can see that he does not enter the yard while the can is down,
  so only the pets may be present. The can is not raised until the pets have left the
  yard, so when the can is raised, the pets are not present. While the can is up, from
  the protocol we can see that the pets do not enter the yard, so only Bob may be
  present. The can is not knocked down until Bob has left the yard. These are all the
  possible transitions, so our protocol satisfies mutual exclusion.
• Starvation-freedom: Suppose the protocol is not starvation-free: it happens that
  the pets are hungry, there is no food, and Bob is trying to provide food, but he
  does not succeed. If the can is up, then Bob will provide food and knock over the
  can, allowing the pets to eat. If the can is down, then since the pets are hungry,
  Alice will eventually raise the can, bringing us back to the previous case.
• Producer–consumer: The mutual exclusion property implies that the pets and Bob
  will never be in the yard together. Bob will not enter the yard until Alice raises the
  can, which she will do only when there is no more food. Similarly, the pets will
  not enter the yard until Bob lowers the can, which he will do only after placing
  the food.
    Like the earlier mutual exclusion protocol, this protocol exhibits waiting: If Bob
deposits food in the yard and then goes on vacation without resetting the can, then
the pets may starve despite the presence of food.
    Turning our attention back to computer science, the producer–consumer problem
appears in almost all parallel and distributed systems. It is the way in which threads
place data in communication buffers to be read or transmitted across a network inter-
connect or shared bus.

1.4 The readers–writers problem
Bob and Alice decide they love their pets so much they need to communicate simple
messages about them. Bob puts up a billboard in front of his house. The billboard
holds a sequence of large tiles, each tile holding a single letter. Bob, at his leisure,
posts a message on the bulletin board by lifting one tile at a time. Alice, whose eye-
sight is poor, reads the message at her leisure by looking at the billboard through a
telescope, one tile at a time.
    This may sound like a workable system, but it is not. Imagine that Bob posts the
message

sell the cat

Alice, looking through her telescope, transcribes the message

sell the

At this point Bob takes down the tiles and writes out a new message

wash the dog

     Alice, continuing to scan across the billboard, transcribes the message

     sell the dog

     You can imagine the rest.
        This readers–writers problem has some straightforward solutions:
     • Alice and Bob can use the mutual exclusion protocol to make sure that Alice reads
       only complete sentences. She might still miss a sentence, however.
     • They can use the can-and-string protocol, with Bob producing sentences and Alice
       consuming them.
         If this problem is so easy to solve, then why do we bring it up? Both the mutual
     exclusion and producer–consumer protocols require waiting: If one participant is sub-
     jected to an unexpected delay, then so is the other. In the context of shared-memory
     multiprocessors, a solution to the readers–writers problem is a way of allowing a
     thread to capture an instantaneous view of several memory locations. Capturing such
     a view without waiting, that is, without preventing other threads from modifying these
     locations while they are being read, is a powerful tool that can be used for backups,
     debugging, and in many other situations. Surprisingly, the readers–writers problem
     does have solutions that do not require waiting. We examine several such solutions
     in later chapters.

     1.5 The harsh realities of parallelization
     Here is why multiprocessor programming is so much fun. In an ideal world, upgrad-
     ing from a uniprocessor to an n-way multiprocessor should provide about an n-fold
     increase in computational power. In practice, sadly, this (almost) never happens. The
     primary reason is that most real-world computational problems cannot be effectively
     parallelized without incurring the costs of interprocessor communication and coordi-
     nation.
         Consider five friends who decide to paint a five-room house. If all the rooms are
     the same size, then it makes sense to assign each friend to paint one room. As long
     as everyone paints at about the same rate, we would get a five-fold speedup over the
     single-painter case. The task becomes more complicated if the rooms are of different
     sizes. For example, if one room is twice the size of the others, then the five painters
     will not achieve a five-fold speedup because the overall completion time is dominated
     by the one room that takes the longest to paint.
         This kind of analysis is very important for concurrent computation. The formula
     we need is called Amdahl’s law. It captures the notion that the extent to which we can
     speed up any complex job (not just painting) is limited by how much of the job must
     be executed sequentially.
         Define the speedup S of a job to be the ratio between the time it takes one pro-
     cessor to complete the job (as measured by a wall clock) versus the time it takes
                                         1.5 The harsh realities of parallelization        13

n concurrent processors to complete the same job. Amdahl’s law characterizes the
maximum speedup S that can be achieved by n processors collaborating on an appli-
cation, where p is the fraction of the job that can be executed in parallel. Assume,
for simplicity, that it takes (normalized) time 1 for a single processor to complete the
job. With n concurrent processors, the parallel part takes time p/n and the sequential
part takes time 1 − p. Overall, the parallelized computation takes time
                                                  p
                                        1−p+        .
                                                  n
Amdahl’s law says that the maximum speedup, that is, the ratio between the sequen-
tial (single-processor) time and the parallel time, is
                                              1
                                    S=              p.
                                         1−p+
                                                    n
To illustrate the implications of Amdahl’s law, consider our room painting example.
Assume that each small room is one unit, and the single large room is two units.
Assigning one painter (processor) per room means that five of six units can be painted
in parallel, implying that p = 5/6, and 1 − p = 1/6. Amdahl’s law states that the
resulting speedup is
                                    1      1
                         S=        p = 1/6 + 1/6 = 3.
                              1−p+
                                   n
Alarmingly, five painters working on five rooms where one room is twice the size of
the others yields only a three-fold speedup.
    It can get worse. Imagine we have 10 rooms and 10 painters, where each painter
is assigned to a room, but one room (out of 10) is twice the size of the others. Here is
the resulting speedup:
                                         1
                               S=               = 5.5.
                                    1/11 + 1/11
With even a small imbalance, applying ten painters to a job yields only a five-fold
speedup, roughly half of what one might naïvely expect.
    The solution, therefore, as with our earlier prime printing problem, seems to be
that as soon as one painter’s work on a room is done, he/she helps others to paint the
remaining room. The issue, of course, is that this shared painting of the room will
require coordination among painters. But can we afford to avoid it?
    Here is what Amdahl’s law tells us about the utilization of multiprocessor ma-
chines. Some computational problems are “embarrassingly parallel”: they can easily
be divided into components that can be executed concurrently. Such problems some-
times arise in scientific computing or in graphics, but rarely in systems. In general,
however, for a given problem and a 10-processor machine, Amdahl’s law says that
even if we manage to parallelize 90% of the solution, but not the remaining 10%,

     then we end up with a five-fold speedup, not a 10-fold speedup. In other words, the
     remaining 10% that we did not parallelize cut our utilization of the machine in half.
     It seems worthwhile to invest effort to derive as much parallelism from the remaining
     10% as possible, even if it is difficult. Typically, it is hard because these additional
     parallel parts involve substantial communication and coordination. A major focus of
     this book is understanding the tools and techniques that allow programmers to effec-
     tively program the parts of the code that require coordination and synchronization,
     because the gains made on these parts may have a profound impact on performance.
         Returning to the prime number printing program of Fig. 1.2, let us revisit the three
     main lines of code:
     i = counter . getAndIncrement (); // take next untaken number
     if ( isPrime (i ))
       print ( i );
     It would have been simpler to have threads perform these three lines atomically, that
     is, in a single mutually exclusive block. Instead, only the call to getAndIncrement() is
     atomic. This approach makes sense when we consider the implications of Amdahl’s
     law: It is important to minimize the granularity of sequential code, in this case, the
     code accessed using mutual exclusion. Moreover, it is important to implement mutual
     exclusion in an effective way, since the communication and coordination around the
     mutually exclusive shared counter can substantially affect the performance of our
     program as a whole.

     1.6 Parallel programming
     For many of the applications we wish to parallelize, significant parts can easily be
     determined as executable in parallel because they do not require any form of coordi-
     nation or communication. However, at the time this book is being written, there is no
     cookbook recipe for identifying these parts. This is where the application designer
     must use his or her accumulated understanding of the algorithm being parallelized.
     Luckily, in many cases it is obvious how to identify such parts. The more substantial
     problem, the one which this book addresses, is how to deal with the remaining parts
     of the program. As noted earlier, these are the parts that cannot be parallelized easily
     because the program must access shared data and requires interprocess coordination
     and communication in an essential way.
         The goal of this text is to expose the reader to core ideas behind modern coordina-
     tion paradigms and concurrent data structures. We present the reader with a unified,
     comprehensive picture of the elements that are key to effective multiprocessor pro-
     gramming, ranging from basic principles to best-practice engineering techniques.
         Multiprocessor programming poses many challenges, ranging from grand intel-
     lectual issues to subtle engineering tricks. We tackle these challenges using succes-
     sive refinement, starting with an idealized model in which mathematical concerns are
     paramount, and gradually moving on to more pragmatic models, where we increas-
     ingly focus on basic engineering principles.
                                                                  1.7 Chapter notes         15

    For example, the first problem we consider is mutual exclusion, the oldest and still
one of the fundamental problems in the field. We begin with a mathematical perspec-
tive, analyzing the computability and correctness properties of various algorithms on
an idealized architecture. The algorithms themselves, while classical, are not practi-
cal for modern multicore architectures. Nevertheless, learning how to reason about
such idealized algorithms is an important step toward learning how to reason about
more realistic (and more complex) algorithms. It is particularly important to learn
how to reason about subtle liveness issues such as starvation and deadlock.
    Once we understand how to reason about such algorithms in general, we turn
our attention to more realistic contexts. We explore a variety of algorithms and data
structures using different multiprocessor architectures with the goal of understanding
which are effective, and why.

1.7 Chapter notes
Most of the parable of Alice and Bob is adapted from Leslie Lamport’s invited lec-
ture at the 1984 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing [104].
The readers–writers problem is a classical synchronization problem that has received
attention in numerous papers over the past 20 years. Amdahl’s law is due to Gene
Amdahl, a parallel processing pioneer [9].

1.8 Exercises
Exercise 1.1. The dining philosophers problem was invented by E.W. Dijkstra, a con-
currency pioneer, to clarify the notions of deadlock- and starvation-freedom. Imagine
five philosophers who spend their lives just thinking and feasting on rice. They sit
around a circular table, illustrated in Fig. 1.5. However, there are only five chopsticks

FIGURE 1.5
Traditional dining table arrangement according to Dijkstra.

     (forks, in the original formulation). Each philosopher thinks. When he gets hungry,
     he picks up the two chopsticks closest to him. If he can pick up both chopsticks, he
     can eat for a while. After a philosopher finishes eating, he puts down the chopsticks
     and again starts to think.
     1. Write a program to simulate the behavior of the philosophers, where each philoso-
        pher is a thread and the chopsticks are shared objects. Note that you must prevent
        a situation where two philosophers hold the same chopstick at the same time.
     2. Amend your program so that it never reaches a state where philosophers are dead-
        locked, that is, it is never the case that every philosopher holds one chopstick and
        is stuck waiting for another to get the second chopstick.
     3. Amend your program so that no philosopher ever starves.
     4. Write a program to provide a starvation-free solution for n philosophers for any
        natural number n.

     Exercise 1.2. For each of the following, state whether it is a safety or liveness prop-
     erty. Identify the bad or good thing of interest.
      1. Patrons are served in the order they arrive.
      2. Anything that can go wrong, will go wrong.
      3. No one wants to die.
      4. Two things are certain: death and taxes.
      5. As soon as one is born, one starts dying.
      6. If an interrupt occurs, then a message is printed within one second.
      7. If an interrupt occurs, then a message is printed.
      8. I will finish what Darth Vader has started.
      9. The cost of living never decreases.
     10. You can always tell a Harvard man.

     Exercise 1.3. In the producer–consumer fable, we assumed that Bob can see whether
     the can on Alice’s windowsill is up or down. Design a producer–consumer protocol
     using cans and strings that works even if Bob cannot see the state of Alice’s can (this
     is how real-world interrupt bits work).

     Exercise 1.4. You are one of P recently arrested prisoners. The warden, a deranged
     computer scientist, makes the following announcement:
        You may meet together today and plan a strategy, but after today you will be in
        isolated cells and have no communication with one another.
        I have set up a “switch room” which contains a light switch, which is either on or
        off. The switch is not connected to anything.
        Every now and then, I will select one prisoner at random to enter the “switch
        room.” This prisoner may throw the switch (from on to off, or vice versa), or may
        leave the switch unchanged. Nobody else will ever enter this room.
        Each prisoner will visit the switch room arbitrarily often. More precisely, for any
        N , eventually each of you will visit the switch room at least N times.
                                                                              1.8 Exercises      17

   At any time, any of you may declare: “We have all visited the switch room at least
   once.” If the claim is correct, I will set you free. If the claim is incorrect, I will feed
   all of you to the crocodiles. Choose wisely!

• Devise a winning strategy when you know that the initial state of the switch is off.
• Devise a winning strategy when you do not know whether the initial state of the
  switch is on or off.

Hint: The prisoners need not all do the same thing.

Exercise 1.5. The same warden has a different idea. He orders the prisoners to stand
in line, and places red and blue hats on each of their heads. No prisoner knows the
color of his own hat, or the color of any hat behind him, but he can see the hats of
the prisoners in front. The warden starts at the back of the line and asks each prisoner
to guess the color of his own hat. The prisoner can answer only “red” or “blue.” If
he gives the wrong answer, he is fed to the crocodiles. If he answers correctly, he is
freed. Each prisoner can hear the answer of the prisoners behind him, but cannot tell
whether that prisoner was correct.
    The prisoners are allowed to consult and agree on a strategy beforehand (while
the warden listens in) but after being lined up, they cannot communicate any other
way besides their answer of “red” or “blue.”
    Devise a strategy that allows at least P − 1 of P prisoners to be freed.

Exercise 1.6. A financial risk management program is sped up by making 85% of
the application concurrent, while 15% remains sequential. However, it turns out that
during a concurrent execution the number of cache misses grows in a way dependent
on N , the number of cores used. The dependency is CacheMiss = N +10    N
                                                                            . Profiling
the program reveals that 20% of the operations performed are memory accesses for
both the sequential and parallel parts. The cost of other operations, including cache
accesses, is 1 unit, and accessing memory has a cost of 3N + 11 units for the par-
allel part and a cost of 14 for the sequential part. Compute the optimal number of
processors on which the program should run.

Exercise 1.7. You are given a program that includes a method M that executes se-
quentially. Use Amdahl’s law to resolve the following questions.
• Suppose M accounts for 30% of the program’s execution time. What is the limit
  for the overall speedup that can be achieved on an n-processor machine?
• Suppose M accounts for 40% of the program’s execution time. You hire a pro-
  grammer to replace M with M ? , which has a k-fold speedup over M. What value
  of k yields an overall speedup of 2 for the whole program?
• Suppose M ? , the parallel replacement for M, has a four-fold speedup. What frac-
  tion of the overall execution time must M account for if replacing it with M ?
  doubles the program’s speedup?
You may assume that the program, when executed sequentially, takes unit time.

     Exercise 1.8. Running your application on two processors yields a speedup of S2 .
     Use Amdahl’s law to derive a formula for Sn , the speedup on n processors, in terms
     of n and S2 .

     Exercise 1.9. You have a choice between buying one uniprocessor that executes five
     zillion instructions per second or a 10-processor multiprocessor where each processor
     executes one zillion instructions per second. Using Amdahl’s law, explain how you
     would decide which to buy for a particular application.
