                                                                                            CHAPTER

Concurrent objects
                                                                                             3
The behavior of concurrent objects is best described through their safety and liveness
properties, often called correctness and progress. In this chapter, we examine various
ways of specifying correctness and progress.
    All notions of correctness for concurrent objects are based on some notion of
equivalence with sequential behavior, but different notions are appropriate for dif-
ferent systems. We examine three correctness conditions. Sequential consistency is
a strong condition, often useful for describing standalone systems such as hardware
memory interfaces. Linearizability is an even stronger condition that supports com-
position: It is useful for describing systems composed from linearizable components.
Quiescent consistency is appropriate for applications that require high performance
at the cost of placing relatively weak constraints on object behavior.
    Along a different dimension, different method implementations provide different
progress guarantees. Some are blocking, where the delay of one thread can prevent
other threads from making progress; some are nonblocking, where the delay of a
thread cannot delay other threads indefinitely.

3.1 Concurrency and correctness
What does it mean for a concurrent object to be correct? Fig. 3.1 shows a simple
lock-based concurrent “first-in-first-out” (FIFO) queue. The enq() and deq() meth-
ods synchronize using a mutual exclusion lock of the kind studied in Chapter 2. We
immediately intuit that this implementation should be correct: Because each method
holds an exclusive lock the entire time it accesses and updates fields, the method calls
take effect sequentially.
    This idea is illustrated in Fig. 3.2, which shows an execution in which thread A
enqueues a, B enqueues b, and C dequeues twice, first throwing EmptyException, and
second returning b. Overlapping intervals indicate concurrent method calls. All the
method calls overlap in time. In this figure, as in others, time moves from left to right,
and dark lines indicate intervals. The intervals for a single thread are displayed along
a single horizontal line. When convenient, the thread name appears on the left. A bar
represents an interval with a fixed start and stop time. A bar with dotted lines on the
right represents an interval with a fixed start-time and an unknown stop-time. The
label “q.enq(x)” means that a thread enqueues item x at object q, while “q.deq(x)”
means that the thread dequeues item x from object q.
The Art of Multiprocessor Programming. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-415950-1.00012-4
Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                      49

     1    class LockBasedQueue<T> {
     2      int head, tail;
     3      T[] items;
     4      Lock lock;
     5      public LockBasedQueue(int capacity) {
     6        head = 0; tail = 0;
     7        lock = new ReentrantLock();
     8        items = (T[])new Object[capacity];
     9      }
     10     public void enq(T x) throws FullException {
     11       lock.lock();
     12       try {
     13         if (tail - head == items.length)
     14           throw new FullException();
     15         items[tail % items.length] = x;
     16         tail++;
     17       } finally {
     18         lock.unlock();
     19       }
     20     }
     21     public T deq() throws EmptyException {
     22       lock.lock();
     23       try {
     24         if (tail == head)
     25           throw new EmptyException();
     26         T x = items[head % items.length];
     27         head++;
     28         return x;
     29       } finally {
     30         lock.unlock();
     31       }
     32     }
     33   }

          FIGURE 3.1
          A lock-based FIFO queue. The queue’s items are kept in an array items, where head is the
          index of the next item (if any) to dequeue, and tail is the index of the first open array slot
          (modulo the capacity). The lock field contains a lock that ensures that methods are
          mutually exclusive. Initially head and tail are zero, and the queue is empty. If enq() finds
          the queue is full (i.e., head and tail differ by the queue capacity), then it throws an
          exception. Otherwise, there is room, so enq() stores the item at array entry for tail, and
          then increments tail. The deq() method works in a symmetric way.

             The timeline shows which thread holds the lock. Here, C acquires the lock, ob-
          serves the queue to be empty, releases the lock, and throws an exception. It does not
          modify the queue. B acquires the lock, inserts b, and releases the lock. A acquires the
          lock, inserts a, and releases the lock. C reacquires the lock, dequeues b, releases the
                                                3.1 Concurrency and correctness                51

FIGURE 3.2
Lock-based queue execution. Here, C acquires the lock, observes the queue to be empty,
releases the lock, and throws an exception. B acquires the lock, inserts b, and releases the
lock. A acquires the lock, inserts a, and releases the lock. C reacquires the lock,
dequeues b, releases the lock, and returns b.

lock, and returns b. Each of these calls takes effect sequentially, and we can easily
verify that dequeuing b before a is consistent with our understanding of sequential
FIFO queue behavior.
    Unfortunately, it follows from Amdahl’s law (Chapter 1) that concurrent objects
whose methods hold exclusive locks, and therefore effectively execute one after the
other, are less desirable than ones with finer-grained locking or no locks at all. We
therefore need a way to specify the behavior required of concurrent objects, and to
reason about their implementations, without relying on method-level locking.
    Consider the alternative concurrent queue implementation in Fig. 3.3. It has al-
most the same internal representation as the lock-based queue of Fig. 3.1; the only
difference is the absence of a lock. We claim that this implementation is correct pro-
vided there is only a single enqueuer and a single dequeuer. But it is no longer easy
to explain why. If the queue supported concurrent enqueues or concurrent dequeues,
it would not even be clear what it means for a queue to be FIFO.
    The lock-based queue example illustrates a useful principle: It is easier to reason
about the behavior of concurrent objects if we can somehow map their concurrent
executions to sequential ones, and otherwise limit our reasoning to these sequential
executions. This principle is the key to the correctness properties introduced in this
chapter. Therefore, we begin by considering specifications of sequential objects.

     1    class WaitFreeQueue<T> {
     2      int head = 0, tail = 0;
     3      T[] items;
     4      public WaitFreeQueue(int capacity) {
     5        items = (T[]) new Object[capacity];
     6      }
     7      public void enq(T x) throws FullException {
     8        if (tail - head == items.length)
     9          throw new FullException();
     10       items[tail % items.length] = x;
     11       tail++;
     12     }
     13     public T deq() throws EmptyException {
     14       if (tail - head == 0)
     15         throw new EmptyException();
     16       T x = items[head % items.length];
     17       head++;
     18       return x;
     19     }
     20   }

          FIGURE 3.3
          A single-enqueuer/single-dequeuer FIFO queue. The structure is identical to that of the
          lock-based FIFO queue, except that there is no need for the lock to coordinate access.

          3.2 Sequential objects
          An object in languages such as Java and C++ is a container for data and a set of meth-
          ods, which are the only way to manipulate those data. Each object has a class, which
          defines the object’s methods and how they behave. An object has a well-defined state
          (for example, the FIFO queue’s current sequence of items). There are many ways to
          describe how an object’s methods behave, ranging from formal specifications to plain
          English. The application program interface (API) documentation that we use every
          day lies somewhere in between.
              The API documentation typically says something like the following: If the ob-
          ject is in such-and-such a state before you call the method, then the object will be
          in some other state when the method returns, and the call will return a particular
          value, or throw a particular exception. This kind of description divides naturally into
          a precondition, which describes the object’s state before invoking the method, and a
          postcondition, which describes the object’s state and return value when the method
          returns. A change to an object’s state is sometimes called a side effect.
              For example, a FIFO queue might be described as follows: The class provides two
          methods, enq() and deq(). The queue state is a sequence of items, possibly empty. If
          the queue state is a sequence q (precondition), then a call to enq(z) leaves the queue
          in state q · z (postcondition with side effect), where “·” denotes concatenation. If the
                                                               3.3 Sequential consistency                53

queue object is nonempty, say, a · q (precondition), then the deq() method removes
the sequence’s first element a, leaving the queue in state q, and returns this element
(postcondition). If, instead, the queue object is empty (precondition), the method
throws EmptyException and leaves the queue state unchanged (postcondition, no side
effect).
     This style of documentation, called a sequential specification, is so familiar that
it is easy to overlook how elegant and powerful it is. The length of the object’s docu-
mentation is linear in the number of methods, because each method can be described
in isolation. There are a vast number of potential interactions among methods, and all
such interactions are characterized succinctly by the methods’ side effects on the ob-
ject state. The object’s documentation describes the object state before and after each
call, and we can safely ignore any intermediate states that the object may assume
while the method call is in progress.
     Defining objects in terms of preconditions and postconditions makes sense in a
sequential model of computation, where a single thread manipulates a collection of
objects. But this familiar style of documentation fails for objects shared by multiple
threads. If an object’s methods can be invoked concurrently by multiple threads, then
method calls can overlap in time, and it no longer makes sense to talk about their
order. What does it mean, for example, if x and y are enqueued onto a FIFO queue
during overlapping intervals? Which will be dequeued first? Can we continue to de-
scribe methods in isolation, via preconditions and postconditions, or must we provide
explicit descriptions of every possible interaction among every possible collection of
concurrent method calls?
     Even the notion of an object’s state becomes confusing. In a single-threaded pro-
gram, an object must assume a meaningful state only between method calls.1 In a
multithreaded program, however, overlapping method calls may be in progress at
every instant, so a concurrent object might never be between method calls. Every
method call must be prepared to encounter an object state that reflects the incomplete
effects of concurrent method calls, a problem that does not arise in single-threaded
programs.

3.3 Sequential consistency
One way to develop an intuition about how concurrent objects should behave is to
review examples of concurrent computations involving simple objects, and decide,
in each case, whether the behavior agrees with our intuition about how the objects
should behave.
    Method calls take time. A method call is the interval that starts with an invocation
event and continues until the corresponding response event, if any. Method calls by

1 There is an exception: Care must be taken if one method partially changes an object’s state and then
calls another method of that same object.

     FIGURE 3.4
     Why each method call should appear to take effect in one-at-a-time order. Two threads
     concurrently write −3 and 7 to a shared register r. Later, one thread reads r and returns the
     value −7. We expect to find either 7 or −3 in the register, not a mixture of both.

     FIGURE 3.5
     Why method calls should appear to take effect in program order. This behavior is not
     acceptable because the value the thread read is not the last value it wrote (and no other
     thread writes to the register).

     concurrent threads may overlap, while method calls by a single thread are always
     sequential (nonoverlapping, one-after-the-other). We say a method call is pending if
     its invocation event has occurred, but its response event has not.
          For historical reasons, the object version of a read–write memory location is
     called a register (see Chapter 4). In Fig. 3.4, two threads concurrently write −3 and
     7 to a shared register r (as before, “r.read(x)” means that a thread reads value x from
     register object r, and similarly for “r.write(x)”). Later, one thread reads r and returns
     the value −7. This behavior is surprising. We expect to find either 7 or −3 in the
     register, not a mixture of both. This example suggests the following principle:

     Principle 3.3.1. Method calls should appear to happen in a one-at-a-time, sequential
     order.

         By itself, this principle is too weak to be useful. For example, it permits reads to
     always return the object’s initial state, even in sequential executions (i.e., executions
     in which method calls do not overlap). Or consider the execution in Fig. 3.5, in which
     a single thread writes 7 and then −3 to a shared register r. Later, it reads r and returns
     7. For some applications, this behavior might not be acceptable because the value the
     thread read is not the value it wrote most recently. The order in which a single thread
     issues method calls is called its program order. (Method calls by different threads are
     unrelated by program order.) In this example, we were surprised that operation calls
     did not take effect in program order. This example suggests the following principle:

     Principle 3.3.2. Method calls should appear to take effect in program order.
                                                        3.3 Sequential consistency             55

FIGURE 3.6
There are two possible sequential orders that can justify this execution. Both orders are
consistent with the method calls’ program order, and either one is enough to show that the
execution is sequentially consistent.

FIGURE 3.7
Sequential consistency versus real-time order. Thread A enqueues x, and later thread B
enqueues y, and finally A dequeues y. This execution may violate our intuitive notion of how
a FIFO queue should behave because the method call enqueuing x finishes before the
method call enqueuing y starts, so y is enqueued after x. But it is dequeued before x.
Nevertheless, this execution is sequentially consistent.

    This principle ensures that purely sequential computations behave the way we ex-
pect. Together, Principles 3.3.1 and 3.3.2 define sequential consistency, a correctness
condition that is widely used in the literature on multiprocessor synchronization.
    Sequential consistency requires that method calls act as if they occurred in a se-
quential order consistent with program order. That is, there is a way to order all the
method calls in any concurrent execution so that they (1) are consistent with program
order and (2) meet the object’s sequential specification. Multiple sequential orders
may satisfy these conditions. For example, in Fig. 3.6, thread A enqueues x while
thread B enqueues y, and then A dequeues y while B dequeues x. Two sequential
orders explain these results: (1) A enqueues x, B enqueues y, B dequeues x, and then
A dequeues y, or (2) B enqueues y, A enqueues x, A dequeues y, and then B de-
queues x. Both orders are consistent with the program order; either suffices to show
that the execution is sequentially consistent.

3.3.1 Sequential consistency versus real-time order
In Fig. 3.7, thread A enqueues x, and later B enqueues y, and finally A dequeues y.
This execution may violate our intuitive notion of how a FIFO queue should behave:

     The call enqueuing x finishes before the call enqueuing y starts, so y is enqueued
     after x. But it is dequeued before x. Nevertheless, this execution is sequentially con-
     sistent. Even though the call that enqueues x happens before the call that enqueues y,
     these calls are unrelated by program order, so sequential consistency is free to re-
     order them. When one operation completes before another begins, we say that the
     first operation precedes the second in the real-time order. This example shows that
     sequential consistency need not preserve the real-time order.
         One could argue whether it is acceptable to reorder method calls whose intervals
     do not overlap, even if they occur in different threads. For example, we might be
     unhappy if we deposit our paycheck on Monday, but the bank bounces our rent check
     the following Friday because it reordered our deposit after your withdrawal.

     3.3.2 Sequential consistency is nonblocking
     How much does sequential consistency limit concurrency? Specifically, under what
     circumstances does sequential consistency require one method call to block wait-
     ing for another to complete? Perhaps surprisingly, the answer is (essentially) never.
     More precisely, for any pending method call in a sequentially consistent concurrent
     execution, there is some sequentially consistent response, that is, a response to the
     invocation that could be given immediately without violating sequential consistency.
     We say that a correctness condition with this property is nonblocking. Sequential
     consistency is a nonblocking correctness condition.
         Note that this observation does not mean that it is easy to figure out a sequentially
     consistent response for a pending method call, only that the correctness condition
     itself does not stand in the way. The observation holds only for total methods, which

      REMARK 3.3.1
      The term nonblocking is used to denote several different notions. In this context,
      referring to correctness conditions, it means that for any pending call of a total
      method, there is a response that satisfies the correctness condition. In Section 3.8,
      referring to progress conditions, it means that a progress condition guarantees
      that the delay of one or more threads cannot prevent other threads from making
      progress. When referring to an object implementation, it means that the implemen-
      tation meets a nonblocking progress condition. (It may even be used with finer
      granularity, referring to an individual method of an object implementation that
      cannot be prevented from making progress by the delay of other threads.) In the
      systems literature, a nonblocking operation returns immediately without waiting
      for the operation to take effect, whereas a blocking operation does not return until
      the operation is complete. (Blocking is also used to describe a lock implementation
      that suspends a thread that tries to acquire a lock that is held by another thread,
      as opposed to spinning implementations, which we discuss in Chapter 7). Unfor-
      tunately, these various uses are all too well established to change, but it should be
      clear from the context which meaning is intended.
                                                         3.3 Sequential consistency          57

are defined for every object state (i.e., for any state on which a total method is in-
voked, there is some response allowed by the sequential specification). There is, of
course, no sequentially consistent response to a method call if there is no response
that satisfies the sequential specification. Our informal description of sequential con-
sistency thus far is not sufficient to capture this and other important details, such as
what it exactly means for an execution with pending method calls to be sequentially
consistent. We make this notion more precise in Section 3.6.

3.3.3 Compositionality
Any sufficiently complex system must be designed and implemented in a modular
fashion. Components are designed, implemented, and proved correct independently.
Each component makes a clear distinction between its implementation, which is
hidden, and its interface, which characterizes the guarantees it makes to the other
components. For example, if a concurrent object’s interface states that it is a sequen-
tially consistent FIFO queue, then users of the queue need not know anything about
how the queue is implemented. The result of composing individually correct compo-
nents that rely only on one another’s interfaces should itself be a correct system.
    A correctness property P is compositional if, whenever each object in the system
satisfies P, the system as a whole satisfies P. Compositionality is important because
it enables a system to be assembled easily from independently derived components.
A system based on a noncompositional correctness property cannot rely solely on its
components’ interfaces: Some kind of additional constraints are needed to ensure that
the components are actually compatible.
    Is sequential consistency compositional? That is, is the result of composing mul-
tiple sequentially consistent objects itself sequentially consistent? The answer, unfor-
tunately, is no. In Fig. 3.8, two threads, A and B, call enqueue and dequeue methods
for two queue objects, p and q. It is not hard to see that p and q are each sequentially
consistent: The sequence of method calls for p is the same as in the sequentially con-
sistent execution shown in Fig. 3.7, and the behavior of q is symmetric. Nevertheless,
the execution as a whole is not sequentially consistent.

FIGURE 3.8
Sequential consistency is not compositional. Two threads, A and B, call enqueue and
dequeue methods on two queue objects, p and q. It is not hard to see that p and q are
each sequentially consistent, yet the execution as a whole is not sequentially consistent.

        To see that there is no correct sequential execution of these methods calls that is
     consistent with their program order, assume, by way of contradiction, that there is
     such an execution. We use the following shorthand: ?p.enq(x) A? → ?p.deq()x B?
     means that any sequential execution must order A’s enqueue of x at p before B’s
     dequeue of x at p, and so on. Because p is FIFO and A dequeues y from p, y must
     have been enqueued at p before x:
                                 p.enq(y) B? → ?p.enq(x) A?.

     Similarly, x must have been enqueued onto q before y:
                                  q.enq(x) A? → ?q.enq(y) B?.

     But program order implies that
             p.enq(x) A? → ?q.enq(x) A?        and   ?q.enq(y) B? → ?p.enq(y) B?.

     Together, these orderings form a cycle.

     3.4 Linearizability
     Sequential consistency has a serious drawback: it is not compositional. That is, the
     result of composing sequentially consistent components is not itself necessarily se-
     quentially consistent. To fix this shortcoming, we replace the requirement that method
     calls appear to happen in program order with the following stronger constraint:
     Principle 3.4.1. Each method call should appear to take effect instantaneously at
     some moment between its invocation and response.
        This principle states that the real-time order of method calls must be preserved.
     We call this correctness property linearizability. Every linearizable execution is se-
     quentially consistent, but not vice versa.

     3.4.1 Linearization points
     The usual way to show that a concurrent object implementation is linearizable is
     to identify for each method a linearization point, an instant when the method takes
     effect. We say that a method is linearized at its linearization point. For lock-based
     implementations, any point within each method’s critical section can serve as its lin-
     earization point. For implementations that do not use locks, the linearization point is
     typically a single step where the effects of the method call become visible to other
     method calls.
         For example, recall the single-enqueuer/single-dequeuer queue of Fig. 3.3. This
     implementation has no critical sections, and yet we can identify linearization points
     for its methods. For example, if a deq() method returns an item, its linearization point
     is when the head field is updated (line 17). If the queue is empty, the deq() method is
     linearized when it reads the tail field (line 14). The enq() method is similar.
                                                       3.5 Quiescent consistency           59

3.4.2 Linearizability versus sequential consistency
Like sequential consistency, linearizability is nonblocking: There is a linearizable
response to any pending call of a total method. In this way, linearizability does not
limit concurrency.
    Threads that communicate only through a single shared object (e.g., the memory
of a shared-memory multiprocessor) cannot distinguish between sequential consis-
tency and linearizability. Only an external observer, who can see that one operation
precedes another in the real-time order, can tell that a sequentially consistent object
is not linearizable. For this reason, the difference between sequential consistency and
linearizability is sometimes called external consistency. Sequential consistency is a
good way to describe standalone systems, where composition is not an issue. How-
ever, if the threads share multiple objects, these objects may be external observers for
each other, as we saw in Fig. 3.8.
    Unlike sequential consistency, linearizability is compositional: The result of com-
posing linearizable objects is linearizable. For this reason, linearizability is a good
way to describe components of large systems, where components must be imple-
mented and verified independently. Because we are interested in systems that com-
pose, most (but not all) data structures considered in this book are linearizable.

3.5 Quiescent consistency
For some systems, implementors may be willing to trade consistency for perfor-
mance. That is, we may relax the consistency condition to allow cheaper, faster,
and/or more efficient implementations. One way to relax consistency is to enforce
ordering only when an object is quiescent, that is, when it has no pending method
calls. Instead of Principles 3.3.2 and 3.4.1, we would adopt the following principle:

Principle 3.5.1. Method calls separated by a period of quiescence should appear to
take effect in their real-time order.

    For example, suppose A and B concurrently enqueue x and y in a FIFO queue.
The queue becomes quiescent, and then C enqueues z. We are not able to predict the
relative order of x and y in the queue, but we do know they are ahead of z.
    Together, Principles 3.3.1 and 3.5.1 define a correctness property called quies-
cent consistency. Informally, it says that any time an object becomes quiescent, the
execution so far is equivalent to some sequential execution of the completed calls.
    As an example of quiescent consistency, consider the shared counter from Chap-
ter 1. A quiescently consistent shared counter would return numbers, not necessarily
in the order of the getAndIncrement() requests, but always without duplicating or
omitting a number. The execution of a quiescently consistent object is somewhat like
a game of musical chairs: At any point, the music might stop, that is, the state could
become quiescent. At that point, each pending method call must return an index so
that all the indices together meet the specification of a sequential counter, implying

     no duplicated or omitted numbers. In other words, a quiescently consistent counter is
     an index distribution mechanism, useful as a “loop counter” in programs that do not
     care about the order in which indices are issued.

     3.5.1 Properties of quiescent consistency
     Note that sequential consistency and quiescent consistency are incomparable: There
     exist sequentially consistent executions that are not quiescently consistent, and vice
     versa. Quiescent consistency does not necessarily preserve program order, and se-
     quential consistency is unaffected by quiescent periods. On the other hand, lineariz-
     ability is stronger than both quiescent consistency and sequential consistency. That
     is, a linearizable object is both quiescently consistent and sequentially consistent.
          Like sequential consistency and linearizability, quiescent consistency is non-
     blocking: Any pending call to a total method in a quiescently consistent execution
     can be completed.
          Quiescent consistency is compositional: A system composed of quiescently con-
     sistent objects is itself quiescently consistent. It follows that quiescently consistent
     objects can be composed to construct more complex quiescently consistent objects.
     It is interesting to consider whether we could build useful systems using quiescent
     consistency rather than linearizability as the fundamental correctness property, and
     how the design of such systems would differ from existing system designs.

     3.6 Formal definitions
     We now consider more precise definitions. We focus on linearizability, since it is the
     property most often used in this book. We leave it as an exercise to provide analogous
     definitions for quiescent consistency and sequential consistency.
         Informally, a concurrent object is linearizable if each method call appears to take
     effect instantaneously at some moment between that method’s invocation and return
     events. This statement suffices for most informal reasoning, but a more precise for-
     mulation is needed to cover some tricky cases (such as method calls that have not
     returned), and for more rigorous styles of argument.

     3.6.1 Histories
     We model the observable behavior of an execution of a concurrent system by a se-
     quence of events called a history, where an event is an invocation or response of a
     method. We write a method invocation as ?x.m(a ∗ ) A?, where x is an object, m is a
     method name, a ∗ is a sequence of arguments, and A is a thread. We write a method
     response as ?x : t (r ∗ ) A?, where t is either OK or an exception name, and r ∗ is a
     sequence of result values.
        An invocation and a response match if they name the same object and thread. An
     invocation in H is pending if no matching response follows the invocation. A method
                                                                   3.6 Formal definitions            61

call in a history H is a pair consisting of an invocation and either the next matching
response in H or a special ⊥ value (pronounced “bottom”) if the invocation is pend-
ing (i.e., if there is no subsequent matching response). We say that a method call is
pending if its invocation is pending, and that it is complete otherwise. A history is
complete if all its method calls are complete. For a history H , we denote the subse-
quence of H consisting of all events of complete method calls (i.e., eliding all the
pending invocations of H ) by complete(H ).
    The interval of a method call in a history H is the history’s sequence of events
starting from its invocation and ending with its response, or the suffix of H starting
from its invocation if the method call is pending. Two method calls overlap if their
intervals overlap.
    A history is sequential if its first event is an invocation, and each invocation,
except possibly the last, is followed immediately by a matching response, and each
response is immediately preceded by an invocation. No method calls overlap in a
sequential history, and a sequential history has at most one pending invocation.
    A subhistory of a history H is a subsequence of H . Sometimes we focus on a
single thread or object: A thread subhistory, H |A (“H at A”), of a history H is the
subsequence of all events in H whose thread names are A. An object subhistory H |x
is similarly defined for an object x. We require each thread to complete each method
call before calling another method: A history H is well formed if each thread sub-
history is sequential. Henceforth, we consider only well-formed histories. Although
thread subhistories of a well-formed history are always sequential, object subhistories
need not be; method calls to the same object may overlap in a well-formed history.
Finally, because what matters in the end is how each thread views the history, we
say that two histories are equivalent if every thread has the same thread subhistory in
both histories; that is, H and H ? are equivalent if H |A = H ? |A for every thread A.
    How can we tell whether a concurrent object is correct? Or, said differently, how
do we define correctness for a concurrent object? The basic idea is to require a concur-
rent execution to be equivalent, in some sense, to some sequential history; the exact
sense of equivalence is different for different correctness properties. We assume that
we can tell whether a sequential object is correct, that is, whether a sequential object
history is a legal history for the object’s class. A sequential specification for an object
is just a set of legal sequential histories for the object. A sequential history H is legal
if each object subhistory is legal for that object.
    A method m of an object x is total if for every finite complete history H in the se-
quential specification of x and every invocation ?x.m(a ∗ ) A? of m, there is a response
 x : t (r ∗ ) A? such that H · ?x.m(a ∗ ) A? · ?x : t (r ∗ ) A? is in the sequential specification
of x. A method is partial if it is not total.

3.6.2 Linearizability
A key concept in defining linearizability is the real-time order of a history. Recall
that a (strict) partial order → on a set X is a relation that is irreflexive and transitive.
That is, it is never true that x → x, and whenever x → y and y → z, then x → z.

     Note that there may be distinct x and y such that neither x → y nor y → x. A total
     order < on X is a partial order such that for all distinct x and y in X, either x < y or
     y < x.
        Any partial order can be extended to a total order.
     Fact 3.6.1. If → is a partial order on X, then there exists a total order < on X such
     that if x → y then x < y.
          We say that a method call m0 precedes a method call m1 in history H if m0
     finishes before m1 starts, that is, if m0 ’s response event occurs before m1 ’s invocation
     event in H . This notion is important enough to introduce some shorthand notation:
     Given a history H containing method calls m0 and m1 , we write m0 →H m1 if m0
     precedes m1 in H . We leave it as an exercise to show that →H is a partial order. Note
     that if H is sequential, then →H is a total order. Given a history H and an object x
     such that H |x contains method calls m0 and m1 , when H is clear from the context,
     we write m0 →x m1 if m0 precedes m1 in H |x.
          For linearizability, the basic rule is that if one method call precedes another, then
     the earlier call must take effect before the later call (each call must linearize within
     its interval, and the interval of the earlier interval is entirely in front of the interval of
     the later call). By contrast, if two method calls overlap, then their order is ambiguous,
     and we are free to order them in any convenient way.
     Definition 3.6.2. A legal sequential history S is a linearization of a history H if H
     can be extended to a history H ? by appending zero or more responses such that:
     L1 complete(H ? ) is equivalent to S, and
     L2 if method call m0 precedes method call m1 in H , then the same is true in S (i.e.,
         m0 →H mq implies m0 →S m1 ).
     H is linearizable if there is a linearization of H .
         Informally, extending H to H ? captures the idea that some pending invocations
     may have taken effect, even though their responses have not yet been returned to the
     caller. Fig. 3.9 illustrates the notion: We must complete the pending enq(x) method
     call to justify the deq() call that returns x. The second condition says that if one
     method call precedes another in the original history, then that ordering must be pre-
     served in the linearization.

     FIGURE 3.9
     The pending enq(x) method call must take effect early to justify the deq() call that returns x.
                                                                     3.6 Formal definitions         63

3.6.3 Linearizability is compositional
Linearizability is compositional.

Theorem 3.6.3. H is linearizable if, and only if, for each object x, H |x is lineariz-
able.
Proof. The “only if” part is left as an exercise.
     For each object x, pick a linearization of H |x. Let Rx be the set of responses
appended to H |x to construct that linearization, and let →x be the corresponding lin-
earization order. Let H ? be the history constructed by appending to H each response
in Rx (the order in which they are appended does not matter).
     We argue by induction on the number of method calls in H ? . For the base case, if
H ? contains no method calls, we are done. Otherwise, assume the claim for every H ?
containing fewer than k ≥ 1 method calls. For each object x, consider the last method
call in H ? |x. One of these calls m must be maximal with respect to →H ; that is,
there is no m? such that m →H m? . Let G? be the history defined by removing m from
H ? . Because m is maximal, H ? is equivalent to G? · m. By the induction hypothesis,
G? is linearizable to a sequential history S ? , and both H ? and H are linearizable to
S ? · m.

3.6.4 Linearizability is nonblocking
Linearizability is a nonblocking property: A pending invocation of a total method is
never required to wait for another pending invocation to complete.

Theorem 3.6.4. If m is a total method of an object x and ?x.m(a ∗ ) P ? is a pending
invocation in a linearizable history H , then there exists a response ?x : t (r ∗ ) P ? such
that H · ?x : t (r ∗ ) P ? is linearizable.
Proof. Let S be any linearization of H . If S includes a response ?x : t (r ∗ ) P ? to
 x.m(a ∗ ) P ?, we are done, since S is also a linearization of H · ?x : t (r ∗ ) P ?. Other-
wise, ?x.m(a ∗ ) P ? does not appear in S either, since a linearization, by definition,
has no pending invocations. Because the method is total, there exists a response
 x : t (r ∗ ) P ? such that
                            S ? = S · ?x.m(a ∗ ) P ? · ?x : t (r ∗ ) P ?

is a legal sequential history. S ? is a linearization of H · ?x : t (r ∗ ) P ?, and hence is also
a linearization of H .

    This theorem implies that linearizability by itself never forces a thread with a
pending invocation of a total method to block. Of course, blocking (or even deadlock)
may occur as artifacts of particular implementations of linearizability, but it is not
inherent to the correctness property itself. This theorem suggests that linearizability
is an appropriate correctness property for systems where concurrency and real-time
response are important.

         The nonblocking property does not rule out blocking in situations where it is
     explicitly intended. For example, it may be sensible for a thread attempting to de-
     queue from an empty queue to block, waiting until another thread enqueues an item.
     A queue specification would capture this intention by making the deq() method’s
     specification partial, leaving its effect undefined when applied to an empty queue.
     The most natural concurrent interpretation of a partial sequential specification is sim-
     ply to wait until the object reaches a state in which that method call’s response is
     defined.

     3.7 Memory consistency models
     We can consider the memory read and written by a program as a single object—the
     composition of many registers—shared by all threads of the program. This shared
     memory is often the only means of communication among threads (i.e., the only way
     that threads can observe the effects of other threads). Its correctness property is called
     the memory consistency model, or memory model for short.
         Early concurrent programs assumed sequentially consistent memory. Indeed, the
     notion of sequential consistency was introduced to capture the assumptions implicit
     in those programs. However, the memory of most modern multiprocessor systems is
     not sequentially consistent: Compilers and hardware may reorder memory reads and
     writes in complex ways. Most of the time no one can tell, because the vast majority
     of reads and writes are not used for synchronization. These systems also provide
     synchronization primitives that inhibit reordering.
         We follow this approach in the first part of this book, where we focus on the prin-
     ciples of multiprocessor programming. For example, the pseudocode for the various
     lock algorithms in Chapter 2 assumes that if a thread writes two locations, one after
     the other, then the two writes are made visible to other threads in the same order,
     so that any thread that sees the later write will also see the earlier write. However,
     Java does not guarantee this ordering for ordinary reads and writes. As mentioned
     in Pragma 2.3.1, these locations would need to be declared volatile to work in real
     systems. We omit these declarations because these algorithms are not practical in
     any case, and the declarations would clutter the code and obscure the ideas embod-
     ied in those algorithms. In the second part of the book, where we discuss practical
     algorithms, we include these declarations. (We describe the Java memory model in
     Appendix A.3.)

     3.8 Progress conditions
     The nonblocking property of linearizability (and sequential consistency and quies-
     cent consistency) ensures that any pending invocation has a correct response. But
     linearizability does not tell us how to compute such a response, nor even require an
     implementation to produce a response at all. Consider, for example, the lock-based
                                                                   3.8 Progress conditions   65

queue shown in Fig. 3.1. Suppose the queue is initially empty, and thread A halts
halfway through enqueuing x, while holding the lock, and B then invokes deq(). The
nonblocking property guarantees that there is a correct response to B’s call to deq();
indeed, there are two: It could throw an exception or return x. In this implementation,
however, B is unable to acquire the lock, and will be delayed as long as A is delayed.
    Such an implementation is called blocking, because delaying one thread can
prevent others from making progress. Unexpected thread delays are common in mul-
tiprocessors. A cache miss might delay a processor for a hundred cycles, a page fault
for a few million cycles, preemption by the operating system for hundreds of millions
of cycles. These delays depend on the specifics of the machine and the operating sys-
tem. The part of the system that determines when threads take steps is called the
scheduler, and the order in which threads take steps is the schedule.
    In this section, we consider progress conditions, which require implementations
to produce responses to pending invocations. Ideally, we would like to say simply
that every pending invocation gets a response. Of course, this is not possible if the
threads with pending invocations stop taking steps. So we require progress only for
those threads that keep taking steps.

3.8.1 Wait-freedom
A method of an object implementation is wait-free if every call finishes its execution
in a finite number of steps; that is, if a thread with a pending invocation to a wait-free
method keeps taking steps, it completes in a finite number of steps. We say that an
object implementation is wait-free if all its methods are wait-free, and that a class is
wait-free if every object of that class is wait-free.
    The queue shown in Fig. 3.3 is wait-free. For example, if B invokes deq() while
A is halted halfway through enqueuing x, then B will either throw EmptyException
(if A halted before incrementing tail) or it will return x (if A halted afterward). In
contrast, the lock-based queue is not wait-free because B may take an unbounded
number of steps unsuccessfully trying to acquire the lock.
    We say that wait-freedom is a nonblocking progress condition2 because a wait-
free implementation cannot be blocking: An arbitrary delay by one thread (say, one
holding a lock) cannot prevent other threads from making progress.

3.8.2 Lock-freedom
Wait-freedom is attractive because it guarantees that every thread that takes steps
makes progress. However, wait-free algorithms can be inefficient, and sometimes we
are willing to settle for a weaker progress guarantee.
    One way to relax the progress condition is to guarantee progress only to some
thread, rather than every thread. A method of an object implementation is lock-free if
executing the method guarantees that some method call finishes in a finite number of

2 See Remark 3.3.1 for various ways in which the term nonblocking is used.

     steps; that is, if a thread with a pending invocation to a lock-free method keeps taking
     steps, then within a finite number of its steps, some pending call to a method of that
     object (not necessarily the lock-free method) completes. An object implementation
     is lock-free if all its methods are lock-free. We say that lock-freedom guarantees
     minimal progress because executing a lock-free method guarantees that the system
     as a whole makes progress, but not that any thread in particular makes progress. In
     contrast, wait-freedom guarantees maximal progress: Every thread that keeps taking
     steps makes progress.
         Clearly, any wait-free method implementation is also lock-free, but not vice versa.
     Although lock-freedom is weaker than wait-freedom, if a program executes only a
     finite number of method calls, then lock-freedom is equivalent to wait-freedom for
     that program.
         Lock-free algorithms admit the possibility that some threads could starve. As a
     practical matter, there are many situations in which starvation, while possible, is ex-
     tremely unlikely, so a fast lock-free algorithm may be preferable to a slower wait-free
     algorithm. We consider several lock-free concurrent objects in later chapters.
         Lock-freedom is also a nonblocking progress condition: A delayed thread does
     not prevent other threads from making progress as long as the system as a whole
     keeps taking steps.

     3.8.3 Obstruction-freedom
     Another way to relax the progress condition is to guarantee progress only under cer-
     tain assumptions about how threads are scheduled, that is, about the order in which
     threads take steps. For example, an implementation may guarantee progress only if
     no other threads actively interfere with it. We say that a thread executes in isolation in
     an interval if no other threads take steps in that interval. A method of an object imple-
     mentation is obstruction-free if, from any point after which it executes in isolation, it
     finishes in a finite number of steps; that is, if a thread with a pending invocation to an
     obstruction-free method executes in isolation from any point (not necessarily from its
     invocation), it completes in a finite number of steps.
         Like other nonblocking progress conditions, obstruction-freedom ensures that a
     thread cannot be blocked by the delay of other threads. Obstruction-freedom guar-
     antees progress to every thread that executes in isolation, so like wait-freedom, it
     guarantees maximal progress.
         By guaranteeing progress only when one thread is scheduled to execute in iso-
     lation (i.e., preventing other threads from taking steps concurrently), obstruction-
     freedom seems to defy most operating system schedulers, which try to ensure a
     schedule in which every thread keeps taking steps (such a schedule is called fair).
     In practice, however, there is no problem. Ensuring progress for an obstruction-free
     method does not require pausing all other threads, only those threads that conflict,
     meaning those that are executing method calls on the same object. In later chapters,
     we consider a variety of contention management techniques to reduce or eliminate
     conflicting concurrent method calls. The simplest such technique is to introduce a
                                                          3.8 Progress conditions          67

back-off mechanism: a thread that detects a conflict pauses to give an earlier thread
time to finish. Choosing when to back off, and for how long, is discussed in detail in
Chapter 7.

3.8.4 Blocking progress conditions
In Chapter 2, we defined two progress conditions for lock implementations: deadlock-
freedom and starvation-freedom. Analogous to lock-freedom and wait-freedom,
respectively, deadlock-freedom guarantees that some thread makes progress and
starvation-freedom guarantees that every thread makes progress provided the lock
is not held by some other thread. The caveat that the lock is not held is necessary
because, while one thread holds the lock, no other thread can acquire it without vi-
olating mutual exclusion, the correctness property for locks. To guarantee progress,
we must also assume that a thread holding a lock will eventually release it. This as-
sumption has two parts: (a) Each thread that acquires the lock must release it after a
finite number of steps, and (b) the scheduler must allow a thread holding the lock to
keep taking steps.
    We can generalize deadlock-freedom and starvation-freedom to concurrent ob-
jects by making a similar assumption for threads executing method calls. Specifically,
we assume that the scheduler is fair; that is, it allows every thread with a pending
method call to take steps. (The first part of the assumption must be guaranteed by
the concurrent object implementation.) We say that a method of an object imple-
mentation is starvation-free if it completes in a finite number of steps provided that
every thread with a pending method call keeps taking steps. We say that a method
of an object implementation is deadlock-free if, whenever there is a pending call to
that method and every thread with a pending method call keeps taking steps, some
method call completes in a finite number of steps.
    Deadlock-freedom and starvation-freedom are useful progress conditions when
the operating system guarantees that every thread keeps taking steps, and particularly
that each thread takes a step in a timely manner. We say these properties are blocking
progress conditions because they admit blocking implementations where the delay of
a single thread can prevent all other threads from making progress.
    A class whose methods rely on lock-based synchronization can guarantee, at best,
a blocking progress condition. Does this observation mean that lock-based algorithms
should be avoided? Not necessarily. If preemption in the middle of a critical section
is sufficiently rare, then blocking progress conditions may be effectively indistin-
guishable from their nonblocking counterparts. If preemption is common enough to
cause concern, or if the cost of preemption-based delay is sufficiently high, then it is
sensible to consider nonblocking progress conditions.

3.8.5 Characterizing progress conditions
We now consider the various progress conditions and how they relate to one an-
other. For example, wait-freedom and lock-freedom guarantee progress no matter
how threads are scheduled. We say that they are independent progress conditions.

     FIGURE 3.10
     Progress conditions and their properties.

     By contrast, obstruction-freedom, starvation-freedom, and deadlock-freedom are all
     dependent progress conditions, where progress is guaranteed only if the underlying
     operating system satisfies certain properties: fair scheduling for starvation-freedom
     and deadlock-freedom, isolated execution for obstruction-freedom. Also, as we al-
     ready discussed, wait-freedom, lock-freedom, and obstruction-freedom are all non-
     blocking progress conditions, whereas starvation-freedom and deadlock-freedom are
     blocking.
         We can also characterize these progress conditions by whether they guarantee
     maximal or minimal progress under their respective system assumptions: Wait-
     freedom, starvation-freedom, and obstruction-freedom guarantee maximal progress,
     whereas lock-freedom and deadlock-freedom guarantee only minimal progress.
         Fig. 3.10 summarizes this discussion with a table that shows the various progress
     conditions and their properties. There is a “hole” in this table because any condition
     that guarantees minimal progress to threads that execute in isolation also guarantees
     maximal progress to these threads.
         Picking a progress condition for a concurrent object implementation depends on
     both the needs of the application and the characteristics of the underlying platform.
     Wait-freedom and lock-freedom have strong theoretical properties, they work on just
     about any platform, and they provide guarantees useful to real-time applications
     such as music, electronic games, and other interactive applications. The dependent
     obstruction-free, deadlock-free, and starvation-free properties rely on guarantees pro-
     vided by the underlying platform. Given those guarantees, however, the dependent
     properties often admit simpler and more efficient implementations.

     3.9 Remarks
     Which correctness condition is right for your application? It depends on your appli-
     cation’s needs. A lightly loaded printer server might be satisfied with a quiescently
                                                                3.10 Chapter notes           69

consistent queue of jobs, since the order in which documents are printed is of little
importance. A banking server that must execute customer requests in program order
(e.g., transfer $100 from savings to checking, then write a check for $50), might re-
quire a sequentially consistent queue. A stock trading server that is required to be
fair, ensuring that orders from different customers must be executed in the order they
arrive, would require a linearizable queue.
    Which progress condition is right for your application? Again, it depends on the
application’s needs. In a way, this is a trick question. Different methods, even ones
for the same object, might have different progress conditions. For example, the ta-
ble lookup method of a firewall program, which checks whether a packet source is
suspect, is called frequently and is time-critical, so we might want it to be wait-free.
By contrast, the method that updates table entries, which is rarely called, might be
implemented using mutual exclusion. As we shall see, it is quite natural to write
applications whose methods differ in their progress guarantees.
    So what progress condition is right for a particular operation? Programmers typ-
ically intend any operation they execute to eventually complete. That is, they want
maximal progress. However, ensuring progress requires assumptions about the un-
derlying platform. For example, how does the operating system schedule threads
for execution? The choice of progress condition reflects what the programmer is
willing to assume to guarantee that an operation will complete. For any progress
guarantee, the programmer must assume that the thread executing the operation is
eventually scheduled. For certain critical operations, the programmer may be unwill-
ing to assume more than that, incurring extra overhead to ensure progress. For other
operations, stronger assumptions, such as fairness or a particular priority scheme for
scheduling, may be acceptable, enabling less expensive solutions.
    The following joke circulated in Italy in the 1920s: According to Mussolini, the
ideal citizen is intelligent, honest, and fascist. Unfortunately, no one is perfect, which
explains why everyone you meet is either intelligent and fascist but not honest, honest
and fascist but not intelligent, or honest and intelligent but not fascist.
    As programmers, it would be ideal to have linearizable hardware, linearizable data
structures, and good performance. Unfortunately, technology is imperfect, and for the
time being, hardware that performs well is usually not even sequentially consistent.
As the joke goes, that leaves open the possibility that data structures might still be
linearizable while performing well. Nevertheless, there are many challenges to make
this vision work, and the remainder of this book presents a road map toward attaining
this goal.

3.10 Chapter notes
Leslie Lamport [102] introduced the notion of sequential consistency, while Christos
Papadimitriou [137] formulated the canonical formal characterization of serializabil-
ity. William Weihl [166] was the first to point out the importance of compositionality
(which he called locality). Maurice Herlihy and Jeannette Wing [75] introduced the

     notion of linearizability. Quiescent consistency was introduced implicitly by James
     Aspnes, Maurice Herlihy, and Nir Shavit [14], and more explicitly by Nir Shavit and
     Asaph Zemach [158]. Leslie Lamport [99,105] introduced the notion of an atomic
     register.
         The two-thread queue is considered folklore; as far as we are aware, it first ap-
     peared in print in a paper by Leslie Lamport [103].
         To the best of our knowledge, the notion of wait-freedom first appeared implicitly
     in Leslie Lamport’s Bakery algorithm [100]. Lock-freedom has had several histori-
     cal meanings and only in recent years has it converged to its current definition. The
     notions of dependent progress and of minimal and maximal progress and the table
     of progress conditions were introduced by Maurice Herlihy and Nir Shavit [72].
     Obstruction-freedom was introduced by Maurice Herlihy, Victor Luchangco, and
     Mark Moir [68].

     3.11 Exercises
     Exercise 3.1. Explain why quiescent consistency is compositional.
     Exercise 3.2. Consider a memory object that encompasses two register components.
     We know that if both registers are quiescently consistent, then so is the memory. Does
     the converse hold? That is, if the memory is quiescently consistent, are the individual
     registers quiescently consistent? Outline a proof, or give a counterexample.
     Exercise 3.3. Give an example of an execution that is quiescently consistent but not
     sequentially consistent, and another that is sequentially consistent but not quiescently
     consistent.
     Exercise 3.4. For each of the histories shown in Figs. 3.11 and 3.12, are they quies-
     cently consistent? Sequentially consistent? Linearizable? Justify your answer.
     Exercise 3.5. If we drop condition L2 from the linearizability definition, is the re-
     sulting property the same as sequential consistency? Explain.

     FIGURE 3.11
     First history for Exercise 3.4.
                                                                      3.11 Exercises         71

FIGURE 3.12
Second history for Exercise 3.4.

Exercise 3.6. Prove the “only if” part of Theorem 3.6.3.
Exercise 3.7. The AtomicInteger class (in the java.util.concurrent.atomic pack-
age) is a container for an integer value. One of its methods is
boolean compareAndSet(int expect, int update).

   This method compares the object’s current value with expect. If the values are
equal, then it atomically replaces the object’s value with update and returns true.
Otherwise, it leaves the object’s value unchanged, and returns false. This class also
provides
int get()

which returns the object’s value.
    Consider the FIFO queue implementation shown in Fig. 3.13. It stores its items
in an array items, which, for simplicity, we assume has unbounded size. It has two
AtomicInteger fields: head is the index of the next slot from which to remove an item,
and tail is the index of the next slot in which to place an item. Give an example
showing that this implementation is not linearizable.
Exercise 3.8. Consider the following rather unusual implementation of a method m:
In every history, the i-th time a thread calls m, the call returns after 2i steps. Is this
method wait-free?
Exercise 3.9. Consider a system with an object x and n threads. Determine if each of
the following properties are equivalent to saying x is deadlock-free, starvation-free,
obstruction-free, lock-free, wait-free, or none of these. Briefly justify your answers.
1. For every infinite history H of x, an infinite number of method calls complete.
2. For every finite history H of x, there is an infinite history H ? = H · G.
3. For every infinite history H of x, every thread takes an infinite number of steps.
4. For every infinite history H of x, every thread that takes an infinite number of
   steps in H completes an infinite number of method calls.

     1    class IQueue<T> {
     2      AtomicInteger head = new AtomicInteger(0);
     3      AtomicInteger tail = new AtomicInteger(0);
     4      T[] items = (T[]) new Object[Integer.MAX_VALUE];
     5      public void enq(T x) {
     6        int slot;
     7        do {
     8          slot = tail.get();
     9        } while (!tail.compareAndSet(slot, slot+1));
     10       items[slot] = x;
     11     }
     12     public T deq() throws EmptyException {
     13       T value;
     14       int slot;
     15       do {
     16         slot = head.get();
     17         value = items[slot];
     18         if (value == null)
     19           throw new EmptyException();
     20       } while (!head.compareAndSet(slot, slot+1));
     21       return value;
     22     }
     23   }

          FIGURE 3.13
          IQueue implementation for Exercise 3.7.

          5. For every finite history H of x, there are n infinite histories Hi? = H · Gi where
             only thread i takes steps in Gi , where it completes an infinite number of method
             calls.
          6. For every finite history H of x, there is an infinite history H ? = H · G where every
             thread completes an infinite number of method calls in G.

          Exercise 3.10. This exercise examines the queue implementation in Fig. 3.14, whose
          enq() method does not have a single fixed linearization point in the code.
             The queue stores its items in an items array, which, for simplicity, we assume is
          unbounded. The tail field is an AtomicInteger, initially zero.
             The enq() method reserves a slot by incrementing tail, and then stores the item
          at that location. Note that these two steps are not atomic: There is an interval after
          tail has been incremented but before the item has been stored in the array.
              The deq() method reads the value of tail, and then traverses the array in as-
          cending order from slot zero to the tail. For each slot, it swaps null with the current
          contents, returning the first non-null item it finds. If all slots are null, the procedure
          is restarted.
                                                                        3.11 Exercises        73

 1   public class HWQueue<T> {
 2     AtomicReference<T>[] items;
 3     AtomicInteger tail;
 4     static final int CAPACITY = Integer.MAX_VALUE;
 5

 6       public HWQueue() {
 7         items =(AtomicReference<T>[])Array.newInstance(AtomicReference.class,
 8             CAPACITY);
 9         for (int i = 0; i < items.length; i++) {
10           items[i] = new AtomicReference<T>(null);
11         }
12         tail = new AtomicInteger(0);
13       }
14       public void enq(T x) {
15         int i = tail.getAndIncrement();
16         items[i].set(x);
17       }
18       public T deq() {
19         while (true) {
20           int range = tail.get();
21           for (int i = 0; i < range; i++) {
22             T value = items[i].getAndSet(null);
23             if (value != null) {
24               return value;
25             }
26           }
27         }
28       }
29   }

     FIGURE 3.14
     Herlihy–Wing queue for Exercise 3.10.

     • Give an execution showing that the linearization point for enq() cannot occur at
       line 15. (Hint: Give an execution in which two enq() calls are not linearized in the
       order they execute line 15.)
     • Give another execution showing that the linearization point for enq() cannot occur
       at line 16.
     • Since these are the only two memory accesses in enq(), we must conclude that
       enq() has no single linearization point. Does this mean enq() is not linearizable?

     Exercise 3.11. This exercise examines a stack implementation (Fig. 3.15) whose
     push() method does not have a single fixed linearization point in the code.
        The stack stores its items in an items array, which, for simplicity, we assume is
     unbounded. The top field is an AtomicInteger, initially zero.

     1    public class AGMStack<T> {
     2      AtomicReferenceArray<T> items;
     3      AtomicInteger top;
     4      static final int CAPACITY = Integer.MAX_VALUE;
     5

     6        public AGMStack() {
     7          items = new AtomicReferenceArray<T>(CAPACITY);
     8          top = new AtomicInteger(0);
     9        }
     10       public void push(T x) {
     11         int i = top.getAndIncrement();
     12         items.set(i,x);
     13       }
     14       public T pop() {
     15         int range = top.get();
     16         for (int i = range - 1; i > -1; i--) {
     17           T value = items.getAndSet(i, null);
     18           if (value != null) {
     19             return value;
     20           }
     21         }
     22         // Return Empty.
     23         return null;
     24       }
     25   }

          FIGURE 3.15
          Afek–Gafni–Morrison stack for Exercise 3.11.

              The push() method reserves a slot by incrementing top, and then stores the item
          at that location. Note that these two steps are not atomic: There is an interval after
          top has been incremented but before the item has been stored in the array.
              The pop() method reads the value of top and then traverses the array in descending
          order from the top to slot zero. For each slot, it swaps null with the current contents,
          returning the first nonnull item it finds. If all slots are null, the method returns null,
          indicating an empty stack.
          • Give an execution showing that the linearization point for push() cannot occur at
            line 11. (Hint: Give an execution in which two push() calls are not linearized in
            the order they execute line 11.)
          • Give another execution showing that the linearization point for push() cannot oc-
            cur at line 12.
          • Since these are the only two memory accesses in push(), we conclude that push()
            has no single fixed linearization point. Does this mean push() is not linearizable?
          Exercise 3.12. Prove that sequential consistency is nonblocking.
