                                                                                            CHAPTER

The relative power of
primitive synchronization
operations
                                                                                             5
Imagine you are in charge of designing a new multiprocessor. What kinds of atomic
instructions should you include? The literature includes a bewildering array of dif-
ferent choices: read() and write(), getAndIncrement(), getAndComplement(), swap(),
compareAndSet(), and many, many others. Supporting them all would be complicated
and inefficient, but supporting the wrong ones could make it difficult or even impos-
sible to solve important synchronization problems.
    Our goal is to identify a set of primitive synchronization operations powerful
enough to solve synchronization problems likely to arise in practice. (We might also
support other, nonessential synchronization operations, for convenience.) To this end,
we need some way to evaluate the power of various synchronization primitives: what
synchronization problems they can solve, and how efficiently they can solve them.
    A concurrent object implementation is wait-free if each method call finishes in
a finite number of steps. A method is lock-free if it guarantees that infinitely often,
some method call finishes in a finite number of steps. We have already seen wait-free
(and therefore also lock-free) register implementations in Chapter 4. One way to
evaluate the power of synchronization instructions is to see how well they support
implementations of shared objects such as queues, stacks, trees, and so on. As we
explain in Section 4.1, we evaluate solutions that are wait-free or lock-free, that is,
that guarantee progress without relying on the underlying platform.1
    Not all synchronization instructions are created equal. If one thinks of primitive
synchronization instructions as objects whose exported methods are the instructions
themselves (these objects are often called synchronization primitives), one can show
that there is an infinite hierarchy of synchronization primitives, such that no primitive
at one level can be used for a wait-free or lock-free implementation of any primitives
at higher levels. The basic idea is simple: Each class in the hierarchy has an associated
consensus number, which is the maximum number of threads for which objects of the
class can solve an elementary synchronization problem called consensus. In a system
of n or more concurrent threads, it is impossible to implement a wait-free or lock-free
object with consensus number n from objects with a lower consensus number.

1 It makes no sense to evaluate solutions that only meet dependent progress conditions such as obstruction-
freedom or deadlock-freedom because the real power of such solutions is masked by the contribution of
the operating system they depend on.

The Art of Multiprocessor Programming. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-415950-1.00014-8
Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                              103

      1   public interface Consensus<T> {
      2     T decide(T value);
      3   }

          FIGURE 5.1
          Consensus object interface.

          5.1 Consensus numbers
          Consensus is an innocuous-looking, somewhat abstract problem that has enormous
          consequences for everything from algorithm design to hardware architecture. A con-
          sensus object provides a single method decide(), as shown in Fig. 5.1. Each thread
          calls the decide() method with its input v at most once. The object’s decide() method
          returns a value meeting the following conditions:
          • consistent: all threads decide the same value,
          • valid: the common decision value is some thread’s input.
          In other words, a concurrent consensus object is linearizable to a sequential consensus
          object in which the thread whose value was chosen completes its decide() first. To
          simplify the presentation, we focus on binary consensus, in which all inputs are either
          0 or 1 but our claims apply to consensus in general.
              We are interested in wait-free solutions to the consensus problem, that is, wait-free
          concurrent implementations of consensus objects. The reader will notice that since
          the decide() method of a given consensus object is executed only once by each thread,
          and there are a finite number of threads, a lock-free implementation would also be
          wait-free and vice versa. Henceforth, we mention only wait-free implementations,
          and for historical reasons, call any class that implements consensus in a wait-free
          manner a consensus protocol.
              We want to understand whether a particular class of objects is powerful enough
          to solve the consensus problem.2 How can we make this notion more precise? If
          we think of such objects as supported by a lower level of the system, perhaps the
          operating system or even the hardware, then we care about the properties of the class,
          not about the number of objects. (If the system can provide one object of this class,
          it can probably provide more.) Second, it is reasonable to suppose that any modern
          system can provide a generous amount of read–write memory for bookkeeping. These
          two observations suggest the following definitions.
          Definition 5.1.1. A class C solves n-thread consensus if there exists a consensus
          protocol for n threads using any number of objects of class C and any number of
          atomic registers.

          2 We restrict ourselves to object classes with deterministic sequential specifications (i.e., ones in which
          each sequential method call has a single outcome). We avoid nondeterministic objects since their structure
          is significantly more complex. See the discussion in the notes at the end of this chapter.
                                                           5.1 Consensus numbers               105

Definition 5.1.2. The consensus number of a class C is the largest n for which that
class solves n-thread consensus. If no largest n exists, we say the consensus number
of the class is infinite.

Corollary 5.1.3. Suppose one can implement an object of class C from one or more
objects of class D, together with some number of atomic registers. If class C solves
n-consensus, then so does class D.

5.1.1 States and valence
A good place to start is to think about the simplest interesting case: binary consensus
(i.e., inputs 0 or 1) for two threads (call them A and B). Each thread makes moves
until it decides on a value. Here, a move is a method call to a shared object. A protocol
state consists of the states of the threads and the shared objects. An initial state is a
protocol state before any thread has moved, and a final state is a protocol state after
all threads have finished. The decision value of any final state is the value decided by
all threads in that state.
     A wait-free protocol’s set of possible states forms a tree, where each node rep-
resents a possible protocol state and each edge represents a possible move by some
thread. Fig. 5.2 shows the tree for a two-thread protocol in which each thread moves
twice. An edge for A from node s to node s ? means that if A moves in protocol state
s, then the new protocol state is s ? . We refer to s ? as a successor state to s. Because
the protocol is wait-free, every (simple) path starting from the root is finite (i.e., even-
tually ends at a leaf node). Leaf nodes represent final protocol states, and are labeled
with their decision values, either 0 or 1.
     A protocol state is bivalent if the decision value is not yet fixed: There is some
execution starting from that state in which the threads decide 0, and one in which
they decide 1. By contrast, a protocol state is univalent if the outcome is fixed: Every
execution starting from that state decides the same value. A protocol state is 1-valent
if it is univalent, and the decision value will be 1, and similarly for 0-valent. As
illustrated in Fig. 5.2, a bivalent state is a node whose descendants in the tree include
both leaves labeled with 0 and leaves labeled with 1, while a univalent state is a node
whose descendants include only leaves labeled with a single decision value.
     Our next lemma says that an initial bivalent state exists. This observation means
that the outcome of the protocol cannot be fixed in advance, but must depend on how
reads and writes are interleaved.

Lemma 5.1.4. Every two-thread consensus protocol has a bivalent initial state.

Proof. Consider the initial state where A has input 0 and B has input 1. If A finishes
the protocol before B takes a step, then A must decide 0, because it must decide some
thread’s input, and 0 is the only input it has seen (it cannot decide 1 because it has no
way of distinguishing this state from the one in which B has input 0). Symmetrically,
if B finishes the protocol before A takes a step, then B must decide 1. It follows that
the initial state where A has input 0 and B has input 1 is bivalent.

      FIGURE 5.2
      An execution tree for two threads A and B. The dark shaded nodes denote bivalent states,
      and the lighter ones denote univalent states.

      Lemma 5.1.5. Every n-thread consensus protocol has a bivalent initial state.
      Proof. Left as an exercise.
         A protocol state is critical if:
      • it is bivalent, and
      • if any thread moves, the protocol state becomes univalent.
      Lemma 5.1.6. Every wait-free consensus protocol has a critical state.
      Proof. By Lemma 5.1.5, the protocol has a bivalent initial state. Start the protocol in
      this state. As long as some thread can move without making the protocol state uni-
      valent, let that thread move. The protocol cannot run forever because it is wait-free.
      Therefore, the protocol eventually enters a state where no such move is possible,
      which is, by definition, a critical state.
        Everything we have proved so far applies to any consensus protocol, no matter
      what class(es) of shared objects it uses. Now we consider specific classes of objects.

      5.2 Atomic registers
      The obvious place to begin is to ask whether we can solve consensus using atomic
      registers. Surprisingly, perhaps, the answer is no. We show that there is no binary
                                                                    5.2 Atomic registers         107

consensus protocol for two threads. We leave it as an exercise to show that if two
threads cannot reach consensus on two values, then n threads cannot reach consensus
on k values, for n ≥ 2 and k ≥ 2.
    Often, when we argue about whether or not there exists a protocol that solves a
particular problem, we construct a scenario of the form: “If we had such a protocol, it
would behave like this under these circumstances.” One particularly useful scenario
is to have one thread, say, A, run completely by itself until it finishes the protocol.
This particular scenario is common enough that we give it its own name: A runs solo.
Theorem 5.2.1. Atomic registers have consensus number 1.
Proof. Suppose there exists a binary consensus protocol for two threads A and B.
We reason about the properties of such a protocol and derive a contradiction.
    By Lemma 5.1.6, we can run the protocol until it reaches a critical state s. Suppose
A’s next move carries the protocol to a 0-valent state, and B’s next move carries the
protocol to a 1-valent state. (If not, then swap thread names.) What methods could A
and B be about to call? We now consider an exhaustive list of the possibilities: one
of them reads from a register, they both write to separate registers, or they both write
to the same register.
    Suppose A is about to read a given register (B may be about to either read or
write the same register or a different register), as depicted in Fig. 5.3. Consider two
possible execution scenarios. In the first scenario, B moves first, driving the protocol
to a 1-valent state s ? , and then B runs solo and eventually decides 1. In the second
execution scenario, A moves first, driving the protocol to a 0-valent state, and then

FIGURE 5.3
Case: A reads first. In the first execution scenario, B moves first, driving the protocol to a
1-valent state s? , and then B runs solo and eventually decides 1. In the second execution
scenario, A moves first, driving the protocol to a 0-valent state, and then B takes a step to
reach state s?? . B then runs solo starting in s?? and eventually decides 0.

      FIGURE 5.4
      Case: A and B write to different registers.

      B takes a step to reach state s ?? . B then runs solo starting in s ?? and eventually de-
      cides 0. The problem is that the states s ? and s ?? are indistinguishable to B (the read A
      performed could only change its thread-local state, which is not visible to B), which
      means that B must decide the same value in both scenarios, a contradiction.
          Suppose, instead of this scenario, both threads are about to write to different reg-
      isters, as depicted in Fig. 5.4. A is about to write to r0 and B to r1 . Consider two
      possible execution scenarios. In the first, A writes to r0 and then B writes to r1 ; the
      resulting protocol state is 0-valent because A went first. In the second, B writes to r1
      and then A writes to r0 ; the resulting protocol state is 1-valent because B went first.
          The problem is that both scenarios lead to the same protocol state. Neither A nor
      B can tell which move was first. The resulting state is therefore both 0-valent and
      1-valent, a contradiction.
          Finally, suppose both threads write to the same register r, as depicted in Fig. 5.5.
      Again, consider two possible execution scenarios. In one scenario A writes first, and
      then B writes; the resulting protocol state s ? is 0-valent, and B then runs solo and de-
      cides 0. In the other scenario, B writes first, the resulting protocol state s ?? is 1-valent,
      and B then runs solo and decides 1. The problem is that B cannot tell the difference
      between s ? and s ?? (because in both s ? and s ?? , B overwrote the register r and oblit-
      erated any trace of A’s write) so B must decide the same value starting from either
      state, a contradiction.

      Corollary 5.2.2. It is impossible to construct a wait-free implementation of any ob-
      ject with consensus number greater than 1 using atomic registers.

         This corollary is one of the most striking impossibility results in computer sci-
      ence. It explains why, if we want to implement lock-free concurrent data structures
                                                          5.3 Consensus protocols          109

    FIGURE 5.5
    Case: A and B write to the same register.

    on modern multiprocessors, our hardware must provide primitive synchronization
    operations other than loads and stores (i.e., reads and writes).

    5.3 Consensus protocols
    We now consider a variety of interesting object classes, asking how well each can
    solve the consensus problem. These protocols have a generic form, shown in Fig. 5.6.
    The object has an array of atomic registers in which each decide() method proposes
    its input value and then goes on to execute a sequence of steps in order to decide
    on one of the proposed values. We devise different implementations of the decide()
    method using various synchronization objects.

1   public abstract class ConsensusProtocol<T> implements Consensus<T> {
2     protected T[] proposed = (T[]) new Object[N]; // N is the number of threads
3     // announce my input value to the other threads
4     void propose(T value) {
5       proposed[ThreadID.get()] = value;
6     }
7     // figure out which thread was first
8     abstract public T decide(T value);
9   }

    FIGURE 5.6
    The generic consensus protocol.

      1    public class QueueConsensus<T> extends ConsensusProtocol<T> {
      2      private static final int WIN = 0; // first thread
      3      private static final int LOSE = 1; // second thread
      4      Queue queue;
      5      // initialize queue with two items
      6      public QueueConsensus() {
      7        queue = new Queue();
      8        queue.enq(WIN);
      9        queue.enq(LOSE);
      10     }
      11     // figure out which thread was first
      12     public T decide(T value) {
      13       propose(value);
      14       int status = queue.deq();
      15       int i = ThreadID.get();
      16       if (status == WIN)
      17         return proposed[i];
      18       else
      19         return proposed[1-i];
      20     }
      21   }

           FIGURE 5.7
           Two-thread consensus using a FIFO queue.

           5.4 FIFO queues
           In Chapter 3, we saw a wait-free FIFO queue implementation using only atomic reg-
           isters, subject to the limitation that only one thread could enqueue to the queue, and
           only one thread could dequeue from the queue. It is natural to ask whether one can
           provide a wait-free implementation of a FIFO queue that supports multiple enqueuers
           and dequeuers. For now, let us focus on a more specific problem: Can we provide a
           wait-free implementation of a two-dequeuer FIFO queue using atomic registers?
           Lemma 5.4.1. The two-dequeuer FIFO queue class has consensus number at least 2.
           Proof. Fig. 5.7 shows a two-thread consensus protocol using a single FIFO queue.
           Here, the queue stores integers. The queue is initialized by enqueuing the value
           WIN followed by the value LOSE. As in all the consensus protocols considered here,
           decide() first calls propose(v), which stores v in proposed[], a shared array of pro-
           posed input values. It then proceeds to dequeue the next item from the queue. If that
           item is the value WIN, then the calling thread was first, and it decides on its own value.
           If that item is the value LOSE, then the other thread was first, so the calling thread
           returns the other thread’s input, as declared in the proposed[] array.
               The protocol is wait-free, since it contains no loops. If each thread returns its own
           input, then they must both have dequeued WIN, violating the FIFO queue specifica-
                                                                    5.4 FIFO queues          111

tion. If each returns the other’s input, then they must both have dequeued LOSE, also
violating the queue specification.
    The validity condition follows from the observation that the thread that dequeued
WIN stored its input in the proposed[] array before any value was dequeued.

    Trivial variations of this program yield protocols for stacks, priority queues, lists,
sets, or any object with methods that return different results if applied in different
orders.
Corollary 5.4.2. It is impossible to construct a wait-free implementation of a queue,
stack, priority queue, list, or set from a set of atomic registers.
   Although FIFO queues solve two-thread consensus, they do not solve three-thread
consensus.
Theorem 5.4.3. FIFO queues have consensus number 2.
Proof. By contradiction, assume we have a consensus protocol for a thread A, B,
and C. By Lemma 5.1.6, the protocol has a critical state s. Without loss of generality,
we can assume that A’s next move takes the protocol to a 0-valent state, and B’s next
move takes the protocol to a 1-valent state. The rest, as before, is a case analysis.
    We know that A and B’s pending moves cannot commute. Thus, they are both
about to call methods of the same object. We also know that A and B cannot be about
to read or write shared registers by the proof of Theorem 5.2.1. It follows that they
are about to call methods of a single queue object.
    First, suppose A and B both call deq(), as depicted in Fig. 5.8. Let s ? be the pro-
tocol state if A dequeues and then B dequeues, and let s ?? be the state if the dequeues

FIGURE 5.8
Case: A and B both call deq().

      occur in the opposite order. Since s ? is 0-valent, if C runs uninterrupted from s ? , then
      it decides 0. Since s ?? is 1-valent, if C runs uninterrupted from s ?? , then it decides 1.
      But s ? and s ?? are indistinguishable to C (the same two items were removed from the
      queue), so C must decide the same value in both states, a contradiction.
          Second, suppose A calls enq(a) and B calls deq(). If the queue is nonempty, the
      contradiction is immediate because the two methods commute (each operates on a
      different end of the queue): C cannot observe the order in which they occurred. If the
      queue is empty, then the 1-valent state reached if B executes a dequeue on the empty
      queue and then A enqueues is indistinguishable to C from the 0-valent state reached
      if A alone enqueues. Note that it does not matter what a deq() on an empty queue
      does, that is, aborts or waits, since this does not affect the state visible to C.
          Finally, suppose A calls enq(a) and B calls enq(b), as depicted in Fig. 5.9. Let s ?
      be the state at the end of the following execution:
      1. Let A and B enqueue items a and b in that order.

      FIGURE 5.9
      Case: A calls enq(a) and B calls enq(b). Note that a new item is enqueued by A after A and
      B enqueued their respective items and before it dequeued (and B could have also
      enqueued items before dequeuing), but that this item is the same in both of the execution
      scenarios.
                                                 5.5 Multiple assignment objects            113

2. Run A until it dequeues a. (Since the only way to observe the queue’s state is via
   the deq() method, A cannot decide before it observes one of a or b.)
3. Before A takes any further steps, run B until it dequeues b.
   Let s ?? be the state after the following alternative execution:
1. Let B and A enqueue items b and a in that order.
2. Run A until it dequeues b.
3. Before A takes any further steps, run B until it dequeues a.
Clearly, s ? is 0-valent and s ?? is 1-valent. Both of A’s executions are identical until
A dequeues a or b. Since A is halted before it can modify any other objects, B’s
executions are also identical until it dequeues a or b. By a now familiar argument, a
contradiction arises because s ? and s ?? are indistinguishable to C.
   Variations of this argument can be applied to show that many similar data types,
such as sets, stacks, double-ended queues, and priority queues, all have consensus
number exactly 2.

5.5 Multiple assignment objects
In the (m, n)-assignment problem for n ≥ m > 1 (sometimes called multiple assign-
ment), we are given an object with n fields (sometimes an n-element array). The
assign() method takes as arguments m values vj and m indices ij ∈ 0, . . . , n − 1 for
j ∈ 0, . . . , m − 1. It atomically assigns vj to array element ij . The read() method
takes an index argument i, and returns the ith array element.
    Fig. 5.10 shows a lock-based implementation of a (2, 3)-assignment object. Here,
threads can assign atomically to any two out of three array entries.
    Multiple assignment is the dual of the atomic snapshot (Section 4.3), where we
assign to one field and read multiple fields atomically. Because snapshots can be
implemented from read–write registers, Theorem 5.2.1 implies snapshot objects have
consensus number 1. However, the same is not true for multiple assignment objects.
Theorem 5.5.1. There is no wait-free implementation of an (m, n)-assignment object
by atomic registers for any n > m > 1.
Proof. It is enough to show that we can solve 2-consensus given two threads and
a (2, 3)-assignment object. (Exercise 5.26 asks you to justify this claim.) As usual,
the decide() method must figure out which thread went first. All array entries are
initialized with null values. Fig. 5.11 shows the protocol. Thread A, with ID 0, writes
(atomically) to fields 0 and 1, while thread B, with ID 1, writes (atomically) to fields
1 and 2. Then they try to determine who went first. From A’s point of view, there are
three cases, as shown in Fig. 5.12:
• If A’s assignment was ordered first, and B’s assignment has not (yet) happened,
  then fields 0 and 1 have A’s value, and field 2 is null. A decides its own input.

      1    public class Assign23 {
      2      int[] r = new int[3];
      3      public Assign23(int init) {
      4       for (int i = 0; i < r.length; i++)
      5         r[i] = init;
      6      }
      7      public synchronized void assign(int v0, int v1, int i0, int i1) {
      8        r[i0] = v0;
      9        r[i1] = v1;
      10     }
      11     public synchronized int read(int i) {
      12       return r[i];
      13     }
      14   }

           FIGURE 5.10
           A lock-based implementation of a (2,3)-assignment object.

      1    public class MultiConsensus<T> extends ConsensusProtocol<T> {
      2      private final int NULL = -1;
      3      Assign23 assign23 = new Assign23(NULL);
      4      public T decide(T value) {
      5        propose(value);
      6        int i = ThreadID.get();
      7        int j = 1-i;
      8        // double assignment
      9        assign23.assign(i, i, i, i+1);
      10       int other = assign23.read((i+2) % 3);
      11       if (other == NULL || other == assign23.read(1))
      12         return proposed[i];      // I win
      13       else
      14         return proposed[j];      // I lose
      15     }
      16   }

           FIGURE 5.11
           Two-thread consensus using (2,3)-multiple assignment.

           FIGURE 5.12
           Consensus using multiple assignment: possible views.
                                                   5.5 Multiple assignment objects               115

• If A’s assignment was ordered first, and B’s second, then field 0 has A’s value,
  and fields 1 and 2 have B’s. A decides its own input.
• If B’s assignment was ordered first, and A’s second, then fields 0 and 1 have A’s
  value, and 2 has B’s. A decides B’s input.
A similar analysis holds for B.

Theorem 5.5.2. (n, n(n+1)
                      2 )-assignment for n > 1 has consensus number at least n.

Proof. We design a consensus protocol for n threads with IDs 0, . . . , n − 1 that
uses an (n, n(n+1)
                 2 )-assignment object. For convenience, we name the object fields
as follows. There are n fields r0 , . . . , rn−1 where thread i writes to register ri , and
n(n − 1)/2 fields rij , for i > j , where threads i and j both write to field rij . All fields
are initialized to null. Each thread i atomically assigns its input value to n fields: its
single-writer field ri and its n − 1 multi-writer fields rij and rj i . The protocol decides
the first value to be assigned.
    After assigning to its fields, a thread determines the relative ordering of the as-
signments for every two threads i and j as follows:
• Read rij or rj i . If the value is null, then neither assignment has occurred.
• Otherwise, read ri and rj . If ri ’s value is null, then j precedes i, and similarly
  for rj .
• If neither ri nor rj is null, reread rij . If its value is equal to the value read from ri ,
  then j precedes i, else vice versa.
    Repeating this procedure, a thread can determine which value was written by the
earliest assignment. Two example orderings appear in Fig. 5.13.

FIGURE 5.13
Two possible cases of (4,10)-assignment solving consensus for four threads. In Case 1, only
threads B and D show up. B is the first to assign and wins the consensus. In Case 2, there
are three threads, A, B, and D, and as before, B wins by assigning first and D assigns last.
The order among the threads can be determined by looking at the pairwise order among
any two. Because the assignments are atomic, these individual orders are always consistent
and define the total order among the calls.

         Note that (n, n(n+1)
                          2 )-assignment solves consensus for n > 1 threads, while its
      dual structures, atomic snapshots, have consensus number 1. Although these two
      problems may appear similar, we have just shown that writing atomically to multiple
      memory locations requires more computational power than reading atomically.

      5.6 Read–modify–write operations
      Many, if not all, synchronization operations commonly provided by multiprocessors
      in hardware can be expressed as read–modify–write (RMW) operations, or, as they
      are called in their object form, read–modify–write registers. Consider an RMW reg-
      ister that encapsulates integer values, and let F be a set of functions from integers to
      integers.3 (Sometimes F is a singleton set.)
          A method is an RMW for the function set F if it atomically replaces the current
      register value v with f (v), for some f ∈ F, and returns the original value v. We
      (mostly) follow the Java convention that an RMW method that applies the function
      mumble is called getAndMumble().
          For example, the java.util.concurrent.atomic package provides AtomicInteger,
      a class with a rich set of RMW methods.
      • The getAndSet(v) method atomically replaces the register’s current value with v
        and returns the prior value. This method (also called swap()) is an RMW method
        for the set of constant functions of the type fv (x) = v.
      • The getAndIncrement() method atomically adds 1 to the register’s current value
        and returns the prior value. This method (also called fetch-and-increment) is an
        RMW method for the function f (x) = x + 1.
      • The getAndAdd(k) method atomically adds k to the register’s current value and re-
        turns the prior value. This method (also called fetch-and-add) is an RMW method
        for the set of functions fk (x) = x + k.
      • The compareAndSet() method takes two values, an expected value e and an update
        value u. If the register value is equal to e, it is atomically replaced with u; other-
        wise it is unchanged. Either way, the method returns a Boolean value indicating
        whether the value was changed. Informally, fe,u (x) = x if x ?= e and u otherwise.
        (Strictly speaking, compareAndSet() is not an RMW method for fe,u , because an
        RMW method would return the register’s prior value instead of a Boolean value,
        but this distinction is a technicality.)
      • The get() method returns the register’s value. This method is an RMW method
        for the identity function f (v) = v.
      The RMW methods are interesting precisely because they are potential hardware
      primitives, engraved not in stone, but in silicon. Here, we define RMW registers

      3 For simplicity, we consider only registers that hold integer values, but they could equally well hold other
      values (e.g., references to other objects).
                                                       5.7 Common2 RMW operations                   117

 1   class RMWConsensus extends ConsensusProtocol {
 2     // initialize to v such that f(v) != v
 3     private RMWRegister r = new RMWRegister(v);
 4     public Object decide(Object value) {
 5       propose(value);
 6       int i = ThreadID.get();     // my index
 7       int j = 1-i;                // other’s index
 8       if (r.rmw() == v)           // I’m first, I win
 9         return proposed[i];
10       else                        // I’m second, I lose
11         return proposed[j];
12     }
13   }

     FIGURE 5.14
     Two-thread consensus using RMW.

     and their methods in terms of synchronized Java methods, but, pragmatically, they
     correspond (exactly or nearly) to many real or proposed hardware synchronization
     primitives.
        A set of functions is nontrivial if it includes at least one function that is not the
     identity function. An RMW method is nontrivial if its set of functions is nontrivial,
     and a RMW register is nontrivial if it has a nontrivial RMW method.
     Theorem 5.6.1. Any nontrivial RMW register has consensus number at least 2.
     Proof. Fig. 5.14 shows a two-thread consensus protocol. Since there exists f in F
     that is not the identity, there exists a value v such that f (v) ?= v. In the decide()
     method, as usual, the propose(v) method writes the thread’s input v to the proposed[]
     array. Then each thread applies the RMW method to a shared register. If a thread’s call
     returns v, it is linearized first, and it decides its own value. Otherwise, it is linearized
     second, and it decides the other thread’s proposed value.
     Corollary 5.6.2. It is impossible to construct a wait-free implementation of any non-
     trivial RMW method from atomic registers for two or more threads.

     5.7 Common2 RMW operations
     We now identify a class of RMW registers, called Common2, that correspond to many
     of the common synchronization primitives provided by processors in the late 20th
     century. Although Common2 registers, like all nontrivial RMW registers, are more
     powerful than atomic registers, we show that they have consensus number exactly 2,
     implying that they have limited synchronization power. Fortunately, these synchro-
     nization primitives have by-and-large fallen from favor in contemporary processor
     architectures.

      Definition 5.7.1. A nontrivial set of functions F belongs to Common2 if for all values
      v and all fi and fj in F, either:
      • fi and fj commute: fi (fj (v)) = fj (fi (v)), or
      • one function overwrites the other: fi (fj (v)) = fi (v) or fj (fi (v)) = fj (v).
      Definition 5.7.2. An RMW register belongs to Common2 if its set of functions F
      belongs to Common2.
         Many RMW registers in the literature belong to Common2. For example, the
      getAndSet() method uses a constant function, which overwrites any prior value. The
      getAndIncrement() and getAndAdd() methods use functions that commute with one
      another.
          Very informally, here is why RMW registers in Common2 cannot solve three-
      thread consensus: The first thread (the winner) can always tell it was first, and each
      of the second and third threads (the losers) can tell that it was not. However, be-
      cause the functions defining the state following operations in Common2 commute or
      overwrite, a loser cannot tell which of the others was the winner (i.e., went first), and
      because the protocol is wait-free, it cannot wait to find out. Let us make this argument
      more precise.
      Theorem 5.7.3. Any RMW register in Common2 has consensus number (exactly) 2.
      Proof. Theorem 5.6.1 states that any such register has consensus number at least 2.
      We show that no Common2 register solves consensus for three threads.
          Assume by contradiction that a three-thread protocol exists using only Common2
      registers and read–write registers. Suppose threads A, B, and C reach consensus
      through Common2 registers. By Lemma 5.1.6, any such protocol has a critical state
      s in which the protocol is bivalent, but any method call by any thread will cause the
      protocol to enter a univalent state.
          We now do a case analysis, examining each possible method call. The kind of
      reasoning used in the proof of Theorem 5.2.1 shows that the pending methods cannot
      be reads or writes, nor can the threads be about to call methods of different objects.
      It follows that the threads are about to call RMW methods of a single register r.
          Suppose A is about to call a method for function fA , sending the protocol to
      a 0-valent state, and B is about to call a method for fB , sending the protocol to a
      1-valent state. There are two possible cases:
      1. As depicted in Fig. 5.15, one function overwrites the other: fB (fA (v)) = fB (v).
         Let s ? be the state that results if A applies fA and then B applies fB . Because s ?
         is 0-valent, C will decide 0 if it runs alone from s ? until it finishes the protocol.
         Let s ?? be the state that results if B alone calls fB . Because s ?? is 1-valent, C will
         decide 1 if it runs alone from s ?? until it finishes the protocol. The problem is that
         the two possible register states fB (fA (v)) and fB (v) are the same, so s ? and s ??
         differ only in the internal states of A and B. If we now let thread C execute, since
         C completes the protocol without communicating with A or B, these two states
         look identical to C, so it cannot decide different values from the two states.
                                                 5.8 The compareAndSet operation               119

FIGURE 5.15
Case: two functions that overwrite.

2. The functions commute: fA (fB (v)) = fB (fA (v)). Let s ? be the state that results
   if A applies fA and then B applies fB . Because s ? is 0-valent, C will decide 0 if
   it runs alone from s ? until it finishes the protocol. Let s ?? be the state that results
   if A and B perform their calls in reverse order. Because s ?? is 1-valent, C will
   decide 1 if it runs alone from s ?? until it finishes the protocol. The problem is that
   the two possible register states fA (fB (v)) and fB (fA (v)) are the same, so s ? and
   s ?? differ only in the internal states of A and B. Now let thread C execute. Since
   C completes the protocol without communicating with A or B, these two states
   look identical to C, so it cannot decide different values from the two states.

5.8 The compareAndSet operation
We now consider the compareAndSet() operation (also called compare-and-swap),
a synchronization operation supported by several contemporary architectures (e.g.,
CMPXCHG on the Intel Pentium). It takes two arguments: an expected value and an
update value. If the current register value is equal to the expected value, then it is
replaced by the update value; otherwise the value is left unchanged. The method call
returns a Boolean indicating whether the value changed.
Theorem 5.8.1. A register providing compareAndSet() and get() methods has an
infinite consensus number.
Proof. Fig. 5.16 shows a consensus protocol for n threads using the AtomicInteger
class’s compareAndSet() method. The threads share an AtomicInteger object, ini-
tialized to a constant FIRST, distinct from any thread index. Each thread calls

      1    class CASConsensus extends ConsensusProtocol {
      2      private final int FIRST = -1;
      3      private AtomicInteger r = new AtomicInteger(FIRST);
      4      public Object decide(Object value) {
      5        propose(value);
      6        int i = ThreadID.get();
      7        if (r.compareAndSet(FIRST, i)) // I won
      8          return proposed[i];
      9        else                        // I lost
      10         return proposed[r.get()];
      11     }
      12   }

           FIGURE 5.16
           Consensus using compareAndSet().

           compareAndSet() with FIRST as the expected value, and its own index as the new
           value. If thread A’s call returns true, then that method call was first in the lineariza-
           tion order, so A decides its own value. Otherwise, A reads the current AtomicInteger
           value, and takes that thread’s input from the proposed[] array.

              We remark that the get() method provided by compareAndSet() register in
           Fig. 5.16 is only a convenience, and not necessary for the protocol.
           Corollary 5.8.2. A register providing only compareAndSet() has an infinite consen-
           sus number.
               As we will see in Chapter 6, machines that provide primitive operations like
           compareAndSet()4 are asynchronous computation’s equivalents of the Turing ma-
           chines of sequential computation: Any concurrent object that can be implemented
           in a wait-free manner on such machines. Thus, in the words of Maurice Sendak,
           compareAndSet() is the “king of all wild things.”

           5.9 Chapter notes
           Michael Fischer, Nancy Lynch, and Michael Paterson [46] were the first to prove
           that consensus is impossible in a message-passing system where a single thread can
           halt. Their seminal paper introduced the “bivalence” style of impossibility argument
           now widely used in distributed computing. M. Loui and H. Abu-Amara [116] and
           Herlihy [69] were the first to extend this result to shared memory.

           4 Some architectures provide a pair of operations similar to get()/compareAndSet() called load-
           linked/store-conditional. In general, the load-linked method marks a location as loaded, and the store-
           conditional method fails if another thread modified that location since it was loaded. See Appendix B.

    Clyde Kruskal, Larry Rudolph, and Marc Snir [96] coined the term read–modify–
write operation as part of the NYU Ultracomputer project.
    Maurice Herlihy [69] introduced the notion of a consensus number as a measure
of computational power, and was the first to prove most of the impossibility and
universality results presented in this and the next chapter.
    The class Common2, which includes several common primitive synchronization
operations, was defined by Yehuda Afek, Eytan Weisberger, and Hanan Weisman [5].
The “sticky-bit” object used in the exercises is due to Serge Plotkin [140].
    The n-bounded compareAndSet() object with arbitrary consensus number n in Ex-
ercise 5.24 is based on a construction by Prasad Jayanti and Sam Toueg [90]. In the
hierarchy used here, we say that X solves consensus if one can construct a wait-free
consensus protocol from any number of instances of X and any amount of read–write
memory. Prasad Jayanti [88] observed that one could also define resource-bounded
hierarchies where one is restricted to using only a fixed number of instances of X, or
a fixed amount of memory. The unbounded hierarchy used here seems to be the most
natural one, since any other hierarchy is a coarsening of the unbounded one.
    Jayanti also raised the question whether the hierarchy is robust, that is, whether
an object X at level m can be “boosted” to a higher consensus level by combining it
with another object Y at the same or a lower level. Wai-Kau Lo and Vassos Hadzila-
cos [114] and Eric Schenk [159] showed that the consensus hierarchy is not robust:
Certain objects can be boosted. Informally, their constructions went like this: Let X
be an object with the following curious properties. X solves n-thread consensus but
“refuses” to reveal the results unless the caller can prove he or she can solve an in-
termediate task weaker than n-thread consensus, but stronger than any task solvable
by atomic read–write registers. If Y is an object that can be used to solve the inter-
mediate task, Y can boost X by convincing X to reveal the outcome of an n-thread
consensus. The objects used in these proofs are nondeterministic.
    The Maurice Sendak quote is from Where the Wild Things Are [155].

5.10 Exercises
Exercise 5.1. Prove Lemma 5.1.5, that is, that every n-thread consensus protocol has
a bivalent initial state.
Exercise 5.2. Prove that in a critical state, one successor state must be 0-valent, and
the other 1-valent.
Exercise 5.3. Show that if binary consensus using atomic registers is impossible for
two threads, then it is also impossible for n threads, where n > 2. (Hint: Argue by
reduction: If we have a protocol to solve binary consensus for n threads, then we can
transform it into a two-thread protocol.)
Exercise 5.4. Show that if binary consensus using atomic registers is impossible for
n threads, then so is consensus over k values, where k > 2.

      1    public class ConsensusProposal {
      2           boolean proposed = new boolean[2];
      3           int speed = new Integer[2];
      4           int position = new Integer[2];
      5           public ConsensusProposal(){
      6                  position[0] = 0;
      7                  position[1] = 0;
      8                  speed[0] = 3;
      9                  speed[1] = 1;
      10          }
      11          public decide(Boolean value) {
      12                 int i = myIndex.get();
      13                 int j = 1 - i;
      14                 proposed[i] = value;
      15                 while (true) {
      16                         position[i] = position[i] + speed[i];
      17                         if (position[i] > position[j] + speed[j]) // I am far ahead of you
      18                                return proposed[i];
      19                         else if (position[i] < position[j]) // I am behind you
      20                                return proposed[j];
      21                 }
      22          }
      23   }

           FIGURE 5.17
           Proposed consensus code for thread i ∈ {0, 1}.

           Exercise 5.5. Show that with sufficiently many n-thread binary consensus objects
           and atomic registers, one can implement n-thread consensus over n values.
           Exercise 5.6. Consider the algorithm in Fig. 5.17 for two-thread binary consensus.

           • Show that the algorithm is consistent and valid (that is, an output value must be
             an input of one of the threads, and the output values cannot differ).
           • Since the algorithm is consistent and valid and only uses read–write registers, it
             cannot be wait-free. Give an execution history that is a counterexample to wait-
             freedom.

           Exercise 5.7. The Stack class provides two methods: push(x) pushes a value onto
           the top of the stack, and pop() removes and returns the most recently pushed value.
           Prove that the Stack class has consensus number exactly 2.
           Exercise 5.8. Suppose we augment the FIFO Queue class with a peek() method that
           returns but does not remove the first element in the queue. Show that the augmented
           queue has infinite consensus number.
           Exercise 5.9. Consider three threads, A, B, and C, each of which has an MRSW
           register, XA , XB , and XC , that it alone can write and the others can read. Each pair
           also shares a RMWRegister register that provides a compareAndSet() method: A and B

share RAB , B and C share RBC , and A and C share RAC . Only the threads that share
a register can call that register’s compareAndSet() method or read its value.
    Either give a three-thread consensus protocol and explain why it works, or sketch
an impossibility proof.
Exercise 5.10. Consider the situation described in Exercise 5.9 except that A, B, and
C can apply a double compareAndSet() to both registers at once.
Exercise 5.11. In the consensus protocol shown in Fig. 5.7, what would happen if
we announced the thread’s value after dequeuing from the queue?
Exercise 5.12. Objects of the StickyBit class have three possible states, ⊥, 0, 1,
initially ⊥. A call to write(v), where v is 0 or 1, has the following effects:
• If the object’s state is ⊥, then it becomes v.
• If the object’s state is 0 or 1, then it is unchanged.
   A call to read() returns the object’s current state.
1. Show that such an object can solve wait-free binary consensus (that is, all inputs
   are 0 or 1) for any number of threads.
2. Show that an array of log2 m StickyBit objects with atomic registers can solve
   wait-free consensus for any number of threads when there are m possible inputs.
   (Hint: Give each thread one atomic multi-reader single-writer register.)
Exercise 5.13. The SetAgree class, like the Consensus class, provides a decide()
method whose call returns a value that was the input of some thread’s decide() call.
However, unlike the Consensus class, the values returned by decide() calls are not
required to agree. Instead, these calls may return no more than k distinct values.
(When k is 1, SetAgree is the same as consensus.)
   What is the consensus number of the SetAgree class when k > 1?
Exercise 5.14. The two-thread approximate agreement class for a given ? > 0 is
defined as follows: Threads A and B each call decide(xa ) and decide(xb ) methods,
where xa and xb are real numbers. These method calls respectively return values ya
and yb such that ya and yb both lie in the closed interval [min(xa , xb ), max(xa , xb )],
and |ya − yb | ≤ ?. Note that this object is nondeterministic.
    What is the consensus number of the approximate agreement object?
Exercise 5.15. An A2Cas object represents two locations for values that can be read
individually and be modified by a2cas(). If both locations have the corresponding
expected values e0 and e1, then a call to a2cas(e0, e1, v) will write v to exactly one
of the two locations, chosen nondeterministically.
    What is the consensus number of the a2cas() object? Prove your claim.
Exercise 5.16. Consider a distributed system where threads communicate by mes-
sage passing. A type A broadcast guarantees:
1. every nonfaulty thread eventually gets each message,

      2. if P broadcasts M1 and then M2 , then every thread receives M1 before M2 , but
      3. messages broadcast by different threads may be received in different orders at
         different threads.
      A type B broadcast guarantees:
      1. every nonfaulty thread eventually gets each message,
      2. if P broadcasts M1 and Q broadcasts M2 , then every thread receives M1 and M2
         in the same order.
         For each kind of broadcast,
      • give a consensus protocol if possible;
      • otherwise, sketch an impossibility proof.
      Exercise 5.17. Consider the following two-thread QuasiConsensus problem.
         Two threads, A and B, are each given a binary input. If both have input v, then
      both must decide v. If they have mixed inputs, then either they must agree, or B may
      decide 0 and A may decide 1 (but not vice versa).
         Here are three possible exercises (only one of which works):
      1. Give a two-thread consensus protocol using QuasiConsensus showing it has con-
         sensus number (at least) 2.
      2. Give a critical-state proof that this object’s consensus number is 1.
      3. Give a read–write implementation of QuasiConsensus, thereby showing it has con-
         sensus number 1.
      Exercise 5.18. Explain why the critical-state proof of the impossibility of consensus
      fails if the shared object is, in fact, a Consensus object.
      Exercise 5.19. A team consensus object provides the same decide() method as con-
      sensus. A team consensus object solves consensus as long as at most two distinct
      values are ever proposed. (If more than two are proposed, any result is allowed.)
         Show how to solve n-thread consensus, with up to n distinct input values, from a
      supply of team consensus objects.
      Exercise 5.20. A trinary register holds values ⊥, 0, 1, and provides compareAndSet()
      and get() methods with the usual meaning. Each such register is initially ⊥. Give a
      protocol that uses one such register to solve n-thread consensus if the inputs of the
      threads are binary, that is, either 0 or 1.
          Can you use multiple such registers (perhaps with atomic read–write registers) to
      solve n-thread consensus even if the threads’ inputs are in the range 0 . . . 2K − 1 for
      K > 1? (You may assume an input fits in an atomic register.) Important: Remember
      that a consensus protocol must be wait-free.
      • Devise a solution that uses at most O(n) trinary registers.
      • Devise a solution that uses O(K) trinary registers.
      Feel free to use all the atomic registers you want (they are cheap).

 1   class Queue {
 2     AtomicInteger head = new AtomicInteger(0);
 3     AtomicReference items[] = new AtomicReference[Integer.MAX_VALUE];
 4     void enq(Object x){
 5       int slot = head.getAndIncrement();
 6       items[slot] = x;
 7     }
 8     Object deq() {
 9       while (true) {
10         int limit = head.get();
11         for (int i = 0; i < limit; i++) {
12           Object y = items[i].getAndSet(); // swap
13           if (y != null)
14             return y;
15         }
16       }
17     }
18   }

     FIGURE 5.18
     Queue implementation.

     Exercise 5.21. Earlier we defined lock-freedom. Prove that there is no lock-free im-
     plementation of consensus using read–write registers for two or more threads.
     Exercise 5.22. Fig. 5.18 shows a FIFO queue implemented with read(), write(),
     getAndSet() (that is, swap), and getAndIncrement() methods. You may assume this
     queue is linearizable, and wait-free as long as deq() is never applied to an empty
     queue. Consider the following sequence of statements:
     • Both getAndSet() and getAndIncrement() methods have consensus number 2.
     • We can add a peek() simply by taking a snapshot of the queue (using the methods
       studied earlier) and returning the item at the head of the queue.
     • Using the protocol devised for Exercise 5.8, we can use the resulting queue to
       solve n-consensus for any n.
     We have just constructed an n-thread consensus protocol using only objects with
     consensus number 2.
        Identify the faulty step in this chain of reasoning, and explain what went wrong.

     Exercise 5.23. Recall that in our definition of compareAndSet(), we noted that strictly
     speaking, compareAndSet() is not an RMW method for fe,u , because an RMW
     method would return the register’s prior value instead of a Boolean value. Use an
     object that supports compareAndSet() and get() to provide a new object with a lin-
     earizable NewCompareAndSet() method that returns the register’s current value
     instead of a Boolean.

      Exercise 5.24. Define an n-bounded compareAndSet() object as follows: It provides
      a compareAndSet() method that takes two values, an expected value e and an update
      value u. For the first n times compareAndSet() is called, it behaves like a conventional
      compareAndSet() register: If the object value is equal to e, it is atomically replaced
      with u, and the method call returns true. If the object value v is not equal to e, then
      it is left unchanged, and the method call returns false, along with the value v. After
      compareAndSet() has been called n times, however, the object enters a faulty state,
      and all subsequent method calls return ⊥.
           Show that an n-bounded compareAndSet() object for n ≥ 2 has consensus number
      exactly n.
      Exercise 5.25. Provide a wait-free implementation of a two-thread (2, 3)-assignment
      object from three compareAndSet() objects (that is, objects supporting the operations
      compareAndSet() and get()).

      Exercise 5.26. In the proof of Theorem 5.5.1, we claimed that it is enough to show
      that we can solve 2-consensus given two threads and a (2, 3)-assignment object. Jus-
      tify this claim.
      Exercise 5.27. We can treat the scheduler as an adversary who uses the knowledge
      of our protocols and input values to frustrate our attempts at reaching consensus.
      One way to outwit an adversary is through randomization. Assume that there are two
      threads that want to reach consensus, each of which can flip an unbiased coin, and that
      the adversary cannot control future coin flips but can observe the result of each coin
      flip and each value read or written. The adversary scheduler can stop a thread before
      or after a coin flip or a read or write to a shared register. A randomized consensus
      protocol terminates with probability arbitrarily close to 1 (given sufficiently long
      time) against an adversary scheduler.
          Fig. 5.19 shows a plausible-looking randomized binary consensus protocol. Give
      an example showing that this protocol is incorrect.
      • Does the algorithm satisfy the safety properties of consensus (i.e., validity and
        consistency)? That is, is it true that each thread can only output a value that is the
        input of one of the two threads, and also that the outputs cannot be different?
      • Does it terminate with a probability arbitrarily close to 1?
      Exercise 5.28. One can implement a consensus object using read–write registers by
      implementing a deadlock- or starvation-free mutual exclusion lock. However, this
      implementation provides only dependent progress, and the operating system must
      make sure that threads do not get stuck in the critical section so that the computation
      as a whole progresses.
      • Is the same true for obstruction-freedom, the nonblocking dependent progress
        condition? Show an obstruction-free implementation of a consensus object using
        only atomic registers.
      • What is the role of the operating system in the obstruction-free solution to consen-
        sus? Explain where the critical state-based proof of the impossibility of consensus

 1   Object prefer[2] = {null, null};
 2

 3   Object decide(Object input) {
 4     int i = Thread.getID();
 5     int j = 1-i;
 6     prefer[i] = input;
 7     while (true) {
 8       if (prefer[j] == null) {
 9         return prefer[i];
10       } else if (prefer[i] == prefer[j]) {
11         return prefer[i];
12       } else {
13         if (flip()) {
14           prefer[i] = prefer[j];
15         }
16       }
17     }
18   }

     FIGURE 5.19
     Is this a randomized consensus protocol?

        breaks down if we repeatedly allow an oracle to halt threads so as to allow others
        to make progress.
     (Hint: Think of how you could restrict the set of allowed executions.)
