                                                                                            CHAPTER

Linked lists: The role of
locking
                                                                                             9
9.1 Introduction
In Chapter 7, we saw how to build scalable spin locks that provide mutual exclusion
efficiently, even when they are heavily used. We might think that it is now a simple
matter to construct scalable concurrent data structures: Take a sequential implemen-
tation of the class, add a scalable lock field, and ensure that each method call acquires
and releases that lock. We call this approach coarse-grained synchronization.
    Coarse-grained synchronization often works well, but there are important cases
where it does not. The problem is that a class that uses a single lock to mediate all its
method calls is not always scalable, even if the lock itself is scalable. Coarse-grained
synchronization works well when levels of concurrency are low, but if too many
threads try to access the object at the same time, then the object becomes a sequential
bottleneck, forcing threads to wait in line for access.
    This chapter introduces several useful techniques that go beyond coarse-grained
locking to allow multiple threads to access a single object at the same time.
• Fine-grained synchronization: Instead of using a single lock to synchronize ev-
  ery access to an object, we partition the object into independently synchronized
  components, allowing method calls that access disjoint components to execute
  concurrently.
• Optimistic synchronization: Many objects, such as trees or lists, consist of multiple
  components linked together by references. Some methods search for a particular
  component (e.g., a list or tree node containing a particular key). One way to reduce
  the cost of fine-grained locking is to search without acquiring any locks at all. If
  the method finds the sought-after component, it locks that component, and then
  checks that the component has not changed in the interval between when it was
  inspected and when it was locked. This technique is worthwhile only if it succeeds
  more often than not, which is why we call it optimistic.
• Lazy synchronization: Sometimes it makes sense to postpone hard work. For ex-
  ample, the task of removing a component from a data structure can be split into
  two phases: The component is logically removed simply by setting a tag bit, and
  later, the component can be physically removed by unlinking it from the rest of
  the data structure.
• Nonblocking synchronization: Sometimes we can eliminate locks entirely, relying
  on built-in atomic operations such as compareAndSet() for synchronization.
The Art of Multiprocessor Programming. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-415950-1.00019-7
Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

      1   public interface Set<T> {
      2     boolean add(T x);
      3     boolean remove(T x);
      4     boolean contains(T x);
      5   }

          FIGURE 9.1
          The Set<T> interface: add() adds an item to the set (no effect if that item is already present),
          remove() removes it (if present), and contains() returns a Boolean indicating whether the
          item is present.

          Each of these techniques can be applied (with appropriate customization) to a variety
          of common data structures. In this chapter, we consider how to use linked lists to
          implement a set, a collection of items that contains no duplicate elements.
             For our purposes, as shown in Fig. 9.1, a set provides the following three methods:
          • The add(x) method adds x to the set, returning true if and only if x was not already
            in the est.
          • The remove(x) method removes x from the set, returning true if and only if x was
            in the set.
          • The contains(x) returns true if and only if the set contains x.
          For each method, we say that a call is successful if it returns true, and unsuccessful
          otherwise. In typical applications using sets, there are significantly more contains()
          calls than add() or remove() calls.

          9.2 List-based sets
          This chapter presents a range of concurrent set algorithms, all based on the same
          basic idea. A set is implemented as a linked list of nodes. The Node<T> class, shown
          in Fig. 9.2, has three fields. The item field is the actual item of interest. The key field
          is the item’s hash code. Nodes are sorted in key order, providing an efficient way to
          detect when an item is absent. The next field is a reference to the next node in the

      1   private class Node {
      2     T item;
      3     int key;
      4     Node next;
      5   }

          FIGURE 9.2
          The Node<T> class: This internal class keeps track of the item, the item’s key, and the next
          node in the list. Some algorithms require changes to this class.
                                                                              9.2 List-based sets             203

FIGURE 9.3
A sequential Set<> implementation: adding and removing nodes. In part (a), a thread
adding a node b uses two variables: curr is the current node, and pred is its predecessor.
The thread moves down the list comparing the keys for curr and b. If a match is found, the
item is already present, so it returns false. If curr reaches a node with a higher key, the item
is not in the set, so it sets b’s next field to curr, and pred’s next field to b. In part (b), to
delete curr, the thread sets pred’s next field to curr’s next field.

list. (Some of the algorithms we consider require changes to this class, such as adding
new fields, changing the types of existing fields, or making some fields volatile.) For
simplicity, we assume that each item’s hash code is unique. (Relaxing this assumption
is left as an exercise.) We associate an item with the same node and key throughout
any given example, which allows us to abuse notation and use the same symbol to
refer to a node, its key, and its item. That is, node a may have key a and item a, and
so on.
     In addition to nodes that hold items in the set, the list contains two sentinel nodes,
head and tail, as the first and last nodes in the list. Sentinel nodes are never added,
removed, or searched for, and their keys are the minimum and maximum integer val-
ues.1 Ignoring synchronization for the moment, the top part of Fig. 9.3 schematically
describes how an item is added to the set. A thread uses two local variables to tra-
verse the list: curr is the current node and pred is its predecessor. To add an item to

1 The algorithms presented here work for any ordered set of keys that has maximum and minimum values
and is well founded, that is, there are only finitely many keys smaller than any given key. For simplicity,
we assume here that keys are integers, and that no item’s key is the maximum or minimum integer value.

      the set, a thread sets pred to head and curr to its successor, and moves down the list,
      comparing curr’s key to the key of the item being added until it finds a node whose
      key is greater than or equal to the new item’s key. If the keys match, the item is al-
      ready present in the set, so the call returns false. Otherwise, pred’s key is less than
      that of the new item, and curr’s key is greater, so the item is not present in the list.
      The method creates a new node b to hold the item, sets b’s next field to curr, and
      then sets pred’s to b. Removing an item from the set works in a similar way.

      9.3 Concurrent reasoning
      Reasoning about concurrent data structures may seem impossibly difficult, but it is a
      skill that can be learned. Often, the key to understanding a concurrent data structure is
      to understand its invariants: properties that always hold. We can show that a property
      is invariant by showing that:
      1. the property holds when the object is created, and
      2. once the property holds, no thread can take a step that makes it false.
      Most interesting invariants hold trivially when the list is created, so it makes sense to
      focus on how invariants, once established, are preserved.
          Specifically, we can check that each invariant is preserved by each invocation of
      insert(), remove(), and contains() methods. This approach works only if we can as-
      sume that these methods are the only ones that modify nodes, a property sometimes
      called freedom from interference. In the list algorithms considered here, nodes are in-
      ternal to the list implementation, so freedom from interference is guaranteed because
      users of the list have no opportunity to modify its internal nodes.
          We require freedom from interference even for nodes that have been removed
      from the list, since some of our algorithms permit a thread to unlink a node while it
      is being traversed by others. Fortunately, we do not attempt to reuse list nodes that
      have been removed from the list, relying instead on a garbage collector to recycle that
      memory. The algorithms described here work in languages without garbage collec-
      tion, but sometimes require nontrivial modifications that are beyond the scope of this
      chapter. We discuss issues that arise in the absence of garbage collection and how to
      deal with them in Chapter 19.
          When reasoning about concurrent object implementations, it is important to un-
      derstand the distinction between an object’s abstract value (here, a set of items) and
      its concrete representation (here, a list of nodes).
          Not every list of nodes is a meaningful representation for a set. An algorithm’s
      representation invariant characterizes which representations make sense as abstract
      values. If a and b are nodes, we say that a points to b if a’s next field is a reference
      to b. We say that b is reachable if there is a sequence of nodes starting at head and
      ending at b, where each node in the sequence points to its successor.
          The set algorithms in this chapter require the following invariants (some require
      more, as explained later):
                                                                9.3 Concurrent reasoning     205

1. The key of any node in the list is less than the key of its successor (if it has one).
   This implies that nodes in the list are sorted by key, and that keys are unique.
2. The key of any item added, removed, or searched for is greater than the key of
   head and less than the key of tail. (Hence, the sentinel nodes are neither added
   nor removed.)
     Think of the representation invariant as a contract among the object’s methods.
Each method call preserves the invariant, and relies on the other methods to preserve
the invariant. In this way, we can reason about each method in isolation, without
having to consider all the possible ways they might interact.
     Given a list satisfying the representation invariant, which set does it represent?
The meaning of such a list is given by an abstraction map carrying lists that satisfy
the representation invariant to sets. Here, the abstraction map is simple: An item is in
the set if and only if it is (in a node) reachable from head.
     What safety and liveness properties do we need? For safety, we want linearizabil-
ity. As we saw in Chapter 3, to show that a concurrent data structure is a linearizable
implementation of a sequential object, it suffices to identify a linearization point, an
atomic step where the method call “takes effect”; we say it is linearized at this point.
This step can be a read, a write, or a more complex atomic operation. Looking at any
execution history of a list-based set, it must be the case that if the abstraction map
is applied to the representation at the linearization points, the resulting sequence of
states and method calls defines a valid sequential set execution. Here, add(a) adds a
to the abstract set, remove(a) removes a from the abstract set, and contains(a) returns
true or false, depending on whether a was already in the set.
     Different list algorithms make different progress guarantees. Some use locks, and
care is required to ensure they are deadlock- and starvation-free. Some nonblocking
list algorithms do not use locks at all, while others restrict locking to certain methods.
Here is a brief summary, from Chapter 3, of the nonblocking properties we use:2
• A method is wait-free if every call finishes in a finite number of steps.
• A method is lock-free if some call always finishes in a finite number of steps.
We are now ready to consider a variety of list-based set algorithms. We start with
algorithms that use coarse-grained synchronization, and successively refine them to
reduce the granularity of locking, culminating in a nonblocking algorithm. Formal
proofs of correctness lie beyond the scope of this book. Instead, we focus on informal
reasoning useful in everyday problem solving.
    As mentioned, in each of these algorithms, methods traverse the list using two
local variables: curr is the current node and pred is its predecessor. Because these
variables are local, each thread has its own instances of them; we use predA and
currA to denote the instances used by thread A.

2 Chapter 3 introduces an even weaker nonblocking property called obstruction-freedom.

      1    public class CoarseList<T> {
      2      private Node head;
      3      private Lock lock = new ReentrantLock();
      4      public CoarseList() {
      5        head = new Node(Integer.MIN_VALUE);
      6        head.next = new Node(Integer.MAX_VALUE);
      7      }
      8      public boolean add(T item) {
      9        Node pred, curr;
      10       int key = item.hashCode();
      11       lock.lock();
      12       try {
      13         pred = head;
      14         curr = pred.next;
      15         while (curr.key < key) {
      16           pred = curr;
      17           curr = curr.next;
      18         }
      19         if (key == curr.key) {
      20           return false;
      21         } else {
      22           Node node = new Node(item);
      23           node.next = curr;
      24           pred.next = node;
      25           return true;
      26         }
      27       } finally {
      28         lock.unlock();
      29       }
      30     }

           FIGURE 9.4
           The CoarseList class: the add() method.

           9.4 Coarse-grained synchronization
           We start with a simple algorithm using coarse-grained synchronization. Figs. 9.4
           and 9.5 show the add() and remove() methods for this coarse-grained algorithm. (The
           contains() method works in much the same way, and is left as an exercise.) The list
           itself has a single lock which every method call must acquire. The principal advan-
           tage of this algorithm, which should not be discounted, is that it is obviously correct.
           All methods act on the list only while holding the lock, so the execution is essentially
           sequential.
               The linearization point for an add(a) or remove(a) call depends on whether the
           call was successful (i.e., whether a was already present). A successful add(a) call
           (a absent) is linearized at the point that it updates the next field of the predecessor of
                                                              9.5 Fine-grained synchronization                     207

31   public boolean remove(T item) {
32     Node pred, curr;
33     int key = item.hashCode();
34     lock.lock();
35     try {
36       pred = head;
37       curr = pred.next;
38       while (curr.key < key) {
39         pred = curr;
40         curr = curr.next;
41       }
42       if (key == curr.key) {
43         pred.next = curr.next;
44         return true;
45       } else {
46         return false;
47       }
48     } finally {
49       lock.unlock();
50     }
51   }

     FIGURE 9.5
     The CoarseList class: the remove() method. All methods acquire a single lock, which is
     released on exit by the finally block.

     the node added (line 24). Similarly, a successful remove(a) call (i.e., if a is present
     before the call) is linearized when it updates the next field of the predecessor of the
     node removed (line 43). An unsuccessful add(a) or remove(a) method call, or any
     contains(a) call, can be linearized when the lock is acquired (or any time while the
     lock is held).3
         The CoarseList class satisfies the same progress condition as its lock: If the Lock
     is starvation-free, so is our implementation. If contention is very low, this algorithm
     is an excellent way to implement a list. If, however, there is contention, then even if
     the lock itself performs well, threads will still be delayed waiting for one another.

     9.5 Fine-grained synchronization
     We can improve concurrency by locking individual nodes, rather than locking the list
     as a whole. Instead of placing a lock on the entire list, we add a Lock to each node,

     3 We can linearize every method call at the instant it acquires the lock, but doing so requires a different
     abstraction map than the one described in Section 9.3.

           along with lock() and unlock() methods. As a thread traverses the list, it locks each
           node when it first visits, and sometime later releases it. Such fine-grained locking
           permits concurrent threads to traverse the list together in a pipelined fashion.
               Consider two nodes a and b, where a points to b. It is not safe to unlock a before
           locking b because another thread could remove b from the list in the interval between
           unlocking a and locking b. Instead, a thread acquires locks using a “hand-over-hand”
           protocol: it acquires the lock for a node (except the head node) while holding (i.e.,
           before releasing) the lock for its predecessor. This locking protocol is sometimes
           called lock coupling. (Note that there is no obvious way to implement lock coupling
           using Java’s synchronized methods.)
               Figs. 9.6 and 9.7 show the FineList algorithm’s add() and remove() methods. As
           in the coarse-grained list, remove() makes currA unreachable by setting predA ’s next

      1    public boolean add(T item) {
      2      int key = item.hashCode();
      3      head.lock();
      4      Node pred = head;
      5      try {
      6        Node curr = pred.next;
      7        curr.lock();
      8        try {
      9          while (curr.key < key) {
      10           pred.unlock();
      11           pred = curr;
      12           curr = curr.next;
      13           curr.lock();
      14         }
      15         if (curr.key == key) {
      16           return false;
      17         }
      18         Node node = new Node(item);
      19         node.next = curr;
      20         pred.next = node;
      21         return true;
      22       } finally {
      23         curr.unlock();
      24       }
      25     } finally {
      26       pred.unlock();
      27     }
      28   }

           FIGURE 9.6
           The FineList class: The add() method uses hand-over-hand locking to traverse the list. The
           finally blocks release locks before returning.
                                                    9.5 Fine-grained synchronization          209

29   public boolean remove(T item) {
30     int key = item.hashCode();
31     head.lock();
32     Node pred = head;
33     try {
34       Node curr = pred.next;
35       curr.lock();
36       try {
37         while (curr.key < key) {
38           pred.unlock();
39           pred = curr;
40           curr = curr.next;
41           curr.lock();
42         }
43         if (curr.key == key) {
44           pred.next = curr.next;
45           return true;
46         }
47         return false;
48       } finally {
49         curr.unlock();
50       }
51     } finally {
52       pred.unlock();
53     }
54   }

     FIGURE 9.7
     The FineList class: The remove() method locks both the node to be removed and its
     predecessor before removing that node.

     field to currA ’s successor. To be safe, remove() must lock both predA and currA . To
     see why, consider the scenario illustrated in Fig. 9.8. Thread A is about to remove
     node a, the first node in the list, while thread B is about to remove node b, where
     a points to b. Suppose A locks head, and B locks a. A then sets head.next to b,
     while B sets a.next to c. The net effect is the removal of a, but not b. The problem
     is that there is no overlap between the locks held by the two remove() calls. Fig. 9.9
     illustrates how hand-over-hand locking avoids this problem.
         To guarantee progress, it is important that all methods acquire locks in the same
     order, starting at head and following next references toward tail. As Fig. 9.10 shows,
     a deadlock could occur if different method calls were to acquire locks in different
     orders. In this example, thread A, trying to add a, has locked b and is attempting
     to lock head, while B, trying to remove b, has locked head and is trying to lock
     b. Clearly, these method calls will never finish. Avoiding deadlocks is one of the
     principal challenges of programming with locks.

      FIGURE 9.8
      The FineList class: why remove() must acquire two locks. Thread A is about to remove a,
      the first node in the list, while thread B is about to remove b, where a points to b. Suppose
      A locks head, and B locks a. Thread A then sets head.next to b, while B sets a’s next field to
      c. The net effect is to remove a, but not b.

      FIGURE 9.9
      The FineList class: Hand-over-hand locking ensures that if concurrent remove() calls try to
      remove adjacent nodes, then they acquire conflicting locks. Thread A is about to remove
      node a, the first node in the list, while thread B is about to remove node b, where a points
      to b. Because A must lock both head and a and B must lock both a and b, they are
      guaranteed to conflict on a, forcing one call to wait for the other.

      FIGURE 9.10
      The FineList class: A deadlock could occur if, for example, remove() and add() calls
      acquired locks in opposite order. Then we could have the scenario depicted, in which
      thread A is about to insert a by locking first b and then head, and thread B is about to
      remove node b by locking first head and then b. Each thread holds the lock the other is
      waiting to acquire, so neither makes progress.
                                                    9.6 Optimistic synchronization            211

    The representation invariant and abstraction map for FineList are the same as
for CoarseList: Sentinels are never added or removed, nodes are sorted by key value
without duplicates, and an item is in the set if and only if its node is reachable.
    As in CoarseList, a successful add(a) or remove(a) call of FineList is linearized
when it updates the next field of the predecessor of the node added or removed
(line 20 or 44). An unsuccessful add(a) or remove(a) call, or any contains(a) call,
can be linearized when it acquires the lock to a node whose key is greater than or
equal to a (line 7 or 13 for add(a); line 35 or 41 for remove(a)).
    The FineList algorithm is starvation-free if all the node locks are starvation-free,
but arguing this property is harder than in the coarse-grained case: Because all meth-
ods acquire locks in the same down-the-list order, deadlock is impossible. If thread A
attempts to lock head, it eventually succeeds. From that point on, because there are no
deadlocks, eventually all locks held by threads ahead of A in the list will be released,
and A will succeed in locking predA and currA .
    Although fine-grained locking reduces contention compared to coarse-grained
locking, it imposes a potentially long sequence of lock acquisitions and releases.
Moreover, threads accessing disjoint parts of the list may still block one another. For
example, a thread removing the second item in the list blocks all concurrent threads
searching for later nodes.

9.6 Optimistic synchronization
One way to reduce synchronization costs is to take a chance: Search without acquiring
locks, lock the nodes found, and then confirm that the locked nodes are correct. If a
synchronization conflict causes the wrong nodes to be locked, then release the locks
and start over. When this kind of conflict is rare, this technique works well, which is
why we call it optimistic synchronization.
    Code for the optimistic add(a) method appears in Fig. 9.11. When thread A calls
this method, it traverses the list without acquiring any locks (lines 6–8). In fact, it
ignores the locks completely. It stops the traversal when currA ’s key is greater than
or equal to a. It then locks predA and currA , and calls validate() to check that predA
is reachable and its next field still refers to currA . If validation succeeds, then thread
A proceeds as before: If currA ’s key is greater than a, thread A adds a new node with
item a between predA and currA , and returns true. Otherwise it returns false. The
remove() and contains() methods (Figs. 9.12 and 9.13) operate similarly, traversing
the list without locking, and then locking the target nodes and validating they are still
in the list. To be consistent with the Java memory model, the next fields in the nodes
must be declared volatile.
    The code of validate() appears in Fig. 9.14. We are reminded of a story:
   A tourist takes a taxi in a foreign town. The taxi driver speeds through a red light.
   The tourist, frightened, asks,“What are you are doing?” The driver answers,“Do
   not worry, I am an expert.” He speeds through more red lights, and the tourist, on

      1    public boolean add(T item) {
      2      int key = item.hashCode();
      3      while (true) {
      4        Node pred = head;
      5        Node curr = pred.next;
      6        while (curr.key < key) {
      7          pred = curr; curr = curr.next;
      8        }
      9        pred.lock();
      10       try {
      11         curr.lock();
      12         try {
      13           if (validate(pred, curr)) {
      14             if (curr.key == key) {
      15               return false;
      16             } else {
      17               Node node = new Node(item);
      18               node.next = curr;
      19               pred.next = node;
      20               return true;
      21             }
      22           }
      23         } finally {
      24           curr.unlock();
      25         }
      26       } finally {
      27         pred.unlock();
      28       }
      29     }
      30   }

           FIGURE 9.11
           The OptimisticList class: the add() method traverses the list ignoring locks, acquires locks,
           and validates before adding the new node.

              the verge of hysteria, complains again, more urgently. The driver replies, “Relax,
              relax, you are in the hands of an expert.” Suddenly, the light turns green, the driver
              slams on the brakes, and the taxi skids to a halt. The tourist picks himself off the
              floor of the taxi and asks,“For crying out loud, why stop now that the light is finally
              green?” The driver answers,“Too dangerous, another expert could be crossing.”
               Ignoring locks while traversing a dynamically changing lock-based data structure
           requires careful thought (there are other expert threads out there). We must be sure to
           use some form of validation and guarantee freedom from interference.
               Validation is necessary because the trail of references leading to predA , or the
           reference from predA to currA , could have changed between when they were last
                                                        9.6 Optimistic synchronization          213

31   public boolean remove(T item) {
32     int key = item.hashCode();
33     while (true) {
34       Node pred = head;
35       Node curr = pred.next;
36       while (curr.key < key) {
37         pred = curr; curr = curr.next;
38       }
39       pred.lock();
40       try {
41         curr.lock();
42         try {
43           if (validate(pred, curr)) {
44             if (curr.key == key) {
45               pred.next = curr.next;
46               return true;
47             } else {
48               return false;
49             }
50           }
51         } finally {
52           curr.unlock();
53         }
54       } finally {
55         pred.unlock();
56       }
57     }
58   }

     FIGURE 9.12
     The OptimisticList class: The remove() method traverses ignoring locks, acquires locks,
     and validates before removing the node.

     read by A and when A acquired the locks. In particular, A could be traversing parts of
     the list that have already been removed. For example, as shown in Fig. 9.15, the node
     currA and all nodes between currA and a (including a) may be removed while A is
     still traversing currA . Thread A discovers that currA points to a; without validation,
     it would “successfully” remove a, even though a is no longer in the list. A validate()
     call detects that a is no longer in the list, and the caller restarts the method.
          Because we ignore the locks that protect concurrent modifications while travers-
     ing the list, a method call may traverse nodes that have been removed from the list.
     Nevertheless, freedom from interference implies that once a node has been unlinked
     from the list, the value of its next field does not change, so following a sequence of
     such links eventually leads back to the list. Freedom from interference, in turn, relies
     on garbage collection to ensure that no node is recycled while it is being traversed.

      59   public boolean contains(T item) {
      60     int key = item.hashCode();
      61     while (true) {
      62       Node pred = head;
      63       Node curr = pred.next;
      64       while (curr.key < key) {
      65         pred = curr; curr = curr.next;
      66       }
      67       pred.lock();
      68       try {
      69         curr.lock();
      70         try {
      71           if (validate(pred, curr)) {
      72             return (curr.key == key);
      73           }
      74         } finally {
      75           curr.unlock();
      76         }
      77       } finally {
      78         pred.unlock();
      79       }
      80     }
      81   }

           FIGURE 9.13
           The OptimisticList class: The contains() method searches, ignoring locks, then acquires
           locks, and validates to determine if the node is in the list.

      82   private boolean validate(Node pred, Node curr) {
      83     Node node = head;
      84     while (node.key <= pred.key) {
      85       if (node == pred)
      86         return pred.next == curr;
      87       node = node.next;
      88     }
      89     return false;
      90   }

           FIGURE 9.14
           The OptimisticList: Validation checks that pred points to curr and is reachable from head.

               The linearization points of the optimistic algorithm are the same as those of the
           fine-grained algorithm, except that we must take into account the possibility of failed
           validation. In particular, we only linearize a method call when it acquires a lock if the
           subsequent validation succeeds.
                                                              9.7 Lazy synchronization             215

FIGURE 9.15
The OptimisticList class: why validation is needed. Thread A is attempting to remove a
node a. While traversing the list, currA and all nodes between currA and a (including a)
might be removed (denoted by a lighter node color). In such a case, thread A would
proceed to the point where currA points to a, and, without validation, would successfully
remove a, even though it is no longer in the list. Validation is required to determine that a is
no longer reachable from head.

    The OptimisticList algorithm is not starvation-free, even if all node locks are
individually starvation-free. A thread might be delayed indefinitely if new nodes are
repeatedly added and removed (see Exercise 9.6). Nevertheless, we expect this al-
gorithm to do well in practice, since starvation is rare. It works best if the cost of
traversing the list twice without locking is significantly less than the cost of travers-
ing the list once with locking.
    Although optimistic synchronization can be applied to coarse-grained locking,
it does not improve that algorithm because validation requires retraversing the list
while holding the lock. However, we can eliminate the need to traverse the list during
validation by maintaining a version number that is incremented whenever the list is
modified. We explore such an approach in the exercises.

9.7 Lazy synchronization
One drawback of the OptimisticList algorithm (and the CoarseList and FineList
algorithms) is that contains() acquires locks, which is unattractive since contains()
calls are typically much more common than calls to other methods. We show how to
refine this algorithm so that contains() is wait-free, and add() and remove() methods,
while still blocking, traverse the list only once (in the absence of contention).
    We add to each node a Boolean marked field indicating whether that node is in the
set. Now, traversals do not need to lock the target node, and there is no need to val-
idate that the node is reachable by retraversing the whole list. Instead, the algorithm
maintains the invariant that every unmarked node is reachable. If a traversing thread
does not find a node, or finds it marked, then that item is not in the set. As a result,

      1     private boolean validate(Node pred, Node curr) {
      2       return !pred.marked && !curr.marked && pred.next == curr;
      3     }

          FIGURE 9.16
          The LazyList class: Validation checks that neither the pred nor the curr node has been
          logically deleted, and that pred points to curr.

          contains() needs only one wait-free traversal. To add an element to the list, add()
          traverses the list, locks the target’s predecessor, and inserts the node. The remove()
          method is lazy, taking two steps: It first marks the target node, logically removing it,
          and then redirects the next field of its predecessor, physically removing it.
               In more detail, as in the OptimisticList algorithm, all methods traverse the list
          (possibly traversing logically and physically removed nodes) ignoring the locks. The
          add() and remove() methods lock the predA and currA nodes, and validates them, as
          before, except that the validate() method (Fig. 9.16) does not retraverse the list to
          determine that the nodes are still in the list. Instead, because of the new invariant, it
          suffices to check that they are not marked. We must check that both predA and currA
          are not marked because predA is the node that is being modified. (See Fig. 9.19 for
          an illustration of why validation is necessary.)
               Except for calling a different validate() method, the add() method of LazyList
          is exactly the same as that of OptimisticList. The remove() method (Fig. 9.17) has a
          small difference: it marks the node (line 18) before (physically) removing it from the
          list, maintaining the invariant that every unmarked node is reachable.
               Logical removals require a small change to the abstraction map: An item is in
          the set if and only if it is referred to by an unmarked reachable node. Note that the
          path along which the node is reachable may contain marked nodes. (The diligent
          reader should check that any unmarked reachable node remains reachable, even if its
          predecessor is logically or physically deleted.) As in the OptimisticList algorithm,
          add() and remove() are not starvation-free, because list traversals may be arbitrarily
          delayed by ongoing modifications.
               The contains() method (Fig. 9.18) traverses the list once ignoring locks and
          returns true if the node it was searching for is present and unmarked, and false other-
          wise. It is thus wait-free.4 A marked node’s value is ignored. Each time the traversal
          moves to a new node, the new node has a larger key than the previous one, even if the
          node is logically deleted.
               The linearization points for LazyList add() and unsuccessful remove() calls are
          the same as for the OptimisticList. A successful remove() call is linearized when
          the node is marked (i.e., when the marked bit is set on line 18), and a successful
          contains() call is linearized when an unmarked matching node is found.

          4 The number of nodes a thread must traverse cannot increase without bound due to newly inserted nodes
          because the set of keys is well founded.
                                                               9.7 Lazy synchronization          217

 4   public boolean remove(T item) {
 5     int key = item.hashCode();
 6     while (true) {
 7      Node pred = head;
 8      Node curr = head.next;
 9      while (curr.key < key) {
10        pred = curr; curr = curr.next;
11      }
12      pred.lock();
13      try {
14        curr.lock();
15        try {
16          if (validate(pred, curr)) {
17            if (curr.key == key) {
18              curr.marked = true;
19              pred.next = curr.next;
20              return true;
21            } else {
22              return false;
23            }
24          }
25        } finally {
26          curr.unlock();
27        }
28      } finally {
29        pred.unlock();
30      }
31     }
32   }

     FIGURE 9.17
     The LazyList class: The remove() method removes nodes in two steps, logical and physical.

33   public boolean contains(T item) {
34     int key = item.hashCode();
35     Node curr = head;
36     while (curr.key < key)
37       curr = curr.next;
38     return curr.key == key && !curr.marked;
39   }

     FIGURE 9.18
     The LazyList class: the contains() method.

      FIGURE 9.19
      The LazyList class: why validation is needed. In part (a), thread A is attempting to remove
      node a. After it reaches the point where predA refers to currA , and before it acquires locks
      on these nodes, the node predA is logically and physically removed. After A acquires the
      locks, validation will detect the problem. In part (b), A is attempting to remove node a. After
      it reaches the point where predA refers to currA , and before it acquires locks on these
      nodes, a new node is added between predA and currA . After A acquires the locks, even
      though neither predA nor currA is marked, validation detects that predA is not the same as
      currA , and A’s call to remove() will be restarted.

           It is trickier to see how to linearize an unsuccessful contains() method call. Con-
      sider the scenario depicted in Fig. 9.20, in which thread A is executing contains(a).
      In part (a), while A is traversing the list, another thread removes, both logically and
      physically, currA and all subsequent nodes up to and including a. Thread A will
      still follow the links until currA points to a, and detect that a is marked, and hence
      no longer in the abstract set. We might be tempted to linearize it at that point (i.e.,
      when A executes line 38). However, as depicted in part (b), this is not always a valid
      linearization point: while A is traversing the removed section of the list, and before
      it reaches the removed node a, another thread may call add(a), adding a new node
      with key a to the reachable part of the list. In this case, A’s unsuccessful contains(a)
      method call cannot be linearized at the point it finds the marked node a, because this
      point occurs after the new node with key a has been inserted in the list. The unsuc-
      cessful method call must be linearized to a point before the new node is inserted.
           We therefore linearize an unsuccessful contains(a) method call within its execu-
      tion interval at the earlier of the following points: (1) the point where a marked node
      with key a, or a node with a key greater than a, is found, or (2) the point immediately
      before a new node with key a is added to the list. The second point is guaranteed to
      be within the execution interval because the insertion of the new node with the same
                                                              9.7 Lazy synchronization             219

FIGURE 9.20
The LazyList class: linearizing an unsuccessful contains() call. Dark nodes are physically in
the list and white nodes are physically removed. In part (a), while thread A is traversing the
list, another thread disconnects the sublist referred to by currA . We can linearize A’s call at
the point it sees that a is marked and is no longer in the abstract set. However, in part (b),
while A is traversing the removed part of the list leading to the marked node a, another
thread adds a new node with key a. It would be wrong to linearize A’s unsuccessful
contains(a) call to when it found the marked node a, since this point occurs after the
insertion of the new node with key a to the list.

key must have happened after the start of the contains() method, or the contains()
method would have found that item. As can be seen, the linearization point of the
unsuccessful contains() is determined by the ordering of events in the execution, and
is not a predetermined point in the method’s code, and indeed, may not even be at
a point where the thread takes a step (e.g., it may be linearized when another thread
takes a step).
    One benefit of lazy synchronization is that we can separate unobtrusive logical
steps, such as setting a flag, from disruptive physical changes to the structure, such
as disconnecting a node. The example presented here is simple because we discon-
nect one node at a time. In general, however, delayed operations can be batched and
performed lazily at a convenient time, reducing the overall disruptiveness of physical
modifications to the structure.

          A principal disadvantage of the LazyList algorithm is that add() and remove() calls
      are blocking: If one thread is delayed, then others may also be delayed.

      9.8 Nonblocking synchronization
      We have seen that we can avoid locking in contains() by marking nodes as logically
      removed before physically removing them from the list. We now show how to extend
      this idea to eliminate locks altogether, allowing all three methods, add(), remove(),
      and contains(), to be nonblocking. (The first two methods are lock-free and the last
      wait-free.)
          A naïve approach would be to use compareAndSet() to change the next fields.
      For example, if thread A wants to remove currA from the list, it might call
      compareAndSet() to set predA ’s next field to currA ’s successor. Unfortunately, this
      idea does not work, as shown in Fig. 9.21. Part (a) shows a thread A attempting to re-
      move a node a while thread B is adding a node b. Suppose A applies compareAndSet()
      to head.next, while B applies compareAndSet() to a.next. The net effect is that a is
      correctly deleted but b is not added to the list. In part (b), A attempts to remove a,
      the first node in the list, while B is about to remove b, where a points to b. Suppose

      FIGURE 9.21
      The LockFreeList class: why mark and reference fields must be modified atomically. In
      part (a), thread A is about to remove a, the first node in the list, while B is about to add b.
      Suppose A applies compareAndSet() to head.next, while B applies compareAndSet() to a.next.
      The net effect is that a is correctly deleted but b is not added to the list. In part (b), thread A
      is about to remove a, the first node in the list, while B is about to remove b, where a points
      to b. Suppose A applies compareAndSet() to head.next, while B applies compareAndSet() to
      a.next. The net effect is to remove a, but not b.
                                                    9.8 Nonblocking synchronization              221

    A applies compareAndSet() to head.next, while B applies compareAndSet() to a.next.
    The net effect is the removal of a, but not b.
        We need a way to ensure that a node’s fields cannot be updated after that node
    has been logically or physically removed from the list. Our approach is to treat the
    node’s next and marked fields as a single atomic unit: any attempt to update the next
    field when the marked field is true will fail.
        As described in detail in Pragma 9.8.1, an AtomicMarkableReference<T> object
    encapsulates both a reference to an object of type T and a Boolean mark. These fields
    can be atomically updated, either together or individually.
        We make each node’s next field an AtomicMarkableReference<Node>. Thread A
    logically removes currA by setting the mark bit in the node’s next field, and shares
    the physical removal with other threads performing add() or remove(): As each thread
    traverses the list, it cleans up the list by physically removing any marked nodes it
    encounters. In other words, threads performing add() and remove() do not traverse

     PRAGMA 9.8.1
     An AtomicMarkableReference<T> object (defined by the java.util.concurrent.
     atomic package) encapsulates both a reference to an object of type T and a Boolean
     mark, also called a mark bit. These fields can be updated atomically, either to-
     gether or individually. The compareAndSet() method tests the expected reference
     and mark values, and if both tests succeed, replaces them with updated reference
     and mark values. The get() method has an unusual interface: It returns the ob-
     ject’s reference value and stores the mark value in a Boolean array argument. The
     getReference() and isMarked() methods return the reference and mark values, re-
     spectively. The interfaces of these methods are shown in Fig. 9.22.
     In C or C++, one could provide this functionality efficiently by “stealing” a bit
     from a pointer, using bit-wise operators to extract the mark and the pointer from a
     single word. In Java, one cannot manipulate pointers directly, so this functionality
     must be provided by a library.

1   public boolean compareAndSet(T expectedReference,
2                                T newReference,
3                                boolean expectedMark,
4                                boolean newMark);
5   public T get(boolean[] marked);
6   public T getReference();
7   public boolean isMarked();

    FIGURE 9.22
    Some AtomicMarkableReference<T> methods: compareAndSet() tests and updates both the
    mark and reference fields; get() returns the encapsulated reference and stores the mark at
    position 0 in the argument array; getReference() and isMarked() return the reference and
    mark, respectively.

      marked nodes; they remove them before continuing. The contains() method remains
      the same as in the LazyList algorithm, traversing all nodes whether they are marked
      or not, and testing if an item is in the list based on its key and mark.
          It is worth pondering a design decision that differentiates the LockFreeList al-
      gorithm from the LazyList algorithm. Why do threads that add or remove nodes
      never traverse marked nodes, and instead physically remove all marked nodes they
      encounter? Suppose that thread A were to traverse marked nodes without physically
      removing them, and after logically removing currA , were to attempt to physically
      remove it as well. It could do so by calling compareAndSet() to try to redirect predA ’s
      next field, simultaneously verifying that predA is not marked and that it refers to
      currA . The difficulty is that, because A is not holding locks on predA and currA ,
      other threads could insert new nodes or remove predA before the compareAndSet()
      call.
          Consider a scenario in which another thread marks predA . As illustrated in
      Fig. 9.21, we cannot safely redirect the next field of a marked node, so A would
      have to restart the physical removal by retraversing the list. This time, however, A
      would have to physically remove predA before it could remove currA . Even worse,
      if there is a sequence of logically removed nodes leading to predA , A must remove
      them all, one after the other, before it can remove currA itself.
          This example illustrates why add() and remove() calls do not traverse marked
      nodes: When they arrive at the node to be modified, they may be forced to retraverse
      the list to remove previous marked nodes. Instead, we choose to have both add() and
      remove() physically remove any marked nodes on the path to their target node. The
      contains() method, by contrast, performs no modification, and therefore need not
      participate in the cleanup of logically removed nodes, allowing it, as in the LazyList,
      to traverse both marked and unmarked nodes.
          In presenting the LockFreeList algorithm, we factor out functionality common
      to the add() and remove() methods by creating a nested Window class to help with
      traversal. As shown in Fig. 9.23, a Window object is a structure with pred and curr
      fields. The find() method takes a head node and a key a, and traverses the list, seeking
      to set pred to the node with the largest key less than a, and curr to the node with
      the least key greater than or equal to a. As thread A traverses the list, each time
      it advances currA , it checks whether that node is marked (line 16). If so, it calls
      compareAndSet() to attempt to physically remove the node by setting predA ’s next
      field to currA ’s next field. This call tests both the field’s reference and Boolean mark
      values, and fails if either value has changed. A concurrent thread could change the
      mark value by logically removing predA , or it could change the reference value by
      physically removing currA . If the call fails, A restarts the traversal from the head of
      the list; otherwise the traversal continues.
          The LockFreeList class uses the same abstraction map as the LazyList class: An
      item is in the set if and only if it is referred to by an unmarked reachable node. The
      compareAndSet() call at line 17 of the find() method is an example of a benevolent
      side effect: It changes the concrete list without changing the abstract set, because
      removing a marked node does not change the value of the abstraction map.
                                                      9.8 Nonblocking synchronization           223

 1    class Window {
 2      public Node pred, curr;
 3      Window(Node myPred, Node myCurr) {
 4        pred = myPred; curr = myCurr;
 5      }
 6    }
 7    Window find(Node head, int key) {
 8      Node pred = null, curr = null, succ = null;
 9      boolean[] marked = {false};
10      boolean snip;
11      retry: while (true) {
12        pred = head;
13        curr = pred.next.getReference();
14        while (true) {
15          succ = curr.next.get(marked);
16          while (marked[0]) {
17            snip = pred.next.compareAndSet(curr, succ, false, false);
18            if (!snip) continue retry;
19            curr = succ;
20            succ = curr.next.get(marked);
21          }
22          if (curr.key >= key)
23            return new Window(pred, curr);
24          pred = curr;
25          curr = succ;
26        }
27      }
28    }

     FIGURE 9.23
     The LockFreeList class: nested Window class and find() method: find() returns a Window
     object with nodes on either side of the key; it removes marked nodes that it encounters.

         Fig. 9.24 shows the LockFreeList class’s add() method. Suppose thread A calls
     add(a). A uses find() to locate predA and currA . If currA ’s key is equal to a’s, the
     call returns false. Otherwise, add() initializes a new node a to hold a, and makes
     a point to currA . It then calls compareAndSet() (line 39) to make predA point to a.
     Because the compareAndSet() tests both the mark and the reference, it succeeds only
     if predA is unmarked and points to currA . If the compareAndSet() is successful, the
     method returns true; otherwise it starts over from head.
         Fig. 9.25 shows the LockFreeList algorithm’s remove() method. When A calls
     remove() to remove item a, it uses find() to locate predA and currA . If currA ’s key
     fails to match a’s, the call returns false. Otherwise, remove() uses a compareAndSet()
     to attempt to mark currA as logically removed (line 55). This call succeeds only if
     no other thread has set the mark first. If it succeeds, the call returns true. A single
     attempt is made to physically remove the node, but there is no need to try again

      29   public boolean add(T item) {
      30     int key = item.hashCode();
      31     while (true) {
      32       Window window = find(head, key);
      33       Node pred = window.pred, curr = window.curr;
      34       if (curr.key == key) {
      35         return false;
      36       } else {
      37         Node node = new Node(item);
      38         node.next = new AtomicMarkableReference(curr, false);
      39         if (pred.next.compareAndSet(curr, node, false, false)) {
      40           return true;
      41         }
      42       }
      43     }
      44   }

           FIGURE 9.24
           The LockFreeList class: The add() method calls find() to locate pred and curr. It adds a
           new node only if pred is unmarked and refers to curr.

      45   public boolean remove(T item) {
      46     int key = item.hashCode();
      47     boolean snip;
      48     while (true) {
      49       Window window = find(head, key);
      50       Node pred = window.pred, curr = window.curr;
      51       if (curr.key != key) {
      52         return false;
      53       } else {
      54         Node succ = curr.next.getReference();
      55         snip = curr.next.compareAndSet(succ, succ, false, true);
      56         if (!snip)
      57           continue;
      58         pred.next.compareAndSet(curr, succ, false, false);
      59         return true;
      60       }
      61     }
      62   }

           FIGURE 9.25
           The LockFreeList class: The remove() method calls find() to locate pred and curr, and
           atomically marks the node for removal.
                                                                                      9.9 Discussion            225

63   public boolean contains(T item) {
64     int key = item.hashCode();
65     Node curr = head;
66     while (curr.key < key) {
67       curr = curr.next.getReference();
68     }
69     return (curr.key == key && !curr.next.isMarked())
70   }

     FIGURE 9.26
     The LockFreeList class: The wait-free contains() method is the same as in the LazyList
     class, except that it calls curr.next.getReference() to get the successor of curr and
     curr.next.isMarked() to test whether curr is marked.

     because the node will be removed by the next thread to traverse that region of the list.
     If the compareAndSet() call fails, remove() starts over.
         The contains() method of the LockFreeList algorithm, shown in Fig. 9.26, is the
     same as that of the LazyList algorithm, except that it uses curr.next.getReference()
     and curr.next.isMarked() to get the successor and mark bit of curr.

     9.9 Discussion
     We have seen a progression of list-based lock implementations in which the granu-
     larity and frequency of locking was gradually reduced, eventually reaching a fully
     nonblocking list. The final transition from the LazyList to the LockFreeList exposes
     some of the design decisions that concurrent programmers face. As we will see, ap-
     proaches such as optimistic and lazy synchronization will appear time and again when
     designing more complex data structures.
         On the one hand, the LockFreeList algorithm guarantees progress in the face of
     arbitrary delays. However, there is a price for this strong progress guarantee:
     • The need to support atomic modification of a reference and a Boolean mark has
       an added performance cost.5
     • As add() and remove() traverse the list, they engage in concurrent cleanup of re-
       moved nodes, introducing the possibility of contention among threads, sometimes
       forcing threads to restart traversals, even if there was no change near the node each
       was trying to modify.
     On the other hand, the lazy lock-based list does not guarantee progress in the face
     of arbitrary delays: Its add() and remove() methods are blocking. However, unlike the

     5 In the java.util.concurrent package, this cost is somewhat reduced by using a reference to an interme-
     diate dummy node to signify that the marked bit is set.

      lock-free algorithm, it does not require each node to include an atomically markable
      reference. It also does not require traversals to clean up logically removed nodes; they
      progress down the list, ignoring marked nodes.
          Which approach is preferable depends on the application. In the end, the balance
      of factors such as the potential for arbitrary thread delays, the relative frequency of
      calls to the add() and remove() methods, the overhead of implementing an atomically
      markable reference, and so on, determines the choice of whether to lock, and if so, at
      what granularity.

      9.10 Chapter notes
      Lock coupling was invented by Rudolf Bayer and Mario Schkolnick [17]. The
      first designs of lock-free linked list algorithms are credited to John Valois [164].
      The lock-free list implementation shown here is a variation on the lists of Maged
      Michael [126], who based his work on earlier linked list algorithms by Tim Har-
      ris [58]. This algorithm, referred to by many as the Harris–Michael algorithm, is the
      one used in the java.util.concurrent package. The OptimisticList algorithm was
      invented for this chapter, and the lazy algorithm is credited to Steve Heller, Maurice
      Herlihy, Victor Luchangco, Mark Moir, Bill Scherer, and Nir Shavit [60].

      9.11 Exercises
      Exercise 9.1. Describe how to modify each of the linked list algorithms if object
      hash codes are not guaranteed to be unique.
      Exercise 9.2. Suppose every method call of CoarseList is linearized at the instant
      the lock is acquired. Explain why we cannot use the abstraction map described in
      Section 9.3. Give an alternative abstraction map that works for these linearization
      points.
      Exercise 9.3. Explain why the fine-grained locking algorithm is does not deadlock.
      Exercise 9.4. Explain why the fine-grained list’s add() method is linearizable.
      Exercise 9.5. Explain why the optimistic and lazy locking algorithms are not subject
      to deadlock.
      Exercise 9.6. Show an execution of the optimistic algorithm in which a thread is
      forever attempting to delete a node.
      Hint: Since we assume that all the individual node locks are starvation-free, the live-
      lock is not on any individual lock, and a bad execution must repeatedly add and
      remove nodes from the list.
      Exercise 9.7. Provide the code for the contains() method missing from the fine-
      grained algorithm. Explain why your implementation is correct.
                                                                     9.11 Exercises         227

Exercise 9.8. Is the optimistic list implementation still correct if we switch the order
in which add() locks the pred and curr nodes?
Exercise 9.9. Show that in the optimistic list algorithm, if predA is not null, then
tail is reachable from predA , even if predA itself is not reachable.

Exercise 9.10. Show that in the optimistic algorithm, the add() method needs to lock
only pred.
Exercise 9.11. Design a coarse-grained optimistic locking linked list-based set al-
gorithm that does not traverse the list while holding the lock by augmenting the list
with a version number.
Exercise 9.12. Design a fine-grained optimistic locking algorithm that uses a version
number to avoid traversing the list while holding any lock if the list does not change
during the first traversal of the list. What are the advantages and disadvantages of this
list compared with the coarse-grained list from the previous exercise?
Exercise 9.13. For each of the following modifications of the sorted linked list
algorithms, explain why the respective algorithm is still linearizable, or give a coun-
terexample showing it is not.
a. In the optimistic algorithm, the contains() method locks two nodes before decid-
   ing whether a key is present. Suppose, instead, it locks no nodes, returning true if
   it observes the value, and false otherwise.
b. In the lazy algorithm, the contains() method executes without inspecting the
   locks, but it inspects the mark bit; it returns false if a node is marked for removal.
   Suppose, instead, the contains() does not inspect the mark bit of the nodes, and
   returns true even for nodes that may be marked.
Exercise 9.14. Would the lazy algorithm still work if we marked a node as removed
simply by setting its next field to null? Why or why not? What about the lock-free
algorithm?
Exercise 9.15. In the lazy algorithm, can predA ever be unreachable? Justify your
answer.
Exercise 9.16. Your new employee claims that the lazy list’s validation method
(Fig. 9.16) can be simplified by dropping the check that pred.next is equal to curr.
After all, the code always sets pred to the old value of curr, and before pred.next
can be changed, the new value of curr must be marked, causing the validation to fail.
Explain the error in this reasoning.
Exercise 9.17. Can you modify the lazy algorithm’s remove() so it locks only one
node?
Exercise 9.18. In the lock-free algorithm, argue the benefits and drawbacks of having
the contains() method help in the cleanup of logically removed nodes.

      Exercise 9.19. In the lock-free algorithm, if an add() method call fails because pred
      does not point to curr, but pred is not marked, do we need to traverse the list again
      from head in order to attempt to complete the call?
      Exercise 9.20. Would the contains() method of the lazy and lock-free algorithms
      still be correct if logically removed entries were not guaranteed to be sorted?

      Exercise 9.21. The add() method of the lock-free algorithm never finds a marked
      node with the same key. Can one modify the algorithm so that it will simply insert
      its new added object into the existing marked node with the same key if such a node
      exists in the list, thus saving the need to insert a new node?

      Exercise 9.22. Explain why the following cannot happen in the LockFreeList algo-
      rithm: A node with item x is logically but not yet physically removed by some thread,
      then the same item x is added into the list by another thread, and finally a contains()
      call by a third thread traverses the list, finding the logically removed node, and re-
      turning false, even though the linearization order of the remove() and add() implies
      that x is in the set.
      Exercise 9.23. Consider the following two modifications for the sorted linked list
      algorithms:
      a. In the optimistic algorithm, the contains() method locks two nodes before decid-
         ing whether a key is present. Suppose, instead, it locks no nodes, returning true if
         it observes the value, and false otherwise.
      b. In the lazy algorithm, the contains() method executes without inspecting the
         locks, but it inspects the mark bit; it returns false if a node is marked for removal.
         Suppose, instead, the contains() does not inspect the mark bit of the nodes, and
         returns true even for nodes that may be marked.
      For both of the modifications, explain why the respective algorithm is still lineariz-
      able, or give a counterexample showing it is not.

      Exercise 9.24. In the lock-free algorithm, we attempt to logically remove the
      node curr by calling curr.next.compareAndSet(succ,succ,false,true) (line 55 of
      Fig. 9.25). For each of the following implementations in which this call is replaced
      with a different method call, either explain why it is correct or describe an execution
      in which it fails.
      a. We     instead  call    curr.next.compareAndSetMark(false,true),      where
         compareAndSetMark() is a fictional method that atomically performs a normal
         compare-and-swap operation on just the mark bit.
      b. We instead call curr.next.attemptMark(succ,true), where attemptMark() is a
         real method of the AtomicMarkableReference<T> class that atomically changes
         the mark bit to the specified value if the reference has the expected value, but is
         allowed to spuriously fail (if there are concurrent modifications).
