5     Pseudorandom Generators

      One-time pad requires a key that’s as long as the plaintext. Let’s forget that we know
      about this limitation. Suppose Alice & Bob share only a short λ-bit secret k, but they
      want to encrypt a 2λ-bit plaintext m. They don’t know that (perfect) one-time secrecy is
      impossible in this setting (Exercise 2.11), so they try to get it to work anyway using the
      following reasoning:

         I The only encryption scheme they know about is one-time pad, so they decide that
           the ciphertext will have the form c = m ⊕ ?? . This means that the unknown value
            ?? must be 2λ bits long.

         I In order for the security of one-time pad to apply, the unknown value ?? should be
           uniformly distributed.

         I The process of obtaining the unknown value ?? from the shared key k should be
           deterministic, so that the sender and receiver compute the same value and decryption
           works correctly.

      Let G denote the process that transforms the key k into this mystery value. Then G :
      {0, 1} λ → {0, 1}2λ , and the encryption scheme is Enc(k, m) = m ⊕ G(k).
          It is not hard to see that if G is a deterministic function, then there are only 2λ possible
      outputs of G, so the distribution of G(k) cannot be uniform in {0, 1}2λ . We therefore cannot
      argue that the scheme is secure in the same way as one-time pad.
          However, what if the distribution of G(k) values is not perfectly uniform but only
      “close enough” to uniform? Suppose no polynomial-time algorithm can distinguish the
      distribution of G(k) values from the uniform distribution. Then surely this ought to be
      “close enough” to uniform for practical purposes. This is exactly the idea of pseudoran-
      domness. It turns out that if G has a pseudorandomness property, then the encryption
      scheme described above is actually secure (against polynomial-time adversaries, in the
      sense discussed in the previous chapter).

5.1   Definitions
      A pseudorandom generator (PRG) is a deterministic function G whose outputs are
      longer than its inputs. When the input to G is chosen uniformly at random, it induces a
      certain distribution over the possible output. As discussed above, this output distribution
      cannot be uniform. However, the distribution is pseudorandom if it is indistinguishable
      from the uniform distribution. More formally:

      © Copyright Mike Rosulek. Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 4.0. Latest version at joyofcryptography.com.
  Draft: January 3, 2021                                          CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

 Definition 5.1    Let G : {0, 1} λ → {0, 1} λ+` be a deterministic function with ` > 0. We say that G is a secure
                   pseudorandom generator (PRG) if Lprg-real G       ∼   G       , where:
(PRG security)                                                       ∼ Lprg-rand

                                                      G
                                                     Lprg-real              G
                                                                           Lprg-rand

                                                  qery():               qery():
                                                   s ← {0, 1} λ          r ← {0, 1} λ+`
                                                   return G(s)           return r

                   The value ` is called the stretch of the PRG. The input to the PRG is typically called a seed.

                      Below is an illustration of the distributions sampled by these libraries, for a length-
                   doubling (` = λ) PRG (not drawn to scale) :

                                        G

                             {0, 1} λ

                                                     {0, 1}2λ                             {0, 1}2λ
                                            pseudorandom distribution              uniform distribution

                   Lprg-real samples from distribution of red dots, by first sampling a uniform element of
                   {0, 1} λ and performing the action of G on that value to get a red result in {0, 1}2λ . The other
                   library Lprg-rand directly samples the uniform distribution on {0, 1}2λ (in green above).
                       To understand PRGs, you must simultaneously appreciate two ways to compare the
                   PRG’s output distribution with the uniform distribution:

                       I From a relative perspective, the PRG’s output distribution is tiny. Out of the 22λ
                         strings in {0, 1}2λ , only 2λ are possible outputs of G. These strings make up a
                         2λ /22λ = 1/2λ fraction of {0, 1}2λ — a negligible fraction!

                       I From an absolute perspective, the PRG’s output distribution is huge. There are 2λ
                         possible outputs of G, which is an exponential amount!

                   The illustration above only captures the relative perspective (comparing the red dots to
                   the entire extent of {0, 1}2λ ), so it can lead to some misunderstanding. Just looking at this
                   picture, it is hard to imagine how the two distributions could be indistinguishable. How
                   could a calling program not notice whether it’s seeing the whole set or just a negligible
                   fraction of the whole set? Well, if you run in polynomial-time in λ, then 2λ and 22λ are
                   both so enormous that it doesn’t really matter that one is vastly bigger than the other.
                   The relative sizes of the distribution don’t really help distinguish, since it is not a viable
                   strategy for the distinguisher to “measure” the size of the distribution it’s sampling.

Draft: January 3, 2021                                                CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                    Consider: there are about 275 molecules in a teaspoon of water, and about 22·75
                 molecules of water in Earth’s oceans. Suppose you dump a teaspoon of water into the
                 ocean and let things mix for a few thousand years. Even though the teaspoon accounts for
                 only 1/275 of the ocean’s contents, that doesn’t make it easy to keep track of all 275 water
                 molecules that originated in the teaspoon! If you are small enough to see individual water
                 molecules, then a teaspoon of water looks as big as the ocean.

                 Discussion & Pitfalls
                     I Do not confuse the interface of a PRG (it takes in a seed as input) with the interface
                       of the security libraries Lprg-? (their qery subroutine doesn’t take any input)! A
                       PRG is indeed an algorithm into which you can feed any string you like. However,
                       security is only guaranteed when the PRG is being used exactly as described in
                       the security libraries — in particular, when the seed is chosen uniformly/secretly
                       and not used for anything else.
                         Nothing prevents a user from putting an adversarially-chosen s into a PRG, or re-
                         vealing a PRG seed to an adversary, etc. You just get no security guarantee from
                         doing it, since it’s not the situation reflected in the PRG security libraries.

                     I It doesn’t really make sense to say that “0010110110 is a random string” or
                       “0000000001 is a pseudorandom string.” Randomness and pseudorandomness are
                       properties of the process used to generate a string, not properties of the indi-
                       vidual strings themselves. When we have a value z = G(s) where G is a PRG and s is
                       chosen uniformly, you could say that z was “chosen pseudorandomly.” You could say
                       that the output of some process is a “pseudorandom distribution.” But it is slightly
                       sloppy (although common) to say that a string z “is pseudorandom”.

                     I There are common statistical tests you can run, which check whether some data
                       has various properties that you would expect from a uniform distribution.1 For
                       example, are there roughly an equal number of 0s and 1s? Does the substring 01010
                       occur with roughly the frequency I would expect? If I interpret the string as a series
                       of points in the unit square [0, 1)2 , is it true that roughly π /4 of them are within
                       Euclidean distance 1 of the origin?
                         The definition of pseudorandomness is kind of a “master” definition that encom-
                         passes all of these statistical tests and more. After all, what is a statistical test, but a
                         polynomial-time procedure that obtains samples from a distribution and outputs a
                         yes/no decision? Pseudorandomness means that every statistical test that “passes”
                         uniform data will also “pass” pseudorandomly generated data.

         5.2     Pseudorandom Generators in Practice
                 You are probably expecting to now see at least one example of a secure PRG. Unfortunately,
                 things are not so simple. We have no examples of secure PRGs! If it were possible to prove
                     1 For one list of such tests, see http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-22-rev1a/SP800-22rev1a.pdf.

Draft: January 3, 2021                                       CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                 that some function G is a secure PRG, it would resolve the famous P vs NP problem —
                 the most famous unsolved problem in computer science (and arguably, all of mathematics).
                     The next best thing that cryptographic research can offer are candidate PRGs, which
                 are conjectured to be secure. The best examples of such PRGs are the ones that have been
                 subjected to significant public scrutiny and resisted all attempts at attacks so far.
                     In fact, the entire rest of this book is based on cryptography that is only conjectured
                 to be secure. How is this possible, given the book’s stated focus on provable security? As
                 you progress through the book, pay attention to how all of the provable security claims
                 are conditional — if X is secure then Y is secure. You will be able to trace back through
                 this web of implications and discover that there are only a small number of underlying
                 cryptographic primitives whose security is merely conjectured (PRGs are one example of
                 such a primitive). Everything else builds on these primitives in a provably secure way.

                     With that disclaimer out of the way, surely now you can be shown an example of a
                 conjectured secure PRG, right? There are indeed some conjectured PRGs that are simple
                 enough to show you at this point, but you won’t find them in the book. The problem is that
                 none of these PRG candidates are really used in practice. When you really need a PRG in
                 practice, you would actually use a PRG that is built from something called a block cipher
                 (which we won’t see until Chapter 6). A block cipher is conceptually more complicated
                 than a PRG, and can even be built from a PRG (in principle). That explains why this book
                 starts with PRGs. In practice, a block cipher is just a more useful object, so that is what
                 you would find easily available (even implemented with specialized CPU instructions in
                 most CPUs). When we introduce block ciphers (and pseudorandom functions), we will
                 discuss how they can be used to construct PRGs.

                 How NOT to Build a PRG
                 We can appreciate the challenges involved in building a PRG “from scratch” by first looking
                 at an obvious idea for a PRG and understanding why it’s insecure.

    Example      Let’s focus on the case of a length-doubling PRG. It should take in λ bits and output 2λ bits.
                 The output should look random when the input is sampled uniformly. A natural idea is for
                 the candidate PRG to simply repeat the input twice. After all, if the input s is random, then
                 s ks is also random, too, right?

                                                         G(s) :
                                                          return s ks

                 To understand why this PRG is insecure, first let me ask you whether the following strings
                 look like they were sampled uniformly from {0, 1}8 :

                                       11011101, 01010101, 01110111, 01000100, · · ·

                 Do you see any patterns? Every string has its first half equal to its second half. That is a
                 conspicuous pattern because it is relatively rare for a uniformly chosen string to have this
                 property.

Draft: January 3, 2021                                         CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                     Of course, this is exactly what is wrong with this simplistic PRG G defined above. Every
                 output of G has equal first/second halves. But it is rare for uniformly sampled strings to have
                 this property. We can formalize this observation as an attack against the PRG-security of G:
                                                                A
                                                         x ky := qery()
                                                                     ?
                                                         return x = y
                 The first line means to obtain the result of query and set its first half to be the string x and
                 its second half to be y. This calling program simply checks whether the output of query has
                 equal halves.
                      To complete the attack, we must show that this calling program has non-negligible bias
                 distinguishing the Lprg-? libraries.
                     I When linked to Lprg-real , the calling program receives outputs of G, which always have
                                                                    G
                       matching first/second halves. So Pr[A ? Lprg-real    ⇒ 1] = 1. Below we have filled in
                       Lprg-real with the details of our G algorithm:
                                                                           G
                                                                          Lprg-real
                                                          A
                                                   x ky := qery() ? qery():
                                                            ?
                                                   return x = y      s ← {0, 1} λ
                                                                     return s ks

                     I When linked to Lprg-rand , the calling program receives uniform samples from {0, 1}2λ .
                                                                           G
                                                                          Lprg-rand
                                                          A
                                                   x ky := qery() ? qery():
                                                            ?
                                                   return x = y      r ← {0, 1}2λ
                                                                     return r

                         A outputs 1 whenever we sample a string from {0, 1}2λ with equal first/second halves.
                         What exactly is the probability of this happening? There are several ways to see that
                         the probability is 1/2λ (this is like asking the probability of rolling doubles with two
                         dice, but each die has 2λ sides instead of 6). Therefore, Pr[A ? Lprg-rand
                                                                                             G      ⇒ 1] = 1/2λ .

                 The advantage of this adversary is 1 − 1/2λ which is certainly non-negligible — it does not
                 even approach 0 as λ grows. This shows that G is not a secure PRG.
                      This example illustrates how randomness/pseudorandomness is a property of the en-
                 tire process, not of individual strings. If you take a string of 1s and concatenate it with
                 another string of 1s, you get a long string of 1s. “Containing only 1s” is a property of
                 individual strings. If you take a “random string” and concatenate it with another “random
                 string,” you might not get a “random long string.” Being random is not a property of an
                 individual string, but of the entire process that generates it.
                      Outputs from this G have equal first/second halves, which is an obvious pattern. The
                 challenge of desiging a secure PRG is that its outputs must have no discernable pattern!
                 Any pattern will lead to an attack similar to the one shown above.

    Draft: January 3, 2021                                        CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                     Related Concept: Random Number Generation
                     The security of a PRG requires the seed to be chosen uniformly. In practice, the seed has to
                     come from somewhere. Generally a source of “randomness” is provided by the hardware
                     or operating system, and the process that generates these random bits is (confusingly)
                     called a random number generator (RNG).
                         In this course we won’t cover low-level random number generation, but merely point
                     out what makes it different than the PRGs that we study:

                         I The job of a PRG is to take a small amount of “ideal” (in other words, uniform)
                           randomness and extend it.

                         I By contrast, an RNG usually takes many inputs over time and maintains an internal
                           state. These inputs are often from physical/hardware sources. While these inputs
                           are “noisy” in some sense, it is hard to imagine that they would be statistically uni-
                           form. So the job of the RNG is to “refine” (sometimes many) sources of noisy data
                           into uniform outputs.

             5.3     Application: Shorter Keys in One-Time-Secret Encryption
                     We revisit the motivating example from the beginning of this chapter. Alice & Bob share
                     only a λ-bit key but want to encrypt a message of length λ + `. The main idea is to expand
                     the key k into a longer string using a PRG G, and use the result as a one-time pad on the
                     (longer) plaintext. More precisely, let G : {0, 1} λ → {0, 1} λ+` be a PRG, and define the
                     following encryption scheme:

Construction 5.2              K = {0, 1} λ        KeyGen:         Enc(k, m):             Dec(k, c):
  (Pseudo-OTP)                M = {0, 1} λ+`       k←K             return G(k) ⊕ m        return G(k) ⊕ c
                              C = {0, 1} λ+`       return k

                         The resulting scheme will not have (perfect) one-time secrecy. That is, encryptions of
                     m L and m R will not be identically distributed in general. However, the distributions will
                     be indistinguishable if G is a secure PRG. The precise flavor of security obtained by this
                     construction is the following.

  Definition 5.3                                                 Σ
                     Let Σ be an encryption scheme, and let Lots-L          Σ
                                                                      and Lots-R be defined as in Definition 2.6 (and
                     repeated below for convenience). Then Σ has (computational) one-time secrecy if Lots-L    Σ    ∼
                                                                                                                    ∼
                       Σ                                                                                Σ
                     Lots-R . That is, if for all polynomial-time distinguishers A, we have Pr[A ? Lots-L ⇒ 1] ≈
                                Σ
                     Pr[A ? Lots-R   ⇒ 1].

                                                 Σ
                                                Lots-L                              Σ
                                                                                   Lots-R
                                    eavesdrop(m L , m R ∈ Σ.M):         eavesdrop(m L , m R ∈ Σ.M):
                                     k ← Σ.KeyGen                        k ← Σ.KeyGen
                                     c ← Σ.Enc(k, m L )                  c ← Σ.Enc(k, m R )
                                      return c                            return c

Draft: January 3, 2021                                       CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                       This is essentially the same as Definition 2.6, except we are using ∼
                                                                                           ∼ (indistinguisha-
                  bility) instead of ≡ (interchangeability).

   Claim 5.4      Let pOTP denote Construction 5.2. If pOTP is instantiated using a secure PRG G then pOTP
                  has computational one-time secrecy.

                  We must show that Lots-L ∼
                                         pOTP     pOTP
       Proof                                  ∼ Lots-R . As usual, we will proceed using a sequence of hybrids
                                    pOTP              pOTP
                  that begins at Lots-L and ends at Lots-R . For each hybrid library, we will demonstrate that
                  it is indistinguishable from the previous one. Note that we are allowed to use the fact
                  that G is a secure PRG. In practical terms, this means that if we can express some hybrid
                                         G
                  library in terms of Lprg-real (one of the libraries in the PRG security definition), we can
                                                    G
                  replace it with its counterpart Lprg-rand  (or vice-versa). The PRG security of G says that
                  such a change will be indistinguishable.

                                     pOTP
                                   Lots-L

                  eavesdrop(m L , m R ∈ {0, 1} λ+` ):                                   pOTP
        pOTP
       Lots-L :                                                 The starting point is Lots-L , shown here with
                    k ← {0, 1} λ                                the details of pOTP filled in.
                    c := G(k) ⊕ m L
                    return c

                                               G
                                              Lprg-real
                  eavesdrop(m L , m R ):
                                                                The first hybrid step is to factor out the
                   z ← qery()                                   computations involving G, in terms of the
       Lhyb-1 :                          ? qery():
                   c := z ⊕ m L             s ← {0, 1} λ          G
                                                                Lprg-real library.
                    return c                return G(s)

                                                G
                                              Lprg-rand
                  eavesdrop(m L , m R ):                        From the PRG security of G, we may re-
                                                                                       G              G
                   z ← qery()                                   place the instance of Lprg-real with Lprg-rand .
       Lhyb-2 :                          ? qery():
                   c = z ⊕ mL
                      :
                                            r ← {0, 1} λ+`
                                                                The resulting hybrid library Lhyb-2 is indis-
                    return c                                    tinguishable from the previous one.
                                            return r

                                                                A subroutine has been inlined. Note that the
                          Lots-L
                           OTP
                                                                resulting library is precisely Lots-L
                                                                                                 OTP involv-

                  eavesdrop(m L , m R ):                        ing standard one-time pad on plaintexts
       Lhyb-3 :     z ← {0, 1} λ+`                              of size λ + `. We have essentially proven
                    c := z ⊕ m L                                that pOTP is indistinguishable from standard
                    return c                                    OTP, and therefore we can apply the security
                                                                of OTP.

Draft: January 3, 2021                                       CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                          Lots-R
                           OTP

                  eavesdrop(m L , m R ):                        The (perfect) one-time secrecy of r OTP al-
                   z ← {0, 1} λ+`                               lows us to replace Lots-L
                                                                                    OTP with L OTP ; they are
       Lhyb-4 :                                                                               ots-R
                   c := z ⊕ m R                                 interchangeable.
                    return c

                  The rest of the proof is essentially a “mirror image” of the previous steps, in which we
                  perform the same steps but in reverse (and with m R being used instead of m L ).

                                                G
                                              Lprg-rand
                  eavesdrop(m L , m R ):
                                                                A statement has been factored out into a
                   z ← qery()
       Lhyb-5 :                          ? qery():              subroutine, which happens to exactly match
                   c := z ⊕ m R             r ← {0, 1} λ+`        G
                                                                Lprg-rand .
                    return c                return r

                                                G
                                              Lprg-real
                  eavesdrop(m L , m R ):
                                                                From the PRG security of G, we can replace
                   z ← qery()              qery():                 G             G
       Lhyb-6 :                          ?                      Lprg-rand with Lprg-real . The resulting library
                   c := z ⊕ m R             s ← {0, 1} λ        is indistinguishable from the previous one.
                    return c
                                            return G(s)

                            pOTP
                          Lots-R
                  eavesdrop(m L , m R ):
        pOTP                                                    A subroutine has been inlined. The result is
       Lots-R :     k ← {0, 1} λ                                  pOTP
                                                                Lots-R .
                    c := G(k) ⊕ m R
                    return c

                  Summarizing, we showed a sequence of hybrid libraries satisfying the following:
                           Lots-L ≡ Lhyb-1 ∼
                                           ∼ Lhyb-2 ≡ Lhyb-3 ≡ Lhyb-4 ≡ Lhyb-5 ∼
                                                                               ∼ Lhyb-6 ≡ Lots-R .
                            pOTP                                                           pOTP

                  Hence, Lots-L ∼
                           pOTP      pOTP
                                ∼ Lots-R , and pOTP has (computational) one-time secrecy.                     ?

         5.4      Extending the Stretch of a PRG
                  The stretch of a PRG measures how much longer its output is than its input. Can we use
                  a PRG with small stretch to construct a PRG with larger stretch? The answer is yes, but
                  only if you do it the right way!

                  Two Approaches to Increase Stretch
                  Suppose G : {0, 1} λ → {0, 1}2λ is a length-doubling PRG (i.e., a PRG with stretch λ). Below
                  are two ideas for constructing a PRG with longer stretch:

Draft: January 3, 2021                                            CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                                                     λ                                                 λ
                    H 1 (s):                H1                         H 2 (s):               H2
                      x ky := G(s)                                       x ky := G(s)
                                                 G            G                                    G            G
                      u kv := G(y)                                       u kv := G(y)
                      return x ku kv                                     return x k y ku kv
                                             | {z }                                             | {z }
                                                         3λ                                                4λ

                 Although the constructions are similar, only one of them is secure. Before reading any
                 further, can you guess which of H 1 , H 2 is a secure PRG and which is insecure? By carefully
                 comparing these two approaches, I hope you develop a better understanding of the PRG
                 security definition.

                 A Security Proof
                 I think it’s helpful to illustrate the “stragey” of security proofs by starting from the desired
                 conclusion and working backwards. What better way to do this than as a Socratic dialogue
                 in the style of Galileo?2

                  Salviati: I’m sure that H 1 is the secure PRG.

                 Simplicio: If I understand the security definition for PRGs correctly, you mean that the
                            output of H 1 looks indistinguishable from uniform, when the input to H 1 is
                            uniform. Why do you say that?

                  Salviati: Simple! H 1 ’s output consists of segments called x, u, and v. Each of these are
                            outputs of G, and since G itself is a PRG its outputs look uniform.

                 Simplicio: I wish I had your boldness, Salviati. I myself am more cautious. If G is a secure
                            PRG, then its outputs are indeed indistinguishable from uniform, but surely
                            only when its input is uniform! Are you so sure that’s the case here?

                  Salviati: You raise a good point, Simplicio. In these endeavors it is always preferable to
                            err on the side of caution. When we want to claim that H 1 is a secure PRG, we
                            consider the nature of its outputs when its seed s is uniform. Since H 1 sends that
                            seed s directly into G, your concern is addressed.

                 Simplicio: Yes, I can see how in the expression x ky := G(s) the input to G is uniform, and
                            so its outputs x and y are indistinguishable from random. Since x is part of
                            H 1 ’s output, we are making progress towards showing that the entire output of
                            H 1 is indistinguishable from random! However, the output of H 1 also contains
                            terms u and v. When I examine how they are generated, as u kv := G(y), I
                            become concerned again. Surely y is not uniform, so I see no way to apply the
                            security if G!
                     2 Don’t answer that.

Draft: January 3, 2021                                               CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                    Salviati: Oh, bless your heart. The answer could not be any more obvious! It is true that
                              y is not uniformly distributed. But did you not just convince yourself that y is
                              indistinguishable from uniform? Should that suffice?

                   Simplicio: Incredible! I believe I understand now. Let me try to summarize: We suppose
                              the input s to H 1 is chosen uniformly, and examine what happens to H 1 ’s out-
                              puts. In the expression x ky := G(s), the input to G is uniform, and thus x
                              and y are indistinguishable from uniform. Now, considering the expression
                              u kv := G(y), the result is indistinguishable from a scenario in which y is truly
                              uniform. But if y were truly uniform, those outputs u and v would be indistin-
                              guishable from uniform! Altogether, x, u, and v (the outputs of H 1 ) are each
                              indistinguishable from uniform!

                   I hope that was as fun for you as it was for me.3 The formal security proof and its sequence
                   of hybrids will follow the outline given in Simplicio’s summary. We start by applying the
                   PRG security definition to the first call to G, and replace its outputs with truly uniform
                   values. After this change, the input to the second call to G becomes uniform, allowing us
                   to apply the PRG security definition again.

   Claim 5.5       If G is a secure length-doubling PRG, then H 1 (defined above) is a secure (length-tripling)
                   PRG.

       Proof       One of the trickier aspects of this proof is that we are using a secure PRG G to prove
                                                                          H1           G
                   the security of another PRG H 1 . That means both Lprg-?     and Lprg-?  will appear in this
                   proof. Both libraries/interfaces have a subroutine named “qery”, and we will rename
                   these subroutines qeryH1 and qeryG to disambiguate.
                                                H1    ∼   H1
                       We want to show that Lprg-real ∼ Lprg-rand . As usual, we do so with a hybrid sequence.
                                                                                                      G
                   Since we assume that G is a secure PRG, we are allowed to use the fact that Lprg-real     ∼
                                                                                                             ∼
                    G
                   Lprg-rand .

                              H1
                             Lprg-real

                   qeryH1 ():
                                                                                                H1
      H
     Lprg-real :    s ← {0, 1} λ                                      The starting point is Lprg-real , shown here with
                    x ky := G(s) )                                    the details of H 1 filled in.
                    u kv := G(y)   H 1 (s)
                    return x ku kv

                                                     G
                                                    Lprg-real
                   qeryH1 ():
                                                                      The first invocation of G has been factored out
                     x ky := qeryG ()
                                        qeryG ():                     into a subroutine. The resulting hybrid library
                     u kv = G(y)
                          :              s ← {0, 1} λ                                           G
                                                                      includes an instance of Lprg-real .
                     return x ku kv      return G(s)
                       3 If you’re wondering what the hell just happened: In Galileo’s 1632 book Dialogue Concerning the Two
                   Chief World Systems, he lays out the arguments for heliocentrism using a dialog between Salviati (who advo-
                   cated the heliocentric model) and Simplicio (who believed the geocentric model).

Draft: January 3, 2021                                 CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                                           G
                                         Lprg-rand
                   qeryH1 ():
                                                       From the PRG security of G, we can replace the
                    x ky := qeryG ()                                 G              G
                                       qeryG ():       instance of Lprg-real with Lprg-rand . The result-
                    u kv := G(y)        r ← {0, 1}2λ   ing hybrid library is indistinguishable.
                    return x ku kv      return r

                   qeryH1 ():
                    x ky ← {0, 1}2λ
                                                       A subroutine has been inlined.
                    u kv := G(y)
                    return x ku kv

                   qeryH1 ():
                                                       Choosing 2λ uniformly random bits and then
                    x ← {0, 1} λ                       splitting them into two halves has exactly the
                    y ← {0, 1} λ                       same effect as choosing λ uniformly random
                    u kv := G(y)                       bits and independently choosing λ more.
                    return x ku kv

                                           G
                                          Lprg-real
                   qeryH1 ():
                                                       The remaining appearance of G has been fac-
                    x ← {0, 1} λ                                                            G
                                       qeryG ():       tored out into a subroutine. Now Lprg-real
                    u kv := qeryG ()    s ← {0, 1} λ   makes its second appearance.
                    return x ku kv      return G(s)

                                           G
                                         Lprg-rand
                   qeryH1 ():
                                                       Again, the PRG security of G lets us replace
                    x ← {0, 1} λ                          G              G
                                       qeryG ():       Lprg-real with Lprg-rand . The resulting hybrid
                    u kv := qeryG ()    r ← {0, 1}2λ   library is indistinguishable.
                    return x ku kv      return r

                   qeryH1 ():
                    x ← {0, 1} λ
                                                       A subroutine has been inlined.
                    u kv ← {0, 1}2λ
                    return x ku kv

                          H1
                         Lprg-rand
                                                       Similar to above, concatenating λ uniform bits
      H1           qeryH1 ():                          with 2λ independently uniform bits has the
     Lprg-rand :                                       same effect as sampling 3λ uniform bits. The
                    r ← {0, 1}3λ                                                 H1
                                                       result of this change is Lprg-rand .
                    return r

Draft: January 3, 2021                                        CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                 Through this sequence of hybrid libraries, we showed that:
                     H1                                                                         H1
                    Lprg-real ≡ Lhyb-1 ∼
                                       ∼ Lhyb-2 ≡ Lhyb-3 ≡ Lhyb-4 ≡ Lhyb-5 ∼
                                                                           ∼ Lhyb-6 ≡ Lhyb-7 ≡ Lprg-rand .

                 Hence, H 1 is a secure PRG.                                                                  ?

                 Where the Proof Breaks Down for H 2
                 The only difference between H 1 and H 2 is that the variable y is included in the output.
                 How does that minor change affect the reasoning that we applied to H 1 ?

                                                     H 2 (s):
                                                       x ky := G(s)
                                                       u kv := G(y)
                                                       return x k y ku kv

                 We argued that outputs u and v are indistinguishable from uniform since its input y is also
                 indistinguishable from random. But it’s not quite so simple: A PRG’s output is indistin-
                 guishable from random if (1) its seed is uniform, and (2) the seed is not used for anything
                 else! This construction H 2 violates condition (2) because it includes the “seed” y in the
                 output.
                      We can see this idea reflected in the formal PRG definition. In Lprg-real , the seed s is
                 chosen uniformly, given as input to G, and then goes out of scope! If we try to reproduce
                 the security proof for H 1 with H 2 instead, we’ll get stuck when we are trying to factor out
                 the second call to G in terms of Lprg-real :

                         qeryH2 ():                                                         G
                                                             qeryH1 ():                    Lprg-real
                          x ← {0, 1} λ
                                                              x ← {0, 1} λ
                           y ← {0, 1} λ             {                               ? qeryG ():
                                                              u kv := qeryG ()         s ← {0, 1} λ
                           u kv := G(y)
                                                              return x k y ku kv       return G(s)
                           return x kyku kv
                                                            |                  {z                      }
                                                                     scope error! y undefined
                 We are trying to factor out the two highlighted lines into a separate library, renaming y
                 into s in the process. But s can only exist inside the private scope of the new library, while
                 there still exists a “dangling reference” y in the original library.
                     Speaking more generally about PRGs, suppose we have a call to G somewhere and
                 want to argue that its outputs are pseudorandom. We can only express this call to G in
                              G
                 terms of Lprg-real   if the input to G is uniform and is used nowhere else. That’s not true
                                                                                G
                 here – we can’t express one of the calls to G in terms of Lprg-real  , so we can’t be sure that
                 the outputs of that call to G look random.
                     These subtle issues are not limited to PRGs. Every hybrid security proof in this course
                 includes steps where we factor out some statements in terms of some pre-existing library.
                 Don’t take these steps for granted! They will fail (often because of scoping issues) if the
                 construction isn’t using the building block correctly. You should always treat such “fac-
                 toring out” steps as “sanity checks” for your proof.

Draft: January 3, 2021                                              CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                 A Concrete Attack on H 2
                 So far, we’ve only demonstrated that we get stuck when trying to prove the security of
                 H 2 . But that doesn’t necessarily mean that H 2 is insecure – it could mean that we’re just
                 not clever enough to see a different security proof. To show that H 2 is actually insecure,
                 we must demonstrate a successful distinguishing attack.
                       Attacking a PRG amounts to finding “patterns” in their outputs. Does H 2 have a pat-
                 tern in its outputs? Yes, in this case the pattern is that if you write the output in the
                 form x ky ku kv, then u kv is always equal to G(y). The calling program can check for this
                 condition, which is unlikely to happen for truly uniform values.
                       You may wonder, is it legal for the calling program to compute G(y)? Well, G is a
                 publicly known algorithm (Kerckhoffs’ principle!), and y is right there as part of the input.
                 Nothing prevents the calling program from running G “in its head.”4

   Claim 5.6     Construction H 2 is not a secure PRG, even if G is.

       Proof     Consider the following distinguisher A:

                                                          x kyku kv := qery()
                                                                           ?
                                                           return G(y) = u kv

                                         H2
                 When A is linked to Lprg-real , the outputs indeed satisfy the condition G(y) = u kv, so A
                 outputs true with probability 1.
                                             H2
                     When A is linked to Lprg-rand  , the outputs are truly uniform. It is helpful to imagine
                 x and y being chosen before u and v. As soon as y is chosen, the value G(y) is uniquely
                 determined, since G is a deterministic algorithm. Then A will output true if u kv is chosen
                 exactly to equal this G(y). Since u and v are chosen uniformly, and are a total of 2κ bits
                 long, this event happens with probability 1/22κ .
                     A’s advantage is the difference in these probabilities: 1 − 1/22κ , which is non-
                 negligible.                                                                                ?

                 Discussion
                 In the attack on H 2 , we never tried to distinguish the output of G from uniform. H 2 is
                 insecure even if G is the best PRG in the world! It’s insecure because of the incorrect way
                 it uses G.
                      From now on in this book, we’ll be studying higher-level constructions that are assem-
                 bled from various building blocks — in this chapter, fancy PRGs constructed from simpler
                 PRGs. “Security” means: if the building blocks are secure then the construction is secure.
                 “Insecurity” means: even if the building blocks are secure, the construction can be insecure.
                 So when you’re showing insecurity, you shouldn’t directly attack the building blocks! You
                 should assume the building blocks are secure and attack the way that the building blocks
                 are being used.
                     4 Compare to the case of distinguishing G(s) from uniform, for a secure G. The calling program knows
                 the algorithm G but doesn’t have the seed s — it only knows the output G(s). In the case of H 2 , the calling
                 program learns both y and G(y)!

   Draft: January 3, 2021                                              CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

       ? 5.5 Applications: Stream Cipher & Symmetric Ratchet
                    The PRG-feedback construction can be generalized in a natural way, by continuing to
                    feed part of G’s output into G again. The proof works in the same way as for the previous
                    construction — the security of G is applied one at a time to each application of G.

      Claim 5.7     If G is a secure length-doubling PRG, then for any n (polynomial function of λ) the following
                    construction Hn is a secure PRG with stretch nλ:
                                                              λ bits
                            Hn (s):
                             s 0 := s
                             for i = 1 to n:                   G       G        G        ··· G      ← n copies of G
                                 si kti := G(si−1 )
                             return t 1 k · · · ktn ksn                                 ···
                                                              |               {z                }
                                                                            λ+nλ bits

                       The fact that this chain of PRGs can be extended indefinitely gives another useful
                    functionality:

  Definition 5.8    A stream cipher is an algorithm G that takes a seed s and length ` as input, and outputs a
(Stream cipher)     string. It should satisfy the following requirements:

                        1. G(s, `) is a string of length `.

                        2. If i < j, then G(s, i) is a prefix of G(s, j).

                        3. For each n, the function G(·, n) is a secure PRG.

                    Because of the 2nd rule, you might want to think about a single infinitely long string that is
                    the limit of G(s, n) as n goes to infinity. The finite-length strings G(s, n) are all the prefixes
                    of this infinitely long string.
                        The PRG-feedback construction can be used to construct a secure stream cipher in the
                    natural way: given seed s and length `, keep iterating the PRG-feedback main loop until
                    ` bits have been generated.

                                                          G     G      G         G        ···

                    Symmetric Ratchet
                    Suppose Alice & Bob share a symmetric key k and are using a secure messaging app to
                    exchange messages over a long period of time. Later in the course we will see techniques
                    that Alice & Bob could use to securely encrypt many messages using a single key. How-
                    ever, suppose Bob’s device is compromised and an attacker learns k. Then the attacker
                    can decrypt all past, present, and future ciphertexts that it saw!

    Draft: January 3, 2021                                        CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                         Alice & Bob can protect against such a key compromise by using the PRG-feedback
                     stream cipher to constantly “update” their shared key. Suppose they do the following,
                     starting with their shared key k:

                         I They use k to seed a chain of length-doubling PRGs, and both obtain the same stream
                           of pseudorandom keys t 1 , t 2 , . . ..

                         I They use ti as a key to send/receive the ith message. The details of the encryption
                           are not relevant to this example.

                         I After making a call to the PRG, they erase the PRG input from memory, and only
                           remember the PRG’s output. After using ti to send/receive a message, they also
                           erase it from memory.

                     This way of using and forgetting a sequence of keys is called a symmetric ratchet.

Construction 5.9             s0 = k                                             s0   s1     s2     s3
(Symm Ratchet)               for i = 1 to ∞:
                               si kti := G(si−1 )
                                                                                G      G      G     G      ···
                               erase si−1 from memory
                               use ti to encrypt/decrypt the ith message
                               erase ti from memory                            t1     t2     t3     t4

                     Suppose that an attacker compromises Bob’s device after n ciphertexts have been sent. The
                     only value residing in memory is sn , which the attacker learns. Since G is deterministic, the
                     attacker can now compute tn+1 , tn+2 , . . . in the usual way and decrypt all future ciphertexts
                     that are sent.
                          However, we can show that the attacker learns no information about t 1 , . . . , tn from
                     sn , which implies that the previous ciphertexts remain safe. By compromising the key sn ,
                     the adversary only compromises the security of future messages, but not past messages.
                     Sometimes this property is called forward secrecy, meaning that messages in the present
                     are protected against a key-compromise that happens in the future.
                          This construction is called a ratchet, since it is easy to advance the key sequence in the
                     forward direction (from sn to sn+1 ) but hard to reverse it (from sn+1 to sn ). The exercises
                     explore the problem of explicitly reversing the ratchet, but the more relevant property
                     for us is whether the attacker learns anything about the ciphertexts that were generated
                     before the compromise.

      Claim 5.10     If the symmetric ratchet (Construction 5.9) is used with a secure PRG G and an encryption
                     scheme Σ that has uniform ciphertexts (and Σ.K = {0, 1} λ ), then the first n ciphertexts are
                     pseudorandom, even to an eavesdropper who compromises the key sn .

           Proof     We are considering an attack scenario in which n plaintexts are encrypted, and the adver-
                     sary sees their ciphertexts as well as the ratchet-key sn . This situation is captured by the
                     following library:

Draft: January 3, 2021                                                       CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                                                                                s0

                             attack(m 1 , . . . , mn ):
                              s 0 ← {0, 1} λ                                    G        G        G        ··· G
                              for i = 1 to n:
                                  si kti := G(si−1 )                         t1   t2  t3        tn
                                  c i ← Σ.Enc(ti , mi )                                   · · ·
                                                                              Enc Enc Enc        Enc
                              return (c 1 , . . . , c n , sn )
                                                                               c1       c2       c3            cn    si
                 As we have seen, the shaded box (the process that computes t 1 , . . . , tn from s 0 ) is actually
                 a PRG. Let us rewrite the library in terms of this PRG Hn :
                                                                                 s0

                             attack(m 1 , . . . , mn ):
                               s 0 ← {0, 1} λ                                    G        G     HGn        ··· G
                               t 1 k · · · ktn ksn := Hn (s 0 )
                               for i = 1 to n:                               t1   t2  t3        tn
                                 c i ← Σ.Enc(ti , mi )                        Enc Enc Enc · · ·  Enc
                               return (c 1 , . . . , c n , sn )
                                                                                c1       c2       c3            cn   si
                 Now, we can apply the PRG security of Hn and instead choose t 1 , . . . , tn and sn uniformly.
                 This change is indistinguishable, by the security of the PRG. Note that we have not written
                 out the standard explicit steps (factor out the first two lines of attack in terms of Lprg-real ,
                 replace with Lprg-rand , and inline).

                                       attack(m 1 , . . . , mn ):
                                                                                 attack(m 1 , . . . , mn ):
                                          for i = 1 to n:
                                                                                  for i = 1 to n:
                                             ti ← {0, 1} λ
                                                                                      ti ← {0, 1} λ
                                          sn ← {0, 1} λ                        ≡
                                                                                     c i ← Σ.Enc(ti , mi )
                                          for i = 1 to n:                          sn ← {0, 1} λ
                                            c i ← Σ.Enc(ti , mi )                 return (c 1 , . . . , c n , sn )
                                          return (c 1 , . . . , c n , sn )

                 At this point, the encryption scheme is being used “as intended,” meaning that we generate
                 its keys ti uniformly/indepenendtly, and use each key only for one encryption and nothing
                 else. Formally speaking, this means we can factor out the body of the for-loop in terms of
                 Lots$-real :
                                                                                               Σ
                                                                                              Lots$-real
                                           attack(m 1 , . . . , mn ):
                                            for i = 1 to n:                           ctxt(m ∈ Σ.M):
                                               c i ← ctxt(mi )                    ?    k ← Σ.KeyGen
                                            sn ← {0, 1} λ                              c ← Σ.Enc(k, m)
                                            return (c 1 , . . . , c n , sn )           return c

Draft: January 3, 2021                                            CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                  We can now replace Lots$-real with Lots$-rand and inline the subroutine (without showing
                  the intermediate library). The result is:

                                                    attack(m 1 , . . . , mn ):
                                                     for i = 1 to n:
                                                        c i ← Σ.C
                                                     sn ← {0, 1} λ
                                                     return (c 1 , . . . , c n , sn )

                  This final library is indistinguishable from the first one. As promised, we showed that the
                  attacker cannot distinguish the first n ciphertexts from random values, even when seeing
                  sn .                                                                                      ?

                      This proof used the uniform-ciphertexts property, but the same logic applies to basi-
                  cally any encryption property you care about — just imagine factoring out the encryption
                  steps in terms of a different library than Lots$-real .

                  Exercises
            5.1. Let G : {0, 1} λ → {0, 1} λ+` be an injective (i.e., 1-to-1) PRG. Consider the following
                 distinguisher:

                                                                   A
                                                  x := qery()
                                                  for all s 0 ∈ {0, 1} λ :
                                                    if G(s 0) = x then return 1
                                                  return 0

                                                                    G
                  (a) What is the advantage of A in distinguishing Lprg-real      G
                                                                             and Lprg-rand ? Is it negligible?
                  (b) Does this contradict the fact that G is a PRG? Why or why not?
                  (c) What happens to the advantage if G is not injective?

            5.2. Let G : {0, 1} λ → {0, 1} λ+` be an injective PRG, and consider the following distinguisher:

                                                                   A
                                                        x := qery()
                                                        s 0 ← {0, 1} λ
                                                                           ?
                                                        return G(s 0) = x

                                                                G
                  What is the advantage of A in distinguishing Lprg-real       G
                                                                         from Lprg-rand ?
                  possible output of G or not.
          Hint:
                  When computing Pr[A ? Lprg-rand
                                               G  outputs 1], separate the probabilities based on whether x is a

Draft: January 3, 2021                                             CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

            5.3. For any PRG G : {0, 1} λ → {0, 1} λ+` there will be many strings in {0, 1} λ+` that are
                 impossible to get as output of G. Let S be any such set of impossible G-outputs, and
                 consider the following adversary that has S hard-coded:

                                                                     A
                                                              x := qery()
                                                                          ?
                                                              return x ∈ S

                                                                   G
                  What is the advantage of A in distinguishing Lprg-real       G
                                                                         from Lprg-rand ? Why does an ad-
                  versary like this one not automatically break every PRG?

            5.4. Show that the scheme from Section 5.3 does not have perfect one-time secrecy, by showing
                 that there must exist two messages m 1 and m 2 whose ciphertext distributions differ.
                  the encryption algorithms.
          Hint:   alone, and do not depend on the random choices made “at runtime” — when the library executes
                  and s 2 . Note that it is legitimate for an attacker to “know” s 1 and s 2 , as these are properties of G
                  to find two messages m 1 and m 2 whose ciphertext distributions assign different probabilities to s 1
                  There must exist strings s 1 , s 2 ∈ {0, 1} λ+` where s 1 ∈ im(G), and s 2 < im(G). Use these two strings

            5.5. The proof of Claim 5.5 applies the PRG security rule to both of the calls to G, starting with
                 the first one. Describe what happens when you try to apply the PRG security of G to these
                 two calls in the opposite order. Does the proof still work, or does it work only in the order
                 that was presented?

            5.6. Let ` 0 > ` > 0. Extend the “PRG feedback” construction to transform any PRG of stretch
                 ` into a PRG of stretch ` 0. Formally define the new PRG and prove its security using the
                 security of the underlying PRG.

            5.7. Prove that if G is a secure PRG, then so is the function H (s) = G(s).

            5.8. Let G : {0, 1} λ → {0, 1}3λ be a secure length-tripling PRG. For each function below, state
                 whether it is also a secure PRG. If the function is a secure PRG, give a proof. If not, then
                 describe a successful distinguisher and explicitly compute its advantage. When we write
                 akb kc := G(s), each of a, b, c have length λ.

                         H (s):                                              H (s):
                  (a)      x kykz := G(s)                                      x := G(s)
                                                                         (d)
                           return G(x)kG(z)                                   y := G(0λ )
                                                                               return x ky
                         H (s):
                  (b)      x kykz := G(s)
                           return x ky

                      H (s):                                                 H (s):
                        x := G(s)                                              x := G(s)
                  (c)                                                    (e)
                       y := G(s)                                              y := G(0λ )
                        return x ky                                            return x ⊕ y

Draft: January 3, 2021                                             CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                         // H : {0, 1}2λ → {0, 1}3λ                         // H : {0, 1}2λ → {0, 1}6λ
                         H (s L ks R ):                                     H (s L ks R ):
                  (f)      x := G(s L )                               (g)     x := G(s L )
                          y := G(s R )                                       y := G(s R )
                           return x ⊕ y                                       return x ky

            5.9. Let G : {0, 1} λ → {0, 1}3λ be a secure length-tripling PRG. Prove that each of the follow-
                 ing functions is also a secure PRG:

                         // H : {0, 1}2λ → {0, 1}4λ

                  (a) H (s L ks R ):
                       y := G(s R )
                        return s L ky
                         Note that H includes half of its input directly in the output. How do you reconcile this
                         fact with the conclusion of Exercise 5.14(b)?
                         // H : {0, 1}2λ → {0, 1}3λ
                  (b) H (s L ks R ):
                        return G(s L )

         ? 5.10. Let G be a secure length-doubling PRG. One of the following constructions is a secure PRG
                 and one is not. Which is which? Give a security proof for one and an attack for the other.

                    H 1 (s):                    H1                       H 2 (s):                   H2
                      x ky := G(s)                                         x ky := G(s)
                                                      G     G                                            G    G
                      u kv := G(y)                                         u kv := G(y)
                      return (x ⊕ y)ku kv                                  return x k(y ⊕ u)kv               ⊕
                                                   ⊕

                  a secure PRG, and then prove that H 1 /H 2 is not secure when using this G.
          Hint:   attack only works for certain G. Basically, you will need to construct a particular G, prove that it’s
                  Usually when something is insecure, it’s insecure for any choice of building block. In this case, the

           5.11. A frequently asked question in cryptography forums is whether it’s possible to determine
                 which PRG implementation was used by looking at output samples.
                  Let G 1 and G 2 be two PRGs with matching input/output lengths. Define two libraries
                    G1             G2
                  Lwhich-prg and Lwhich-prg as follows:

                                                       G1                    G2
                                                      Lwhich-prg            Lwhich-prg

                                               qery():                   qery():
                                                s ← {0, 1} λ              s ← {0, 1} λ
                                                return G 1 (s)            return G 2 (s)

Draft: January 3, 2021                                                CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                                                                        G1        ∼  G2
                  Prove that if G 1 and G 2 are both secure PRGs, then Lwhich-prg ∼ Lwhich-prg — that is, it is
                  infeasible to distinguish which PRG was used simply by receiving output samples.

           5.12. Let G 1 and G 2 be deterministic functions, each accepting inputs of length λ and producing
                 outputs of length 3λ.

                  (a) Define the function H (s 1 ks 2 ) = G 1 (s 1 ) ⊕ G 2 (s 2 ). Prove that if either of G 1 or G 2 (or
                      both) is a secure PRG, then so is H .
                  (b) What can you say about the simpler construction H (s) = G 1 (s) ⊕ G 2 (s), when one of
                      G 1 , G 2 is a secure PRG?

         ? 5.13. Prove that if PRGs exist, then P , NP.
                  construct an efficient adversary to attack any candidate PRG.
          Hint:   {y | ∃s : G(s) = y} ∈ NP. Prove the contrapositive! Use the powerful assumption that P = NP to

           5.14. (a) Let f be any function. Show that the following function G is not a secure PRG, no
                     matter what f is. Describe a successful distinguisher and explicitly compute its ad-
                     vantage:
                                                                  G(s):
                                                                   return s k f (s)

                  (b) Let G : {0, 1} λ → {0, 1} λ+` be a candidate PRG. Suppose there is a polynomial-time
                      algorithm V with the property that it inverts G with non-negligible probability. That
                      is,
                                                        V (G(s)) = s is non-negligible.
                                                                     
                                                 Pr
                                                 s←{0, 1 } λ

                         Show that if an algorithm V exists with this property, then G is not a secure PRG. In
                         other words, construct a distinguisher contradicting the PRG-security of G and show
                         that it achieves non-negligible distinguishing advantage.
                         Note: Don’t assume anything about the output of V other than the property shown
                         above. In particular, V might very frequently output the “wrong” thing.

           5.15. Let s 0 , s 1 , . . . and t 1 , t 2 , . . . be defined as in the symmetric ratchet (Construction 5.9).

                  (a) Prove that if G is a secure PRG then the following two libraries are indistinguishable,
                      for any polynomial-time algorithm A:

                                                          Lleft                       Lright
                                                 test():                        test():
                                                  sn−1 ← {0, 1} λ                sn ← {0, 1} λ
                                                  sn ktn := G(sn−1 )             t˜ = A(sn )
                                                  t˜ = A(sn )                    tn ← {0, 1} λ
                                                            ?                              ?
                                                  return t˜ = tn                 return t˜ = tn

                  (b) What is Pr[test outputs true] in Lright ?
                  (c) Prove that for any polynomial-time algorithm A, Pr[A(sn ) = tn ] is negligible, where
                      sn , tn are generated as in the symmetric ratchet construction.

Draft: January 3, 2021                                      CHAPTER 5. PSEUDORANDOM GENERATORS

                 (d) Prove that for any polynomial-time algorithm A, Pr[A(sn ) = sn−1 ] is negligible. In
                     other words, “turning the ratchet backwards” is a hard problem.
                                                   the proof should be a few lines, a direct corollary of part (c).
               Hint:

