        15 Public-Key Encryption

                  So far, the encryption schemes that we’ve seen are symmetric-key schemes. The same
                  key is used to encrypt and decrypt. In this chapter we introduce public-key (sometimes
                  called asymmetric) encryption schemes, which use different keys for encryption and de-
                  cryption. The idea is that the encryption key can be made public, so that anyone can send
                  an encryption to the owner of that key, even if the two users have never spoken before
                  and have no shared secrets. The decryption key is private, so that only the designated
                  owner can decrypt.
                      We modify the syntax of an encryption scheme in the following way. A public-key
                  encryption scheme consists of the following three algorithms:

                  KeyGen: Outputs a pair (pk, sk) where pk is a public key and sk is a private/secret key.

                       Enc: Takes the public key pk and a plaintext m as input, and outputs a ciphertext c.

                       Dec: Takes the secret key sk and a ciphertext c as input, and outputs a plaintext m.

                  We modify the correctness condition similarly. A public-key encryption scheme satisfies
                  correctness if, for all m ∈ M and all (pk, sk) ← KeyGen, we have Dec(sk, Enc(pk, m)) = m
                  (with probability 1 over the randomness of Enc).

         15.1     Security Definitions
                  We now modify the definition of CPA security to fit the setting of public-key encryption.
                  As before, the adversary calls a challenge subroutine with two plaintexts — the differ-
                  ence between the two libraries is which plaintext is actually encrypted. Of course, the
                  encryption operation now takes the public key.
                     Then the biggest change is that we would like to make the public key public. In other
                  words, the calling program should have a way to learn the public key (otherwise the library
                  cannot model a situation where the public key is known to the adversary). To do this, we
                  simply add another subroutine that returns the public key.

Definition 15.1   Let Σ be a public-key encryption scheme. Then Σ is secure against chosen-plaintext at-

                  © Copyright Mike Rosulek. Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 4.0. Latest version at joyofcryptography.com.
  Draft: January 3, 2021                                              CHAPTER 15. PUBLIC-KEY ENCRYPTION

                                          Σ
                   tacks (CPA secure) if Lpk-cpa-L ∼  Σ        , where:
                                                   ∼ Lpk-cpa-R

                                            Σ
                                           Lpk-cpa-L                             Σ
                                                                                Lpk-cpa-R

                                (pk, sk) ← Σ.KeyGen                   (pk, sk) ← Σ.KeyGen
                                getpk():                              getpk():
                                 return pk                             return pk
                                challenge(m L , m R ∈ Σ.M):           challenge(m L , m R ∈ Σ.M):
                                 return Σ.Enc(pk, m L )                return Σ.Enc(pk, m R )

         to-do     Re-iterate how deterministic encryption still can’t be CPA-secure in the public-key setting.

                   Pseudorandom Ciphertexts
                   We can modify/adapt the definition of pseudorandom ciphertexts to public-key encryption
                   in a similar way:

Definition 15.2    Let Σ be a public-key encryption scheme. Then Σ has pseudorandom ciphertexts in the
                                                                                   Σ
                   presence of chosen-plaintext attacks (CPA$ security) if Lpk-cpa$-real ∼  Σ            ,
                                                                                         ∼ Lpk-cpa$-rand
                   where:
                                                                          Σ
                                                                        Lpk-cpa$-rand
                                               Σ
                                             Lpk-cpa$-real
                                                                  (pk, sk) ← Σ.KeyGen
                                      (pk, sk) ← Σ.KeyGen
                                                                  getpk():
                                      getpk():
                                                                    return pk
                                        return pk
                                                                  challenge(m ∈ Σ.M):
                                      challenge(m ∈ Σ.M):
                                                                    c ← Σ.C
                                        return Σ.Enc(pk, m)
                                                                    return c

                      As in the symmetric-key setting, CPA$ security (for public-key encryption) implies
                   CPA security:

    Claim 15.3     Let Σ be a public-key encryption scheme. If Σ has CPA$ security, then Σ has CPA security.

                      The proof is extremely similar to the proof of the analogous statement for symmetric-
                   key encryption (Theorem 7.3), and is left as an exercise.

         15.2      One-Time Security Implies Many-Time Security
                   So far, everything about public-key encryption has been directly analogous to what we’ve
                   seen about symmetric-key encryption. We now discuss a peculiar property that is different
                   between the two settings.

  Draft: January 3, 2021                                             CHAPTER 15. PUBLIC-KEY ENCRYPTION

                        In symmetric-key encryption, we saw examples of encryption schemes that are secure
                   when the adversary sees only one ciphertext, but insecure when the adversary sees more
                   ciphertexts. One-time pad is the standard example of such an encryption scheme.
                        Surprisingly, if a public-key encryption scheme is secure when the adversary sees just
                   one ciphertext, then it is also secure for many ciphertexts! In short, there is no public-key
                   one-time pad that is weaker than full-fledged public-key encryption — there is public-key
                   encryption or nothing.
                        To show this property formally, we first adapt the definition of one-time secrecy (Def-
                   inition 2.6) to the public-key setting. There is one small but important technical subtlety:
                   in Definition 2.6 the encryption key is chosen at the last possible moment in the body of
                   challenge. This ensures that the key is local to this scope, and therefore each value of
                   the key is only used to encrypt one plaintext.
                        In the public-key setting, however, it turns out to be important to allow the adver-
                   sary to see the public key before deciding which plaintexts to encrypt. (This concern is
                   not present in the symmetric-key setting precisely because there is nothing public upon
                   which the adversary’s choice of plaintexts can depend.) For that reason, in the public-key
                   setting we must sample the keys at initialization time so that the adversary can obtain the
                   public key via getpk. To ensure that the key is used to encrypt only one plaintext, we
                   add a counter and a guard condition to challenge, so that it only responds once with a
                   ciphertext.
                                                                                            Σ
                   Let Σ be a public-key encryption scheme. Then Σ has one-time secrecy if Lpk-ots-L ∼
Definition 15.4                                                                                      ∼
                     Σ
                   Lpk-ots-R , where:

                                            Σ
                                           Lpk-ots-L                            Σ
                                                                               Lpk-ots-R

                                (pk, sk) ← Σ.KeyGen                  (pk, sk) ← Σ.KeyGen
                                count := 0                           count := 0
                                getpk():                             getpk():
                                 return pk                            return pk
                                challenge(m L , m R ∈ Σ.M):          challenge(m L , m R ∈ Σ.M):
                                  count := count + 1                  count := count + 1
                                  if count > 1: return null           if count > 1: return null
                                  return Σ.Enc(pk, m L )              return Σ.Enc(pk, m R )

    Claim 15.5     Let Σ be a public-key encryption scheme. If Σ has one-time secrecy, then Σ is CPA-secure.
                              Σ
                   Suppose Lpk-ots-L ∼     Σ                                    Σ      ∼    Σ
         Proof                       ∼ Lpk-ots-R . Our goal is to show that Lpk-cpa-L  ∼ Lpk-cpa-R  . The proof
                   centers around the following hybrid library Lhyb-h , which is designed to be linked to either

Draft: January 3, 2021                                                  CHAPTER 15. PUBLIC-KEY ENCRYPTION

                 Lpk-ots-L or Lpk-ots-R :
                                                                Lhyb-h
                                                  count = 0
                                                  pk := getpk()
                                                  challenge(m L , m R ∈ Σ.M):
                                                   count := count + 1
                                                   if count < h :
                                                       return Σ.Enc(pk, m R )
                                                   elsif count = h :
                                                       return challenge0(m L , m R )
                                                   else:
                                                       return Σ.Enc(pk, m L )

                 Here the value h is an unspecified value that will be a hard-coded constant, and
                 challenge0 (called by the “elsif” branch) and getpk refer to the subroutine in Lpk-ots-? .
                 Note that Lhyb-h is designed so that it only makes one call to challenge0 — in particular,
                 only when its own challenge subroutine is called for the h th time.
                    We now make a few observations:

                                 Lhyb-1 ? Lpk-ots-L ≡ Lpk-cpa-L : In both libraries, every call to challenge en-
                                                                  crypts the left plaintext. In particular, the first
                                                                  call to challenge in Lhyb-1 triggers the “elsif”
                                                                  branch, so the challenge is routed to Lpk-ots-L ,
                                                                  which encrypts the left plaintext. In all other
                                                                  calls to challenge, the “else” branch is trig-
                                                                  gered and the left plaintext is encrypted explic-
                                                                  itly.

                 Lhyb-h ? Lpk-ots-R ≡ Lhyb-(h + 1) ? Lpk-ots-L , for all h . In both of these libraries, the first h
                                                                 calls to challenge encrypt the right plaintext,
                                                                 and all subsequent calls encrypt the left plain-
                                                                 text.

                         Lhyb-h ? Lpk-ots-L ∼
                                            ∼ Lhyb-h ? Lpk-ots-R , for all h . This simply follows from the fact
                                                                   that Lpk-ots-L ∼
                                                                                  ∼ Lpk-ots-R .
                                 Lhyb-q ? Lpk-ots-R ≡ Lpk-cpa-R , where q is the number of times the calling pro-
                                                                  gram calls challenge. In particular, every call
                                                                  to challenge encrypts the right plaintext.

                         Putting everything together, we have that:

                                         Lpk-cpa-L ≡ Lhyb-1 ? Lpk-ots-L ∼
                                                                        ∼ Lhyb-1 ? Lpk-ots-R
                                                   ≡ Lhyb-2 ? Lpk-ots-L ∼
                                                                        ∼ Lhyb-2 ? Lpk-ots-R
                                                   ..
                                                    .

     Draft: January 3, 2021                                                  CHAPTER 15. PUBLIC-KEY ENCRYPTION

                                                       ≡ Lhyb-q ? Lpk-ots-L ∼
                                                                            ∼ Lhyb-q ? Lpk-ots-R
                                                       ≡ Lpk-cpa-R ,

                      and so Lpk-cpa-L ∼
                                       ∼ Lpk-cpa-R .                                                                 ?

                           The reason this proof goes through for public-key encryption but not symmetric-key
                      encryption is that anyone can encrypt in a public-key scheme. In a symmetric-key scheme,
                      it is not possible to generate encryptions without the key. But in a public-key scheme, the
                      encryption key is public.
                           In more detail, the Lhyb-h library can indeed obtain pk from Lpk-ots-? . It therefore has
                      enough information to perform the encryptions for all calls to challenge. Indeed, you
                      can think of Lhyb-0 as doing everything that Lpk-cpa-L does, even though it doesn’t know
                      the secret key. We let Lhyb-h designate the h th call to challenge as a special one to be
                      handled by Lpk-ots-? . This allows us to change the h th encryption from using m L to m R .

            15.3      ElGamal Encryption
                      ElGamal encryption is a public-key encryption scheme that is based on DHKA.

Construction 15.6     The public parameters are a choice of cyclic group G with n elements and generator д.
       (ElGamal)                            KeyGen:                Enc(A, M ∈ G):
                              M=G            sk := a ← Zn           b ← Zn                      Dec(a, (B, X )):
                              C = G2         pk := A := дa          B := д b                     return X (B a )−1
                                             return (pk, sk)        return (B, M · Ab )

                      The scheme satisfies correctness, since for all M:

                                              Dec(sk, Enc(pk, M)) = Dec(sk, (дb , M · Ab ))
                                                                       = (M · Ab )((дb )a )−1
                                                                       = M · (дab )(дab )−1 = M.

                      Security
                      Imagine an adversary who is interested in attacking an ElGamal scheme. This adversary
                      sees the public key A = дa and a ciphertext (дb , M дab ) go by. Intuitively, the Decisional
                      Diffie-Hellman assumption says that the value дab looks random, even to someone who
                      has seen дa and дb . Thus, the message M is masked with a pseudorandom group element
                      — as we’ve seen before, this is a lot like masking the message with a random pad as in
                      one-time pad. The only change here is that instead of the xor operation, we are using the
                      group operation in G.
                          More formally, we can prove the security of ElGamal under the DDH assumption:

       Claim 15.7     If the DDH assumption in group G is true, then ElGamal in group G is CPA$-secure.

Draft: January 3, 2021                                               CHAPTER 15. PUBLIC-KEY ENCRYPTION

       Proof     It suffices to show that ElGamal has pseudorandom ciphertexts when the calling program
                 sees only a single ciphertext. In other words, we will show that Lpk-ots$-real ∼
                                                                                                ∼ Lpk-ots$-rand ,
                 where these libraries are the Lpk-cpa$-? libraries from Definition 15.2 but with the single-
                 ciphertext restriction used in Definition 15.4. It is left as an exercise to show that
                 Lpk-ots$-real ∼
                               ∼ Lpk-ots$-rand implies CPA$ security (which in turn implies CPA security);
                 the proof is very similar to that of Claim 15.5.
                      The sequence of hybrid libraries is given below:

                         Lpk-ots$-real
                  a ← Zn
                  A := дa
                  count = 0
                  getpk():
                                                                              The starting point is the
                   return A
                                                                              Lpk-ots$-real library, shown here
                  qery(M ∈ G):                                                with the details of ElGamal filled
                   count : count + 1                                          in.
                   if count > 1: return null
                   b ← Zn
                   B := дb
                   X := M · Ab
                   return (B, X )

                  a ← Zn ; b ← Zn
                  A := дa ; B := дb ; C := Ab
                  count = 0                                                  The main body of qery com-
                                                                             putes some intermediate values
                  getpk():
                                                                             B and Ab . But since those lines
                   return A                                                  are only reachable one time, it
                  qery(M ∈ G):                                               does not change anything to pre-
                   count : count + 1                                         compute them at initialization
                   if count > 1: return null                                 time.
                   X := M · C
                   return (B, X )

Draft: January 3, 2021                                                  CHAPTER 15. PUBLIC-KEY ENCRYPTION

                  (A, B, C) ← dhqery()
                  count = 0
                  getpk():                                  Ldh-real           We can factor out the genera-
                   return A                                                    tion of A, B, C in terms of the
                                                    dhqery():
                                                                               Ldh-real library from the De-
                  qery(M ∈ G):                       a, b ← Zn                 cisional Diffie-Hellman security
                   count : count + 1                 return (дa , дb , дab )   definition (Definition 14.5).
                   if count > 1: return null
                   X := M · C
                   return (B, X )

                  (A, B, C) ← dhqery()
                  count = 0
                  getpk():                                 Ldh-rand
                   return A                                                    Applying the security of DDH,
                                                  dhqery():
                                                                               we can replace Ldh-real with
                  qery(M ∈ G):                     a, b, c ← Zn
                                                                               Ldh-rand .
                   count : count + 1               return (дa , дb , дc )
                   if count > 1: return null
                   X := M · C
                   return (B, X )

                  a, b, c ← Zn
                  A := дa ; B := дb ; C := дc
                  count = 0
                  getpk():
                   return A                                                    The call to dhqery has been in-
                                                                               lined.
                  qery(M ∈ G):
                   count : count + 1
                   if count > 1: return null
                   X := M · C
                   return (B, X )

Draft: January 3, 2021                                             CHAPTER 15. PUBLIC-KEY ENCRYPTION

                  a ← Zn
                  A := дa
                  count = 0
                  getpk():
                   return A                                                As before, since the main body of
                                                                           qery is only reachable once, we
                  qery(M ∈ G):                                             can move the choice of B and C
                   count : count + 1                                       into that subroutine instead of at
                   if count > 1: return null                               initialization time.
                    b, c ← Zn
                    B := дb ; C := дc
                    X := M · C
                    return (B, X )

                         Lpk-ots$-rand
                  a ← Zn                                                   When b is sampled uniformly
                  A := дa                                                  from Zn , the expression B = дb
                  count = 0                                                is a uniformly distributed ele-
                                                                           ment of G. Also recall that when
                  getpk():
                                                                           C is a uniformly distributed el-
                   return A
                                                                           ement of G, then M · C is uni-
                  qery(M ∈ G):                                             formly distributed — this is anal-
                   count : count + 1                                       ogous to the one-time pad prop-
                   if count > 1: return null                               erty (see Exercise 2.5). Applying
                   b, x ← Zn                                               this change gives the library to
                   B := д b ; X := д x                                     the left.
                   return (B, X )

                    In the final hybrid, the response to qery is a pair of uniformly distributed group
                 elements (B, X ). Hence that library is exactly Lpk-ots$-rand , as desired.         ?

       15.4      Hybrid Encryption
                 As a rule, public-key encryption schemes are much more computationally expensive than
                 symmetric-key schemes. Taking ElGamal as a representative example, computing дb in a
                 cryptographically secure cyclic group is considerably more expensive than one evaluation
                 of AES. As the plaintext data increases in length, the difference in cost between public-key
                 and symmetric-key techniques only gets worse.
                     A clever way to minimize the cost of public-key cryptography is to use a method
                 called hybrid encryption. The idea is to use the expensive public-key scheme to encrypt
                 a temporary key for a symmetric-key scheme. Then use the temporary key to (cheaply)
                 encrypt the large plaintext data.

     Draft: January 3, 2021                                               CHAPTER 15. PUBLIC-KEY ENCRYPTION

                         To decrypt, one can use the decryption key of the public-key scheme to obtain the
                      temporary key. Then the temporary key can be used to decrypt the main payload.

Construction 15.8     Let Σpub be a public-key encryption scheme, and let Σsym be a symmetric-key encryption
    (Hybrid Enc)      scheme, where Σsym .K ⊆ Σpub .M — that is, the public-key scheme is capable of encrypting
                      keys of the symmetric-key scheme.
                          Then we define Σhyb to be the following construction:
                                                                        Enc(pk, m):
                                                                         tk ← Σsym .KeyGen
                                      M = Σsym .M
                                                                         c pub ← Σpub .Enc(pk, tk)
                                      C = Σpub .C × Σsym .C
                                                                         c sym ← Σsym .Enc(tk, m)
                                                                         return (c pub , c sym )
                                     KeyGen:
                                      (pk, sk) ← Σpub .KeyGen
                                                                        Dec(sk, (c pub , c sym )):
                                      return (pk, sk)
                                                                         tk := Σpub .Dec(sk, c pub )
                                                                         return Σsym .Dec(tk, c sym )

                      Importantly, the message space of the hybrid encryption scheme is the message space of
                      the symmetric-key scheme (think of this as involving very long plaintexts), but encryption
                      and decryption involves expensive public-key operations only on a small temporary key
                      (think of this as a very short string).
                          The correctness of the scheme can be verified via:
                                                                                               
                          Dec(sk, Enc(pk, m)) = Dec sk, Σpub .Enc(pk, tk), Σsym .Enc(tk, m)
                                                                                                               
                                               = Σsym .Dec Σpub .Dec sk, Σpub .Enc(pk, tk) , Σsym .Enc(tk, m)
                                                                                           
                                                                                 
                                               = Σsym .Dec tk, Σsym .Enc(tk, m)
                                              = m.

                         To show that hybrid encryption is a valid way to encrypt data, we prove that it provides
                      CPA security, when its two components have appropriate security properties:

       Claim 15.9     If Σsym is a one-time-secret symmetric-key encryption scheme and Σpub is a CPA-secure public-
                      key encryption scheme, then the hybrid scheme Σhyb (Construction 15.8) is also a CPA-secure
                      public-key encryption scheme.

                          Note that Σsym does not even need to be CPA-secure. Intuitively, one-time secrecy
                      suffices because each temporary key tk is used only once to encrypt just a single plaintext.
                                                          Σhyb     ∼  Σhyb
            Proof     As usual, our goal is to show that Lpk-cpa-L ∼ Lpk-cpa-R , which we do in a standard sequence
                      of hybrids:

Draft: January 3, 2021                                                 CHAPTER 15. PUBLIC-KEY ENCRYPTION

                               Σ
                             hyb
                           Lpk-cpa-L
                                                    The starting point is Lpk-cpa-L , shown here with the details
                  (pk, sk) ← Σpub .KeyGen           of Σhyb filled in.

                  getpk():                          Our only goal is to somehow replace m L with m R . Since m L
                   return pk                        is only used as a plaintext for Σsym , it is tempting to simply
                                                    apply the one-time-secrecy property of Σsym to argue that
                  challenge(m L , m R ):            m L can be replaced with m R . Unfortunately, this cannot
                   tk ← Σsym .KeyGen                work because the key used for that ciphertext is tk, which
                   c pub ← Σpub .Enc(pk, tk)        is used elsewhere. In particular, it is used as an argument
                   c sym ← Σsym .Enc(tk, m L )      to Σpub .Enc.
                   return (c pub , c sym )

                    However, using tk as the plaintext argument to Σpub .Enc should hide tk to the calling
                 program, if Σpub is CPA-secure. That is, the Σpub -encryption of tk should look like a Σpub -
                 encryption of some unrelated dummy value. More formally, we can factor out the call to
                 Σpub .Enc in terms of the Lpk-cpa-L library, as follows:

                                                                                    Σ
                                                                                   pub
                                                                                 Lpk-cpa-L
                                   challenge(m L , m R ):
                                    tk ← Σsym .KeyGen                  (pk, sk) ← Σpub .KeyGen
                                    tk 0 ← Σsym .KeyGen
                                                                     getpk():
                                    c pub ← challenge0(tk, tk 0)      return pk
                                    c sym ← Σsym .Enc(tk, m L )
                                    return (c pub , c sym )            challenge0(tk L , tk R ):
                                                                        return Σpub .Enc(pk, tk L )

                 Here we have changed the variable names of the arguments of challenge0 to avoid un-
                 necessary confusion. Note also that challenge now chooses two temporary keys — one
                 which is actually used to encrypt m L and one which is not used anywhere. This is because
                 syntactically we must have two arguments to pass into challenge0.
                     Now imagine replacing Lpk-cpa-L with Lpk-cpa-R and then inlining subroutine calls. The
                 result is:
                                                (pk, sk) ← Σpub .KeyGen
                                                    getpk():
                                                     return pk
                                                    challenge(m L , m R ):
                                                     tk ← Σsym .KeyGen
                                                     tk 0 ← Σsym .KeyGen
                                                     c pub ← Σpub .Enc(pk, tk 0 )
                                                     c sym ← Σsym .Enc(tk, m L )
                                                     return (c pub , c sym )
                 At this point, it does now work to factor out the call to Σsym .Enc in terms of the Lots-L
                 library. This is because the key tk is not used anywhere else in the library. The result of

Draft: January 3, 2021                                               CHAPTER 15. PUBLIC-KEY ENCRYPTION

                 factoring out in this way is:

                               (pk, sk) ← Σpub .KeyGen
                               getpk():
                                                                                   Σ
                                return pk
                                                                                   sym
                                                                                 Lots-L

                                                                 challenge (m L , m R ):
                                                                           0
                               challenge(m L , m R ):
                                tk 0 ← Σsym .KeyGen               tk ← Σsym .KeyGen
                                c pub ← Σpub .Enc(pk, tk )0       return Σsym .Enc(tk, m L )
                                c sym ← challenge (m L , m R )
                                                        0

                                return (c pub , c sym )

                 At this point, we can replace Lots-L with Lots-R . After this change the Σsym -ciphertext
                 encrypts m R instead of m L . This is the “half-way point” of the proof, and the rest of the
                 steps are a mirror image of what has come before. In summary: we inline Lots-R , then
                 we apply CPA security to replace the Σpub -encryption of tk 0 with tk. The result is exactly
                 Lpk-cpa-R , as desired.                                                                    ?

                 Exercises
           15.1. Prove Claim 15.3.

           15.2. Show that a 2-message key-agreement protocol exists if and only if CPA-secure public-key
                 encryption exists.
                 In other words, show how to construct a CPA-secure encryption scheme from any 2-
                 message KA protocol, and vice-versa. Prove the security of your constructions.

           15.3. (a) Suppose you are given an ElGamal encryption of an unknown plaintext M ∈ G. Show
                     how to construct a different ciphertext that also decrypts to the same M.
                 (b) Suppose you are given two ElGamal encryptions, of unknown plaintexts M 1 , M 2 ∈ G.
                     Show how to construct a ciphertext that decrypts to their product M 1 · M 2 .

           15.4. Suppose you obtain two ElGamal ciphertexts (B 1 , C 1 ), (B 2 , C 2 ) that encrypt unknown plain-
                 texts M 1 and M 2 . Suppose you also know the public key A and cyclic group generator д.

                 (a) What information can you infer about M 1 and M 2 if you observe that B 1 = B 2 ?
                 (b) What information can you infer about M 1 and M 2 if you observe that B 1 = д · B 2 ?
               ? (c) What information can you infer about M 1 and M 2 if you observe that B 1 = (B 2 )2 ?

