Chapter 1

Introduction

Software is transforming the way that we live and work. We communicate with friends via
social media on smartphones, and use websites to buy what we need and to learn about any-
thing in the world. At work, software helps us organize our businesses, reach customers, and
distinguish ourselves from competitors.
    Unfortunately, it is still challenging to produce high-quality software, and much of the
software we do use has bugs and security vulnerabilities. Recent examples of problems caused
by buggy software include uncontrollable acceleration in Toyota cars and a glitch in Nest smart
thermostats left many homes without heat. Just looking at one category of defect, software race
conditions, we observe problems ranging from power outages affecting millions of people in
the US Northeast in 2003 to deadly radiation overdoses from the Therac-25 radiation therapy
machine.
    Program analysis is all about analyzing software code to learn about its properties. Pro-
gram analyses can find bugs or security vulnerabilities like the ones mentioned above. It can
also be used to synthesize test cases for software, and even to automatically patch software.
For example, Facebook uses the Getafix tool to automatically produce patches for bugs found
by other analysis tools.1 Finally, program analysis is used in compiler optimizations in order
to make programs run faster.
    This book covers both foundations and practical aspects of the automated analysis of pro-
grams, which is becoming increasingly critical to find software errors, assure program correct-
ness, and discover properties of code. We start by looking at how we can use mathematical
formalisms to reason about how programs execute, then examine how programs are repre-
sented within compilers and analysis tools. We study dataflow analysis and the correspond-
ing theory of abstract interpretation, which captures the essence of a broad range of program
analyses and supports reasoning about their correctness. Building on this foundation, later
chapters will describe various kinds of dataflow analysis, pointer analysis, interprocedural
analysis, and symbolic execution.
    In course assignments that go with this book, students will design and implement analy-
sis tools that find bugs and verify properties of software. Students will apply knowledge and
skills learned in the course to a capstone research project that involves designing, implement-
ing, and evaluating a novel program analysis.
    Overall program analysis is an area with deep mathematical foundations that is also very
practically useful. I hope you will also find it to be fun!

  1
      See https://code.fb.com/developer-tools/getafix-how-facebook-tools-learn-to-fix-bugs-automatically/

