Chapter 2

The W HILE Language and Program
Representation

2.1       The W HILE Language
We will begin our study of the theory of analyses using a simple programming language called
W HILE, with various extensions. The W HILE language is at least as old as Hoare’s 1969 pa-
per [15] on a logic for proving program properties. It is a simple imperative language, with (to
start!) assignment to local variables, if statements, while loops, and simple integer and boolean
expressions.
    We use the following metavariables to describe different categories of syntax. The letter on
the left will be used as a variable representing a piece of a program. On the right, we describe
the kind of program piece that variable represents:

                                     S      statements
                                     a      arithmetic expressions (AExp)
                                     x, y   program variables (Vars)
                                     n      number literals
                                     b      boolean expressions (BExp)
    The syntax of W HILE is shown below. Statements S can be an assignment x :“ a; a skip
statement, which does nothing;1 and if and while statements, with boolean expressions b
as conditions. Arithmetic expressions a include variables x, numbers n, and one of several
arithmetic operators (opa ). Boolean expressions include true, false, the negation of another
Boolean expression, Boolean operators opb applied to other Boolean expressions, and relational
operators opr applied to arithmetic expressions.

 S ::“       x :“ a               b ::“         true      a ::“ x         opb   ::“   and | or
   |         skip                   |           false       |   n         opr   ::“   ă | ď | “
   |         S1 ; S2                |           not b       |   a1 opa a2       |     ą | ě
   |         if b then S1 else S2   |           b1 opb b2                 opa   ::“   `|´|˚|{
   |         while b do S           |           a1 opr a2

  1
      Similar to a lone semicolon or open/close bracket in C or Java

2.2     W HILE 3A DDR: A Representation for Analysis
For analysis, the source-like definition of W HILE can sometimes prove inconvenient. For ex-
ample, W HILE has three separate syntactic forms—statements, arithmetic expressions, and
boolean predicates—and we would have to define the semantics and analysis of each sepa-
rately to reason about it. A simpler and more regular representation of programs will help
simplify certain of our formalisms.
    As a starting point, we will eliminate recursive arithmetic and boolean expressions and
replace them with simple atomic statement forms, which are called instructions, after the as-
sembly language instructions that they resemble. For example, an assignment statement of the
form w “ x ˚ y ` z will be rewritten as a multiply instruction followed by an add instruction.
The multiply assigns to a temporary variable t1 , which is then used in the subsequent add:

                                                   t1 “ x ˚ y
                                                   w “ t1 ` z
    As the translation from expressions to instructions suggests, program analysis is typically
studied using a representation of programs that is not only simpler, but also lower-level than
the source (W HILE, in this instance) language. Many Java analyses are actually conducted on
byte code, for example. Typically, high-level languages come with features that are numerous
and complex, but can be reduced into a smaller set of simpler primitives. Working at the lower
level of abstraction thus also supports simplicity in the compiler.
    Control flow constructs such as if and while are similarly translated into simpler jump
and conditional branch constructs that jump to a particular (numbered) instruction. For exam-
ple, a statement of the form if b then S1 else S2 would be translated into:

                                              1:    if b then goto 4
                                              2:    S2
                                              3:    goto 5
                                              4:    S1

Exercise 1. How would you translate a W HILE statement of the form while b do S?

    This form of code is often called 3-address code, because every instruction has at most
two source operands and one result operand. We now define the syntax for 3-address code
produced from the W HILE language, which we will call W HILE 3A DDR. This language consists
of a set of simple instructions that load a constant into a variable, copy from one variable to
another, compute the value of a variable from two others, or jump (possibly conditionally) to
a new address n. A program P is just a map from addresses to instructions:2

                            I ::“      x :“ n            op ::“ ` | ´ | ˚ | {
                              |        x :“ y            opr ::“ ă | “
                              |        x :“ y op z       P   P   NÑI
                              |        goto n
                              |        if x opr 0 goto n

    Formally defining a translation from a source language such as W HILE to a lower-level
intermediate language such as W HILE 3A DDR is possible, but more appropriate for the scope
of a compilers course. For our purposes, the above should suffice as intuition. We will formally
define the semantics of W HILE 3A DDR in subsequent lectures.
   2
     The idea of the mapping between numbers and instructions is akin to mapping line numbers to code. Other
textbooks, such as Nielsen et al.’s Principles of Program Analysis, similarly use abstract labels to denote a program
point.

2.3    Extensions
The languages described above are sufficient to introduce the fundamental concepts of pro-
gram analysis in this course. However, we will eventually examine various extensions to
W HILE and W HILE 3A DDR, so that we can understand how more complicated constructs in
real languages can be analyzed. Some of these extensions to W HILE 3A DDR will include:

                            I ::“    ...
                              |      read x          input
                              |      print x         output
                              |      x :“ f pyq      function call
                              |      return x        return
                              |      x :“ y.mpzq     method call
                              |      x :“ &p         address-of operator
                              |      x :“ ˚p         pointer dereference
                              |      ˚p :“ x         pointer assignment
                              |      x :“ y.f        field read
                              |      x.f :“ y        field assignment
   We will not give semantics to these extensions now, but it is useful to be aware of them as
you will see intermediate code like this in practical analysis frameworks.

2.4    Control flow graphs
Many program analysis tools and techniques work on a representation of code known as a
control-flow graph (CFG), which is a graph-based representation of the flow of control through
the program. It connects simple instructions in a way that statically captures all possible execu-
tion paths through the program and defines the execution order of instructions in the program.
When control could flow in more than one direction, depending on program values, the graph
branches. An example is the representation of an if or while statement. At the end of the
instructions in each branch of an if statement, the branches merge together to point to the sin-
gle instruction that comes afterward. Historically, this arises from the use of program analysis
to optimize programs.
    More precisely, a control flow graph consists of a set of nodes and edges. The nodes N
correspond to basic blocks: Sequences of program instructions with no jumps in or out (no
gotos, no labeled targets). The edges E represent the flow of control between basic blocks.
We use Pred(n) to denote the set of all predecessors of the node n, and Succ(n) the set of all
successors. A CFG has a start node, and a set of final nodes, corresponding to return or other
termination of a function. Finally, for the purposes of dataflow analysis, we say that a program
point exists before and after each node. Note that there exists considerable flexibility in these
definitions, and the precision of the representation can vary based on the desired precision of
the resulting analysis as well as the peculiarities of the language. In this course, we will in fact
often ignore the concept of a basic block and just treat instructions as the nodes in a graph;
this view is semantically equivalent and simpler, but less efficient in practice. Further defining
and learning how to construct CFGs is a subject best left to a compilers course; this discussion
should suffice for our purposes.

