Chapter 3

Program Semantics

3.1     Operational Semantics
To reason about analysis correctness, we need a clear definition of what a program means. One
way to do this is using natural language (e.g., the Java Language Specification [8]). However,
although natural language specifications are accessible, they are also often imprecise. This can
lead to many problems, including incorrect compiler implementations or program analyses.
    A better alternative is a formal definition of program semantics. We begin with operational
semantics, which mimics, at a high level, the operation of a computer executing the program.
Such a semantics also reflects the way that techniques such as dataflow analysis or Hoare Logic
reason about the program, so it is convenient for our purposes.
    There are two broad classes of operational semantics: big-step operational semantics, which
specifies the entire operation of a given expression or statement; and small-step operational se-
mantics, which specifies the operation of the program one step at a time.

3.1.1    W HILE: Big-step operational semantics
We’ll start by restricting our attention to arithmetic expressions, for simplicity. What is the
meaning of a W HILE expression? Some expressions, like a natural number, have a very clear
meaning: The “meaning” of 5 is just, well, 5. But what about x ` 5? The meaning of this ex-
pression clearly depends on the value of the variable x. We must abstract the value of variables
as a function from variable names to integer values:

                                                   E P Var Ñ Z
Here E denotes a particular program state. The meaning of an expression with a variable like
x ` 5 involves “looking up” the x’s value in the associated E, and substituting it in. Given a
state, we can write a judgment as follows:

                                                    xE, ay ó n
This means that given program state E, the arithmetic expression a evaluates to n. This for-
mulation is called big-step operational semantics; the ó judgment relates an expression and
its “meaning.”1 We then build up the meaning of more complex expressions using rules of
inference (also called derivation or evaluation rules). An inference rule is made up of a set of
judgments above the line, known as premises, and a judgment below the line, known as the
conclusion. The meaning of an inference rule is that the conclusion holds if all of the premises
hold:
    1
      Note that I have chosen ó because it is a common notational convention; it’s not otherwise special. This is true
for many notational choices in formal specification.

                              premise1     premise2 . . .     premisen
                                             conclusion
An inference rule with no premises is an axiom, which is always true. For example, integers
always evaluate to themselves, and the meaning of a variable is its stored value in the state:

                                         big-int                   big-var
                            xE, ny ó n             xE, xy ó Epxq

Addition expressions illustrate a rule with premises:

                                xE, a1 y ó n1 xE, a2 y ó n2
                                                            big-add
                                  xE, a1 ` a2 y ó n1 ` n2
     But, how does the value of x come to be “stored” in E? For that, we must consider W HILE
statements. Unlike expressions, statements have no direct result. However, they can have side
effects. That is to say: the “result” or meaning of a Statement is a new state. The judgment ó as
applied to statements and states therefore looks like:

                                             xE, Sy ó E 1
   This allows us to write inference rules for statements, bearing in mind that their meaning is
not an integer, but a new state. The meaning of skip, for example, is an unchanged state:

                                                        big-skip
                                       xE, skipy ó E
Statement sequencing, on the other hand, does involve premises:

                                xE, S1 y ó E 1 xE 1 , S2 y ó E 2
                                                                 big-seq
                                      xE, S1 ; S2 y ó E 2
    The if statement involves two rules, one for if the boolean predicate evaluates to true
(rules for boolean expressions not shown), and one for if it evaluates to false. I’ll show you
just the first one for demonstration:

                              xE, by ó true xE, S1 y ó E 1
                                                              big-iftrue
                             xE, if b then S1 else S2 y ó E 1
What should the second rule for if look like?

This brings us to assignments, which produce a new state in which the variable being assigned
to is mapped to the value from the right-hand side. We write this with the notation Erx ÞÑ ns,
which can be read “a new state that is the same as E except that x is mapped to n.”

                                       xE, ay ó n
                                                        big-assign
                                xE, x :“ ay ó Erx ÞÑ ns
   Note that the update to the state is modeled functionally; the variable E still refers to the
old state, while Erx ÞÑ ns is the new state represented as a mathematical map.
   Fully specifying the semantics of a language requires a judgment rule like this for every
language construct. For brevity, these notes only include a subset of the rules for the complete
W HILE language.

Exercise 1. What are the rule(s) for the while construct?

3.1.2     W HILE: Small-step operational semantics
Big-step operational semantics has its uses. Among other nice features, it directly suggests a
simple interpreter implementation for a given language. However, it is difficult to talk about
a statement or program whose evaluation does not terminate. Nor does it give us any way to
talk about intermediate states (so modeling multiple threads of control is out).
    Sometimes it is instead useful to define a small-step operational semantics, which specifies
program execution one step at a time. We refer to the pair of a statement and a state (xE, Sy) as
a configuration. Whereas big step semantics specifies program meaning as a function between a
configuration and a new state, small step models it as a step from one configuration to another.
    You can think of small-step semantics as a set of rules that we repeatedly apply to configu-
rations until we reach a final configuration for the language (xE, skipy, in this case) if ever.2 We
write this new judgment using a slightly different arrow: Ñ. xE, Sy Ñ xE 1 , S 1 y indicates one
step of execution; xE, Sy Ñ˚ xE 1 , S 1 y indicates zero or more steps of execution. We formally
define multiple execution steps as follows:

                                            xE, Sy Ñ xE 1 , S 1 y xE 1 , S 1 y Ñ˚ xE 2 , S 2 y
                         multi-reflexive                                                       multi-inductive
  xE, Sy Ñ˚ xE, Sy                                    xE, Sy Ñ˚ xE 2 , S 2 y

   To be complete, we should also define auxiliary small-step operators Ña and Ñb for arith-
metic and boolean expressions, respectively; only the operator for statements results in an
updated state (as in big step). The types of these judgments are thus:

                                    Ñ : pE ˆ Stmtq Ñ pE ˆ Stmtq
                                    Ña : pE ˆ Aexpq Ñ Aexp
                                    Ñb : pE ˆ Bexpq Ñ Bexp
We can now again write the semantics of a W HILE program as new rules of inference. Some
rules look very similar to the big-step rules, just with a different arrow. For example:

                                                             small-var
                                           xE, xy Ña Epxq

                                                            small-int
                                            xE, ny Ña n
Compound expressions are evaluated by reducing component terms in order until they are in
normal form, and then computing a result. For example:

                                  xE, a1 y Ña a11
                                                       small-add-congruence-1
                             xE, a1 ` a2 y Ña a11 ` a2

                                  xE, a2 y Ña a12
                                                       small-add-congruence-2
                             xE, n1 ` a2 y Ña n1 ` a12

                                                                  small-add
                                    xE, n1 ` n2 y Ña n1 ` n2
Things get more interesting when we return to statements. Remember, small-step semantics
express a single execution step.

                                  xE, ay Ña a1
                                                       small-assign-congruence
                           xE, x :“ ay Ñ xE, x :“ a1 y
  2
      Not all statements reach a final configuration, like while true do skip.

                                                                      small-assign
                               xE, x :“ ny Ñ xErx ÞÑ ns, skipy
      Conditional control flow is also defined by rewriting. Consider an if statement:

                                  xE, by Ñb b1
                                                                      small-if-congruence
             xE, if b then S1 else S2 y Ñ xE, if b1 then S1 else S2 y

                                                                           small-iftrue
                           xE, if true then S1 else S2 y Ñ xE, S1 y

Exercise 2. We have again omitted the small-iffalse case, as well as rule(s) for while, as
exercises to the reader.

Note also the change for statement sequencing:

                                 xE, S1 y Ñ xE 1 , S11 y
                                                                small-seq-congruence
                              xE, S1 ; S2 y Ñ xE 1 , S11 ; S2 y

                                                                  small-seq
                                      xE, skip; S2 y Ñ xE, S2 y

3.1.3     W HILE 3A DDR: Small-step semantics
The ideas behind big- and small-step operational semantics are consistent across languages,
but the way they are written can vary based on what is notationally convenient for a particular
language or analysis. W HILE 3A DDR is slightly different from W HILE, so beyond requiring
different rules for its different constructs, it makes sense to modify our small-step notation a
bit for defining the meaning of a W HILE 3A DDR program.
    First, let’s revisit the configuration to account for the slightly different meaning of a
W HILE 3A DDR program. As before, the configuration must include the state, which we still
call E, mapping variables to values. However, a well-formed, terminating W HILE program
was effectively a single statement that can be iteratively reduced to skip; a W HILE 3A DDR
program, on the other hand, is a mapping from natural numbers to program instructions. So,
instead of a statement that is being reduced in steps, the W HILE 3A DDR c must include a pro-
gram counter n, representing the next instruction to be executed.
    Thus, a configuration c of the abstract machine for W HILE 3A DDR must include the stored
program P (which we will generally treat implicitly), the state environment E, and the current
program counter n representing the next instruction to be executed (c P E ˆ N). The abstract
machine executes one step at a time, executing the instruction that the program counter points
to, and updating the program counter and environment according to the semantics of that
instruction.
    This adds a tiny bit of complexity to the inference rules, because they must explicitly con-
sider the mapping between line number/labels and program instructions. We represent exe-
cution of the abstract machine via a judgment of the form P $ xE, ny ; xE 1 , n1 y The judgment
reads: “When executing the program P , executing instruction n in the state E steps to a new
state E 1 and program counter n1 .”3 To see this in action, consider a simple inference rule defin-
ing the semantics of the constant assignment instruction:

                                        P pnq “ x :“ m
                                                                step-const
                                P $ xE, ny ; xErx ÞÑ ms, n ` 1y
  3
      I could have used the same Ñ I did above instead of ;, but I don’t want you to mix them up.

    This states that in the case where the nth instruction of the program P (looked up using
P pnq) is a constant assignment x :“ m, the abstract machine takes a step to a state in which the
state E is updated to map x to the constant m, written as Erx ÞÑ ms, and the program counter
now points to the instruction at the following address n ` 1. We similarly define the remaining
rules:

                                   P rns “ x :“ y
                                                            step-copy
                         P $ xE, ny ; xErx ÞÑ Epyqs, n ` 1y

                       P pnq “ x :“ y op z Epyq op Epzq “ m
                                                            step-arith
                          P $ xE, ny ; xErx ÞÑ ms, n ` 1y
                                   P pnq “ goto m
                                                     step-goto
                                 P $ xE, ny ; xE, my

                   P pnq “ if x opr 0 goto m Epxq opr 0 “ true
                                                               step-iftrue
                                P $ xE, ny ; xE, my

                  P pnq “ if x opr 0 goto m Epxq opr 0 “ f alse
                                                                step-iffalse
                              P $ xE, ny ; xE, n ` 1y

    Here, we have used a single rule step-arith to encompass all arithmetic operations. A similar
generic rule can be written for boolean operators too. In previous sections, we used explicit
rules for operators like add when defining the semantics of W HILE. Either convention is fine,
since they are both equivalent. It’s usually good to choose one convention and stick to it when
defining the semantics of a language instead of mixing generic and operator-specific rules, so
as to ensure the uniqueness of derivations when desired.

3.1.4   Derivations and provability
Among other things, we can use operational semantics to prove that concrete program ex-
pressions will evaluate to particular values. We do this by chaining together rules of infer-
ence (which simply list the hypotheses necessary to arrive at a conclusion) into derivations,
which interlock instances of rules of inference to reach particular conclusions. For example if
E1 “ tx ÞÑ 4u, then:

                              xE1 , xy ó 4 xE1 , 2y ó 2
                                    xE1 , x ˚ 2y ó 8        xE1 , 6y ó 6
                                           xE1 , px ˚ 2q ´ 6y ó 2
   We say that xE, ay ó n is provable (expressed mathematically as $ xE, ay ó n) if there exists
a well-formed derivation with xE, ay ó n as its conclusion. “Well formed” simply means that
every step in the derivation is a valid instance of one of the rules of inference for this system.
   A proof system like our operational semantics is complete if every true statement is prov-
able. It is sound (or consistent) if every provable judgment is true.

3.2     Proof techniques using operational semantics
A precise language specification lets us precisely prove properties of our language or programs
written in it (and analyses of those programs!). Note that this exposition primarily uses big-
step semantics to illustrate, but the concepts generalize.

Well-founded induction. A key family of proof techniques in programming languages is
based on induction. You may already be familiar with mathematical induction. As a reminder: if
P pnq is a property of the natural numbers that we want to show holds for all n, mathematical
induction says that it suffices to show that P p0q is true (the base case), and then that if P pmq is
true, then so is P pm ` 1q for any natural number m (the inductive step). This works because
there are no infinite descending chains of natural numbers. So, for any n, P pnq can be obtained
by simply starting from the base case and applying n instances of the inductive step.
    Mathematical induction is a special case of well-founded induction, a general, powerful proof
principle that works as follows: a relation ă Ď A ˆ A is well-founded if there are no infinite
descending chains in A. If so, to prove @x P A.P pxq it is enough to prove @x P A.r@y ă x ñ
P pyqs ñ P pxq; the base case arises when there is no y ă x, and so the part of the formula
within the brackets rs is vacuously true.4
Structural induction. Structural induction is another special case of well-founded induction
where the ă relation is defined on the structure of a program or a derivation. For example,
consider the syntax of arithmetic expressions in W HILE, Aexp. Induction on a recursive def-
inition like this proves a property about a mathematical structure by demonstrating that the
property holds for all possible forms of that structure. We define the relation a ă b to hold if a
is a substructure of b. For Aexp expressions, the relation ă Ď Aexp ˆ Aexp is:

                                                    a1 ă a1 ` a2
                                                    a1 ă a1 ˚ a2
                                                    a2 ă a1 ` a2
                                                    a2 ă a1 ˚ a2
                                     . . . etc., for all arithmetic operators opa

   To prove that a property P holds for all arithmetic expressions in W HILE (or, @a P
Aexp.P paq), we must show P holds for both the base cases and the inductive cases. a is a
base case if there is no a1 such that a1 ă a; a is an inductive case if Da1 . a1 ă a. There is thus one
proof case per form of the expression. For Aexp, the base cases are:

                                                $ @n P Z . P pnq
                                                $ @x P Vars . P pxq

And the inductive cases:

                               $ @a1 , a2 P Aexp . P pa1 q ^ P pa2 q ñ P pa1 ` a2 q
                               $ @a1 , a2 P Aexp . P pa1 q ^ P pa2 q ñ P pa1 ˚ a2 q
                                . . . and so on for the other arithmetic operators. . .

Example. Let Lpaq be the number of literals and variable occurrences in some expression a
and Opaq be the number of operators in a. Prove by induction on the structure of a that @a P
Aexp . Lpaq “ Opaq ` 1:
Base cases:
  • Case a “ n. Lpaq “ 1 and Opaq “ 0
  • Case a “ x. Lpaq “ 1 and Opaq “ 0
Inductive case 1: Case a “ a1 ` a2
  • By definition, Lpaq “ Lpa1 q ` Lpa2 q and Opaq “ Opa1 q ` Opa2 q ` 1.
  4
      Mathematical induction as a special case arises when ă is simply the predecessor relation (px, x ` 1q|x P N).

   • By the induction hypothesis, Lpa1 q “ Opa1 q ` 1 and Lpa2 q “ Opa2 q ` 1.
   • Thus, Lpaq “ Opa1 q ` Opa2 q ` 2 “ Opaq ` 1.
The other arithmetic operators follow the same logic.
   Other proofs for the expression sublanguages of W HILE can be similarly conducted. For
example, we could prove that the small-step and big-step semantics will obtain equivalent
results on expressions:

                             @a P AExp . xE, ay Ñ˚a n ô xE, ay ó n
    The actual proof is left as an exercise, but note that this works because the semantics rules
for expressions are strictly syntax-directed: the meaning of an expression is determined en-
tirely by the meaning of its subexpressions, the structure of which guides the induction.
Induction on the structure of derivations. Unfortunately, that last statement is not true for
statements in the W HILE language. For example, imagine we’d like to prove that W HILE is
deterministic (that is, if a statement terminates, it always evaluates to the same value). More
formally, we want to prove that:

             @a P Aexp . @E . @n, n1 P N . xE, ay ó n ^ xE, ay ó n1 ñ n “ n1                (3.1)
                                    1                             1         1
             @b P Bexp . @E . @b, b P B .   xE, by ó b ^ xE, by ó b ñ b “ b                 (3.2)
                                1   2                       1         2         1   2
             @S .         @E, E , E .       xE, Sy ó E ^ xE, Sy ó E ñ E “ E                 (3.3)

    We can’t prove the third statement with structural induction on the language syntax be-
cause the evaluation of statements (like while) does not depend only on the evaluation of its
subexpressions.
    Fortunately, there is another way. Recall that the operational semantics assign meaning
to programs by providing rules of inference that allow us to prove judgments by making
derivations. Derivation trees (like the expression trees we discussed above) are also defined
inductively, and are built of sub-derivations. Because they have structure, we can again use
structural induction, but here, on the structure of derivations.
    Instead of assuming (and reasoning about) some statement S, we instead assume a deriva-
tion D :: xE, Sy ó E 1 and induct on the structure of that derivation (we define D :: judgment
to mean “D is the derivation that proves judgment.” e.g., D :: xE, x ` 1y ó 2). That is, to prove
that property P holds for a statement, we will prove that P holds for all possible derivations
of that statement. Such a proof consists of the following steps:
Base cases: show that P holds for each atomic derivation rule with no premises (of the form
J).
Inductive cases: For each derivation rule D of the form:

                                                 H1 ...Hn
                                         D ::“      J
By the induction hypothesis, P holds for Hi , where i “ 1 . . . n. We then have to prove that the
property is preserved by the derivation using the given rule of inference.
    A key technique for induction on derivations is inversion. Because the number of forms
of rules of inference is finite, we can tell which inference rules might have been used last in
the derivation. For example, given D :: xEi , x :“ 55y ó E, we know (by inversion) that
the assignment rule of inference must be the last rule used in D (because no other rules of
inference involve an assignment statement in their concluding judgment). Similarly, if D ::
xEi , while b do Sy ó E, then (by inversion) the last rule used in D was either the while-true
rule or the while-false rule.

    Given those preliminaries, to prove that the evaluation of statements is deterministic (equa-
tion (3) above), pick arbitrary S, E, E 1 , let D :: xE, Sy ó E 1 , and let D1 :: xE, Sy ó E 2
Proof: by induction of the structure of the derivation D, which we define D :: xE, Sy ó E 1 .
Base case: the one rule with no premises, skip:

                                      D ::“ xE, skipy ó E
    By inversion, the last rule used in D1 (which, again, produced E 2 ) must also have been the
rule for skip. By the structure of the skip rule, we know E 2 “ E.
Inductive cases: We need to show that the property holds when the last rule used in D was
each of the possible non-skip W HILE commands. I will show you one representative case; the
rest are left as an exercise. If the last rule used was the while-true statement:

                D1 :: xE, by ó true D2 :: xE, Sy ó E1 D3 :: xE1 , while b do Sy ó E 1
          D ::“                       xE, while b do Sy ó E 1
Pick arbitrary E 2 such that D1 :: xE, while b do Sy ó E 2
    By inversion, D1 must use either the while-true or the while-false rule. However,
having proved that boolean expressions are deterministic (via induction on syntax), and given
that D contains the judgment xE, by ó true, we know that D1 cannot be the while-false
rule, as otherwise it would have to contain a contradicting judgment xE, by ó false.
    So, we know that D1 is also using while-true rule. In its derivation, D1 must also have
subderivations D21 :: xE, Sy ó E11 and D31 :: xE11 , while b do Sy ó E 2 . By the induction hypoth-
esis on D2 with D21 , we know E1 “ E11 . Using this result and the induction hypothesis on D3
with D31 , we have E 2 “ E 1 .

