Chapter 4

A Dataflow Analysis Framework for
W HILE 3A DDR

4.1       Defining a dataflow analysis
A dataflow analysis computes some dataflow information at each program point in the control
flow graph.1 We thus start by examining how this information is defined. We will use σ to
denote this information. Typically σ tells us something about each variable in the program.
For example, σ may map variables to abstract values taken from some set L:

                                                     σ P Var Ñ L
    L represents the set of abstract values we are interested in tracking in the analysis. This
varies from one analysis to another. For example, consider a zero analysis, which tracks whether
each variable is zero or not at each program point (Thought Question: Why would this be
useful?). For this analysis, we define L to be the set tZ, N, Ju. The abstract value Z represents
the value 0, N represents all nonzero values. J is pronounced “top”, and we define it more
concretely later it in these notes; we use it as a question mark, for the situations when we do
not know whether a variable is zero or not, due to imprecision in the analysis.
    Conceptually, each abstract value represents a set of one or more concrete values that may
occur when a program executes. We define an abstraction function α that maps each possible
concrete value of interest to an abstract value:

                                                      α:ZÑL
For zero analysis, we define α so that 0 maps to Z and all other integers map to N :

                                              αZ p0q “ Z
                                              αZ pnq “ N where n ‰ 0

    The core of any program analysis is how individual instructions in the program are ana-
lyzed and affect the analysis state σ at each program point. We define this using flow functions
that map the dataflow information at the program point immediately before an instruction to
the dataflow information after that instruction. A flow function should represent the semantics
of the instruction, but abstractly, in terms of the abstract values tracked by the analysis. We
will link semantics to the flow function precisely when we talk about correctness of dataflow
analysis. For now, to approach the idea by example, we define the flow functions fZ for zero
analysis on W HILE 3A DDR as follows:
  1
      Refer to the first set of course notes for an overview of CFGs.

                        fZ vx :“ 0wpσq            “ σrx ÞÑ Zs                                  (4.1)
                        fZ vx :“ nwpσq            “ σrx ÞÑ N s where n ‰ 0                     (4.2)
                        fZ vx :“ ywpσq         “ σrx ÞÑ σpyqs                                  (4.3)
                        fZ vx :“ y op zwpσq       “ σrx ÞÑ Js                                  (4.4)
                        fZ vgoto nwpσq                 “σ                                      (4.5)
                        fZ vif x “ 0 goto nwpσq        “σ                                      (4.6)

    In the notation, the form of the instruction is an implicit argument to the function, which
is followed by the explicit dataflow information argument, in the form fZ vIwpσq. (1) and (2)
are for assignment to a constant. If we assign 0 to a variable x, then we should update the
input dataflow information σ so that x maps to the abstract value Z. The notation rx ÞÑ Zsσ
denotes dataflow information that is identical to σ except that the value in the mapping for x
is updated to refer to Z. Flow function (3) is for copies from a variable y to another variable x:
we look up y in σ, written σpyq, and update σ so that x maps to the same abstract value as y.
    We start with a generic flow function for arithmetic instructions (4). Arithmetic can produce
either a zero or a nonzero value, so we use the abstract value J to represent our uncertainty.
More precise flow functions are available based on certain instructions or operands. For exam-
ple, if the instruction is subtraction and the operands are the same, the result will definitely be
zero. Or, if the instruction is addition, and the analysis information tells us that one operand
is zero, then the addition is really a copy and we can use a flow function similar to the copy
instruction above. These examples could be written as follows (we would still need the generic
case above for instructions that do not fit such special cases):

                      fZ vx :“ y ´ ywpσq “ σrx ÞÑ Zs
                      fZ vx :“ y ` zwpσq “ σrx ÞÑ σpyqs where σpzq “ Z

Exercise 1. Define another flow function for some arithmetic instruction and certain conditions
where you can also provide a more precise result than J.

    The flow function for branches ((5) and (6)) is trivial: branches do not change the state of the
machine other than to change the program counter, and thus the analysis result is unaffected.
    However, we can provide a better flow function for conditional branches if we distinguish
the analysis information produced when the branch is taken or not taken. To do this, we
extend our notation once more in defining flow functions for branches, using a subscript to the
instruction to indicate whether we are specifying the dataflow information for the case where
the condition is true (T ) or when it is false (F ). For example, to define the flow function for
the true condition when testing a variable for equality with zero, we use the notation fZ vif x “
0 goto nwT pσq. In this case we know that x is zero so we can update σ with the Z lattice value.
Conversely, in the false condition we know that x is nonzero:

                             fZ vif x “ 0 goto nwT pσq “ σrx ÞÑ Zs
                             fZ vif x “ 0 goto nwF pσq “ σrx ÞÑ N s

Exercise 2. Define a flow function for a conditional branch testing whether a variable x ă 0.

4.2     Running a dataflow analysis
The point of developing a dataflow analysis is to compute information about possible program
states at each point in a program. For example, for of zero analysis, whenever we divide some
expression by a variable x, we might like to know whether x must be zero (the abstract value
Z) or may be zero (represented by J) so that we can warn the developer.

4.2.1    Straightline code
One way to think of a simple dataflow analysis is that are statically simulating program exe-
cution, tracking only the information we care about. For each node in the CFG (each of which
contains an instruction), we use the flow function to compute the dataflow analysis informa-
tion at the program point immediately after that node from the information we had at the
program point before that node. To demonstrate, consider the following simple program (left),
with its control flow graph (middle):

                                                                                    x    y     z
        1:   x :“ 0                                                          P1     ?    ?     ?
        2:   y :“ 1                                                          P2     Z    ?     ?
        3:   z :“ y                                                          P3     Z    N     ?
        4:   y :“ z ` x                                                      P4     Z    N     N
        5:   x :“ y ´ z                                                      P5     Z    N     N
                                                                             P6     J    N     N

    For such simple code, we can track analysis information using a table with a column for
each program variable and a row for each program point (right, above).
    The first thing to notice is that, because flow functions operate on the abstract state for
the program point immediately before a node, we need some kind of initial assumption (this
confusion is illustrated by the ? in the cells of the table). We will return to this point in a
moment, since those values don’t influence the analysis for such simple, straight-line code.
    Notice also that the analysis is imprecise at the end with respect to the value of x. We
were able to keep track of which values are zero and nonzero quite well through instruction
4, using (in the last case) the flow function that knows that adding a variable known to be
zero is equivalent to a copy. However, at instruction 5, the analysis does not know that y
and z are equal, and so it cannot determine whether x will be zero. Because the analysis
is not tracking the exact values of variables, but rather approximations, it will inevitably be
imprecise in certain situations. However, in practice, well-designed approximations can often
allow dataflow analysis to compute quite useful information.

4.2.2    Alternative Paths: Illustration
Things get more interesting in W HILE 3A DDR code that contains if statements. An if state-
ment introduces two possible paths through the program. Consider the following simple ex-
ample (left), and its CFG (middle).2 We will begin by analyzing the first node as though the
   2
     A point on diagrams: in the interest of clarity, we sometimes elide program points between nodes when we
can. That is, in this example,, the state going into instruction 3 is exactly the state coming out of instruction 2, so
we label a single program point P3. However, when we need to consider multiple paths to determine the incoming
state at a node, we often need differentiate the two program points in our CFG diagrams.

branch is not taken:

                                                                            x    y      z

     1:   if x “ 0 goto 4                                             P1    ?    ?      ?
     2:   y :“ 0                                                      P2   NF    ?      ?
     3:   goto 6                                                      P3   N     Z      ?
     4:   y :“ 1                                                      P4   N     Z      ?
     5:   x :“ 1                                                      P5
     6:   z :“ y                                                      P6
                                                                      P7   N?    Z?    ??
                                                                      P8   N??   Z??   Z??

    In the table above, the entry for x at P2 indicates the abstract value produced for the false
condition on the branch, which is then used as input to analyze instruction 2 (and produce the
state at P3). We can go right from P3 to P4 without any complexity. But, if we just continue
“simulating” execution, we get to P7. It has two possible incoming edges, so two possible
incoming states to use for the flow function for instruction 6. What to do? We have not yet
analyzed a path through lines 4 and 5. The table shows the (questionable) values if we just use
the state coming from P4 as “incoming” at instruction 6, and ignore what might have happened
along that other path.
    Perhaps turning to that alternative path, will give answers. Let’s analyze instructions 4 and
5 as if we had taken the true branch at instruction 1:

                                    x       y      z
                            P1      ?       ?      ?
                            P2   ZT , NF    ?      ?
                            P3     N        Z      ?
                            P4     N        Z      ?
                            P5      Z       ?      ?
                            P6      Z       N      ?
                            P7     N       N?      ?    note: different!
                            P8    N??      N??    N??   ??????

    We have a dilemma. The first time we analyzed instruction 6, the incoming state had come
from instruction 3, where x was nonzero and y was zero. Now have, the incoming state coming
from instruction 5 is different: x is still nonzero, but so is y!
    We resolve this dilemma by combining the abstract values computed along the two paths
for y. The incoming abstract values at P7 for y are N and Z. We represent this uncertainty
with a new abstract value J (pronounced “top”). This value indicates that we do know know
if y is zero or not, because we don’t know how we reached this program location. We can
apply similar logic to x, but because x is nonzero on both incoming paths, we can maintain
our knowledge that x is nonzero. Thus, we should analyze instruction 6 with this combined
incoming state: tx ÞÑ N, y ÞÑ Ju.
    The corrected analysis, showing the combined state at P6, looks like:

          x      y   z
 P1       ?      ?   ?
 P2    ZT , NF   ?   ?
 P3      N       Z   ?
 P4      N       Z   ?
 P5       Z      ?   ?
 P6       Z      N   ?
 P7      N       J   ?    combined with P4
 P8      N       J   J    corrected

4.3    Join
The mechanism for combining analysis results along multiple paths is called a join operation,
\. When taking two abstract values l1 , l2 P L, the result of l1 \ l2 is an abstract value lj that

generalizes both l1 and l2 .
    To precisely define what “generalizes” means, we define a partial order Ď over abstract
values, and say that l1 and l2 are at least as precise as lj , written l1 Ď lj . Recall that a partial
order is any relation that is:
   • reflexive: @l : l Ď l
   • transitive: @l1 , l2 , l3 : l1 Ď l2 ^ l2 Ď l3 ñ l1 Ď l3
   • anti-symmetric: @l1 , l2 : l1 Ď l2 ^ l2 Ď l1 ñ l1 “ l2
       The join of two elements with respect to a partial order Ď is the least upper bound. That is,

           l1 \ l2 “ l3 ô l1 Ď l3 ^ l2 Ď l3 ^ p@l4 P L : l1 Ď l4 ^ l2 Ď l4 ^ l4 Ď l3 ñ l3 “ l4 q
This definition says that the join of l1 and l2 is l3 iff l3 is more general than both l1 and l2 , and
there is no element l4 that is also more general than l1 and l2 yet more precise than l3 . So, l3 is
the most precise generalization of l1 and l2 .
     A set of values L that is equipped with a partial order Ď, and for which the least up-
per bound of any two values in that ordering l1 \ l2 is unique and is also in L, is called a
join-semilattice. We require that the abstract values used in dataflow analyses form a join-
semilattice. We will use the term lattice for short; as we will see below, this is the correct
terminology for most dataflow analyses anyway.
     For zero analysis, we define the partial order with Z Ď J and N Ď J, where Z \ N “ J.
We usually use the symbol J (pronounced “top”) to refer the maximal element of a lattice; that
is, for all l, we have l Ď J. Intuitively, J is the most general dataflow value.
     We have now considered all the elements necessary to define a dataflow analysis:
   • a lattice pL, Ďq
   • an abstraction function α
   • a flow function f
   • initial dataflow analysis assumptions, σ0
    Note that the theory of lattices answers that side question that came up in the very first
example: what should we assume about the value of input variables (the question marks in
our example tables)? If we do not know anything about the value x can be, one good choice
is to assume it can be anything. That is, in the initial environment σ0 , variables’ initial state is
mapped to J.

4.3.1      Dataflow analysis of loops
We now consider W HILE 3A DDR programs with loops. Our intuition above, which simply
analyzed the two paths induced by the if statement separately, no longer works so well. A
loop produces a potentially unbounded number of program paths, and we want our analysis
to take only bounded time. Consider the following simple looping example:3

   3
     I provide the CFG for reference but omit the annotations in the interest of a cleaner diagram. Notice that I
differentiate P2 and P3 because of the join, as well as P7 and P8, since they don’t both come from instruction 6.

                                                                               x   y
                                                                         P0   J    J
   1:   x :“ 10                                                          P1   N    J
   2:   y :“ 0                                                           P2   N    Z
   3:   if x “ 0 goto 7                                                  P3   N    Z   first time through...
   4:   y :“ 1                                                           P4   NF   Z
   5:   x :“ x ´ 1                                                       P5   N    N
   6:   goto 3                                                           P6   J    N
   7:   x :“ y                                                           P7   J    N
                                                                         P8   Zt   N   first time through...
                                                                         P9   N    N   first time through...

    The right-hand side above shows the straightforward straight-line analysis of the path that
runs the loop exactly once. Thinking back to our handling of if above, we might now recon-
sider instruction 3, joining the states at P2 and P7 to create a new P3. For x, N \ J “ J. For y,
Z \ N “ J. This changes the incoming values at instruction 3. We can now choose between
two paths once again. We will choose (arbitrarily, for now) to stay within the loop, and recon-
sider instruction 4. We have new incoming information (at P4, where both x and y are now J).
But, since instruction 4 assigns 1 to y, we still know that y is nonzero at P5. The updated input
data does not change the analysis results at P5.
    A quick check shows that going through the remaining instructions in the loop, even back
to instruction 3, the analysis information will no longer change. That is because the flow func-
tions are deterministic: given the same input analysis information and the same instruction,
they will produce the same output analysis information.
    We say that the dataflow analysis has reached a fixed point (or fixpoint). In mathematics, a
fixed point of a function is a data value v that is mapped to itself by the function, i.e., f pvq “ v.
In analysis, the mathematical function is the flow function, and the fixed point is a tuple of the
dataflow analysis values at each program point. If we invoke the flow function on the fixed
point, the analysis results do not change (we get the same fixed point back).
    Once we have reached a fixed point for the loop, further analysis of the loop will not be
useful. Therefore, we will proceed to analyze statement 7. The final analysis results are as
follows:

                                      x     y
                                P0   J      J
                                P1   N      J
                                P2   N      Z
                                P3   J      J   join
                                P4   NF     J   updated
                                P5   N      N   already at fixed point
                                P6   J      N   already at fixed point
                                P7   J      N   already at fixed point
                                P8   ZT     J   updated
                                P9   J      J   updated

     Quickly simulating a run of the program program shows that these results correctly ap-
proximate actual execution. The uncertainty in the value of x at P6 and P7 is real: x is nonzero
after these instructions, except the last time through the loop, when it is zero. The uncertainty
in the value of y at the end shows analysis imprecision: this loop always executes at least once,
so y will be nonzero at these points. However, the analysis (as currently formulated) cannot
tell this for certain, so it reports that it cannot tell if y is zero or not. This is safe—it is always
correct to say the analysis is uncertain—but not as precise as would be ideal.
     The benefit of analysis, however, is that we can gain correct information about all possible
executions of the program with only a finite amount of work. In our example, we only had
to analyze the loop statements at most twice each before reaching a fixed point. This is a
significant improvement over the actual program execution, which runs the loop 10 times. We
sacrificed precision in exchange for coverage of all possible executions, a classic tradeoff.
     How can we be confident that the results of the analysis are correct, besides simulating
every possible run of a (possibly very complex) program? The intuition behind correctness
is the invariant that at each program point, the analysis results approximate all the possible
program values that could exist at that point. If the analysis information at the beginning of
the program correctly approximates the program arguments, then the invariant is true at the
beginning of program execution. One can then make an inductive argument that the invariant
is preserved. In particular, when the program executes an instruction, the instruction modifies
the program’s state. As long as the flow functions account for every possible way that instruc-
tion can modify state, then at the analysis fixed point they will have correctly approximated
actual program execution. We will make this argument more precise in a future lecture.

4.3.2   A convenience: the K abstract value and complete lattices
To define an algorithm for dataflow anlaysis more precisely, we need to be more concrete about
how to compute incoming states for CFG nodes with multiple incoming edges (like instruction
3, above). We’ve been ignoring these in our “one path at a time” approach so far, but this is a
handwave for didactic purposes.
     Instead, it is more precise and consistent to say that analyzing an instruction always uses the
incoming dataflow analysis information from all instructions that could precede it. However,
for instruction 3, this requires a dataflow value from instruction 6, even if instruction 6 has not
yet been analyzed. We could do this if we had a dataflow value that is always ignored when it
is joined with any other dataflow value. In other words, we need a abstract dataflow value K
(pronounced “bottom”) such that K \ l “ l.
     K plays a dual role to the value J: it sits at the bottom of the dataflow value lattice. For
all l, we have the identity l Ď J and correspondingly K Ď l. There is an greatest lower bound
operator meet, [, which is dual to \. The meet of all dataflow values is K.
     A set of values L that is equipped with a partial order Ď, and for which both a least element
K and a greatest element J exist in L is called a complete lattice.
     This provides an elegant solution to the problem mentioned above. We initialize σ at every
program point in the program, except at entry, to K, indicating that the instruction there has
not yet been analyzed. We can then always merge all input values to a node, whether or not
the sources of those inputs have been analysed, because we know that any K values from
unanalyzed sources will simply be ignored by the join operator \, and that if the dataflow
value for that variable will change, we will get to it before the analysis is completed.

4.4     Analysis execution strategy
Our informal strategy above, which considers all paths until the dataflow analysis information
reaches a fixed point, can be simplified. The argument for correctness outlined above implies

that for correct flow functions, it doesn’t matter how we get to the analysis fixed point (it
would be surprising if analysis correctness depended on which branch of an if statement we
explored first!). It is in fact possible to run the analysis on program instructions in any order
we choose. As long as we continue doing so until a reaching a fixed point, the final result
will be correct. The simplest correct algorithm for executing dataflow analysis can therefore be
stated as follows:
for Node n in cfg
    results[n] = K
results[0] = initialDataflowInformation

while not at fixed point
    pick a node n in program
    input = join { results[j] | j in predecessors(n) }
    output = flow(n, input)
    results[n] = output
   Or, equivalently:
for Node n in cfg
    input[n] = K
input[1] = initialDataflowInformation

while not at fixed point
    pick a node n in program
    output = flow(n, input[n])
    for Node j in sucessors(n)
        input[j] = input[j] \ output
     In the code above, the termination condition is expressed abstractly (“not at fixed point”).
It can easily be checked by keeping track, when we process each node, whether the new results
have changed compared to what we previously had stored for that node. If the results do not
change for any node, the analysis has reached a fix point.
     How do we know the algorithm will terminate? The intuition is as follows. We rely on the
choice of a node to be fair, so that each node is eventually considered. As long as the analysis
is not at a fixed point, some node can be analyzed to produce new results. If our flow functions
are well-behaved (technically, if they are monotone, as we will discuss in a future lecture) then
each time the flow function runs on a given node, either the results do not change, or they get
become more approximate (i.e., they are higher in the lattice). Later runs of the flow function
consider more possible paths through the program and therefore produce a more approximate
result which considers all these possibilities. If the lattice is of finite height—meaning there
are at most a finite number of steps from any place in the lattice going up towards the J
value—then this process must terminate eventually. More concretely: once an abstract value is
computed to be J, it will stay J no matter how many times the analysis is run. The abstraction
only flows in one direction.
     Although the simple algorithm above always terminates and results in the correct answer,
it is still not always the most efficient. Typically, for example, it is beneficial to analyze the
program instructions in order, so that results from earlier instructions can be used to update the
results of later instructions. It is also useful to keep track of a list of instructions for which there
has been a change since the instruction was last analyzed in the result dataflow information of
some predecessor. Only those instructions need be analyzed; reanalyzing other instructions is
useless since their input has not changed. Kildall [21] captured this intuition with his worklist
algorithm, described in pseudocode below. For this algorithm, we associate with each CFG
node (or equivalently, each program instruction), two sets of dataflow values representing the

program state just before as well as just after executing the corresponding instruction; these
are named input and output respectively.
worklist = H
for Node n in cfg
    input[n] = output[n] = K
    add n to worklist
input[0] = initialDataflowInformation

while worklist is not empty
    take a Node n off the worklist
    output[n] = flow(n, input[n])
    for Node j in succs(n)
          newInput = input[j] \ output[n]
          if newInput ‰ input[j]
                input[j] = newInput
                add j to worklist
The algorithm above is very close to the generic algorithm declared previously, except the
worklist that chooses the next instruction to analyze and determines when a fixed point is
reached. The worklist is initialized with all nodes, so that we visit each of them at least once4 .
The algorithm terminates when there are no more nodes left to process in the worklist.
    We can reason about the performance of this algorithm as follows. We only add a node to
the worklist when the input data to it changes. The input for a given node can only change h
times, where h is the height of the lattice. Thus we add at most n ˚ h nodes to the worklist,
where n is the number of nodes/instructions in the program. After running the flow function
for a node, however, we must test all its successors to find out if their input has changed. This
test is done once for each edge, for each time that the source node of the edge is added to the
worklist: thus at most e ˚ h times, where e is the number of control flow edges in the successor
graph between instructions. If each operation (such as a flow function, a \ operation, or a
comparison of dataflow values) has cost Opcq, then the overall cost is Opc ˚ pn ` eq ˚ hq, or
Opc ˚ e ˚ hq because n is bounded by e. Note that c and h are both related to the size of the
dataflow lattice; for most analyses, these values increase with the size of the program.
    The algorithm above is still abstract: We have not defined the operations to add and remove
instructions from the worklist. We would like adding to the work list to be a set addition
operation, so that no instruction appears in it multiple times. If we have just analysed the
program with respect to an instruction, analyzing it again will not produce different results.
    That leaves a choice of which instruction to remove from the worklist. We could choose
among several policies, including last-in-first-out (LIFO) order or first-in-first-out (FIFO) order.
In practice, the most efficient approach is to identify the strongly-connected components (i.e.
loops) in the control flow graph of components and process them in topological order, so that
loops that are nested, or appear in program order first, are solved before later loops. This
works well because we do not want to do a lot of work bringing a loop late in the program
to a fixed point, then have to redo that work when dataflow information from an earlier loop
changes.
    Within each loop, the instructions should be processed in reverse postorder, the reverse
of the order in which each node is last visited when traversing a tree. Consider the example
from Section 4.2.2 above, in which instruction 1 is an if test, instructions 2–3 are the then
branch, instructions 4–5 are the else branch, and instruction 6 comes after the if statement.
A tree traversal might go as follows: 1, 2, 3, 6, 3 (again), 2 (again), 1 (again), 4, 5, 4 (again),
1 (again). Some instructions in the tree are visited multiple times: once going down, once
  4
      If the output of flow functions cannot be J, then we can also initialize the worklist to only the start node.

between visiting the children, and once coming up. The postorder, or order of the last visits to
each node, is 6, 3, 2, 5, 4, 1. The reverse postorder is the reverse of this: 1, 4, 5, 2, 3, 6. Now we
can see why reverse postorder works well: we explore both branches of the if statement (4–5
and 2–3) before we explore node 6. This ensures that we do not have to reanalyze node 6 after
one of its inputs changes.
   Although analyzing code using the strongly-connected component and reverse postorder
heuristics improves performance substantially in practice, it does not change the worst-case
performance results described above.

