Chapter 5

Dataflow Analysis Examples

Zero analysis is useful for simply tracking whether a given variable is zero or not; even this
simple didactic example can be used to find possible bugs in programs. We will now examine
several more complex analyses, including certain well-known analyses that are, particularly
(but not exclusively) useful within a compiler.

5.1   Integer Sign Analysis
Integer sign analysis tracks whether each integer in the program is positive, negative, or zero.
The results of this analysis can be used to optimize a program or to circumvent errors like
using a negative index into an array (or memory underflow gnerally). This analysis is broadly
similar to the zero analysis discussed previously (ignoring the possibility of integer overflow,
i.e., consider mathematical integers).
     This problem admits natural alternatives in designing our analysis, starting with the ab-
stract domain L. For example, we can prefer simplicity in favor of imprecision, defining L to
track only whether a value is less than zero, greater than zero, equal to zero, or unknown.

Exercise 1. Specify this on paper, indicating (A) the set of lattice elements, (B) the relation
between them, (c) the top element and (d) the bottom element.

    One way to increase precision in this analysis is to define a more precise abstract domain.
For example, we might decide to track whether a value is less than zero, greater than zero,
equal to zero, greater than or equal to zero, less than or equal to zero, non-zero, or unknown.
In addition to (trivially) increasing the size of L, this also makes the ordering relation more
interesting.

Exercise 2. Specify this on paper, indicating (A) the set of lattice elements, (B) the relation
between them, (c) the top element and (d) the bottom element.
    Of course, this requires constituent changes in the flow function; we will outline a couple
of examples on the board (but won’t fully specify it; it gets a bit tedious!).

5.2   Constant Propagation
Constant propagation analysis attempts to track the constant values of variables in the program,
where possible. Constant propagation has long been used in compiler optimization passes in
order to turn variable reads and computations into constants. However, it is generally useful
for analysis for program correctness as well: any client analysis that benefits from knowing
program values (e.g. an array bounds analysis) can leverage it.

    For constant propagation, we want to track what is the constant value, if any, of each pro-
gram variable. Therefore we will use a lattice where the set LCP is ZYtJ, Ku. The partial order
is @l P LCP : K Ď l ^ l Ď J. In other words, K is below every lattice element and J is above
every element, but otherwise lattice elements are incomparable.
    In the above lattice, as well as our earlier discussion of zero analysis, we used a lattice to
describe individual variable values. We can lift the notion of a lattice to cover all the dataflow
information available at a program point. This is called a tuple lattice, where there is an element
of the tuple for each of the variables in the program. For constant propagation, the elements of
the set σ are maps from Var to LCP , and the other operators and J{K are lifted as follows:

                                σ          P    Var Ñ LCP
                            σ1 Ďlift σ2   iff   @x P Var : σ1 pxq Ď σ2 pxq
                            σ1 \lift σ2   “     tx ÞÑ σ1 pxq \ σ2 pxq | x P Varu
                               Jlift      “     tx ÞÑ J | x P Varu
                               Klift      “     tx ÞÑ K | x P Varu
   We can likewise define an abstraction function for constant propagation, as well as a lifted
version that accepts an environment E mapping variables to concrete values. We also define
the initial analysis information to conservatively assume that initial variable values are un-
known. Note that in a language that initializes all variables to zero, we could make more
precise initial dataflow assumptions, such as tx ÞÑ 0 | x P Varu:

                              αCP pnq “ n
                              αlift pEq “ tx ÞÑ αCP pEpxqq | x P Varu
                                 σ0     “ Jlift
   We can now define flow functions for constant propagation:

 fCP vx :“ nwpσq                “ σrx ÞÑ αCP pnqs
 fCP vx :“ ywpσq                “ σrx ÞÑ σpyqs
 fCP vx :“ y op zwpσq           “ σrx ÞÑ σpyq oplift σpzqs
                                 where n oplift m “ n op m (when m, n P Z)

                                  and l oplift K “ K              (and symmetric, where l P LCP )

                                 and l oplift J “ J               (and symmetric, where l P LCP ztKu)
 fCP vgoto nwpσq                “σ
 fCP vif x “ 0 goto nwT pσq “ σrx ÞÑ 0s
 fCP vif x “ 0 goto nwF pσq “ σ
 fCP vif x ă 0 goto nwpσq       “σ

    We can now look at an example of constant propagation. Below, the code is on the left, and
the results of the analysis is on the right. In this table we show the worklist as it is updated to
show how the algorithm operates:

                                          stmt      worklist     x   y       z      w
               1:   x :“ 3                   0   1,2,3,4,5,6,7   J   J       J      J
               2:   y :“ x ` 7               1     2,3,4,5,6,7   3   J       J      J
               3:   if z “ 0 goto 6          2       3,4,5,6,7   3   10      J      J
               4:   z :“ x ` 2               3         4,5,6,7   3   10   0T , JF   J
               5:   goto 7                   4           5,6,7   3   10      5      J
               6:   z :“ y ´ 5               5             6,7   3   10      5      J
               7:   w :“ z ´ 2               6               7   3   10      5      J
                                             7              H    3   10      5      3

5.3    Reaching Definitions
Reaching definitions analysis determines, for each use of a variable, which assignments to that
variable might have set the value seen at that use. Consider the following program:

                                        1:   y :“ x
                                        2:   z :“ 1
                                        3:   if y “ 0 goto 7
                                        4:   z :“ z ˚ y
                                        5:   y :“ y ´ 1
                                        6:   goto 3
                                        7:   y :“ 0
In this example, definitions 1 and 5 reach the use of y at 4.

Exercise 3. Which definitions reach the use of z at statement 4?

    Reaching definitions can be used as a simpler but less precise version of constant propaga-
tion, zero analysis, etc. where instead of tracking actual constant values we just look up the
reaching definition and see if it is a constant. We can also use reaching definitions to identify
uses of undefined variables, e.g. if no definition from the program reaches a use.
    For reaching definitions, we define a new kind of lattice: a set lattice. Here, a dataflow lattice
element is the set of definitions that reach the current program point. Assume that DEFS is the
set of all definitions in the program. The set of elements in the lattice is the set of all subsets of
DEFS—that is, the powerset of DEFS, written P DEFS .
    What should Ď be for reaching definitions? The intuition is that our analysis is more precise
the smaller the set of definitions it computes at a given program point. This is because we want
to know, as precisely as possible, where the values at a program point came from. So Ď should
be the subset relation Ď: a subset is more precise than its superset. This naturally implies that
\ should be union, and that J and K should be the universal set DEFS and the empty set H,
respectively.
    In summary, we can formally define our lattice and initial dataflow information as follows:

                                          σ       P    P DEFS
                                       σ1 Ď σ2   iff   σ1 Ď σ2
                                       σ1 \ σ2   “     σ1 Y σ2
                                          J      “     DEFS
                                          K      “     H
                                          σ0     “     H
    Instead of using the empty set for σ0 , we could use an artificial reaching definition for each
program variable (e.g. x0 as an artificial reaching definition for x) to denote that the variable is
either uninitialized, or was passed in as a parameter. This is convenient if it is useful to track

whether a variable might be uninitialized at a use, or if we want to consider a parameter to be
a definition. We could write this formally as σ0 “ tx0 | x P Varsu
    We will now define flow functions for reaching definitions. Notationally, we will write xn
to denote a definition of the variable x at the program instruction numbered n. Since our lattice
is a set, we can reason about changes to it in terms of elements that are added (called GEN)
and elements that are removed (called KILL) for each statement. This GEN/KILL pattern is
common to many dataflow analyses. The flow functions can be formally defined as follows:

                    fRD vIwpσq              “ σ ´ KILLRD vIw Y GENRD vIw

                    KILLRD vn: x :“ ...w “ txm | xm P DEFSpxqu
                    KILLRD vIw              “H      if I is not an assignment

                    GENRD vn: x :“ ...w “ txn u
                    GENRD vIw               “H      if I is not an assignment

    We would compute dataflow analysis information for the program shown above as follows
(nodes that are added to the worklist again because of a change of dataflow values are depicted
in bold):
 stmt      worklist         defs
     0 1,2,3,4,5,6,7          H
     1    2,3,4,5,6,7       ty1 u
     2      3,4,5,6,7     ty1 , z2 u
     3        4,5,6,7     ty1 , z2 u
     4          5,6,7     ty1 , z4 u
     5            6,7     ty5 , z4 u
     6            3,7     ty5 , z4 u
     3            4,7 ty1 , y5 , z2 , z4 u
     4            5,7   ty1 , y5 , z4 u
     5              7     ty5 , z4 u
     7             H    ty7 , z2 , z4 u

5.4    Live Variables
Live variable analysis determines, for each program point, which variables might be used
again before they are redefined. Consider again the following program:

                                       1:   y :“ x
                                       2:   z :“ 1
                                       3:   if y “ 0 goto 7
                                       4:   z :“ z ˚ y
                                       5:   y :“ y ´ 1
                                       6:   goto 3
                                       7:   y :“ 0
    In this example, after instruction 1, y is live, but x and z are not. Live variables analysis
typically requires knowing what variable holds the main result(s) computed by the program.
In the program above, suppose z is the result of the program. Then at the end of the program,
only z is live.
    Live variable analysis was originally developed for optimization purposes: if a variable is
not live after it is defined, we can remove the definition instruction. For example, instruction 7

in the code above could be optimized away, under our assumption that z is the only program
result of interest.
    We must be careful of the side effects of a statement, of course. Assigning a variable that is
no longer live to null could have the beneficial side effect of allowing the garbage collector to
collect memory that is no longer reachable—unless the GC itself takes into consideration which
variables are live. Sometimes warning the user that an assignment has no effect can be useful
for software engineering purposes, even if the assignment cannot safely be optimized away.
For example, eBay found that FindBugs’s analysis detecting assignments to dead variables was
useful for identifying unnecessary database calls.1
    For live variable analysis, we will use a set lattice to track the set of live variables at each
program point. The lattice is similar to that for reaching definitions:

                                             σ        P    P Var
                                          σ1 Ď σ2    iff   σ1 Ď σ2
                                          σ1 \ σ2    “     σ1 Y σ2
                                             J       “     Var
                                             K       “     H
     What is the initial dataflow information? This is a tricky question. To determine the vari-
ables that are live at the start of the program, we must reason about how the program will
execute...i.e. we must run the live variables analysis itself! There’s no obvious assumption we
can make about this. On the other hand, it is quite clear which variables are live at the end of
the program: just the variable(s) holding the program result.
     Consider how we might use this information to compute other live variables. Suppose the
last statement in the program assigns the program result z, computing it based on some other
variable x. Intuitively, that statement should make x live immediately above that statement, as
it is needed to compute the program result z—but z should now no longer be live. We can use
similar logic for the second-to-last statement, and so on. In fact, we can see that live variable
analysis is a backwards analysis: we start with dataflow information at the end of the program
and use flow functions to compute dataflow information at earlier statements.
     Thus, for our “initial” dataflow information—and note that “initial” means the beginning
of the program analysis, but the end of the program—we have:

                          σend “ tx | x holds part of the program resultu
  We can now define flow functions for live variable analysis. We can do this simply using
GEN and KILL sets:

                                    KILLLV vIw “ tx | I defines xu
                                    GENLV vIw “ tx | I uses xu

    We would compute dataflow analysis information for the program shown above as follows.
Note that we iterate over the program backwords, i.e. reversing control flow edges between
instructions. We also determine reverse postorder by considering the last statement–in this
case line 7—as the “root”. For each instruction, the corresponding row in our table will hold
the information after we have applied the flow function—that is, the variables that are live
immediately before the statement executes:
   1
    see Ciera Jaspan, I-Chin Chen, and Anoop Sharma, Understanding the value of program analysis tools, OOPSLA
practitioner report, 2007

stmt      worklist      live
 end   7,3,6,5,4,2,1    tzu
   7     3,6,5,4,2,1    tzu
   3       6,5,4,2,1   tz, yu
   6         5,4,2,1   tz, yu
   5           4,2,1   tz, yu
   4           3,2,1   tz, yu
   3             2,1   tz, yu
   2               1    tyu
   1              H     txu

