Chapter 6

Dataflow Analysis: Termination,
Correctness and Precision

6.1    Termination
As we think about the correctness of program analysis, let us first think more carefully about
the situations under which program analysis will terminate. In a previous lecture, we analyzed
the performance of Kildall’s worklist algorithm. A critical part of that performance analysis
was the the observation that running a flow function on the same statement for the second
time always either leaves the output dataflow analysis information unchanged, or makes it
more approximate—that is, it moves the current dataflow analysis results up in the lattice,
relative to the output when the flow function was run the first time. The dataflow values at
each program point describe an ascending chain:

      Ascending Chain         A sequence σk is an ascending chain iff n ď m implies σn Ď
                              σm
We can define the height of an ascending chain, and of a lattice, in order to bound the number
of new analysis values we can compute at each program point:

      Height of an Ascend-    An ascending chain σk has finite height h if it contains h ` 1
      ing Chain               distinct elements.

      Height of a Lattice     A lattice pL, Ďq has finite height h if there is an ascending
                              chain in the lattice of height h, and no ascending chain in
                              the lattice has height greater than h

    We can now show that for a lattice of finite height, the worklist algorithm is guaranteed
to terminate. We do so by showing that the dataflow analysis information at each program
point follows an ascending chain. Consider again the worklist algorithm, this time in a slight
variation that computes the new input to a node by joining the outputs of all its predecessors.
This variation will make our correctness arguments more obvious, and was first presented by
Kam and Ullman [19]. We assume a distinguished programStart node which comes before
the first instruction:

worklist = H
for Node n in cfg
    input[n] = output[n] = K
    add n to worklist
output[programStart] = initialDataflowInformation

while worklist is not empty
    take a Node n off the worklist
    input[n] = \kPpredspnq output[k]
    newOutput = flow(n, input[n])
    if newOutput ‰ output[n]
        output[n] = newOutput
        for Node j in succs(n)
           add j to worklist
     We can make an intuitive inductive argument for termination: At the beginning of the
analysis, the analysis information before and after every program point (other than after the
program start node) is K (by definition). Thus the first time we run each flow function for each
instruction, the result will be at least as high in the lattice as what was there before (because
nothing is lower in a lattice than K). We will run the flow function for a given instruction again
at a program point only if the output from a predecessor instruction changes. Assume that the
previous time we ran the flow function, we had input information σi and output information
σo . Now we are running it again because the input dataflow analysis information has changed
to some new σi1 —and by the induction hypothesis, we can assume it is higher in the lattice
than before, i.e. σi Ď σi1 .
     What we need to show is that the output information σo1 is at least as high in the lattice as
the old output information σo —that is, we must show that σo Ď σo1 . This will be true if our
flow functions are monotonic:

    Monotonicity               A function f is monotonic iff σ1 Ď σ2 implies f pσ1 q Ď f pσ2 )

Now we can state the termination theorem:
Theorem 1 (Dataflow Analysis Termination). If a dataflow lattice pL, Ďq has finite height, and the
corresponding flow functions are monotonic, the worklist algorithm will terminate.

Proof. The idea should be intuitively clear from the argument above. However, to make it
rigorous, we provide the following termination metric:

                                M “ |worklist| ` EpN ˚ LCpσq
    where |worklist| is the length of the worklist, EpN is the maximum number of outgoing
Edges per Node, and LCpσq is the longest aescending chain from σ to J. When computing
LCpσq we consider σ to be one big lattice, i.e. a tuple constructed from the sub-lattices for each
program point, so that moving up in the sub-lattice for any program point moves the overall
σ lattice up as well.
    M is finite because |worklist| is bounded by the number of nodes in the program, EpN is
finite, and the lattice σ is of finite height (which we know because it is a tuple lattice with a
finite number of sub-lattices, all of which have finite height by the assumption in the theorem).
    M decreases on each iteration of the loop, as follows. |worklist| generally decreases by
one in each iteration because one node is removed from it. However, we must account for
additions to the worklist when the newOutput ‰ output[i] condition holds. But note
that when this condition holds, newOutput must be higher in the lattice than output[i] by
monotonicity. Thus, running the flow function reduced LCpσq by at least one. We then add

at most EpN nodes to the worklist. The increase to the worklist is at least balanced by the
decrease in EpN ˚ LCpσq. Thus, the metric M decreases even when the condition that results
in adding nodes to the worklist holds.

Exercise 1. Convince yourself that, for monotonic flow functions, the algorithm above does
the same thing as the algorithm given in a previous lecture.

Monotonicity of Zero Analysis. We can formally show that zero analysis is monotone; that
is, σ1 Ď σ2 ñ fZ pσ1 q Ď fZ pσ2 q. This is relevant both to the proof of termination, above, and to
correctness, next. We will only give a couple of the more interesting cases, and leave the rest
as an exercise to the reader:
      Case fZ vx :“ 0wpσq “ σrx ÞÑ Zs:
            Let fZ vx :“ 0wpσ1 q “ σ1 rx ÞÑ Zs “ σ11 and fZ vx :“ 0wpσ2 q “ σ2 rx ÞÑ Zs “ σ21 .
            Given σ1 Ď σ2 , we have to show that σ11 Ď σ21 .
            We know that σ11 pxq “ σ21 pxq “ Z and that the mappings for all other variables are
            unchanged.
            Since Ď is defined pointwise, we therefore have that σ1 rx ÞÑ Zs Ď σ2 rx ÞÑ Zs or
            σ11 Ď σ21 as required.

      Case   fZ vx :“ ywpσq “ σrx ÞÑ σpyqs:
             Let fZ vx :“ ywpσ1 q “ σ1 rx ÞÑ σ1 pyqs “ σ11 and fZ vx :“ ywpσ2 q “ σ2 rx ÞÑ σ2 pyqs “ σ21 .
             Given σ1 Ď σ2 , we have to show that σ11 Ď σ21 .
             Since Ď is defined pointwise and σ1 Ď σ2 , we have that σ1 pyq Ďsimple σ2 pyq.
             Using the pointwise definition of Ď again, we also obtain σ1 rx ÞÑ σ1 pyqs Ď σ2 rx ÞÑ
             σ2 pyqs or σ11 Ď σ21 as required.
(αsimple and Ďsimple are simply the unlifted versions of α and Ď, i.e. they operate on individual
values rather than maps.)

Exercise 2. Write an alternative (incorrect) flow function for zero analysis that is non-
monotone, and write a program on which dataflow analysis using your alternative flow func-
tion will not terminate.

6.2    Correctness
What does it mean for an analysis of a W HILE 3A DDR program to be correct? Intuitively, we
would like the program analysis results to correctly describe every actual execution of the pro-
gram. To establish correctness, we will make use of the precise definitions of W HILE 3A DDR we
gave in the form of operational semantics in the first couple of lectures. We start by formalizing
a program execution as a trace:

      Program Trace           A trace T of a program P is a potentially infinite sequence
                              tc0 , c1 , ...u of program configurations, where c0 “ E0 , 1 is
                                                                                              .
                              called the initial configuration, and for every i ě 0 we have
                              P $ ci ; ci`1
Given this definition, we can formally define soundness:

      Dataflow  Analysis        The result xσn | n P P y of a program analysis running on
      Soundness                 program P is sound iff, for all traces T of P , for all i such
                                that 0 ď i ă lengthpT q, αpci q Ď σni

    In this definition, just as ci is the program configuration immediately before executing in-
struction ni as the ith program step, σni is the dataflow analysis information immediately
before instruction ni .

Exercise 3. Consider the following (incorrect) flow function for zero analysis:

                                fZ vx :“ y ` zwpσq “ σrx ÞÑ Zs
   Give an example of a program and a concrete trace that illustrates that this flow function is
unsound.

    The key to designing a sound analysis is to make sure that the flow functions map abstract
information before each instruction to abstract information after that instruction in a way that
matches the instruction’s concrete semantics. Another way of saying this is that the manipu-
lation of the abstract state done by the analysis should reflect the manipulation of the concrete
machine state done by the executing instruction. We can formalize this as a local soundness
property:

    Local Soundness            A flow function f is locally sound iff P $ ci ; ci`1 and
                               αpci q Ď σni and f vP rni swpσni q “ σni`1 implies αpci`1 q Ď
                               σni`1
    In English: if we take any concrete execution of a program instruction, map the input ma-
chine state to the abstract domain using the abstraction function, find that the abstracted input
state is described by the analysis input information, and apply the flow function, we should
get a result that correctly accounts for what happens if we map the actual concrete output
machine state to the abstract domain.

Exercise 4. Consider again the incorrect zero analysis flow function described above. Specify
an input state ci and use that input state to show that the flow function is not locally sound.

    We can now show that the flow functions for zero analysis are locally sound. Although
technically the overall abstraction function α accepts a complete program configuration pE, nq,
for zero analysis we can ignore the n component and so in the proof below we will simply
focus on the environment E. We show the cases for a couple of interesting syntax forms; the
rest are either trivial or analogous:

    Case   fZ vx :“ 0wpσni q = σni rx ÞÑ Zs:
           Assume ci “ E, n and αpEq Ď σni
           Thus σni`1 “ fZ vx :“ 0wpσni q “ σni rx ÞÑ Zs
           ci`1 “ Erx ÞÑ 0s, n ` 1 by rule step-const
           Now αpci`1 q “ αpErx ÞÑ 0sq “ αpEqrx ÞÑ Zs by the definition of α.
           αpEq Ď σni implies αpci`1 q “ αpEqrx ÞÑ Zs Ď σni rx ÞÑ Zs “ σni`1 ,
           so therefore αpci`1 q Ď σni`1 , which finishes the case.

    Case   fZ vx :“ mwpσni q “ σni rx ÞÑ N s where m ‰ 0:
           Assume ci “ E, n and αpEq Ď σni
           Thus σni`1 “ fZ vx :“ mwpσni q “ σni rx ÞÑ N s
           ci`1 “ Erx ÞÑ ms, n ` 1 by rule step-const
           Now αpci`1 q “ αpErx ÞÑ msq “ αpEqrx ÞÑ N s by the definition of α and the assump-
           tion that m ‰ 0.
           αpEq Ď σni implies αpci`1 q “ αpEqrx ÞÑ N s Ď σni rx ÞÑ N s “ σni`1 .
           so therefore αpci`1 q Ď σni`1 which finishes the case.

     Case   fZ vx :“ y op zwpσni q “ σni rx ÞÑ Js:
            Assume ci “ E, n and αpEq Ď σni
            Thus σni`1 “ fZ vx :“ y op zwpσni q “ σni rx ÞÑ Js
            ci`1 “ Erx ÞÑ ks, n ` 1 for some k by rule step-arith
            Now αpci`1 q “ αpErx ÞÑ ksq Ď αpEqrx ÞÑ Js because the map is equal for all keys
            except x, and for x we have αsimple pkq Ďsimple J for all k, where αsimple and Ďsimple are
            the unlifted versions of α and Ď, i.e. they operate on individual values rather than
            maps.
            αpEq Ď σni implies αpci`1 q “ αpErx ÞÑ ksq Ď αpEqrx ÞÑ Js Ď σni rx ÞÑ Js “ σni`1 ,
            so therefore, by transitivity of Ď, αpci`1 q Ď σni`1 which finishes the case.

Exercise 5. Prove the case for fZ vx :“ ywpσq “ σrx ÞÑ σpyqs.

   Now we can show that local soundness can be used to prove the global soundness of a
dataflow analysis. To do so, let us formally define the state of the dataflow analysis at a fixed
point:

     Fixed Point               Let Fpxσ1 , σ2 , ....σ|P | yq “ xσ11 , σ21 , ....σ|P
                                                                                 1 y be a composite flow
                                                                                    |
                               function for program P , such that:
                                                                ¨                               ˛
                                                                         ğ
                                   @1 ă i ď |P| : σi1 “ ˝                         f vP rjswpσj q‚
                                                                 jPpredspiq
                                                               ¨                          ˛
                                                                     ğ
                                                       σ11 “ ˝                f vP rjswpσj q‚\ σ0
                                                                 jPpredsp1q

                               where σ0 is the initial dataflow information. Then, a
                               dataflow analysis result Σ “ xσ1 , σ2 , ....σ|P | y is a fixed point
                               iff FpΣq “ Σ.

   At the fixed point, we therefore have the following equations satisfied:

                                                               σ0 Ď σ1
                                     ¨                          ˛
                                           ğ
                            @i P P : ˝               f vP rjswpσj q‚ Ď σi
                                        jPpredspiq

The worklist algorithm shown above computes a fixed point when it terminates. We can prove
this by showing that the following loop invariant is maintained:

                 @i . pDj P predspiq such that f vP rjswpσj q Ď
                                                              ­ σi q ñ i P worklist
The invariant is trivially true initially because all instructions are initially in the worklist. The
invariant is maintained because whenever the output f vP rjswpσj q of instruction j changes, pos-
sibly breaking the invariant, then the successors of j are added to the worklist, thus restoring it.
When an instruction i is removed from the worklist and processed, the invariant as it applies
to i is established. Finally, when the worklist is empty, the above equations are satisfied.

And now the main result we will use to prove program analyses correct:

Theorem 2 (A fixed point of a locally sound analysis is globally sound). If a dataflow analysis’s
flow function f is monotonic and locally sound, and for all traces T we have αpc0 q Ď σ0 where σ0 is the
initial analysis information, then any fixed point tσn | n P P u of the analysis is sound.

Proof. To show that the analysis is sound, we must prove that for all program traces, every
program configuration in that trace is correctly approximated by the analysis results. We
consider an arbitrary program trace T and do the proof by induction on the program configu-
rations tci u in the trace.

       Case c0 :
                     αpc0 q Ď σ0 by assumption.
                     σ0 Ď σn0 by the definition of a fixed point.
                     αpc0 q Ď σn0 by the transitivity of Ď.

       Case ci`1 :
                     αpci q Ď σni by the induction hypothesis.
                     P $ ci ; ci`1 by the definition of a trace.
                     αpci`1 q Ď f vP rni swpσni q by local soundness.
                     f vP rni swpσni q \ ... Ď σni`1 by the definition of fixed point.
                     f vP rni swpσni q Ď σni`1 by the properties of \.
                     αpci`1 q Ď σni`1 by the transitivity of Ď.

    Since we previously proved that Zero Analysis is locally sound and that its flow functions
are monotonic, we can use this theorem to conclude that the analysis is sound. This means, for
example, that Zero Analysis will never neglect to warn us if we are dividing by a variable that
could be zero.

6.3      Precision
We have seen that fixed points of flow functions produce sound results. We now consider,
among all possible sound results, how they rank in terms of relative precision.
    We first define a family of sets Γpjq which collects all possible concrete configurations that
can be observed at instruction j. That is, Γpjq “ tc | c “ xE, jy ^ c P TracespP qu. We can now
define what the most optimal dataflow analysis (OPT) would compute:

       Optimal Precision           The result xσn | n P P y of a program Ůanalysis running on
                                   program P is optimally precise iff σi “ cPΓpiq αpcq

Such an analysis would compute only the most precise generalization of all possible abstract
values that can be observed at a program point. Unfortunately, getting such results is impos-
sible in general due to Rice’s theorem [35]. Intuitively, the main problem with this solution is
that it requires us to solve program reachability to determine the exact set of possible program
traces, which is not computable.
    Next, we consider a solution that over-approximates the set of all traces by considering the
(possibly infinite) set of all program paths through the program’s control-flow graph (CFG).
This is an over-approximation because not all CFG paths may be feasible to execute, but we
will consider them anyway. It is called the MOP solution because it merges over all paths1 .
   1
    Technically, the name originates from “meet over all paths” in frameworks where the lattice is flipped top to
bottom. In our framework, the MOP actually computes the “join over all paths”.

   We first enumerate all paths π of the form π “ n1 , n2 , ... in the control-flow graph,
where ni are the instructions (nodes) in the path. For each such path π, we successively
apply flow functions to form the sequence of tuples Π “ xσ1 , n1 y, xσ2 , n2 y, . . . such that
σΠj “ f vP rnΠj swpσΠj´1 q, where Πj is the j-th tuple in the sequence and σ0 is the initial data
flow information. We then join over all σ values computed for an instruction i to get the MOP:
                                        ğ
                             MOPpiq “ tσ | xσ, iy P Some Π for P u
   The MOP solution is the most precise result if we consider all possible program paths
through the CFG, even though it may be less precise than the optimal solution due to the
consideration of infeasible paths. The MOP is computable when flow functions are distributive
over join.

     Distributivity            A function f is distributive iff f pσ1 q \ f pσ2 q “ f pσ1 \ σ2 q

Exercise 3. Are the flow functions for zero analysis distributive over \? Either prove they are
or demonstrate a violation of the distributive law.

    Let’s turn back to the data-flow analysis framework described in the previous subsection,
where we proved that fixed points of the composite flow function are sound results. There can
be more than one such fixed point, however, and so we also define the special case of a least
fixed point (LFP):

     Least Fixed Point         The least fixed point solution of a composite flow function
                               F is the fixed-point result Σ˚ such that FpΣ˚ q “ Σ˚ and
                               @Σ : pFpΣq “ Σq ñ pΣ˚ Ď Σq.

    It turns out that if we start the worklist algorithm by initializing the dataflow values for
every program point with K, then the fixed point that the algorithm computes is actually the
LFP. It can be shown that if flow functions are distributive over the join operator \, then the
LFP = MOP.
    Putting it all together: The optimal sound solution is not computable in general. The MOP
is the most precise solution that considers all CFG paths, but it may be less precise than the
optimal solution. It is computable when flow functions are distributive. The MOP is at least
as precise as the least fixed point (LFP) solution, and the LFP is at least as precise as any other
fixed point (FP) solution. Finally, there may be sound solutions that are not fixed points. So,
we have the relation:

                                OPT Ď MOP Ď LFP Ď FP Ď J

Exercise 4. For the program below, perform zero analysis to determine the optimal solution
(OPT), the MOP, the LFP. Are these all equal or do they differ?

                                       1:     if x “ 0 goto 4
                                       2:     y :“ 0
                                       3:     goto 5
                                       4:     y :“ 1
                                       5:     w :“ x ˚ y
                                       6:     if x “ 0 goto 9
                                       7:     z :“ y
                                       8:     goto 10
                                       9:     z :“ 0
                                       10 :   halt

