Chapter 8

Interprocedural Analysis

Consider an extension of W HILE 3A DDR that includes functions. We thus add a new syntactic
category F (for functions), and two new instruction forms (function call and return), as follows:

                                 F   ::“ fun f pxq t n : I u
                                 I   ::“ . . . | return x | y :“ f pxq
     In the notation above, n : I, the line is shorthand for a list, so that the body of a function is
a list of instructions I with line numbers n. We assume in our formalism that all functions take
a single integer argument and return an integer result, but this is easy to generalize if we need
to. We can also add global variables to this language by tracking a separate set of variables,
Globals. We assume simple syntactic scoping.
     Note that this is not a truly precise syntactic specification. Specifying even just “possibly
empty list of arithmetic expressions” properly takes several intermediate syntactic steps;
correctly handling scope requires rather significant refinement to the operational semantics.
However, providing such precision is more trouble than it’s worth for this discussion.
Function names are strings. Functions may return either void or a single integer. We leave the
problem of type-checking to another class.
     We’ve made our programming language much easier to use, but dataflow analysis has be-
come rather more difficult. Interprocedural analysis concerns analyzing a program with mul-
tiple procedures, ideally taking into account the way that information flows among those pro-
cedures. We use zero analysis as our running example throughout, unless otherwise indicated.

8.1    Two Simple Approaches
Default assumptions. Our first approach assumes a default lattice value for all arguments to
a function La and a default value for procedure results Lr . In some respects, La is equivalent
to the initial dataflow information we set at the entry to the program when we were only
looking intraprocedurally; now we assume it on entry to every procedure. We check the
assumptions hold when analyzing a call or return instruction (trivial if La “ Lr “ J). We then
use the assumption when analyzing the result of a call instruction or starting the analysis of a
method. For example, we have σ0 “ tx ÞÑ La | x P Varu.
    Here is a sample flow function for call and return instructions:

                       f vx :“ gpyqwpσq “ σrx ÞÑ Lr s perror if σpyq Ď
                                                                     ­ La q
                       f vreturn xwpσq    “σ              perror if σpxq Ď
                                                                         ­ Lr q
     We can apply zero analysis to the following function, using La                     “     Lr    “
J:

                                    1 : fun divByXpxq : int
                                    2:    y :“ 10{x
                                    3:    return y
                                    4 : fun mainpq : void
                                    5:    z :“ 5
                                    6:    w :“ divByXpzq

   The results are sound, but imprecise. We can avoid the false positive by using a more
optimistic assumption La “ Lr “ N Z. But then we get a problem with the following program:

                                    1 : fun doublepxq : int
                                    2:    y :“ 2 ˚ x
                                    3:    return y
                                    4 : fun mainpq : void
                                    5:    z :“ 0
                                    6:    w :“ doublepzq

Now what?

Annotations. An alternative approach uses annotations. This allows us to choose different
argument and result assumptions for different procedures. Flow functions might look like:

             f vx :“ gpyqwpσq “ σrx ÞÑ annotvgw.rs perror if σpyq Ď
                                                                  ­ annotvgw.aq
             f vreturn xwpσq   “σ                                     ­ annotvgw.rq
                                                       perror if σpxq Ď
Now we can verify that both of the above programs are safe, given the proper annotations. We
will see other example analysis approaches that use annotations later in the semester, though
historically, programmer buy-in remains a challenge in practice.

Local vs. global variables. If we add global variables, we must make conservative assump-
tions about them too. Assume globals should always be described by some lattice value Lg at
procedure boundaries. We can extend the flow functions as follows:

             f vx :“ gpyqwpσq “ σrx ÞÑ Lr srz ÞÑ Lg | z P Globalss
                                perror if σpyq Ď
                                               ­ La _ @z P Globals : σpzq Ď
                                                                          ­ Lg q
             f vreturn xwpσq   “σ
                                perror if σpxq Ď
                                               ­ Lr _ @z P Globals : σpzq Ď
                                                                          ­ Lg q
   The annotation approach can also be extended in a natural way to handle global variables.

8.2   Interprocedural Control Flow Graphs
An approach that avoids the burden of annotations, and can capture what a procedure
actually does as used in a particular program, is to build a control flow graph for the entire
program, rather than just a single procedure. To make this work, we handle call and return
instructions specially as follows:

   • We add additional edges to the control flow graph. For every call to function g, we add
     an edge from the call site to the first instruction of g, and from every return statement of
     g to the instruction following that call.

   • When analyzing the first statement of a procedure, we generally gather analysis infor-
     mation from each predecessor as usual. However, we take out all dataflow information
     related to local variables in the callers. Furthermore, we add dataflow information
     for parameters in the callee, initializing their dataflow values according to the actual
     arguments passed in at each call site.

   • When analyzing an instruction immediately after a call, we get dataflow information
     about local variables from the previous statement. Information about global variables
     is taken from the return sites of the function that was called. Information about the
     variable that the result of the function call was assigned to comes from the dataflow
     information about the returned value.

   Now the examples described above can be successfully analyzed.                   However, other
programs still cause problems:

                                      1 : fun doublepxq : int
                                      2:    y :“ 2 ˚ x
                                      3:    return y
                                      4 : fun mainpq
                                      5:    z :“ 5
                                      6:    w :“ doublepzq
                                      7:    z :“ 10{w
                                      8:    z :“ 0
                                      9:    w :“ doublepzq

What’s the issue here?

8.3    Context Sensitive Analysis
Context-sensitive analysis analyzes a function either multiple times, or parametrically, so that
the analysis results returned to different call sites reflect the different analysis results passed in
at those call sites. We could get context sensitivity just by duplicating (or inlining) all callees,
but this only works for non-recursive programs.
    A simple solution is to build a summary of each function, mapping dataflow input
information to dataflow output information. We will analyze each function once for each
context, where a context is an abstraction for a set of calls to that function. At a minimum, each
context must track the input dataflow information to the function.
    Let’s look at how this approach allows the program given above to be proven safe by zero
analysis...(Example will be given in class)
    Things become more challenging in the presence of recursive functions, or more generally
mutual recursion. Let us consider context-sensitive interprocedural constant propagation
analysis of a factorial function called by main. We are not focused on the intraprocedural part
of the analysis, so we will just show the function in the form of Java or C source code:
      int fact(int x) {
          if (x == 1)                         void main() {
              return 1;                           int y = fact(2);
          else                                    int z = fact(3);
              return x * fact(x-1);               int w = fact(getInputFromUser());
      }                                       }
    We can analyze the first two calls to fact within main straightforwardly, and in fact we
can even cache the results of analyzing fact(2) for reuse when analyzing the recursive call
inside fact(3).

    For the third call to fact, the argument is determined at runtime, and so constant
propagation uses J for the calling context. In this case, the recursive call to fact() also has J
as the calling context. But we cannot look up the result in the cache yet as analysis of fact()
with J has not completed. A naive approach would attempt to analyze fact() with J again,
and would therefore not terminate.
    We can solve the problem by applying the same idea as in intraprocedural analysis.
The recursive call is a kind of a loop. We make the initial assumption that the result of the
recursive call is K, conceptually equivalent to information coming from the back edge of a
loop. When we discover the result is a higher point in the lattice then K, we reanalyze the
calling context (and recursively, all calling contexts that depend on it). The algorithm to do so
can be expressed as follows:
  type Context
     val f n : F unction                                              Ź the function being called
     val input : σ                                                     Ź input for this set of calls

  type Summary                                        Ź the input/output summary for a context
     val input : σ
     val output : σ

  val worklist : SetrContexts Ź contexts we must revisit due to updated analysis information
  val analyzing : SetrContexts                     Ź the contexts we are currently analyzing
  val results : M aprContext, Summarys                                 Ź the analysis results
  val callers : M aprContext, SetrContextss  Ź the call graph - used for change propagation

  function G ET C TX(f, callingCtx, n, σin )
     return Contextpf, σin q                          Ź constructs a new Context with f and σin
  end function

  function A NALYZE P ROGRAM                         Ź starting point for interprocedural analysis
     initCtx Ð G ET C TXpmain, nil, 0, Jq
     worklist Ð tinitCtxu
     resultsrinitCtxs Ð SummarypJ, Kq
     while N OT E MPTY(worklist) do
         ctx Ð R EMOVE(worklist)
         A NALYZE(ctx, resultsrctxs.input)
     end while
  end function

  function A NALYZE(ctx, σin )
     σout Ð resultsrctxs.output
     A DD(analyzing, ctx)
       1
     σout  ÐI NTRAPROCEDURAL(ctx, σin )
     R EMOVE(analyzing, ctx)
         1
     if σout ­Ď σout then
                                              1 q
         resultsrctxs Ð Summarypσin , σout \ σout
         for c P callersrctxs do
              A DD(worklist, c)
         end for
     end if
               1
     return σout
  end function

  function F LOW(vn: x :“ f pyqw, ctx, σn )                Ź called by intraprocedural analysis
     σin Ð rf ormalpf q ÞÑ σn pyqs        Ź map f ’s formal parameter to info on actual from σn
     calleeCtx Ð G ET C TXpf, ctx, n, σin q
     σout ÐR ESULTS F OR(calleeCtx, σin )
     A DD(callersrcalleeCtxs, ctx)
     return σn rx ÞÑ σout rresultss                Ź update dataflow with the function’s result
  end function

   function R ESULTS F OR(ctx, σin )
      if ctx P dompresultsq then
          if σin Ď resultsrctxs.input then
              return resultsrctxs.output                              Ź existing results are good
          else
              resultsrctxs.input Ð resultsrctxs.input \ σin Ź keep track of more general input
          end if
      else
          resultsrctxs “ Summarypσin , Kq                      Ź initially optimistic assumption
      end if
      if ctx P analyzing then
          return resultsrctxs.output Ź K if it hasn’t been analyzed yet; otherwise last known
      else
          return A NALYZE(ctx, resultsrctxs.input)
      end if
   end function
    The interprocedural analysis algorithm relies on ordinary intraprocedural analysis, as
defined in earlier chapters. We give only the flow functions for function calls, since this
is the essence of what makes an analysis interprocedural. An important note regarding
intraprocedural analysis is that if a function has multiple return statements, the lattice values
returned at each statement are joined together to before being added to the summary that is
then used in interprocedural analysis.
    The following example shows that the algorithm generalizes naturally to the case of
mutually recursive functions:
   bar() { if (...) return 2 else return foo() }
   foo() { if (...) return 1 else return bar() }

   main() { foo(); }

8.4   Precision and Termination
Precision. A notable part of the algorithm above is that if we are currently analyzing a
context and are asked to analyze it again, we return K as the result of the analysis. This has
similar benefits to using K for initial dataflow values on the back edges of loops: starting with
the most optimistic assumptions about code we haven’t finished analyzing allows us to reach
the best possible fixed point. The following example program illustrates a function where the
result of analysis will be better if we assume K for recursive calls to the same context, vs. for
example if we assumed J:
   int iterativeIdentity(x, y)
       if x <= 0
            return y
       else
            return iterativeIdentity(x-1, y)

   void main(z)
       w = iterativeIdentity(z, 5)

Termination. When will the algorithm above terminate? Analyze is called only when (1) a
context has not been analyzed yet, or when (2) it has just been taken off the worklist. So it is
called once per reachable context, plus once for every time a reachable context is added to the
worklist.
    We can bound the total number of worklist additions by (C) the number of reachable
contexts, times (H) the height of the lattice (we don’t add to the worklist unless results for
some context changed, i.e. went up in the lattice relative to an initial assumption of K or
relative to the last analysis result), times (N) the number of callers of that reachable context.
C*N is just the number of edges (E) in the inter-context call graph, so we can see that we will
do intraprocedural analysis O(E*H) times.
    Thus the algorithm will terminate as long as the lattice is of finite height and there are a
finite number of reachable contexts. Note, however, that for some lattices, notably including
constant propagation, there are an unbounded number of lattice elements and thus an
unbounded number of contexts. If more than a finite number are not reachable, the algorithm
will not terminate. So for lattices with an unbounded number of elements, we need to adjust
the context-sensitivity approach above to limit the number of contexts that are analyzed.

8.5    Approaches to Limiting Context-Sensitivity
No context-sensitivity. One approach to limiting the number of contexts is to allow only
one for each function. This is equivalent to the interprocedural control flow graph approach
described above. We can recast this approach as a variant of the generic interprocedural
analysis algorithm by replacing the Context type to track only the function being called, and
then having the G ET C TX method always return the same context:
  type Context
     val f n : F unction

  function G ET C TX(f, callingCtx, n, σin )
     return Contextpf q
  end function
    Note that in this approach the same calling context might be used for several different
input dataflow information σin , one for each call to G ET C TX. This is handled correctly by
R ESULTS F OR, which updates the input information in the Summary for that context so that it
generalizes all the input to the function seen so far.

Limited contexts. Another approach is to create contexts as in the original algorithm, but
once a certain number of contexts have been created for a given function, merge all subsequent
calls into a single context. Of course, this means the algorithm will lose precision beyond this
bounds. But, if most functions have fewer contexts that are actually used, this can be a good
strategy for analyzing most of the program in a context-sensitive way while avoiding perfor-
mance problems for the minority of functions that are called from many different contexts.
Can you implement a G ET C TX function that represents this strategy?

Call strings. Another context sensitivity strategy is to differentiate contexts by a call string:
the call site, its call site, and so forth. For example, the initial context for the main function is
xmain, rsy; a call to foo on line 3 will create the context xfoo, r3sy; if this function calls bar
on line 10 we will get the context xbar, r3, 10sy, and so on. If main additionally calls foo on

line 5, we will get contexts xfoo, r5sy and then eventually xbar, r5, 10sy. So, the two calls to
bar are distinguished by the full calling context from main. In the limit, when considering
call strings of arbitrary length, this provides full context sensitivity (but is not guaranteed
to terminate for arbitrary recursive functions). This strategy can be implemented using the
following representation in pseudo-code:
   type Context
      val f n : F unction
      val string : ListrInts

   function G ET C TX(f, callingCtx, n, σin )
       newStr Ð callingCtx.string ++ n
       return Contextpf, newStrq
   end function
    Dataflow analysis results for contexts based on arbitrarylength call strings are as precise as
the results for contexts based on separate analysis for each different input dataflow informa-
tion. The latter strategy can be more efficient, however, because it reuses analysis results when
a function is called twice with different call strings but the same input dataflow information.
    In practice, both strategies (arbitrary-length call strings vs. input dataflow information)
can result in reanalyzing each function an unacceptable number of times. Multiple contexts
must be combined somehow. The call-string approach provides an easy, but naive, way to do
this: call strings can simply be cut off at a certain length. For example, if we have call strings
“a b c” and “d e b c” (where c is the most recent call site) with a cutoff of 2, the input dataflow
information for these two call strings will be merged and the analysis will be run only once, for
the context identified by the common length-two suffix of the strings, “b c”. We can illustrate
this by redoing the analysis of the factorial example. The algorithm is the same as above;
however, we use a different implementation of G ET C TX that computes the call string suffix:
   type Context
      val f n : F unction
      val string : ListrInts

   function G ET C TX(f, callingCtx, n, σin )
      newStr ÐS UFFIX(callingCtx.string ++ n, CALL STRING CUTOFF)
      return Contextpf, newStrq
   end function
    Although this strategy reduces the overall number of analyses, it does so in a relatively
blind way. If a function is called many times but we only want to analyze it a few times,
we want to group the calls into analysis contexts so that their input information is similar.
Call string context is a heuristic way of doing this that sometimes works well. But it can
be wasteful: if two different call strings of a given length happen to have exactly the same
input analysis information, we will do an unnecessary extra analysis, whereas it would have
been better to spend that extra analysis to differentiate calls with longer call strings that have
different analysis information.
    Given a limited analysis budget, it is usually best to use heuristics that are directly based
on input information. Unfortunately these heuristics are harder to design, but they have the
potential to do much better than a call-string based approach. We will look at some examples
from the literature to illustrate this later in the course.

