Chapter 9

Control Flow
Analysis for Functional Languages

We have made progress by expanding our dataflow analysis to handle programs with mul-
tiple procedures. However, the approach we’ve developed relies on a number of simplifying
assumptions. Notably, in W HILE 3A DDR with functions, it is always easy to tell which
function is being called at any particular callsite. This is often not the case in real languages.
Object-oriented languages (or any language with dynamic dispatch) and functional languages
challenge this assumption: in both cases, it can be difficult to tell which function is being
called, statically.
    We therefore turn now to the general problem of statically analyzing functional languages.
In doing so, we will see techniques for addressing this general question of determining control
flow (or call graphs), and generalize several of our ideas about dataflow analysis (like the idea
of a program point). Additionally, analyzing functional languages motivates and provides
a good introduction to constraint-based analyses. We will additionally expand on a number of
these ideas in subsequent classes.

9.1     A simple, labeled, functional language
Consider an idealized functional language based on the lambda calculus, similar to the core
of Scheme or ML, with the additional property that we label all expressions:

                       e P       Expressions              ...or labelled terms
                       t P       T erm                    ...or unlabelled expressions
                       l P       L                        labels

                       e ::“ tl
                       t ::“ λx.e
                         |   x
                         |   pe1 q pe2 q
                         |   let x “ e1 in e2
                         |   if e0 then e1 else e2
                         |   n | e1 ` e2 | ...
   The grammar includes a definition of an anonymous function λx.e, where x is the function
argument and e is the function body.1 The function can include any of the other types of ex-
   1
    The formulation in PPA also includes a syntactic construct for explicitly recursive functions. The ideas extend
naturally, but we’ll follow the simpler syntax for expository purposes.

pressions, such as variables x or function calls pea1 qpeb2 q,2 where e1 is the function to be invoked
and e2 is passed to that function as an argument (labeled a and b respectively). We evaluate a
function call pλx.eqpvq by substituting the argument v for all occurrences of x in e. For example,
ppλx.pxa ` 1b qc qd p3qe qg evaluates to 3 ` 1, which of course evaluates to 4. A more interesting ex-
ample is pppλf.pf a 3b qc qe pλx.pxg ` 1h qi qj qk , which first substitutes the argument for f , yielding
pλx.xg ` 1h qi 3. Then we invoke the function, getting 3 ` 1 which again evaluates to 4.
   Note that this grammar associates each expression with a label l P L; this is important
to keeping track of analysis information (analogous to program points in our imperative
analysis), as we discuss next.

9.2     Simple Control Flow Analysis
Static analysis can be just as useful in this type of language as in imperative languages, but
immediate complexities arise. For example: what is a program point in a language without
obvious predecessors or successors? Computation is intrinsically nested. Second, because
functions are first-class entities that can be passed around as variables, it’s not obvious which
function is being applied where. We need some way to figure this out, because the value a
function returns (which we may hope to track, such as through constant propagation analysis)
will inevitably depend on which function is called, as well as its arguments.
    Control flow analysis (CFA)3 seeks to statically determine which functions could be asso-
ciated with which variables. Because functional languages are not based on statements but
rather expressions, it is appropriate to reason about both the values of variables and the values
expressions evaluate to.

9.2.1    0-CFA
We will start by discussing the simplest form of a CFA, called 0-CFA. This is the simplest form
because it is context-insensitive (the “0-” label indicates no context is taken into account). We
track analysis information for variables and labels, in lieu of the explicit program points in the
control flow graphs we used before. Although this may feel like a big change, this approach
actually connects directly to what we’ve been doing in imperative dataflow analysis so far.
Dataflow analysis is a type of abstract interpretation, an overall framework or theory of sound
approximation of program semantics. At a high level and separate from a particular program
definition, abstract interpretation associates labels with properties by manipulating sets of states
using monotonic functions over ordered sets as defined by lattices. In our formulation for
imperative languages, we implicitly associated labels with the program points between nodes
in a control flow graph.
    That said, our analysis information σ maps each variable and label to a lattice value. 0-CFA
analysis is only concerned with tracking which functions are possibly associated with each
location or variable (we will add dataflow information later), and so the abstract domain is as
follows:

                             σ P Var Y L Ñ L                   L “ J ` Ppλx.eq
    The analysis information at any given expression is the set of all functions that could be
the result of evaluating that expression. As suggested above, expressions are identified by
their labels l, and we track similar information for variables. We use J to denote all possible
   2
     In an imperative language this would more typically be written ea1 pe2 qb , but we follow the functional conven-
tion here, with parenthesis included when helpful syntactically.
   3
     This nomenclature is confusing because it is also used to refer to analyses of control flow graphs in imperative
languages; We usually abbreviate to CFA when discussing the analysis of functional languages.

functions; if we know all the functions in the program, we could enumerate them, but a
symbolic J representation is useful when we don’t have the whole program available.
Question: what is the Ď relation on this dataflow state?
    A 0-CFA is a Constraint Based Analysis: it is defined via inference rules that generate
constraints over the possible dataflow values for each variable or labeled location; those
constraints are then solved. We use the ãÑ to define constraint generation. The judgment
vewl ãÑ C can be read as “The analysis of expression e with label l generates constraints C over
dataflow state σ.” For our first CFA, we can define inference rules for this judgment as follows:
                                                               var
                                       vxwl ãÑ σpxq Ď σplq
    In this rule, the variable value flows to the program location l. Although we didn’t list
it above (we generalize it below), a rule for constants produces the empty set, because this
analysis is tracking only function values.
    The rules for functions/calls is more complex:

                                          vewl0 ãÑ C
                                                                     lambda
                               vλx.el0 wl ãÑ tλx.eu Ď σplq Y C

                                  ve1 wl1 ãÑ C1   ve2 wl2 ãÑ C2
                                                                         apply
                             vel11 el22 wl ãÑ C1 Y C2 Y fn l1 : l2 ñ l

    The first rule just states that if a literal function is declared at a program location l, that
function is part of the lattice value σplq computed by the analysis for that location. Because
we want to analyze the data flow inside the function, we also generate a set of constraints C
from the function body and return those constraints as well.
    The rule for application first analyzes the function and the argument to extract two sets
of constraints C1 and C2 . We then generate an abstract function flow constraint of the form
fn l1 : l2 ñ l. This function flow constraint is interpreted by the constraint solver to generate
additional concrete constraints using the following rule:

                                      λx.el00 P σpl1 q
                                                                     function-flow
                     fn l1 : l2 ñ l ãÑ σpl2 q Ď σpxq ^ σpl0 q Ď σplq

   This rule states that for every literal function λx.el00 that the analysis (eventually) deter-
mines the expression labeled l1 may evaluate to, we must generate additional constraints that
capture value flow from the actual argument expression l2 to formal function argument x, and
from the function result to the calling expression l.
   Consider the first example program given above: ppλx.pxa ` 1b qc qd p3qe qg . The first rule to
use is apply (because that’s the top-level program construct). We will work this out together,
but the generated constraints could look like:

              pσpxq Ď σpaqq Y ptλx.x ` 1u Ď σpdqq Y pσpeq Ď σpxqq ^ pσpcq Ď σpgqq

    There are many possible valid (typically referred to as acceptable) solutions to this con-
straint set. Eliding the formalities, it suffices to say that we would like the least solution to
these constraints, as that will be the most precise result. We will return to constraint solving
properly later in the course; for now, we will simply assert that a σ that maps all variables and
locations except d to H, and d to tλx.x ` 1u, satisfies this set of constraints.
Question: what might the rules for the if-then-else or arithmetic operator expressions look like?

9.2.2   0-CFA with dataflow information
The analysis in the previous subsection is interesting if all you’re interested in is which
functions can be called where, but doesn’t solve the general problem of dataflow analysis of
functional programs. Fortunately, extending that approach to a more general analysis space
is straightforward: we simply add the abstract information we’re tracking to the abstract
domain defined above. For constant propagation, for example, we can extend the dataflow
state as follows:

                      σ P Var Y Lab Ñ L                  L “ Z ` J ` Ppλx.eq
   Now, the analysis information maps each program point (or variable) to an integer n, or
J, or a set of functions. This requires that we modify our inference rules slightly, but not as
much as you might expect. Indeed, the rules mostly change for arithmetic operators (which
we omitted above) and constants. We simply need to provide an abstraction over concrete
values that captures the dataflow information in question. We get the following rules:

                                                      ve1 wl1 ãÑ C1   ve2 wl2 ãÑ C2
                            const                                                                  plus
      vnwl ãÑ αpnq Ď σplq                 vel11 ` el22 wl ãÑ C1 Y C2 Y pσpl1 q `J σpl2 qq Ď σplq

Where α is defined as we discussed in abstract interpretation, and `J is addition lifted to
work over a domain that includes J (and simply ignores/drops any lambda values). There
are similar rules for other arithmetic operations.
    Consider the second example, above, properly labeled: pppλf.pf a 3b qc qe pλx.pxg ` 1h qi qj qk
A constant propagation analysis could produce the following results:

      Var Y Lab      L         by rule
          e        λf.f 3      lambda
          j       λx.x ` 1     lambda
          f       λx.x ` 1      apply
          a       λx.x ` 1       var
          b          3          const
          x          3          apply
          g          3           var
          h          1          const
          i          4           add
          c          4          apply
          k          4          apply

9.3     m-Calling Context Sensitive Control Flow Analysis (m-CFA)
The control flow analysis described above quickly becomes imprecise in more interesting
programs that reuse functions in several calling contexts. This problem should seem familiar
from interprocedural imperative program analysis, but the following code illustrates the
problem in this new language:

                                         let add “ λx. λy. x ` y
                                         let add5 “ padd 5qa5
                                         let add6 “ padd 6qa6
                                         let main “ padd5 2qm

    This example illustrates currying, in which a function such as add that takes two arguments
x and y in sequence can be called with only one argument (e.g. 5 in the call labeled a5),
resulting in a function that can later be called with the second argument (in this case, 2 at the
call labeled m). The value 5 for the first argument in this example is stored with the function
in the closure add5. Thus when the second argument is passed to add5, the closure holds the
value of x so that the sum x ` y “ 5 ` 2 “ 7 can be computed.
    In this case, we create two closures, add5 and add6, binding 5 and 6 and the respective
values for x. 0-CFA analysis cannot distinguish them, and because it only computes one value
for x we learn only that x has the value J. This is illustrated in the following analysis (we
shorten the trace to focus only on the variables):

    Var Y Lab         L          notes
       add       λx. λy. x ` y
        x              5         when analyzing first call
      add5        λy. x ` y
        x             J          when analyzing second call
      add6        λy. x ` y
      main            J

    We can add precision using a context-sensitive analysis. One could, in principle, use either
the functional or call-string approach we discussed previously. In practice the call-string
approach is more commonly used for control-flow analysis in functional programming lan-
guages, perhaps because functional programs will typically produced an intractable number
of contexts per function, and it is easier to place a bound on the analysis in the call-string
approach.
    We add context sensitivity by making our analysis information σ track information
separately for different call strings, denoted by ∆. Here a call string is a sequence of labels,
each one denoting a function call site, where the sequence can be of any length between 0 and
some bound m (in practice m will be in the range 0-2 for scalability reasons):

     σ P pVar Y Labq ˆ ∆ Ñ L             ∆ “ Labnďm              L “ Z ` J ` Pppλx.e, δqq
    When a lambda expression is analyzed, we now consider as part of the lattice the call
string context δ in which its free variables were captured. We can then define a set of rules
that generate constraints which, when solved, provide an answer to control-flow analysis, as
well as (in this case) constant propagation:
                                         const                                        var
            δ $ vnwl ãÑ αpnq Ď σpl, δq                δ $ vxwl ãÑ σpx, δq Ď σpl, δq

                                                                    lambda
                          δ $ vλx.el0 wl ãÑ tpλx.e, δqu Ď σpl, δq

                          δ $ ve1 wl1 ãÑ C1      δ $ ve2 wl2 ãÑ C2
                                                                         apply
                        δ $ vel11 el22 wl ãÑ C1 Y C2 Y fnδ l1 : l2 ñ l

    These rules contain a call string context δ in which the analysis of each line of code is
done. The rules const and var are unchanged except for indexing σ by the current context δ.
Similarly, the apply rule is the same except we index everything by δ and record δ as part of the
function flow constraint. The lambda rule now captures the context δ along with the lambda
expression, so that when the lambda expression is called the analysis knows in which context
to look up the free variables. But the rule no longer analyzes inside the function; we want to
delay that and do it for a new context δ 1 when the function is called.

                    pλx.el00 , δq P σpl1 , δq     δ 1 “ suffix pδ``l, mq
                     C1 “ σpl2 , δq Ď σpx, δ q ^ σpl0 , δ 1 q Ď σpl, δq
                                                1

                      C2 “ tσpy, δq Ď σpy, δ 1 q | y P FV pλx.e0 qu
                                     δ 1 $ ve0 wl0 ãÑ C3
                                                                         function-flow-δ
                             fnδ l1 : l2 ñ l ãÑ C1 Y C2 Y C3

    The function flow constraint has gotten a bit more complicated. A new context δ 1 is formed
by appending the current call site l to the old call string, then taking the suffix of length m
(or less). For each function that may be called, we set up constraints between the actual and
formal parameters and the function result, as before (C1 ). We analyze the body of the function
in the new context δ 1 (C3 ). Finally, we produce constraints that bind the free variables in
the new context: all free variables in the called function flow from the point δ0 at which the
closure was captured.
    We can now reanalyze the earlier example, observing the benefit of context sensitivity. In
the table below, ‚ denotes the empty calling context (e.g. when analyzing the main procedure):

     Var / Lab, δ            L              notes
       add, ‚        pλx. λy. x ` y, ‚q
        x, a5                5
       add5, ‚        pλy. x ` y, a5q
        x, a6                6
       add6, ‚        pλy. x ` y, a6q
       main, ‚               7

    Note three points about this analysis. First, we can distinguish the values of x in the two
calling contexts: x is 5 in the context a5 but it is 6 in the context a6. Second, the closures re-
turned to the variables add5 and add6 record the scope in which the free variable x was bound
when the closure was captured. This means, third, that when we invoke the closure add5 at pro-
gram point m, we will know that x was captured in calling context a5, and so when the analysis
analyzes the addition, it knows that x holds the constant 5 in this context. This enables constant
propagation to compute a precise answer, learning that the variable main holds the value 7.

Optional: Uniform k-Calling Context Sensitive Control Flow Analysis (k-CFA)
m-CFA was proposed recently by Might, Smaragdakis, and Van Horn as a more scalable ver-
sion of the original k-CFA analysis developed by Shivers for Scheme. While m-CFA now seems
to be a better tradeoff between scalability and precision, k-CFA is interesting both for historical
reasons and because it illustrates a more precise approach to tracking the values of variables in
a closure. The following example illustrates a situation in which m-CFA may be too imprecise:

                               let adde “ λx.
                                             let h “ λy. λz. x ` y ` z
                                             let r “ h 8
                                             in r
                               let t    “ padde 2qt
                               let f    “ padde 4qf
                               let e    “ pt 1qe
   When we analyze it with m-CFA, we get the following results:

    Var / Lab, δ           L               notes
      adde, ‚           pλx..., ‚q
        x, t                2
        y, r                8
        x, r                2              when analyzing first call

        t, ‚       pλz. x ` y ` z, rq
        x, f               4
        x, r               J               when analyzing second call

         f, ‚      pλz. x ` y ` z, rq
         t, ‚              J

   The k-CFA analysis is like m-CFA, except that rather than keeping track of the scope in
which a closure was captured, the analysis keeps track of the scope in which each variable
captured in the closure was defined. We use an environment η to track this. Note that since
η can represent a separate calling context for each variable, it has the potential to be more
accurate, but also much more expensive. We can represent the analysis information as follows:

                      σ P pVar Y Labq ˆ ∆ Ñ L                  ∆ “ Labnďk
                      L “ Z ` J ` Ppλx.e, ηq                   η P Var Ñ ∆

    Let us briefly analyze the complexity of this analysis. In the worst case, if a closure
captures n different variables, we may have a different call string for each of them. There
are Opnk q different call strings for a program of size n, so if we keep track of one for each
of n variables, we have Opnn˚k q different representations of the contexts for the variables
captured in each closure. This exponential blowup is why k-CFA scales so badly. m-CFA is
comparatively cheap—there are “only” Opnk q different contexts for the variables captured in
each closure—still exponential in k, but polynomial in n for a fixed (and generally small) k.
    We can now define the rules for k-CFA. They are similar to the rules for m-CFA, except that
we now have two contexts: the calling context δ, and the environment context η tracking the
context in which each variable is bound. When we analyze a variable x, we look it up not in
the current context δ, but the context ηpxq in which it was bound. When a lambda is analyzed,
we track the current environment η with the lambda, as this is the information necessary to
determine where captured variables are bound. The function flow rule is actually somewhat
simpler, because we do not copy bound variables into the context of the called procedure:

                                         const                                                var
        δ, η $ vnwl ãÑ αpnq Ď σpl, δq                   δ, η $ vxwl ãÑ σpx, ηpxqq Ď σpl, δq

                                                                       lambda
                          δ, η $ vλx.el0 wl ãÑ tpλx.e, ηqu Ď σpl, δq

                         δ, η $ ve1 wl1 ãÑ C1       δ, η $ ve2 wl2 ãÑ C2
                                                                            apply
                        δ, η $ vel11 el22 wl ãÑ C1 Y C2 Y fnδ l1 : l2 ñ l

                   pλx.el00 , η0 q P σpl1 q       δ 1 “ suffix pδ``l, mq
                   C1 “ σpl2 , δq Ď σpx, δ q ^ σpl0 , δ 1 q Ď σpl, δq
                                                1

                                   δ 1 , η0 $ ve0 wl0 ãÑ C2
                                                                         function-flow-δ
                               fnδ l1 : l2 ñ l ãÑ C1 Y C2

    Now we can see how k-CFA analysis can more precisely analyze the latest example
program. In the simulation below, we give two tables: one showing the order in which
the functions are analyzed, along with the calling context δ and the environment η for each
analysis, and the other as usual showing the analysis information computed for the variables
in the program:

    function   δ   η
      main     ‚   H
      adde     t   tx ÞÑ tu
        h      r   tx ÞÑ t, y ÞÑ ru
      adde     f   tx ÞÑ f u
        h      r   tx ÞÑ f, y ÞÑ ru
      λz....   e   tx ÞÑ t, y ÞÑ r, z ÞÑ eu

    Var / Lab, δ                   L                   notes
      adde, ‚                  pλx..., ‚q
        x, t                       2
        y, r                       8
        t, ‚       pλz. x ` y ` z, tx ÞÑ t, y ÞÑ ruq
        x, f                       4
        f, ‚       pλz. x ` y ` z, tx ÞÑ f, y ÞÑ ruq
        z, e                       1
        t, ‚                      11

    Tracking the definition point of each variable separately is enough to restore precision
in this program. However, programs with this structure—in which analysis of the program
depends on different calling contexts for bound variables even when the context is the same
for the function eventually called—appear to be rare in practice. Might et al. observed no
examples among the real programs they tested in which k-CFA was more accurate than
m-CFA—but k-CFA was often far more costly. Thus at this point the m-CFA analysis seems to
be a better tradeoff between efficiency and precision, compared to k-CFA.

