Chapter 10

Advanced Interprocedural Analysis:
Pointer Analysis and Object-Oriented
Call Graph Construction

We have successfully extended our interprocedural dataflow analysis framework to a small
functional programming language, which required us to reason explicitly about which
functions might be called, where. This provides insight into similar problems in other
programming paradigms, namely dynamic dispatch. Precisely addressing dynamic dispatch
relies on techniques for pointer analysis, which establishes which pointers can point to which
locations. Analyses that address real programming languages (whether they use dynamic
dispatch or not) must address pointers, because ignoring them dramatically impacts analysis
precision. Thus, in the interest of adapting our framework to real languages, we turn our
attention to these issues.

10.1    Pointer Analysis
Pointers are variables whose value refers to another value elsewhere in memory, by storing
the address of that stored value. To illustrate why they matter in analyzing real programs,
consider constant-propagation analysis of the following program:

                                           1:   z :“ 1
                                           2:   p :“ &z
                                           3:   ˚p :“ 2
                                           4:   print z
To analyze this program correctly we must be aware that at instruction 3, p points to z. If this
information is available we can use it in a flow function as follows:

                     fCP v˚p :“ ywpσq “ σrz ÞÑ σpyq | z P must-point-toppqs

    When we know exactly what a variable x points to, we have must-point-to information,
and we can perform a strong update of the target variable z, because we know with confidence
that assigning to ˚p assigns to z. A technicality in the rule is quantifying over all z such that
p must point to z. How is this possible? It is not possible in C or Java; however, in a language
with pass-by-reference, for example C++, it is possible that two names for the same location
are in scope.
    Of course, it is also possible to be uncertain to which of several distinct locations p points:

                                    1:    z :“ 1
                                    2:    if pcondq p :“ &y else p :“ &z
                                    3:    ˚p :“ 2
                                    4:    print z
    Now constant propagation analysis must conservatively assume that z could hold either 1
or 2. We can represent this with a flow function that uses may-point-to information:

                     fCP v˚p :“ ywpσq “ σrz ÞÑ σpzq \ σpyq | z P may-point-toppqs

10.1.1      Andersen’s Points-To Analysis
Two common kinds of pointer analysis are alias analysis and points-to analysis. Alias analysis
computes sets S holding pairs of variables pp, qq, where p and q may (or must) point to the
same location. Points-to analysis computes the set points-toppq, for each pointer variable p,
where the set contains a variable x if p may (or must) point to the location of the variable x.
We will focus primarily on points-to analysis, beginning with a simple but useful approach
originally proposed by Andersen.1
    Our initial setting will be C programs. We are interested in analyzing instructions that are
relevant to pointers in the program. Ignoring for the moment memory allocation and arrays,
we can decompose all pointer operations in C into four types:

                  I ::“     ...
                    |       p :“ &x      taking the address of a variable
                    |       p :“ q       copying a pointer from one variable to another
                    |       ˚p :“ q      assigning through a pointer
                    |       p :“ ˚q      dereferencing a pointer
    Andersen’s points-to analysis is a context-insensitive interprocedural analysis. It is also
a flow-insensitive analysis, that is an analysis that does not consider program statement order.
Context- and flow-insensitivity improve analysis performance, as precise pointer analysis can
be notoriously expensive.
    We will formulate Andersen’s analysis by generating set constraints which can later
be processed by a set constraint solver, much like we did for CFA. Because the analysis is
flow-insensitive, we do not care what order the instructions in the program come in; we
simply generate a set of constraints and solve them. Constraint generation for each statement
works by these rules:

                                                               address-of
                                         vp :“ &xw ãÑ lx P p

                                                                copy
                                            vp :“ qw ãÑ p Ě q

                                                                 assign
                                          v˚p :“ qw ãÑ ˚p Ě q

                                                               dereference
                                      vp :“ ˚qw ãÑ p Ě ˚q

    The first rule states that a constant location lx , representation the address of x, is in the
set of location pointed to by p. The second rule states that the set of locations pointed to by
  1
      PhD thesis: “Program Analysis and Specialization for the C Programming Language.”

p must be a superset of those pointed to by q. The last two rules state the same, but take into
account that one or the other pointer is dereferenced. Note that if Andersen’s algorithm says
that the set p points to only one location lz , we have must-point-to information, whereas if the
set p contains more than one location, we have only may-point-to information.
    A number of specialized set constraint solvers exist, and constraints in the form above
can be translated into input for them.2 We will treat constraint-solving abstractly using the
following constraint propagation rules:

                                             p Ě q lx P q
                                                          copy
                                                lx P p

                                       ˚p Ě q      lr P p     lx P q
                                                                       assign
                                                  lx P r

                                    p Ě ˚q     lr P q       lx P r
                                                                     dereference
                                              lx P p

   We can now apply Andersen’s points-to analysis to the programs above. We can also
apply it to programs with dynamic memory allocation, such as:

                                             1:     q :“ mallocpq
                                             2:     p :“ mallocpq
                                             3:     p :“ q
                                             4:     r :“ &p
                                             5:     s :“ mallocpq
                                             6:     ˚r :“ s
                                             7:     t :“ &s
                                             8:     u :“ ˚t
   The analysis is run the same way, but we treat the memory cell allocated at each malloc or
new statement as an abstract location labeled by the location n of the allocation point:

                                                                         malloc
                                    vn: p :“ mallocpqw ãÑ ln P p

   We must be careful because a malloc statement can be executed more than once, and each
time it executes, a new memory cell is allocated. Unless we have some other means of proving
that the malloc executes only once, we must assume that if some variable p only points to one
abstract malloc’d location ln , that is still may-alias information (i.e. p points to only one of the
many actual cells allocated at the given program location) and not must-alias information.

Efficiency. Analyzing the efficiency of Andersen’s algorithm, we can see that all constraints
can be generated in a linear Opnq pass over the program. The solution size is Opn2 q, because
each of the Opnq variables defined in the program could potentially point to Opnq other
variables.
    We can derive the execution time as follows:3 There are Opnq flow constraints generated of
the form p Ě q, ˚p Ě q, or p Ě ˚q. How many times could a constraint propagation rule fire
for each flow constraint? For a p Ě q constraint, the rule may fire at most Opnq times, because
there are at most Opnq premises of the proper form lx P p. However, a constraint of the form
   2
    Note that the dereference operation (the ˚ in ˚p Ě q) is not standard, but can be encoded,
   3
    David A. McAllester. 1999. On the Complexity Analysis of Static Analyses. In Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Symposium on Static Analysis (SAS ’99): 312–329.

p Ě ˚q could cause Opn2 q rule firings, because there are Opnq premises each of the form lx P p
and lr P q. With Opnq constraints of the form p Ě ˚q and Opn2 q firings for each, we have Opn3 q
constraint firings overall. A similar analysis applies for ˚p Ě q constraints. McAllester’s theo-
rem states that the analysis with Opn3 q rule firings can be implemented in Opn3 q time. Thus we
have derived that Andersen’s algorithm is cubic in the size of the program, in the worst case.
   Interestingly, Andersen’s algorithm can be executed in Opn2 q time for k-sparse programs.4
The k-sparse assumption requires that at most k statements dereference each variable, and that
the flow graph is sparse. The publication showing this result also showed that typical Java
programs are k-sparse, and that Andersen’s algorithm scales quadratically in practice.

10.1.2    Field Sensitivity
What happens when we have a pointer to a struct in C, or an object in an object-oriented
language? In this case, we would like the pointer analysis to tell us what each field in the
struct or object points to. A simple solution is to be field-insensitive, treating all fields in a struct
as equivalent. Thus if p points to a struct with two fields f and g, and we assign:

                                                 1 : p.f :“ &x
                                                 2 : p.g :“ &y
    A field-insensitive analysis would tell us (imprecisely) that p.f could point to y. We can
modify the rules above by treating any field dereference or field assignment to p.f as a pointer
dereference ˚p. Essentially, you can think of this as just considering all fields to be named ˚.
    To be more precise, we can instead track the contents each field of each abstract location
separately. In the discussion below, we assume a Java-like setting, in which all objects are
allocated on the heap and where we cannot take the address of a field. A slightly more
complicated variant of this scheme works in C-like languages.
    We will use the malloc and copy rules unchanged from above.5 We drop the assign and
dereference rules, and replace them with:

                                                                      field-read
                                      vp :“ q.f w ãÑ p Ě q.f

                                                                     field-assign
                                     vp.f :“ qw ãÑ p.f Ě q

    Now assume that objects (e.g. in Java) are represented by abstract locations l. We will have
two forms of basic facts. The first is the same as before: ln P p, where ln is an object allocated
in a new statement at line n. The second basic fact is ln P lm .f , which states that the field f of
the object represented by lm may point to an object represented by ln .
    We can now process field constraints with the following rules:

                                   p Ě q.f      lq P q lf P lq .f
                                                                  field-read
                                                lf P p

                                    p.f Ě q      lp P p     lq P q
                                                                     field-assign
                                              lq P lp .f

   If we run this analysis on the code above, we find that it can distinguish that p.f points to
x and p.g points to y.
   4
      Manu Sridharan and Stephen J. Fink. 2009. The Complexity of Andersen’s Analysis in Practice. In Proceedings
of the 16th International Symposium on Static Analysis (SAS ’09): 205–221.
    5
      In Java, the new expression plays the role of malloc

10.1.3   Steensgaard’s Points-To Analysis
For very large programs, a quadratic-in-practice algorithm is too inefficient. Steensgaard pro-
posed an pointer analysis algorithm that operates in near-linear time, supporting essentially
unlimited practical scalability.
    The first challenge in designing a near-linear time points-to analysis is to represent the
results in linear space. This is nontrivial because over the course of program execution, any
given pointer p could potentially point to the location of any other variable or pointer q.
Representing all of these pointers explicitly will inherently take Opn2 q space.
    The solution Steensgaard found is based on using constant space for each variable in the
program. His analysis associates each variable p with an abstract location named after the
variable. Then, it tracks a single points-to relation between that abstract location p and another
one q, to which it may point. Now, it is possible that in some real program p may point to
both q and some other variable r. In this situation, Steensgaard’s algorithm unifies the abstract
locations for q and r, creating a single abstract location representing both of them. Now we
can track the fact that p may point to either variable using a single points-to relationship.
    For example, consider the program to the left, and the graph that Andersen’s points-to
analysis would produce (right):

                  1:   p :“ &x
                  2:   r :“ &p
                  3:   q :“ &y
                  4:   s :“ &q
                  5:   r :“ s

  But in Steensgaard’s setting, when we discover that r could point both to q and to p, we
must merge q and p into a single node:

                                            x        y

                                                pq

                                            r        s

   Notice that we have lost precision: by merging the nodes for p and q our graph now
implies that s could point to p, which is not the case in the actual program. But we are not
done. Now pq has two outgoing arrows, so we must merge nodes x and y. The final graph
produced by Steensgaard’s algorithm is therefore:

                                                xy

                                                pq

                                            r        s

   We study Steensgaard’s analysis more precisely by specifying a simplified version that
ignores function pointers:
                                                                    copy
                                         vp :“ qw ãÑ joinp˚p, ˚qq

                                                                 address-of
                                     vp :“ &xw ãÑ joinp˚p, xq

                                                                 dereference
                                    vp :“ ˚qw ãÑ joinp˚p, ˚˚qq

                                                                    assign
                                      v˚p :“ qw ãÑ joinp˚˚p, ˚qq

    With each abstract location p, we associate the abstract location that p points to, denoted
˚p. Abstract locations are implemented as a union-find6 data structure so that we can merge
two abstract locations efficiently. In the rules above, we implicitly invoke find on an abstract
location before calling join on it, or before looking up the location it points to.
    The join operation essentially implements a union operation on the abstract locations.
However, since we are tracking what each abstract location points to, we must update this
information also. The algorithm to do so is as follows:
      join(`1 , `2 )
          if (find(`1 ) == find(`2 ))
                 return
          n1 Ð ˚`1
          n2 Ð ˚`2
          union(`1 , `2 )
          join(n1 , n2 )

   Once again, we implicitly invoke find on an abstract location before comparing it for
equality, looking up the abstract location it points to, or calling join recursively.
   As an optimization, Steensgaard does not perform the join if the right hand side is not
a pointer. For example, if we have an assignment vp :“ qw and q has not been assigned any
pointer value so far in the analysis, we ignore the assignment. If later we find that q may hold
a pointer, we must revisit the assignment to get a sound result.
   Steensgaard illustrated his algorithm using the following program, and the graph the
algorithm produces:

                       1:   a :“ &x
                       2:   b :“ &y
                       3:   if p then
                       4:      y :“ &z
                       5:   else
                       6:      y :“ &x
                       7:   c :“ &y

Efficiency. Rayside illustrates how Andersen must sometimes do more work than Steens-
gaard:
  6
      See any algorithms textbook

                                                  1:   q :“ &x
                                                  2:   q :“ &y
                                                  3:   p :“ q
                                                  4:   q :“ &z
    After processing the first three statements, Steensgaard’s algorithm will have unified vari-
ables x and y, with p and q both pointing to the unified node. Andersen’s algorithm will have
both p and q pointing to both x and y. When the fourth statement is processed, Steensgaard’s
algorithm does only a constant amount of work, merging z in with the already-merged xy. On
the other hand, Andersen’s algorithm must not just create a points-to relation from q to z, but
must also propagate that relationship to p. It is this additional propagation step that results in
the significant performance difference between these algorithms.7
    Analyzing Steensgaard’s pointer analysis for efficiency, we observe that each of n state-
ments in the program is processed once. The processing is linear, except for find operations
on the union-find data structure (which may take amortized time Opαpnqq each) and the join
operations. We note that in the join algorithm, the short-circuit test will fail at most Opnq
times—at most once for each variable in the program. Each time the short-circuit fails, two
abstract locations are unified, at cost Opαpnqq. The unification assures the short-circuit will not
fail again for one of these two variables. Because we have at most Opnq operations and the
amortized cost of each operation is at most Opαpnqq, the overall running time of the algorithm
is near linear: Opn ˚ αpnqq. Space consumption is linear, as no space is used beyond that used
to represent abstract locations for all the variables in the program text.
    Based on this asymptotic efficiency, Steensgaard’s algorithm was run on a 1 million line
program (Microsoft Word) in 1996; this was an order of magnitude greater scalability than
other pointer analyses known at the time.
    Steensgaard’s pointer analysis is field-insensitive; making it field-sensitive would mean
that it is no longer linear.

10.2      Dynamic dispatch
Dynamic dispatch is the process of selecting which implementation of a method or function
should be called at runtime; it is a defining characteristic object-oriented programming lan-
guages and systems, but is not limited to them (e.g., calling through function pointers in C).
To construct a precise call graph in such languages, an analysis must determine the type of the
receiver object is at each call site. Flow analysis techniques similar to points-to analysis can be
used to compute this information, but using an interprocedural flow analysis off the shelf re-
quires a call graph, which is exactly what we are trying to construct. Therefore, object-oriented
call graph construction algorithms must simultaneously build a call graph and compute
dataflow information describing the types of the objects to which each variable could point.

10.2.1    Simple approaches
Before examining a full-fledged dataflow analysis-based call graph construction algorithm,
we will consider two simpler approaches that do not require flow analysis. These approaches
have the side benefit of being very efficient, and so are used in settings such as JIT compilers
where analysis time is scarce.
    The simplest approach, class hierarchy analysis, uses the type of a variable, together with the
class hierarchy, to determine what types of object the variable could point to. Unsurprisingly,
   7
     For fun, try adding a new statement r :“ p after statement 3. Then z has to be propagated to the points-to sets
of both p and r. In general, the number of propagations can be linear in the number of copies and the number of
address-of operators, which makes it quadratic overall even for programs in the simple form above.

this is very imprecise, but can be computed very efficiently in Opn ˚ tq time, because it visits
n call sites and at each call site traverses a subtree of size t of the class hierarchy.
    An improvement to class hierarchy analysis is rapid type analysis, which eliminates from
the hierarchy classes that are never instantiated. The analysis iteratively builds a set of
instantiated types, method names invoked, and concrete methods called. Initially, it assumes
that main is the only concrete method that is called, and that no objects are instantiated. It
then analyzes concrete methods known to be called, one by one. When a method name is
invoked, it is added to the list, and all concrete methods with that name defined within (or
inherited by) types known to be instantiated are added to the called list. When an object is
instantiated, its type is added to the list of instantiated types, and all its concrete methods
that have a method name that is invoked are added to the called list. This proceeds iteratively
until a fixed point is reached, at which point the analysis knows all of the object types that
may actually be created at run time.
    Rapid type analysis can be considerably more precise than class hierarchy analysis in
programs that use libraries that define many types, only a few of which are used by the
program. It remains extremely efficient, because it only needs to traverse the program once
(in Opnq time) and then build the call graph by visiting each of n call sites and considering a
subtree of size t of the class hierarchy, for a total of Opn ˚ tq time.

10.2.2   0-CFA Style Object-Oriented Call Graph Construction
Object-oriented call graphs can also be constructed using a pointer analysis such as Ander-
sen’s algorithm, either context-insensitive or context-sensitive. The context-sensitive versions
are called k-CFA by analogy with control-flow analysis for functional programs. The context-
insensitive version is called 0-CFA for the same reason. Essentially, the analysis proceeds as
in Andersen’s algorithm, but the call graph is built up incrementally as the analysis discovers
the types of the objects to which each variable in the program can point.
    Even 0-CFA analysis can be considerably more precise than Rapid Type Analysis. For
example, in the program below, RTA would assume that any implementation of foo() could
be invoked at any program location, but 0-CFA can distinguish the two call sites:
   class A { A foo(A x) { return x; } }
   class B extends A { A foo(A x) { return new D(); } }
   class D extends A { A foo(A x) { return new A(); } }
   class C extends A { A foo(A x) { return this; } }

   // in main()
   A x = new A();
   while (...)
       x = x.foo(new B()); // may call A.foo, B.foo, or D.foo
   A y = new C();
   y.foo(x);               // only calls C.foo

