Chapter 11

Axiomatic Semantics and
Hoare-style Verification

       It has been found a serious problem to define these languages [ALGOL, FOR-
       TRAN, COBOL] with sufficient rigor to ensure compatibility among all implemen-
       tations...One way to achieve this would be to insist that all implementations of the
       language shall satisfy the axioms and rules of inference which underlie proofs of
       properties of programs expressed in the language. In effect, this is equivalent to ac-
       cepting the axioms and rules of inference as the ultimately definitive specification
       of the meaning of the language.
       C.A.R Hoare, An Axiomatic Basis for Computer Programming,1969

   So far in this course we have largely represented and reasoned about programs (and
analysis of those programs) in terms of operational semantics, which gives meaning to
programs based on what happens when we execute them. Now, we turn our attention to
a different kind of representation, which in turn enables a different kind of static reasoning
about program correctness.

11.1     Axiomatic Semantics
Axiomatic semantics (or Hoare-style logic) defines the meaning of a statement in terms of its
effects on assertions of truth that can be made about the associated program. This provides
a formal system for reasoning about correctness. An axiomatic semantics fundamentally
consists of: (1) a language for stating assertions about programs (where an assertion is
something like “if this function terminates, x ą 0 upon termination”), coupled with (2)
rules for establishing the truth of assertions. Various logics have been used to encode such
assertions; for simplicity, we will begin by focusing on first-order logic.
    In this system, a Hoare Triple encodes such assertions:

                                            tP u S tQu
    P is the precondition, Q is the postcondition, and S is a piece of code of interest. Relating
this back to our earlier understanding of program semantics, this can be read as “if P holds
in some state E and if xE, Sy ó E 1 , then Q holds in E 1 .” We distinguish between partial
(tP u S tQu) and total (rP s S rQs) correctness by saying that total correctness means that,
given precondition P , S will terminate, and Q will hold; partial correctness does not make
termination guarantees. We primarily focus on partial correctness.

11.1.1   Assertion judgements using operational semantics
Consider a simple assertion language adding first-order predicate logic to W HILE expressions:

                 P    ::“ true    | false   | e1 “ e2 | e1 ě e2 | P1 ^ P2
                      |   P1 _ P2 | P1 ñ P2 | @x.P    | Dx.P
    Note that we are somewhat sloppy in mixing logical variables and program variables; all
W HILE variables implicitly range over integers, and all W HILE boolean expressions are also
assertions.
    We now define an assertion judgement E ( P , read “P is true in E” or alternatively “E
entails P .” The ( judgment is defined inductively on the structure of assertions, and relies on
the operational semantics of W HILE arithmetic expressions. For example:

                     E ( true      always
                     E ( a1 “ a2   iff xE, a1 y ó n and xE, a2 y ó n
                     E ( a1 ě a2   iff xE, a1 y ó n1 , xE, a2 y ó n2 , and n1 ě n2
                     E ( P1 ^ P2   iff E ( P1 and E ( P2
                     ...
                     E ( @x.P      iff @n P Z.Erx ÞÑ ns ( P
                     E ( Dx.P      iff Dn P Z.Erx ÞÑ ns ( P
   Now we can define formally the meaning of a partial correctness assertion ( tP u S tQu:

                           @E.@E 1 .pE ( P ^ xE, Sy ó E 1 q ñ E 1 ( Q

Question: What about total correctness?
    This gives us a formal, but unsatisfactory, mechanism to decide ( tP u S tQu. By defining
the judgement in terms of the operational semantics, we practically have to run the program
to verify an assertion! It’s also awkward/impossible to effectively verify the truth of a @x.P
assertion (check every integer?!). This motivates a new symbolic technique for deriving valid
assertions from others that are known to be valid.

11.1.2   Derivation rules for Hoare triples
We write $ P (read “we can prove P”) when P can be derived from basic axioms. The
derivation rules for $ P are the usual ones from first-order logic with arithmetic, like (but
obviously not limited to):

                                            $P $Q
                                                  and
                                            $P ^Q
    We can now write $ tP u S tQu when we can derive a triple using derivation rules. There
is one derivation rule for each statement type in the language (sound familiar?):
                                         skip                           assign
                      $ tP u skip tP u          $ tra{xsP u x:=a tP u

$ tP u S1 tP 1 u          $ tP 1 u S2 tQu       $ tP ^ buS1 tQu            $ tP ^ bu S2 tQu
                                          seq                                               if
           $ tP u S1 ; S2 tQu                          $ tP u if b then S1 else S2 tQu

Question: What can we do for while?

   There is also the rule of consequence:

                  $ P1 ñ P             $ tP u S tQu            $ Q ñ Q1
                                                                           consq
                                       $ tP 1 u S tQ1 u
    This rule is important because it lets us make progress even when the pre/post conditions
in our program don’t exactly match what we need (even if they’re logically equivalent) or are
stronger or weaker logically than ideal.
    We can use this system to prove that triples hold. Consider ttrueu x :“ e tx “ eu, using (in
this case) the assignment rule plus the rule of consequence:

                         $ true ñ a “ a         ta “ au x :“ a tx “ au
                                    $ ttrueux :“ atx “ au

    A system of axiomatic semantics is sound if everything we can prove is also true, that is:
if $ tP uStQu then ( tP uStQu. This can be proven via simultaneous induction on the
structure of the operational semantics derivation and the axiomatic semantics proof; will not
conduct this proof in these notes. Intuitively, it expresses that the axiomatic proof we can
derive using these rules is equivalent to the operational semantics derivation
    A system of axiomatic semantics is complete if we can prove all true things:
if ( tP uStQu then $ tP uStQu The system we have outlined is relatively complete
(that is, as complete as the underlying logic). We now move to showing how to (soundly/-
completely) prove properties of programs using this style of semantics.

11.2     Proofs of a Program
Hoare-style verification is based on the idea of a specification as a contract between the
implementation of a function and its clients. The specification consists of the precondition and
a postcondition. The precondition is a predicate describing the condition the code/function
relies on for correct operation; the client must fulfill this condition. The postcondition is a
predicate describing the condition the function establishes after correctly running; the client
can rely on this condition being true after the call to the function.
    Note that if a client calls a function without fulfilling its precondition, the function can
behave in any way at all and still be correct. Therefore, if a function must be robust to errors,
the precondition should include the possibility of erroneous input, and the postcondition
should describe what should happen in case of that input (e.g. an exception being thrown).
    The goal in Hoare-style verification is thus to (statically!) prove that, given a pre-condition,
a particular post-condition will hold after a piece of code executes. We do this by generating
a logical formula known as a verification condition, constructed such that, if true, we know
that the program behaves as specified. The general strategy for doing this, introduced by
Dijkstra, relies on the idea of a weakest precondition of a statement with respect to the desired
post-condition. We then show that the given precondition implies it. However, loops, as ever,
complicate this strategy.

11.2.1   Strongest postconditions and weakest pre-conditions
We can write any number of perfectly valid Hoare triples. Consider the Hoare triple
tx “ 5u x :“ x ˚ 2 tx ą 0u. This triple is clearly correct, because if x “ 5 and we multiply x by
2, we get x “ 10 which clearly implies that x ą 0. However, although correct, this Hoare triple
is not a precise as we might like. Specifically, we could write a stronger postcondition, i.e. one
that implies x ą 0. For example, x ą 5 ^ x ă 20 is stronger because it is more informative;

it pins down the value of x more precisely than x ą 0. The strongest postcondition possible
is x “ 10; this is the most useful postcondition. Formally, if tP u S tQu and for all Q1 such that
tP u S tQ1 u, Q ñ Q1 , then Q is the strongest postcondition of S with respect to P .
    We can compute the strongest postcondition for a given statement and precondition using
the function sppS, P q. Consider the case of a statement of the form x :“ e. If the condition
P held before the statement, we now know that P still holds and that x “ e—where P and e
are now in terms of the old, pre-assigned value of x. For example, if P is x ` y “ 5, and S is
x :“ x ` z, then we should know that x1 ` y “ 5 and x “ x1 ` z, where x1 is the old value of
x. The program semantics doesn’t keep track of the old value of x, but we can express it by
introducing a fresh, existentially quantified variable x1 . This gives us the following strongest
postcondition for assignment:1

                               sppx :“ a, P q “ Dx1 .rx1 {xsP ^ x “ rx1 {xsa
    While this scheme is workable, it is awkward to existentially quantify over a fresh variable
at every statement; the formulas produced become unnecessarily complicated, and if we want
to use automated theorem provers, the additional quantification tends to cause problems.
Dijkstra proposed reasoning instead in terms of weakest preconditions, which turns out to work
better. If tP u S tQu and for all P 1 such that tP 1 u S tQu, P 1 ñ P , then P is the weakest
precondition wppS, Qq of S with respect to Q.
    We can define a function yielding the weakest precondition inductively, following the
Hoare rules. For assignments, sequences, and if statements, this yields:

                    wppx :“ a, P q                  “ ra{xsP
                    wppS; T, Qq                     “ wppS, wppT, Qqq
                    wppif b then S else T, Qq “ b ñ wppS, Qq ^ b ñ wppT, Qq

11.2.2    Loops
As usual, things get tricky when we get to loops. Consider:

                        tP u whilepi ă xq do f “ f ˚ i; i :“ i ` 1 donetf “ x!u

    What is the weakest precondition here? Fundamentally, we need to prove by induction
that the property we care about will generalize across an arbitrary number of loop iterations.
Thus, P is the base case, and we need some inductive hypothesis that is preserved when
executing loop body an arbitrary number of times. We commonly refer to this hypothesis as
a loop invariant, because it represents a condition that is always true (i.e. invariant) before and
after each execution of the loop.
    Computing weakest preconditions on loops is very difficult on real languages. Instead,
we assume the provision of that loop invariant. A loop invariant must fulfill the following
conditions:

   • P ñ Inv : The invariant is initially true. This condition is necessary as a base case, to
     establish the induction hypothesis.

   • tInv ^ bu S tInvu : Each execution of the loop preserves the invariant. This is the
     inductive case of the proof.
   1
     Recall that the operation rx1 {xse denotes the capture-avoiding substitution of x1 for x in e; we rename bound
variables as we do the substitution so as to avoid conflicts.

   • pInv ^ bq ñ Q : The invariant and the loop exit condition imply the postcondition.
     This condition is simply demonstrating that the induction hypothesis/loop invariant we
     have chosen is sufficiently strong to prove our postcondition Q.

    The procedure outlined above only verifies partial correctness, because it does not reason
about how many times the loop may execute. Verifying full correctness involves placing an
upper bound on the number of remaining times the loop body will execute, typically called a
variant function, written v, because it is variant: we must prove that it decreases each time we go
through the loop. We mention this for the interested reader; we will not spend much time on it.

11.2.3    Proving programs
Assume a version of W HILE that annotates loops with invariants: whileinv b do S. Given such
a program, and associated pre- and post-conditions:

                                                tP u S tQu
    The proof strategy constructs a verification condition V CpSannot , Qq that we seek to prove
true (usually with the help of a theorem prover). V C is guaranteed to be stronger than
wppS, Qq but still weaker than P : P ñ V CpS, Qq ñ wppS, Qq We compute V C using a
verification condition generation procedure V CGen, which mostly follows the definition of
the wp function discussed above:

         V CGenpskip, Qq                    “    Q
         V CGenpS1 ; S2 , Qq                “    V CGenpS1 , V CGenpS2 , Qqq
         V CGenpif b then S1 else S2 , Qq   “    b ñ V CGenpS1 , Qq ^ b ñ V CGenpS2 , Qq
         V CGenpx :“ a, Qq                  “    ra{xsQ

   The one major point of difference is in the handling of loops:

   V CGenpwhileinv b do S, Qq “ Inv ^ p@x1 ...xn .Inv ñ pb ñ V CGenpS, Invq ^          b ñ Qqq

   To see this in action, consider the following W HILE program:

                                            r :“ 1;
                                            i :“ 0;
                                            while i ă m do
                                                   r :“ r ˚ n;
                                                   i :“ i ` 1
    We wish to prove that this function computes the nth power of m and leaves the result in
r. We can state this with the postcondition r “ nm .
    Next, we need to determine a precondition for the program. We cannot simply compute
it with wp because we do not yet know the loop invariant is—and in fact, different loop in-
variants could lead to different preconditions. However, a bit of reasoning will help. We must
have m ě 0 because we have no provision for dividing by n, and we avoid the problematic
computation of 00 by assuming n ą 0. Thus our precondition will be m ě 0 ^ n ą 0.
    A good heuristic for choosing a loop invariant is often to modify the postcondition of the
loop to make it depend on the loop index instead of some other variable. Since the loop index
runs from i to m, we can guess that we should replace m with i in the postcondition r “ nm .
This gives us a first guess that the loop invariant should include r “ ni .

    This loop invariant is not strong enough, however, because the loop invariant conjoined
with the loop exit condition should imply the postcondition. The loop exit condition is i ě m,
but we need to know that i “ m. We can get this if we add i ď m to the loop invariant. In
addition, for proving the loop body correct, we will also need to add 0 ď i and n ą 0 to the
loop invariant. Thus our full loop invariant will be r “ ni ^ 0 ď i ď m ^ n ą 0.
    Our next task is to use weakest preconditions to generate proof obligations that will verify
the correctness of the specification. We will first ensure that the invariant is initially true when
the loop is reached, by propagating that invariant past the first two statements in the program:

                                  tm ě 0 ^ n ą 0u
                                  r :“ 1;
                                  i :“ 0;
                                  tr “ ni ^ 0 ď i ď m ^ n ą 0u
    We propagate the loop invariant past i :“ 0 to get r “ n0 ^0 ď 0 ď m^n ą 0. We propagate
this past r :“ 1 to get 1 “ n0 ^ 0 ď 0 ď m ^ n ą 0. Thus our proof obligation is to show that:

                         m ě 0 ^ n ą 0 ñ 1 “ n0 ^ 0 ď 0 ď m ^ n ą 0
   We prove this with the following logic:

        mě0^ną0                         by assumption
        1 “ n0                          because n0 “ 1 for all n ą 0 and we know n ą 0
        0ď0                             by definition of ď
        0ďm                             because m ě 0 by assumption
        ną0                             by the assumption above
        1 “ n0 ^ 0 ď 0 ď m ^ n ą 0      by conjunction of the above
   To show the loop invariant is preserved, we have:

                             tr “ ni ^ 0 ď i ď m ^ n ą 0 ^ i ă mu
                             r :“ r ˚ n;
                             i :“ i ` 1;
                             tr “ ni ^ 0 ď i ď m ^ n ą 0u
    We propagate the invariant past i :“ i ` 1 to get r “ ni`1 ^ 0 ď i ` 1 ď m ^ n ą 0. We
propagate this past r :“ r ˚ n to get: r ˚ n “ ni`1 ^ 0 ď i ` 1 ď m ^ n ą 0. Our proof obligation
is therefore:

                            r “ ni ^ 0 ď i ď m ^ n ą 0 ^ i ă m
                            ñ r ˚ n “ ni`1 ^ 0 ď i ` 1 ď m ^ n ą 0
   We can prove this as follows:

              r “ ni ^ 0 ď i ď m ^ n ą 0 ^ i ă m       by assumption
              r ˚ n “ ni ˚ n                           multiplying by n
              r ˚ n “ ni`1                             definition of exponentiation
              0ďi`1                                    because 0 ď i
              i`1ăm`1                                  by adding 1 to inequality
              i`1ďm                                    by definition of ď
              ną0                                      by assumption
              r ˚ n “ ni`1 ^ 0 ď i ` 1 ď m ^ n ą 0     by conjunction of the above
    Last, we need to prove that the postcondition holds when we exit the loop. We have
already hinted at why this will be so when we chose the loop invariant. However, we can
state the proof obligation formally:

                         r “ ni ^ 0 ď i ď m ^ n ą 0 ^ i ě m
                         ñ r “ nm
We can prove it as follows:

       r “ ni ^ 0 ď i ď m ^ n ą 0 ^ i ě m by assumption
       i“m                                because i ď m and i ě m
       r “ nm                             substituting m for i in assumption

