Chapter 12

Satisfiability Modulo Theories

12.1    Motivation and Overview
Program analysis often makes use of techniques that generate and solve logical formulas.
For example, in Hoare-style verification, we used weakest preconditions and verification
conditions to generate formulas of the form P ñ Q. Usually P and Q have free variables x,
e.g. P could be x ą 3 and Q could be x ą 1. We want to prove, ideally automatically, that
P ñ Q no matter what x we choose, i.e. no matter what the model (an assignment from
variables to values) is. This is equivalent to saying P ñ Q is valid. We will see in subsequent
chapters how symbolic and concolic execution similarly generate sets of path conditions with
free variables, such as those that correspond to program inputs. We would like to determine
if such path conditions are feasible; we moreover would like to identify values for those free
variables, because that can help generate test inputs that cover particular program paths. SMT
solving addresses this type of problem. Although the general goal won’t be feasible for all
formulas, it is feasible for a useful subset of formulas.
    Solving this problem begins by reducing general formula validity to another problem, that
of satisfiability. A formula F with free variable x is valid iff for all x, F is true. That’s the same
thing as saying there is no x for which F is false. But that’s furthermore the same as saying
there is no x for which F is true. This last formulation is asking whether F is satisfiable. It
turns out to be easier to seach for a single satisfying model (or prove there is none), then to
show that a formula is valid for all models.
    Strictly speaking, satisfiability is for boolean formulas, or those that include boolean
variables as well as boolean operators such as ^, _, and . They may include quantifiers such
as @ and D, as well. But if we want to have variables over the integers or reals, and operations
over numbers (e.g. `, ą, the types of relations we’ve included even in our very simple W HILE
language), we need a solver for a theory, such as the theory of Presburger arithmetic (which
could prove that 2 ˚ x “ x ` x), or the theory of arrays (which could prove that assigning
xrys to 3 and then looking up xrys yields 3). SMT solvers include a basic satisfiability checker,
and allow that checker to communicate with specialized solvers for those theories. This is the
meaning of the “Modulo Theories” in “Satisfiability Modulo Theories.”

12.2    DPLL for Boolean Satisfiability
In building to satisfiability modulo theories, we begin by discussing the problem of satisfia-
bility.

12.2.1   Boolean satisfiability (SAT)
Satisfiability decides whether a conjunction of literals in a theory is satisfiable. The “easiest”
theory is propositional logic. The problem of establishing satisfiability for boolean formulas
in propositional logic is referred to as SAT, and a decision procedure for it as a “SAT solver.”
    We begin by transforming a formula F into conjuctive normal form (CNF)—i.e. a conjunction
of disjunctions of positive or negative literals. For example pa _ bq ^ p a _ cq ^ pb _ cq is
a CNF formula. If the formula is not already in CNF, we can put it into CNF by using De
Morgan’s laws, the double negative law, and the distributive laws:

                                pP _ Qq     ðñ   P^ Q
                                pP ^ Qq     ðñ   P_ Q
                                      P     ðñ P
                          pP ^ pQ _ Rqq     ðñ ppP ^ Qq _ pP ^ Rqq
                          pP _ pQ ^ Rqq     ðñ ppP _ Qq ^ pP _ Rqq
    The goal of the decision procedure is, given a formula, to say it is satisfiable; this can
be established by giving an example satisfying assignment. A satisfying assignment maps
variables to boolean values. So, X _ Y is satisfiable, and one satisfying assignment for it is
X ÞÑ true, Y ÞÑ false (there are other satisfying assignments as well). X ^ X, by contrast,
is not satisfiable.
    The Cook-Levin theorem established that boolean satisfiability is NP-complete. In the
worst case, one can decide SAT for a given formula by simply trying all possible assignments.
For example, given:

                            DE.E ( px _ y _ zq ^ p x _ yq ^ pzq
    We can brute-force by conducting a backtracking search that tries all possible assignments
of true and false to x, y, z. There are 2n possible combinations in the worst case, where n is
the number of variables.

12.2.2   The DPLL Algorithm
The DPLL algorithm, named for its developers Davis, Putnam, Logemann, and Loveland,
is an efficient approach to deciding SAT. The DPLL algorithm improves on the backtracking
search with two innovations: unit propagation and pure literal elimination.
    Let’s illustrate by example. Consider the following formula:

              pb _ cq ^ paq ^ p a _ c _ dq ^ p c _ dq ^ p c _ d _ aq ^ pb _ dq
    There is one clause with just a in it. This clause, like all other clauses, has to be true for
the whole formula to be true, so we must make a true for the formula to be satisfiable. We can
do this whenever we have a clause with just one literal in it, i.e. a unit clause. (Of course, if a
clause has just b, that tells us b must be false in any satisfying assignment). In this example,
we use the unit propagation rule to replace all occurrences of a with true. After simplifying,
this gives us:

                      pb _ cq ^ pc _ dq ^ p c _ dq ^ p c _ dq ^ pb _ dq
     Now here we can see that b always occurs positively (i.e. without a in front of it). If
we set b to be true, that eliminates all occurrences of b from our formula, thereby making it
simpler—but it doesn’t change the satisfiability of the underlying formula. An analogous ap-
proach applies when a variable always occurs negatively. A literal that occurs only positively,
or only negatively, in a formula is called pure. Therefore, this simplification is called the pure
literal elimination rule, and applying it to the example above gives us:

                                 pc _ dq ^ p c _ dq ^ p c _ dq
   Now for this formula, neither of the above rules applies. We just have to pick a literal and
guess its value. Let’s pick c and set it to true. Simplifying, we get:

                                            pdq ^ p dq
   After applying the unit propagation rule (setting d to true) we get:

                                        ptrueq ^ pfalseq
    This didn’t work out! But remember, we guessed about the value of c. Let’s backtrack to
the formula where we made that choice:

                                 pc _ dq ^ p c _ dq ^ p c _ dq
   and now we’ll try things the other way, i.e. with c “ false. Then we get the formula

                                                pdq
     because the last two clauses simplified to true once we know c is false. Now unit propaga-
tion sets d “ true and then we have shown the formula is satisfiable. A real DPLL algorithm
would keep track of all the choices in the satisfying assignment, and would report back that a
is true, b is true, c is false, and d is true in the satisfying assignment.
     This procedure—applying unit propagation and pure literal elimination eagerly, then
guessing a literal and backtracking if the guess goes wrong—is the essence of DPLL. Here’s
an algorithmic statement of DPLL, adapted slightly from a version on Wikipedia:
   function DPLL(φ)
       if φ “ true then
           return true
       end if
       if φ contains a false clause then
           return false
       end if
       for all unit clauses l in φ do
           φ Ð UNIT- PROPAGATE(l, φ)
       end for
       for all literals l occurring pure in φ do
           φ Ð PURE - LITERAL - ASSIGN(l, φ)
       end for
       l Ð CHOOSE - LITERAL(φ)
       return DPLL(φ ^ l) _ DPLL(φ ^ l)
   end function
     Mostly the algorithm above is straightforward, but there are a couple of notes. First,
why does the algorithm do unit propagation before pure literal assignment? It’s good to do
unit propagation first because it can create additional opportunities to apply further unit
propagation as well as pure literal assignment. On the other hand, pure literal assignment will
never create unit literals that didn’t exist before: pure assignment can eliminate entire clauses,
but never makes an existing clause shorter.
     Secondly, the last line implements backtracking. We assume a short-cutting _ operation at
the level of the algorithm. So if the first recursive call to DPLL returns true, so does the current
call–but if it returns fall, we invoke DPLL with the chosen literal negated, which effectively
backtracks.

Exercise 1. Apply DPLL to the following formula, describing each step (unit propagation,
pure literal elimination, choosing a literal, or backtracking) and showing now it affects the
formula until you prove that the formula is satisfiable or not:

                      pa _ bq ^ pa _ cq ^ p a _ cq ^ pa _ cq ^ p a _ cq ^ p dq
    There is a lot more to learn about DPLL, including hueristics for how to choose the literal l
to be guessed and smarter approaches to backtracking (e.g. non-chronological backtracking),
but in this class, let’s move on to consider SMT.

12.3       Solving SMT Problems
The approach above targets formulas in the theory of propositional logic. However, there
are many other possibly useful theories, and useful formulas may mix them. For example,
consider a conjunction of the following formulas:1

                                           f pf pxq ´ f pyqq “ a ^
                                           f p0q “ a ` 2         ^
                                           x“y
    This problem mixes linear arithmetic with the theory of uninterpreted functions (here, f is
some unknown function). We may have a satisfiability procedure for each theory involved in
the formula, but how can we deal with their combination? Note that we can’t in general just
separate out the terms from each theory in a formula to see if they are separately satisfiable,
because multiple satisfying assignments might not be compatible. Instead, we handle each
domain separately (as a theory), and then combine them all together using DPLL and SAT as
the “glue”.

12.3.1      Definitions
A satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) solver operates on propositions involving both logical
terms and terms from theories (defined below). Effectively, such solvers replace all the theory
clauses in a mixed-theory formula with special propositional variables, and then use a pure
SAT solver to solve the result. If the solution involves any of the theory clauses, the solver
asks the theory if they can all be true. If not, new constraints are added to the formula, and
the process repeats.
    In general, a theory is a set of sentences (syntax) with a deductive system that can determine
satisfiability (semantics). Usually, the set of sentences is formally defined by a grammar of
terms over atoms. The satisfying assignment (or model, or interpretation) maps literals (terms
or negated terms) to booleans. Useful theories include linear and non-linear arithmetic,
bitvectors, arrays, quantifiers, or strings, as well as uninterpreted functions (like f in our
example above).
    An important feature of the kinds of theories we are discussing is that they all understand
equality. We do not delve deeply into how/why in these notes, but the fact is important to
how SMT can solve formulas that mix theories, as we will see below.

12.3.2      Basic SMT idea, illustrated
We will work through our example above to demonstrate the ideas behind SMT. The first
step is to separate the multiple theories. We can do this by replacing expressions with fresh
variables, in a procedure named Nelson-Oppen after its two inventors. For example, in the
  1
      This example is due to Oliveras and Rodriguez-Carbonell

first formula, we’d like to factor out the subtraction, so we generate a fresh variable and divide
the formula into two:

                 f pe1q “ a         // in the theory of uninterpreted functions now
                 e1 “ f pxq ´ f pyq // still a mixed formula
   Now we want to separate out f pxq and f pyq as variables e2 and e3, so we get:

                      e1 “ e2 ´ e3 // in the theory of arithmetic now
                      e2 “ f pxq   // in the theory of uninterpreted functions
                      e3 “ f pyq   // in the theory of uninterpreted functions
   We can do the same for f p0q “ a ` 2, yielding:

                                            f pe4q “ e5
                                            e4 “ 0
                                            e5 “ a ` 2
   We now have formulas in two theories. First, formulas in the theory of uninterpreted
functions:

                                            f pe1q “ a
                                            e2 “ f pxq
                                            e3 “ f pyq
                                            f pe4q “ e5
                                            x“y
   And second, formulas in the theory of arithmetic:

                                           e1 “ e2 ´ e3
                                           e4 “ 0
                                           e5 “ a ` 2
                                           x“y
    Notice that x “ y is in both sets of formulas (remember, all theories understand equality).
First, however, let’s run a solver. The solver for uninterpreted functions has a congruence
closure rule that states, for all f, x, and y, if x “ y then f pxq “ f pyq. Applying this rule (since
x “ y is something we know), we discover that f pxq “ f pyq. Since f pxq “ e2 and f pyq “ e3,
by transitivity we know that e2 “ e3.
    But e2 and e3 are symbols that the arithmetic solver knows about, so we add e2 “ e3 to the
set of formulas we know about arithmetic. Now the arithmetic solver can discover that e2 ´
e3 “ 0, and thus e1 “ e4. We communicate this discovered equality to the uninterpreted func-
tions theory, and then we learn that a “ e5 (again, using congruence closure and transitivity).
    This fact goes back to the arithmetic solver, which evaluates the following constraints:

                                           e1 “ e2 ´ e3
                                           e4 “ 0
                                           e5 “ a ` 2
                                           x“y
                                           e2 “ e3
                                           a “ e5
    Now there is a contradiction: a “ e5 but e5 “ a ` 2. That means the original formula is
unsatisfiable.
    In this case, one theory was able to infer equality relationships that another theory could
directly use. But sometimes a theory doesn’t figure out an equality relationship, but only

certain correlations, e.g., e1 is either equal to e2 or e3. In the more general case, we can simply
generate a formula that represents all possible equalities between shared symbols, which
would look something like:

              pe1 “ e2 _ e1 ‰ e2q ^ pe2 “ e3 _ e2 ‰ e3q ^ pe1 “ e3 _ e1 ‰ e3q ^ ...
   We can now look at all possible combinations of equalities. In fact, we can use DPLL to
do this, and DPLL also explains how we can combine expressions in the various theories with
boolean operators such as ^ and _. If we have a formula such as:2

                                 x ě 0 ^ y “ x ` 1 ^ py ą 2 _ y ă 1q
   We can then convert each arithmetic (or uninterpreted function) formula into a fresh
propositional symbol, to get:

                                          p1 ^ p2 ^ pp3 _ p4q
    and then run a SAT solver using DPLL. DPLL will return a satisfying assignment, such as
p1, p2, p3, p4. We then check this against each of the theories. In this case, the theory of arith-
metic finds a contradiction: p1, p2, and p4 can’t all be true, because p1 and p2 together imply
that y ě 1. We add a clause saying that these can’t all be true and give it back to the SAT solver:

                              p1 ^ p2 ^ pp3 _ p4q ^ p p1 _ p2 _ p4q
    Running DPLL again gives us p1, p2, p3, p4.                We check this against the theory of
arithmetic, and it all works out.

12.3.3    DPLL(T)
This use of DPLL parameterized with respect to a set of theories T is called DPLL(T) or
(DPLL-T), and it is an SMT algorithm. At a high level, DPLL(T) works as we illustrated above:
it converts mixed constraints to boolean constraints and then runs DPLL, and then checks the
resulting assignments with the underlying theories to determine if they are valid. The version
of DPLL used in DPLL(T) has two key changes compared to the original, however.
    First, DPLL(T) does not use the pure variable elimination optimization. This is because,
in pure propositional logic, variables are necessarily independent. If some variable x only
appears positively, you can set it to true and save time. With theories, variables may be
dependent. For example, consider

                           px ą 10 _ x ă 3q ^ px ą 10 _ x ă 9q ^ px ă 7q
    In the above, x ą 10, but if we just set that term to be true as part of the model, the other
terms all become false. We cannot simply skip over it.
    Second, unit propagation interacts with the theories to add constraints to the formula when
available. We saw this example above, when the theory of arithmetic found a contradiction in
a satisfying assignment to the formula

                                          p1 ^ p2 ^ pp3 _ p4q

    and the solving procedure added a clause to the formula before giving it back to the SAT
solver.
   2
    If we had multiple theories, I am assuming we’ve already added the equality constraints between them, as
described above.

12.3.4   Bonus: Arithmetic solvers
We discussed above how the solver for the theory of uninterpreted functions work; how does
the arithmetic solver work? In cases like the above example where we assert formulas of the
form y “ x ` 1, we can eliminate y by substituting it with x ` 1 everywhere. In the cases
where we only constrain a variable using inequalities, there is a more general approach called
Fourier-Motzkin Elimination. In this approach, we take all inequalities that involve a variable
x and transform them into one of the following forms:

                                            Aďx
                                            xďB
    where A and B are linear formulas that don’t include x. We can then eliminate x, replacing
the above formulas with the equation A ď B. If we have multiple formulas with x on the
left and/or right, we just conjoin the cross product. There are various optimizations that are
applied in practice, but the basic algorithm is general and provides a broad understanding of
how arithmetic solvers work.

