Chapter 13

Symbolic Execution

13.1     Overview
In previous lectures, we developed axiomatic semantics as a way to represent a program
meaning in terms of what is true after code executes. We used weakest preconditions (versus
strongest postconditions) to prove program properties (that is, that some property Q is true
after S executes, assuming P is true before it executes). However, because weakest precondi-
tions are typically infeasible to compute, we further extended our language to include loop
invariants, and used them to compute verification conditions to verify program properties.

13.1.1   Forward Verification Condition Intuition
Revisiting the verification condition generation procedure, recall that it effectively works
backwards (which should make sense, given our intuition regarding weakest preconditions).
This is visible in the way the recursive calls to V CGen worked. Consider computing the VC
for a sequence of assignments with respect to some post condition Q:

                                            tP u
                                            x :“ e1
                                            x :“ e2
                                            tQu
But what if instead, we went forwards, after all? We could get a proof obligation of the form:

                @xn : prx0 {xsP ^ x1 “ rx0 {xse1 ^ x2 “ prx1 {xse2 qq ñ rx2 {xsQ

We use fresh mathematical variables xi each time the value of the mutable program var x is
updated. For example, to prove the following:

                                           tx ą 0u
                                           x :“ x ˚ 2
                                           x :“ x ` 1
                                           tx ą 1u

we need to show that:

                @x0 , x1 , x2 P Z : px0 ą 0 ^ x1 “ x0 ˚ 2 ^ x2 “ x1 ` 1q ñ x2 ą 1

   Computing a verification conditions forwards is conducted using a technique known
as symbolic execution. Symbolic execution is a general technique that executes a program
abstractly, so that one abstract execution covers multiple possible inputs of the program
that share a particular execution path through the code. We introduce it as a mechanism to

generate verification conditions; one benefit of symbolic execution is that it makes axiomatic
semantics practical. However, it can also be viewed as a way to generalize testing, automate
testing, and find bugs in programs (as we will see).
    Things get a bit more complicated when dealing with conditional branching. Consider:

                                         ttrueu
                                         if px ă 0q :
                                                y :“ ´x
                                         else :
                                                y :“ x
                                         ty ě 0u
   One option is to traverse each program path independently and generate distinct
verification conditions. If all of them can be proven to be true, then the program is correct:

                          @x0 , y0 P Z : px0 ă 0 ^ y0 “ ´x0 q ñ y0 ě 0
                           @x0 , y0 P Z : px0 ě 0 ^ y0 “ x0 q ñ y0 ě 0
    Another option is to combine these conditions into one formula by merging information
at join points; that is, when the two branches of the if-else come together. Verification reduces
to showing that the following formula is true:

             @x0 , y0 P Z : ppx0 ă 0 ñ y0 “ ´x0 q _ px0 ě 0 ñ y0 “ x0 qq ñ y0 ě 0
    The former strategy is often referred to as dynamic symbolic execution (DSE) while the latter
is static symbolic execution (SSE) [2, 36]. The advantage of SSE is that formulas can often be
made compact by removing redundancies (e.g. for variables that don’t get modified along
either conditional branch) and making other algebraic simplifications across paths. However,
DSE retains provenance; if any of the verification conditions don’t hold true, then it is easy
to determine the execution path along which an error occurs (and find a corresponding
input). Further, DSE lends itself well to performing under-approximate analysis when dealing
external library calls and loops with symbolic bounds.

13.1.2   Formalizing Forward VCGen
We can define forward verification condition generation in terms of symbolically evaluating
the program, using the same kinds of big-step rules we used for operational semantics. This
makes it easier to understand how verification conditions propagate along multiple program
paths and uses symbolic environments to track the formulas for mutable variables (which
mechanizes the generation of ”fresh” mathematical variables).

Symbolic expressions. We start by defining symbolic analogs for arithmetic expressions
and boolean predicates. We will call symbolic predicates guards and use the metavariable g,
as these will turn into guards for paths the symbolic evaluator explores. These analogs are the
same as the ordinary versions, except that in place of variables we use symbolic constants:

                           g ::“    true        as ::“ α
                             |      false          |   n
                             |      not g          |   as1 opa as2
                             |      g1 opb g2
                             |      as1 opr as2

    Next, we generalize the notion of the environment Σ, so that variables refer not just to
integers but to symbolic expressions:

                                               Σ P Var Ñ as
    Big-step rules for the symbolic evaluation of expressions results in symbolic expressions.
Since we don’t have actual values in many cases, the expressions won’t evaluate, but variables
will be replaced with symbolic constants. That is, we obtain a symbolic expression from a
concrete expression e by replacing all variables x in e with their values in the current symbolic
state Σ. When these values are concrete, we use the concrete values; if not, we replace
variables with symbolic constants:

                                                           big-int
                                            xΣ, ny ó n

                                                             big-var
                                          xΣ, xy ó Σpxq

                                xΣ, a1 y ó as1 xΣ, a2 y ó as2
                                                              big-add
                                  xΣ, a1 ` a2 y ó as1 ` as2

Dynamic symbolic execution (DSE) of statements. We can likewise define rules for state-
ment evaluation. These rules update not only the environment Σ, but also a path guard g
associated with that state:

                                                                 big-skip
                                     xg, Σ, skipy ó xg, Σy

                        xg, Σ, s1 y ó xg 1 , Σ1 y xg 1 , Σ1 , s2 y ó xg 2 , Σ2 y
                                                                                 big-seq
                                    xg, Σ, s1 ; s2 y ó xg 2 , Σ2 y

                                        xΣ, ay ó as
                                                               big-assign
                             xg, Σ, x :“ ay ó xg, Σrx ÞÑ as sy

                   xΣ, by ó g 1 g ^ g 1 SAT xg ^ g 1 , Σ, s1 y ó xg 2 , Σ1 y
                                                                             big-iftrue
                        xg, Σ, if b then s1 else s2 , y ó xg 2 , Σ1 y

                 xΣ, by ó g 1 g ^ g 1 SAT xg ^ g 1 , Σ, s2 y ó xg 2 , Σ1 y
                                                                           big-iffalse
                        xg, Σ, if b then s1 else s2 , y ó xg 2 , Σ1 y

    The rules for skip, sequence, and assignment are compositional in the expected way. The
rules for if are more interesting. Here, we evaluate the condition to a symbolic predicate g 1 .
In the true case, we use a SMT solver to verify that the guard is satisfiable when conjoined
with the existing path condition. If that’s the case, we continue by evaluating the true branch
symbolically. The false case is analogous.
    Doing this produces a symbolic state and a path condition or guard that describes that
state. In practice, however, multiple states or paths are possible given symbolic inputs,
and so in the general case, dynamic symbolic execution in fact produces a tree of possible
paths/symbolic states guarded by path conditions that lead to them.

Static symbolic execution (SSE) of statements As noted earlier, SSE merges symbolic
formulas at join points. We won’t write out all the rules for SSE here, but most of them are
similar to that of DSE with the main exception of big-seq which handles the sequence of
statements s1 ; s2 . For static symbolic execution, we would consider all possible xg 1 , Σ1 y such
that xg, Σ, s1 y ó xg 1 , Σ1 y, and merge these symbolic environments together before propagating
them to s2 . How does merging work? Consider the merge of xg1 , Σ1 y with xg2 , Σ1 y to result
in Σmerged . The merging introduces fresh symbolic variables αx corresponding to each x
such that Σ1 pxq ‰ Σ2 pxq; then sets Σmerged pxq “ αx ; and then adds to the path constraints
pg1 ñ αx “ Σ1 pxqq _ pg2 ñ αx “ Σ2 pxqq to the original constraint g. All other mappings that
are common in Σ1 and Σ2 are propagated as-is in Σmerged .

Loops. Speaking of multiple paths: what about loops? The simplest way to handle while is
analogous to if, above, but this will lead to a potentially infinite number of paths if the loop
conditions contain symbolic formulas that are always feasible. Practical DSE tools (such as
what is used in industry, discussed below) typically choose to symbolically “execute” loops
up to k times (where k is usually no more than 1 or 2). This approach is particularly applicable
if the goal is to find bugs or symbolically enumerate as many paths through the program as
possible, especially on real-world code without loop invariants.

      k ą 0 xΣ, by ó g 1     g ^ g 1 SAT xg ^ g 1 , Σ, s; whilek´1 b do sy ó xg 2 , Σ1 y
                                                                                         big-whiletrue
                             xg, Σ, whilek b do s, y ó xg 2 , Σ1 y

                                  xΣ, by ó g 1 g ^ g 1 SAT
                                                                   big-whilefalse
                           xg, Σ, whilek b do s, y ó xg ^ g 1 , Σy

In this formulation, we assume that all loops in the program are syntactically annotated with
a limit k (this may be a program-wide constant or be user-defined per loop). When k ą 0,
the rule big-whiletrue first checks if the loop condition is feasible, and if so it analyzes the
loop body and recursively subsequent iterations of the loop with a limit k ´ 1. Each time the
loop is analyzed, the rule big-whilefalse considers the case where the loop condition may be
false, and if this is feasible, simply propagates the symbolic environment and resulting path
condition. Note that when k “ 0, we do not consider the case that the loop body executes
further. This form of k-limited symbolic execution is unsound for verification and incomplete
for bug finding.
    In SSE, when we do have loop invariants1 , we can incorporate them into the verification
condition no more than twice: once, the first time the loop invariant is encountered, and again
for an “arbitrary” loop iteration. For this arbitrary iteration, we determine which variables
could possibly be modified on the path back to the invariant through the loop (how might
we do this?). Then, we quantify over a new set of symbolic values for all of those variables
(setting them to “arbitrary” values).2 Static symbolic execution can then proceed through the
while loop to the rest of the program.

13.2     Symbolic Execution as a Generalization of Testing
Symbolic execution3 is fundamentally a way to generalize testing. A test involves executing
a program concretely on one specific input, and checking the results. In contrast, symbolic
   1
     Note that some approaches or languages for verification support arbitrary invariant annotation to help prune
paths or render the verification problem simpler; the approach is the same.
   2
     This approach can be similarly applied to extend symbolic execution to function calls.
   3
     The general term “symbolic execution” will refer to DSE hereon and whenever used without qualification.

execution considers how the program executes abstractly on a family of related inputs.

13.2.1   Illustration
Consider the following code example, where a, b, and c are user-provided inputs:
1   int x=0, y=0, z=0;
2   if(a) {
3     x = -2;
4   }
5   if (b < 5) {
6     if (!a && c) { y = 1; }
7     z = 2;
8   }
9   assert(x + y + z != 3);

Question: What is an example input that will lead this assertion to fail? What path is it associated
with?
    If we are good (or lucky) testers, we can stumble upon a combination of inputs that
triggers the assertion to fail, and then generalize to the combination of input spaces that will
lead to it (and hopefully fix it!).
    Symbolic execution effectively inverts this process by describing the paths through the
program symbolically. Instead of executing the code on concrete inputs (like a = 1, b = 2, and
c = 1), it instead tracks execution in terms of symbolic inputs a “ α, b “ β, c “ γ. If a branch
condition ever depends on unknown symbolic values, the symbolic execution engine simply
chooses one branch to take, recording the condition on the symbolic values that would lead to
that branch. We can split the state, and use a worklist algorithm to make sure we come back to
the other branch.
    For example, consider abstractly executing a path through the program above, keeping
track of the (potentially symbolic) values of variables, and the conditions that must be true
in order for us to take that path. We can write this in tabular form, showing the values of the
path condition g and symbolic environment E after each line:
      line g                                 E
         0 true                              a ÞÑ α, b ÞÑ β, c ÞÑ γ
         1 true                              . . . , x ÞÑ 0, y ÞÑ 0, z ÞÑ 0
         2     α                             . . . , x ÞÑ 0, y ÞÑ 0, z ÞÑ 0
         5     α^β ě5                        . . . , x ÞÑ 0, y ÞÑ 0, z ÞÑ 0
         9     α ^ β ě 5 ^ 0 ` 0 ` 0 ‰ 3 . . . , x ÞÑ 0, y ÞÑ 0, z ÞÑ 0
    In the example, we arbitrarily picked the path where the abstract value of a, i.e. α, is false,
and the abstract value of b, i.e. β, is not less than 5. We build up a path condition out of these
boolean predicates as we hit each branch in the code. The assignment to x, y, and z updates
the symbolic state E with expressions for each variable; in this case we know they are all equal
to 0. At line 9, we treat the assert statement like a branch. In this case, the branch expression
evaluates to 0 ` 0 ` 0 ‰ 3 which is true, so the assertion is not violated.
    Now, we can run symbolic execution again along another path (this style of analysis
should feel familiar; note that I haven’t given you termination guarantees, however, unlike
in abstract interpretation! That’s where the slacker vs. non-slacker debate comes back in...).
We can do this multiple times, until we explore all paths in the program (exercise to the reader:
how many paths are there in the program above?) or we run out of time. If we continue doing this,
eventually we will explore the following path:

     line g                                     E
        0 true                                  a ÞÑ α, b ÞÑ β, c ÞÑ γ
        1 true                                  . . . , x ÞÑ 0, y ÞÑ 0, z ÞÑ 0
        2    α                                  . . . , x ÞÑ 0, y ÞÑ 0, z ÞÑ 0
        5    α^β ă5                             . . . , x ÞÑ 0, y ÞÑ 0, z ÞÑ 0
        6    α^β ă5^γ                           . . . , x ÞÑ 0, y ÞÑ 1, z ÞÑ 0
        6    α^β ă5^γ                           . . . , x ÞÑ 0, y ÞÑ 1, z ÞÑ 2
        9    α ^ β ă 5 ^ p0 ` 1 ` 2 ‰ 3q . . . , x ÞÑ 0, y ÞÑ 1, z ÞÑ 2
   Along this path, we have α ^ β ă 5. This means we assign y to 1 and z to 2, meaning
that the assertion 0 ` 1 ` 2 ‰ 3 on line 9 is false. Symbolic execution has found an error in the
program!

13.2.2   Symbolic Execution History and Industrial Use
Symbolic execution was originally proposed (as a way to generalize testing) in the 1970s [5, 22],
but it relied on automated theorem proving, and the algorithms and hardware of that period
weren’t ready for widespread use. With recent advances in SAT/SMT solving and four
decades of Moore’s Law applied to hardware, symbolic execution is now practical in many
more situations, and is used extensively in program analysis research as well as some
emerging industry tools. One of the most prominent examples is the use of the PREfix to find
errors in C/C++ code within Microsoft; the Klee symbolic execution engine is well known in
open source and research contexts.
    Of course, programs with loops have infinite numbers of paths, so exhaustive symbolic
execution is not possible. Instead, tools take heuristics, as discussed above. To avoid analyzing
complex library code, symbolic executors may use an abstract model of libraries. So, in its
most common practical formulations, which uses heuristics scalability and termination,
symbolic execution is typically less general than abstract interpretation. However, symbolic
execution can often avoid approximating in places where AI must approximate to ensure
termination. This means that symbolic execution can avoid giving false warnings; any error
found by symbolic execution represents a real, feasible path through the program, and (as we
will see) can be witnessed with a test case that illustrates the error.

13.3     Optional: Heap Manipulating Programs
We can extend the idea of symbolic execution to heap-manipulating programs. Consider the
following extensions to the grammar of arithmetic expressions and statements, supporting
memory allocation with malloc as well as dereferences and stores:

                                    a ::“ . . . | ˚a | malloc
                                    S ::“ . . . | ˚a :“ a
    Now we can define memories as a basic memory µ that can be extended based on stores
into the heap. The memory is modeled as an array, which allows SMT solvers to reason about
it using the theory of arrays:

                                    m ::“ µ | mras ÞÑ as s
   Finally, we extend symbolic expressions to include heap reads:

                                      as ::“ . . . | mras s
   Now we can define extended version of the arithmetic expression and statement execution
semantics that take (and produce, in the case of statements) a memory:

               α R Σ, m
                             big-malloc
          xΣ, malloc, my ó α

             xΣ, a, my ó as
                               big-deref
           xΣ, ˚a, my ó mras s

     xΣ, a, my ó as xΣ, a1 , my ó a1s
                                             big-store
xg, Σ, m, ˚a :“ a1 y ó xg, Σ, mras ÞÑ a1s sy

