Chapter 15

Program Synthesis

Note: A complete, if lengthy, resource on inductive program synthesis is the book “Program
Synthesis” by Gulwani et. al [13]. You need not read the whole thing; I encourage you to
investigate the portions of interest to you, and skim as appropriate. Many references in this
document are drawn from there; if you are interested, it contains many more.

15.1    Program Synthesis Overview
The problem of program synthesis can be expressed as follows:
                                       DP . @x . ϕpx, P pxqq
    In the setting of constructive logic, proving the validity of a formula that begins with an
existential involves coming up with a witness, or concrete example, that can be plugged into
the rest of the formula to demonstrate that it is true. In this case, the witness is a program
P that satisfies some specification ϕ on all inputs. We take a liberal view of P in discussing
synthesis, as a wide variety of artifact types have beeen successfully synthesized (anything
that reads inputs or produces outputs). Beyond (relatively small) program snippets of the
expected variety, this includes protocols, interpreters, classifiers, compression algorithms or
implementations, scheduling policies, and cache coherence protocols for multicore processors.
The specification ϕ is an expression of the user intent, and may be expressed in one of several
ways: a formula, a reference implementation, input/output pairs, traces, demonstrations, or
a syntactic sketch, among other options.
    Program synthesis can thus be considered along three dimensions:

(1) Expressing user intent. User intent (or ϕ in the above) can be expressed in a number of
ways, including logical specifications, input/output examples [9] (often with some kind of
user- or synthesizer-driven interaction), traces, natural language [6, 12, 23], or full- or partial
programs [38]. In this latter category lies reference implementations, such as executable
specifications (which give the desired output for a given input) or declarative specifications
(which check whether a given input/output pair is correct). Some synthesis techniques
allow for multi-modal specifications, including pre- and post- conditions, safety assertions at
arbitrary program points, or partial program templates.
    Such specifications can constrain two aspects of the synthesis problem:
   • Observable behavior, such as an input/output relation, a full executable specification
     or safety property. This specifies what a program should compute.
   • Structural properties, or internal computation steps. These are often expressed as a
     sketch or template, but can be further constrained by assertions over the number or va-
     riety of operations in a synthesized programs (or number of iterations, number of cache

          misses, etc, depending on the synthesis problem in question). Indeed, one of the key
          principles behind the scaling of many modern synthesis techniques lie in the way they
          syntactically restrict the space of possible programs, often via a sketch, grammar, or DSL.
.
    Note that basically all of the above types of specifications can be translated to constraints
in some form or another. Techniques that operate over multiple types of specifications can
overcome various challenges that come up over the course of an arbitrary synthesis problem.
Different specification types are more suitable for some types of problems than others.
In addition, trace- or sketch-based specifications can allow a synthesizer to decompose a
synthesis problems into intermediate program points.

Question: how many ways can we specify a sorting algorithm?

(2) Search space of possible programs. The search space naturally includes programs, often
constructed of subsets of normal programming languages. This can include a predefined set
of considered operators or control structures, defined as grammars. However, other spaces are
considered for various synthesis problems, like logics of various kinds, which can be useful
for, e.g., synthesizing graph/tree algorithms.

(3) Search technique. At a high level, there are two general approaches to logical synthesis:
    • Deductive (or classic) synthesis (e.g., [26]), which maps a high-level (e.g. logical)
      specification to an executable implementation, classically using a theorem prover. Such
      approaches are efficient and provably correct: thanks to the semantics-preserving rules,
      only correct programs are explored. However, they require complete specifications and
      sufficient axiomatization of the domain. These approaches are classically applied to e.g.,
      controller synthesis.

    • Inductive (sometimes called syntax-guided) synthesis, which takes a partial (and often
      multi-modal) specification and constructs a program that satisfies it. These techniques
      are more flexible in their specification requirements and require no axioms, but often
      at the cost of lower efficiency and weaker bounded guarantees on the optimality of
      synthesized code.
    Deductive synthesis shares quite a bit in common, conceptually, with compilation:
rewriting a specification according to various rules to achieve a new program in at a different
level of representation. However, deductive synthesis approaches assume a complete formal
specification of the desired user intent was provided. In many cases, this can be as complicated
as writing the program itself.
    This has motivated new inductive synthesis approaches, towards which considerable
modern research energy has been dedicated. This category of techniques lends itself to a wide
variety of search strategies, including brute-force or enumerative [1] (you might be surprised!),
probabilistic inference/belief propagation [11], or genetic programming [20]. Alternatively,
techniques based on logical reasoning delegate the search problem to a constraint solver. We
will spend more time on this set of techniques.

15.2          Deductive Synthesis
We will very briefly overview Denali [18], a prototypical deductive synthesis technique for
superoptimization.1 Denali seeks to generate short sequences of provably optimal loop-free
    1
        This explanation is further illustrated using the associated lecture slides.

machine instructions, for use primarily in compilation. While compilers generate reasonably
good code, there are cases in which we would instead prefer provably optimal code. Generat-
ing such code is the task of a superoptimizer (so-called because the title of optimization “has
been given to a field that does not aspire to optimize but only to improve”). Early approaches
for superoptimization attempted to enumerate via brute force (in order of increasing length)
efficient sequences of instructions, with correctness checked by hand and against a set of test
cases. This correctness critierion is challenging to confirm, however, and does not necessarily
result in optimality.
    Joshi et al. propose an approach to superoptimization based on theorem proving. The
“obvious” approach (which they do not take) would be to, given a desired program fragment
P, express in formal logic “no program of the target architecture computes P in at most N
cycles.” However, this obvious approach is very difficult to manage with a theorem prover,
because it must be expressed using nested quantifiers.
    Instead, they propose a process based on the idea that for sufficiently simple programs,
equivalence between a desired P and some alternative implementation M for all inputs is
essentially the universal validity of an equality between two vectors of terms (the one M
computes, and the terms specified by P in the computatoin). This type of equivalience can be
proved by matching, which is a well understood technique in theorem proving.
    To do this, their technique, named Denali, takes as input a program P written in a DSL
for the associated target architecture. It then constructs an E-graph using the specified desired
program P as input. An E-graph is a term DAG corresponding to the expression to be
synthesized, augmented with an equivalence relation on the nodes of the DAG. Two nodes
are equivalent if the terms they represent are identical in value. Denali then uses a theorem
prover, along with two sets of axioms (encoding instruction semantics—an interpreter for the
target language, effectively—and algebraic properties—memory modeling, mostly), to search
the e-graph for the most efficient way to compute the expression.

15.3     Inductive Synthesis
Inductive synthesis uses inductive reasoning to construct programs in response to partial
specifications. The program is synthesized via a symbolic interpretation of a space of can-
didates, rather than by deriving the candidate directly. So, to synthesize such a program,
we basically only require an interpreter, rather than a sufficient set of derivation axioms.
Inductive synthesis is applicable to a variety of problem types, such as string transformation
(FlashFill) [10], data extraction/processing/wrangling [9, 37], layout transformation of tables
or tree-shaped structures [39], graphics (constructing structured, repetitive drawings) [14, 4],
program repair [27, 24] (spoiler alert!), superoptimization [18], and efficient synchronization,
among others.
    Inductive synthesis consists of several family of approaches; we will overview several
prominent examples, without claiming to be complete.

15.3.1   SKETCH, CEGIS, and SyGuS
SKETCH is a well-known synthesis system that allows programs to provide partial programs
(a sketch) that expresses the high-level structure of the intended implementation but leaves
holes for low-level implementation details. The synthesizer fills these holes from a finite set
of choices, using an approach now known as Counterexample-guided Inductive Synthesis
(CEGIS) [38, 34]. This well-known synthesis architecture divies the problem into search and
verification components, and uses the output from the latter to refine the specification given to
the former.

We have a diagram to illustrate on slides.

    Syntax-Guided Synthesis (or SyGuS) formalizes the problem of program synthesis where
specification is supplemented with a syntactic template. This defines a search space of
possible programs that the synthesizer effectively traverses. Many search strategies exist; two
especially well-known strategies are enumerative search (which can be remarkably effective,
though rarely scales), and deductive or top down search, which recursively reduces the problem
into simpler sub-problems.

15.3.2    Oracle-guided synthesis
Templates or sketches are often helpful and easy to write. However, they are not always
available. Beyond search or enumeration, constraint-based approaches translate a program’s
specification into a constraint system that is provided to a solver. This can be especially
effective if combined with an outer CEGIS loop that provides oracles.
    This kind of synthesis can be effective when the properties we care about are relatively
easy to verify. For example, imagine we wanted to find a maximum number m in a list l.
Here’s a specification of this as a synthesis problem:

                        DPmax @l, m : Pmax plq “ m ñ pm P lq ^ p@x P l : m ě xq
   Given a particular program Pmax , we can prove it correct by showing that the following
formula holds:

                            @l, m : Pmax plq “ m ñ pm P lq ^ p@x P l : m ě xq
    Let’s look in particular at counterexample generation from a logical viewpoint. To capture
this, iinstead of proving that a program satisfies the formula above, we can instead disprove
its negation, which is:

                            Dl, m : pPmax plq “ mq ^ pm R l _ Dx P l : m ă xq
    If the above is satisfiable, a solver will give us a counterexample, which we can use to
strengthen the specification–so that next time the synthesis engine will give us a program
that excludes this counterexample. We can make this counterexample more useful by asking
the solver not just to provide us with an input that produces an error, but also to provide the
corresponding correct output m˚ :

                         Dl, m˚ : pPmax plq ‰ m˚ q ^ pm˚ P lq ^ p@x P l : m˚ ě xq
   This is a much stronger constraint than the original counterexample, as it says what the
program should output in this case rather than one example of something it should not
output. Thus we now have an additional test case for the next round of synthesis. This
counterexample-guided sythesis approach was originally introduced for SKETCH, and was
generalized to oracle-guided inductive synthesis by Jha and Seshia. Different oracles have
been developed for this type of synthesis. We will discuss component-based oracle-guided
program synthesis in detail, which illustrates the use of distinguishing oracles.

15.4      Oracle-guided Component-based Program Synthesis
Problem statement and intuition.2 Given a set of input-output pairs ă α0 , β0 ą . . . ă αn , βn ą
and N components f1 , . . . fN , the goal is to synthesize a function f out of the components such
   2
    These notes are inspired by Section III.B of Nguyen et al., ICSE 2013 [31] ...which provides a really beautifully
clear exposition of the work that originally proposed this type of synthesis in Jha et al., ICSE 2010 [17].

that @αi .f pαi q produces βi . We achieve this by constructing and solving a set of constraints
over f , passing those constraints to an SMT solver, and using a returned satisfying model to
reconstruct f . In this approach, the synthesized function will have the following form:

                               0              z0 :“ input0
                               1              z1 :“ input1
                               ...            ...
                               m              zm :“ inputm
                               m`1            zm`1 :“ f? pz? , . . . , z? q
                               m`2            zm`2 :“ f? pz? , . . . , z? q
                               ...            ...
                               m`N            zm`N :“ f? pz? , . . . , z? q
                               m`N `1         return z?
    The thing we have to do is fill in the ? indexes in the program above. These indexes
essentially define the order in which functions are invoked and what arguments they are
invoked with. We will assume that each component is used once, without loss of generality,
since we can duplicate the components.
Definitions. We will set up the problem for the solver using two sets of variables. One set
represents the input values passed to each component, and the output value that component
produces, when the program is run for a given test case. We use Ñ        Ýχ i to denote the vector
of input values passed to component i and ri to denote the result value computed by that
component. So if we have a single component (numbered 1) that adds two numbers, the input
values Ñ
       Ý
       χ 1 might be (1,3) for a given test case and the output r1 in that case would be 4. We use
Q to denote the set of all variables representing inputs and R to denote the set of all variables
representing outputs:
                                             ŤN Ñ Ý
                                        Q :“  i“1 χ i
                                             ŤN
                                        R :“  i“1 ri

                                                                      Ñ
                                                                      Ý
    We also define the overall program’s inputs to be the vector Y and the program’s output
to be r.
    The other set of variables determines the location of each component, as well as the
locations at which each of its inputs were defined. We call these location variables. For each
variable x, we define a location variable lx , which denotes where x is defined. Thus lri is the
                                                      Ý
                                                      Ñ
location variable for the result of component i and lχi is the vector of location variables for the
                                                     ÝÑ
inputs of component i. So if we have lr3 “ 5 and lχ3 is (2,4), then we will invoke component
#3 at line 5, and we will pass variables z2 and z4 to it. L is the set of all location variables:
                                                       Ñ
                                                       Ý
                                L :“ tlx | x P Q Y R Y Y Y ru
    We will have two sets of constraints: one to ensure the program is well-formed, and the
other that ensures the program encodes the desired functionality.
                                                                         Ñ
                                                                         Ý
Well-formedness. ψwf p denotes the well-formedness constraint. Let M “ | Y | ` N , where N
is the number of available components:
                                def   Ź                         Ź ÑÝ
                 ψwf p pL, Q, Rq “          p0 ď lx ă M q ^      p| Y | ď lx ă M q ^
                                      xPQ                      xPR
                                      ψcons pL, Rq ^ ψacyc pL, Q, Rq
   The first line of that definition says that input locations are in the range 0 to M , while
component output locations are all defined after program inputs are declared. ψcons and ψacyc

dictate that there is only one component in each line and that the inputs of each component
are defined before they are used, respectively:
                                                           def       Ź
                                        ψcons pL, Rq       “                    plx ‰ ly q
                                                                  x,yPR,xıy
                                                           def    ŹN Ź
                                  ψacyc pL, Q, Rq          “                    lx ă lri
                                                                  i“1 xPÑ
                                                                        Ý
                                                                        χ   i

Functionality. φf unc denotes the functionality constraint that guarantees that the solution f
satisfies the given input-output pairs:

                                  def               Ñ
                                                    Ý                                 Ñ
                                                                                      Ý
              φf unc pL, α, βq    “       ψconn pL, Y , r, Q, Rq ^ φlib pQ, Rq ^ pα “ Y q ^ pβ “ rq
                 Ñ
                 Ý                def            Ź
       ψconn pL, Y , r, Q, Rq     “                         plx “ ly ñ x “ yq
                                                    Ñ
                                                    Ý
                                          x,yPQYRY Y Ytru
                                  def       N
                                          p φi pÑ Ý
                                           Ź
                  φlib pQ, Rq     “               χ , ri qq
                                                       i
                                           i“1

    ψconn encodes the meaning of the location variables: If two locations are equal, then the
values of the variables defined at those locations are also equal. φlib encodes the semantics of
the provided basic components, with φi representing the specification of component fi . The
rest of φf unc encodes that if the input to the synthesized function is α, the output must be β.
    Almost done! φf unc provides constraints over a single input-output pair αi , βi , we still
need to generalize it over all n provided pairs tă αi , βi ą |1 ď i ď nu:

                                  def    n
                                         Ź
                                 θ “ p         φf unc pL, αi , βi qq ^ ψwf p pL, Q, Rq
                                         i“1
    θ collects up all the previous constraints, and says that the synthesized function f should
satisfy all input-output pairs and the function has to be well formed.

LVal2Prog. The only real unknowns in all of θ are the values for the location variables L. So,
the solver that provides a satisfying assignment to θ is basically giving a valuation of L that
we then turn into a constructed program as follows:
    Given a valuation of L, Lval2ProgpLq converts it to a program as follows: The ith line of
                                                           η
                                                           Ź
the program is zi “ fj pzσ1 , ..., zση q when lrj ““ i and   plχk ““ σk q, where η is the number
                                                                                   j
                                                     k“1
of inputs for component fj and χkj denotes the k th input parameter of component fj .                 The
program output is produced in line lr .

Example. Assume we only have one component, +. + has two inputs: χ1` and χ2` . The
output variable is r` . Further assume that the desired program f has one input Y0 (which
we call input0 in the actual program text) and one output r. Given a mapping for location
variables of: tlr` ÞÑ 1, lχ1` ÞÑ 0, lχ2` ÞÑ 0, lr ÞÑ 1, lY ÞÑ 0u, then the program looks like:

                                                   0 z0 :“ input0
                                                   1 z1 :“ z0 ` z0
                                                   2 return z1
     This occurs because the location of the variables used as input to + are both on the same
line (0), which is also the same line as the input to the program (0). lr , the return variable of the
program, is defined on line 1, which is also where the output of the + component is located.
(lr` ). We added the return on line 2 as syntactic sugar.

