Preface

Why publish yet another book on digital design and computer architecture?
There are dozens of good books in print on digital design. There are also
several good books about computer architecture, especially the classic texts
of Patterson and Hennessy. This book is unique in its treatment in that it
presents digital logic design from the perspective of computer architecture,
starting at the beginning with 1’s and 0’s, and leading students through the
design of a MIPS microprocessor.
     We have used several editions of Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer
Organization and Design (COD) for many years at Harvey Mudd
College. We particularly like their coverage of the MIPS architecture
and microarchitecture because MIPS is a commercially successful micro-
processor architecture, yet it is simple enough to clearly explain and build
in an introductory class. Because our class has no prerequisites, the first
half of the semester is dedicated to digital design, which is not covered
by COD. Other universities have indicated a need for a book that com-
bines digital design and computer architecture. We have undertaken to
prepare such a book.
     We believe that building a microprocessor is a special rite of passage
for engineering and computer science students. The inner workings of a
processor seem almost magical to the uninitiated, yet prove to be straight-
forward when carefully explained. Digital design in itself is a powerful
and exciting subject. Assembly language programming unveils the inner
language spoken by the processor. Microarchitecture is the link that
brings it all together.
     This book is suitable for a rapid-paced, single-semester introduction
to digital design and computer architecture or for a two-quarter or
two-semester sequence giving more time to digest the material and
experiment in the lab. The course can be taught without prerequisites.
The material is usually taught at the sophomore- or junior-year level,
but may also be accessible to bright freshmen.

                                                                               xix
xx   PREFACE

               FEATURES
               This book offers a number of special features.

               Side-by-Side Coverage of SystemVerilog and VHDL
               Hardware description languages (HDLs) are at the center of modern digi-
               tal design practices. Unfortunately, designers are evenly split between the
               two dominant languages, SystemVerilog and VHDL. This book intro-
               duces HDLs in Chapter 4 as soon as combinational and sequential logic
               design has been covered. HDLs are then used in Chapters 5 and 7 to
               design larger building blocks and entire processors. Nevertheless, Chapter 4
               can be skipped and the later chapters are still accessible for courses that
               choose not to cover HDLs.
                    This book is unique in its side-by-side presentation of SystemVerilog
               and VHDL, enabling the reader to learn the two languages. Chapter 4
               describes principles applying to both HDLs, then provides language-
               specific syntax and examples in adjacent columns. This side-by-side treat-
               ment makes it easy for an instructor to choose either HDL, and for the
               reader to transition from one to the other, either in a class or in professional
               practice.

               Classic MIPS Architecture and Microarchitecture
               Chapters 6 and 7 focus on the MIPS architecture adapted from the treat-
               ment of Patterson and Hennessy. MIPS is an ideal architecture because it
               is a real architecture shipped in millions of products yearly, yet it is
               streamlined and easy to learn. Moreover, hundreds of universities around
               the world have developed pedagogy, labs, and tools around the MIPS
               architecture.

               Real-World Perspectives
               Chapters 6, 7, and 8 illustrate the architecture, microarchitecture,
               and memory hierarchy of Intel x86 processors. Chapter 8 also describes
               peripherals in the context of Microchip’s PIC32 microcontroller. These
               real-world perspective chapters show how the concepts in the chapters
               relate to the chips found in many PCs and consumer electronics.

               Accessible Overview of Advanced Microarchitecture
               Chapter 7 includes an overview of modern high-performance micro-
               architectural features including branch prediction, superscalar and
               out-of-order operation, multithreading, and multicore processors.
               The treatment is accessible to a student in a first course and shows
               how the microarchitectures in the book can be extended to modern
               processors.
                                                                    PREFACE    xxi

End-of-Chapter Exercises and Interview Questions
The best way to learn digital design is to do it. Each chapter ends with
numerous exercises to practice the material. The exercises are followed
by a set of interview questions that our industrial colleagues have asked
students applying for work in the field. These questions provide a helpful
glimpse into the types of problems job applicants will typically encounter
during the interview process. (Exercise solutions are available via the
book’s companion and instructor webpages. For more details, see the
next section, Online Supplements.)

ONLINE SUPPLEMENTS
Supplementary materials are available online at textbooks.elsevier.com/
9780123944245. This companion site (accessible to all readers) includes:
▶   Solutions to odd-numbered exercises
▶   Links to professional-strength computer-aided design (CAD) tools
    from Altera® and Synopsys®
▶   Link to QtSpim (referred to generically as SPIM), a MIPS simulator
▶   Hardware description language (HDL) code for the MIPS processor
▶   Altera Quartus II helpful hints
▶   Microchip MPLAB IDE helpful hints
▶   Lecture slides in PowerPoint (PPT) format
▶   Sample course and lab materials
▶   List of errata
The instructor site (linked to the companion site and accessible to adopters
who register at textbooks.elsevier.com) includes:
▶   Solutions to all exercises
▶   Links to professional-strength computer-aided design (CAD) tools
    from Altera® and Synopsys®. (Synopsys offers Synplify® Premier to
    qualified universities in a package of 50 licenses. For more informa-
    tion on the Synopsys University program, go to the instructor site
    for this book.)
▶   Figures from the text in JPG and PPT formats
Additional details on using the Altera, Synopsys, Microchip, and QtSpim
tools in your course are provided in the next section. Details on the sam-
ple lab materials are also provided here.
xxii   PREFACE

                 HOW TO USE THE SOFTWARE TOOLS IN A COURSE
                 Altera Quartus II
                 Quartus II Web Edition is a free version of the professional-strength
                 Quartus™ II FPGA design tools. It allows students to enter their digital
                 designs in schematic or using either the SystemVerilog or VHDL hard-
                 ware description language (HDL). After entering the design, students
                 can simulate their circuits using ModelSim™-Altera Starter Edition, which
                 is available with the Altera Quartus II Web Edition. Quartus II Web Edition
                 also includes a built-in logic synthesis tool supporting both SystemVerilog
                 and VHDL.
                      The difference between Web Edition and Subscription Edition is that
                 Web Edition supports a subset of the most common Altera FPGAs. The
                 difference between ModelSim-Altera Starter Edition and ModelSim com-
                 mercial versions is that Starter Edition degrades performance for simula-
                 tions with more than 10,000 lines of HDL.

                 Microchip MPLAB IDE
                 Microchip MPLAB Integrated Development Environment (IDE) is a tool
                 for programming PIC microcontrollers and is available for free down-
                 load. MPLAB integrates program writing, compiling, simulating, and
                 debugging into a single interface. It includes a C compiler and debugger,
                 allowing the students to develop C and assembly programs, compile
                 them, and optionally program them onto a PIC microcontroller.

                 Optional Tools: Synplify Premier and QtSpim
                 Synplify Premier and QtSpim are optional tools that can be used with this
                 material.
                      The Synplify Premier product is a synthesis and debug environment
                 for FPGA and CPLD design. Included is HDL Analyst, a unique graphical
                 HDL analysis tool that automatically generates schematic views of the
                 design with cross-probing back to the HDL source code. This is immen-
                 sely useful in the learning and debugging process.
                      Synopsys offers Synplify Premier to qualified universities in a package
                 of 50 licenses. For more information on the Synopsys University program
                 or the Synopsys FPGA design software, visit the instructor site for this
                 book (textbooks.elsevier.com/9780123944245).
                      QtSpim, also called simply SPIM, is a MIPS simulator that runs MIPS
                 assembly code. Students enter their MIPS assembly code into a text file
                 and run it using QtSpim. QtSpim displays the instructions, memory,
                 and register values. Links to the user’s manual and example files are avail-
                 able at the companion site (textbooks.elsevier.com/9780123944245).
                                                                    PREFACE    xxiii

LABS
The companion site includes links to a series of labs that cover topics
from digital design through computer architecture. The labs teach stu-
dents how to use the Quartus II tools to enter, simulate, synthesize, and
implement their designs. The labs also include topics on C and assembly
language programming using the Microchip MPLAB IDE.
     After synthesis, students can implement their designs using the Altera
DE2 Development and Education Board. This powerful and competitively
priced board is available from www.altera.com. The board contains an
FPGA that can be programmed to implement student designs. We provide
labs that describe how to implement a selection of designs on the DE2 Board
using Cyclone II Web Edition.
     To run the labs, students will need to download and install Altera
Quartus II Web Edition and Microchip MPLAB IDE. Instructors may also
choose to install the tools on lab machines. The labs include instructions
on how to implement the projects on the DE2 Board. The implementation
step may be skipped, but we have found it of great value.
     We have tested the labs on Windows, but the tools are also available
for Linux.

BUGS
As all experienced programmers know, any program of significant com-
plexity undoubtedly contains bugs. So too do books. We have taken great
care to find and squash the bugs in this book. However, some errors
undoubtedly do remain. We will maintain a list of errata on the book’s
webpage.
    Please send your bug reports to ddcabugs@onehotlogic.com. The first
person to report a substantive bug with a fix that we use in a future print-
ing will be rewarded with a $1 bounty!

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First and foremost, we thank David Patterson and John Hennessy for
their pioneering MIPS microarchitectures described in their Computer
Organization and Design textbook. We have taught from various editions
of their book for many years. We appreciate their gracious support of this
book and their permission to build on their microarchitectures.
     Duane Bibby, our favorite cartoonist, labored long and hard to illus-
trate the fun and adventure of digital design. We also appreciate the enthu-
siasm of Nate McFadden, Todd Green, Danielle Miller, Robyn Day, and
the rest of the team at Morgan Kaufmann who made this book happen.
     We’d like to thank Matthew Watkins who contributed the section on
Heterogeneous Multiprocessors in Chapter 7. We also appreciate the
xxiv   PREFACE

                 work of Chris Parks, Carl Pearson, and Johnathan Chai who tested code
                 and developed content for the second edition.
                     Numerous reviewers substantially improved the book. They include
                 John Barr, Jack V. Briner, Andrew C. Brown, Carl Baumgaertner,
                 A. Utku Diril, Jim Frenzel, Jaeha Kim, Phillip King, James Pinter-Lucke,
                 Amir Roth, Z. Jerry Shi, James E. Stine, Luke Teyssier, Peiyi Zhao, Zach
                 Dodds, Nathaniel Guy, Aswin Krishna, Volnei Pedroni, Karl Wang,
                 Ricardo Jasinski, and an anonymous reviewer.
                     We also appreciate the students in our course at Harvey Mudd
                 College who have given us helpful feedback on drafts of this textbook.
                 Of special note are Matt Weiner, Carl Walsh, Andrew Carter, Casey
                 Schilling, Alice Clifton, Chris Acon, and Stephen Brawner.
                     And, last but not least, we both thank our families for their love and
                 support.
This page intentionally left blank
