                                                          Introduction

Preliminaries
In this book, we are going to assume at least intermediate level familiarity with
Haskell. We will feel free to use many of GHC’s general-purpose language exten-
sions like DataKinds or TypeApplications, without introducing them. In fact, Clash,
the main tool we will use throughout this book, turns on these (and many more)
extensions by default. On the other hand, Template Haskell, being a more special-
ized tool that is not necessarily used by, the working Haskell programmer, will get
its own introduction before using it in anger in chapter 14.
    We take a similar approach to libraries: we will use Containers, the Monad
Transformer Library, and small parts of Lens, assuming readers are either already
familiar with them, or can look up the documentation as needed. Libraries for
more niche domains, such as Barbies for easier handling of higher-kinded data
types, Terminal for text IO, and SDL2 for interactive, graphical applications, are
described in detail alongside the parts of the book that use them.

Notation
In text, monospaced typeface denotes code fragments; the most common case is
referring to Haskell types and functions by name, such as Bool or fmap. For the
actual definitions that make up our programs, we will use code blocks like this:

succIdx :: (Eq a, Enum a, Bounded a) => a -> Maybe a
succIdx x | x == maxBound = Nothing
          | otherwise = Just $ succ x

   Due to the limitations of paginated media, code blocks sometimes necessarily
spread across page boundaries. Good code should tell a story, so in these situations,
the cliffhangers get their own “to be continued” title card by drawing the code
block’s frame dashed, as in the following example:

predIdx :: (Eq a, Enum a, Bounded a) => a -> Maybe a

2   Introduction

    predIdx x | x == minBound = Nothing
              | otherwise = Just $ pred x

        Sometimes, we will build function or data type definitions piecewise over sev-
    eral blocks. In these cases, we will indicate where later parts are to be inserted,
    by including some of the previous code. Readers are very much encouraged to
    follow along by assembling the program from the parts and experimenting with
    the incomplete intermediate steps, not just looking at the final version.
        In illustrations, since we are creating hardware by writing code, the role of the
    schematic diagrams is just to provide overview. We will include more or less detail
    in these diagrams in different contexts. When we want to highlight the distinction
    between purely combinational circuits vs. stateful ones, we will enclose the pure
    parts in rounded shapes, like the not circuit in the following example:

                                                             r'

                                   not                       r
                                                 reg

                                                clk

       When the details of memory access are the focus of discussion, we will draw
    separate connections for address, read, and write lines. In other contexts, we will
    keep our diagrams easier to read by using a single connection, denoting the read-
    only, write-only, or read/write access by the direction of the connection:

                         Address
                          Read
             RAM                         CPU             RAM                  CPU
                          Write

              (1) Detailed memory connections          (2) Simplified memory connection

    Resources
    The website of this book is at https://unsafePerform.IO/retroclash/ with links to
    repositories of the full source code of all programs appearing in the book.
Introduction                                                                                3

Acknowledgements
I don’t know if it takes a village to write a book, but a village certainly came together
for this one.
    Even before the idea of writing a book, I’ve been regularly bouncing my in-
creasingly hare-brained schemes of describing hardware with all the abstractions
afforded by Haskell with Marten Ågren, Nguyễn Hữu Hải, and Raphael Montelatici.
Hải originally put the bug in my ear that I should tell not just them, but the whole
world about these ideas.
    Once I got to writing, Christiaan Baaĳ supported this endeavor from the get-go.
The whole Clash development team and QBayLogic got busy to fix the various
bugs I’ve uncovered on the way with very quick turnaround. Christiaan, Cosette
Reczek, Andor Pénzes, Ellie Hermaszewska, Viktória Kiss, and Miëtek Bak provided
invaluable feedback on the chapters as I wrote them. I have only myself to blame
for any errors that might still have slipped through.
    Károly Lőrentey helped me enter the world of typography beyond “whatever is
default in LATEX”, and Viktória had great ideas for how to turn some of the concepts
in my head into illustrations. I am also indebted to TEX.stackexchange.com in their
assistance in turning these ideas into reality.

                                          ...

   But before any of that, there was my father, bringing first an Atari 2600 home,
then a short while later, a Commodore 64. Followed by countless nights figuring out
Impossible Mission 2, and countless days designing BASIC programs and drawing
sprites of red balloons on graphing paper. He would have enjoyed — not the
technical details — but certainly the idea of this book.
