                                         Into the world of FPGAs
                                                                 1
    This book is about the intersection of FPGAs, retrocomputing, and Haskell; ap-
    proaching the topic from the direction of Haskell. In other words, we expect readers
    to be familiar with traditional (software) programming in Haskell, and will concen-
    trate on the hardware aspects. This chapter’s goal is to introduce FPGAs, and to
    make our argument for picking retrocomputing as our topic.

1.1 Computers everywhere
    We are surrounded by computers. Smartphones are computers. Gaming con-
    soles are computers. Smart TVs are computers, but so are “dumb” ones as well.
    Washing machines are computers. Bluetooth headphones are computers, as are
    non-Bluetooth noise canceling ones. Computers are computers. In fact, computers are
    surrounded by smaller computers in their peripherals: there’s a computer in the
    keyboard, there’s one in the mouse, and there’s one in the network adapter.
        If everything is a computer, does that make the term meaningless? No. What
    we mean by the word “computer” here is an artificial physical device designed to
    implement a finite approximation of a Turing machine. There are many proposed
    ways of building devices that perform computation: we can build a computer from
    water running through an elaborate network of pipes; we can synthesize organic
    molecules whose interaction corresponds to computation; there are even children’s
    toys in which a ball falling through a lattice of pins and spindles can perform
    universal computation achieving Turing-completeness.
        However, there is only one substrate of computation that sees real-world use:
    digital electronics. If we look at all these computers around us as physical artifacts,
    we see that they contain a bunch of functionality-specific parts (the drum of the
    washing machine, the speaker of the headphone, or the LCD of the TV) and one or
    more fiberglass epoxy boards (the printed circuit boards or PCBs) containing small
    plastic boxes and electric components (mostly resistors and capacitors), with copper
    traces running between the parts. To the naked eye, the epoxy boards look very
    similar across devices, even though the washing machine is a lot less capable a

      computer than a smartphone.
          Amazingly, this similarity runs much deeper. Resistors are resistors, capacitors
      are capacitors, copper is copper, so the difference must be inside those small plastic
      boxes, right? If we zoom in on the inside of one of those boxes, we find a tiny silicon
      plane called an integrated circuit or IC for short. And if we zoom in much, much
      more, we will see that on these planes, all ICs are made up of a large number of
      components: a small portion is tiny versions of the resistors, capacitors, and other
      electric components we’ve seen earlier, and the rest are transistors.
          Different chips have different sized transistors; the rapid advancement in comput-
      ing performance since the first computers is in large part because of improvements
      in integrated circuit manufacturing. Newer transistors are smaller, use less energy,
      and so more of them can be packed into the same area. But functionally, all these
      transistors, large and small, are exactly the same: a tiny version of an electric switch
      where being short or open is itself also controlled electronically.
          What this means is that the difference between the microcontroller in a toaster
      and the processor of a top-of-the-line supercomputer is only in how many of these
      transistors are connected to each other, and what the connections are. The key
      corollary is that we can build our own computer just by deciding on the connections.

1.1.1 Digital electronics
      As the saying goes, in theory, theory and practice are the same, but in practice, they
      are not. The above description of the insides of a computer is a gross simplification,
      glossing over a lot of the electrical components. However, we are in good company
      by making these simplifications: when we say that the computer is made of a
      network of transistors and nothing more, we are using the digital abstraction.
          The idea of digital electronics is to pretend that every transistor lead and every
      pin visible to the outside world is always at one of only two voltage levels, referred
      to as “low” and “high” voltage. Of course, nature is messy, and it takes considerable
      electrical engineering effort to maintain this abstraction. In fact, for purely digital
      circuits, the role of everything else on the circuit board (resistors, capacitors, etc.) is
      to ensure that the digital abstraction isn’t leaky.1
          In this book, we will stay firmly inside the confines of the digital abstraction.
      When interfacing with the rest of the world, we will assume that the peripheral
      hardware contains sufficient circuitry to solve impedance mismatches, translate
      between voltage levels, and so on.

          1 There are also circuits where the functionality is intrinsically tied to non-digital electronics, e.g. a

      radio receiver. Here, we regard those parts in the same way as we regard the heating coil of a toaster: a
      peripheral that interfaces with the digital parts, but isn’t part of the “computer” proper.

1.1.2 Universality

      From two transistors, we can build a NAND gate: a two-input, one-output cir-
      cuit where the output is the complement of the two input’s conjunction (the
      name “NAND” stands for “NOT-AND”); in Haskell notation, we could write it as
      \x y -> not (x && y). By using enough NAND gates, we can implement any func-
      tion mapping 𝑛 Boolean inputs to 𝑚 outputs. This property of the NAND gate is called
      universality.2 By way of example, the following circuit diagram implements a NOT
      gate from a single NAND gate; armed with NOT and NAND, we can directly implement
      all the usual binary Boolean functions, since e.g. x AND y = NOT (x NAND y) and
      x OR y = NAND (NOT x) (NOT y).

                                                     x
      x                     NAND              z                       NAND                    NOT            z
                                                     y

                   (1) z = NOT x                                  (2) z = x AND y

                            x                  NOT
                                                                   NAND                   z
                            y                  NOT

                                                   (3) z = x OR y

          In most devices, however, the outputs are not purely a function of the inputs:
      there is also some internal state. By wiring together four NAND gates in a crossover
      configuration, we can create a so-called latch: a circuit with two inputs (data and
      enable) and one output where the output “remembers” what its data input was the
      last time the enable input was high:3

          2 For any given concrete function, it is entirely possible that we can design a circuit that implements

      that function using fewer transistors than the one built from NAND gates. The point here is that via the
      NAND gate’s universality, we can show that any function can be built just by wiring together transistors,
      without needing any other components.
          3 More specifically, this configuration is called a D latch. Other latch types with slightly different

      behavior are also used in circuit design; for example, an SR latch also has two inputs, but the output
      “remembers” which of the two inputs was last seen high.

                d
                                    NAND
                                                         NAND                  q

                                                         NAND
                                    NAND
                e

        Adding one more NAND gate, we can build a flip-flop: a latch that is triggered not
    by a high enable input, but by the enable input (called the clock in this case) changing
    from low to high. As we will see in chapter 4, clocks are essential to compositional
    circuit design.

         d
                                              NAND
                                                                 NAND                  q

       clk

                                                                 NAND
                                              NAND
                             NOT

        To summarize, it is possible to build this tower of abstractions where the higher
    levels correspond to the purely functional and the stateful parts of a given device’s
    intended behavior, but at its foundation, everything is built up of the same basic
    element of the NAND gate.

1.2 Field-programmable Gate Arrays
    The rest of this book is about building even higher abstractions to make it manage-
    able to design large circuits that implement complicated behavior. But once we have

such a design, how are we going to turn that into physical hardware?
    As we have seen, one solution would be to climb all the way down into the
world of transistors, and wire them together. This is exactly what happens in
traditional chip design: the output of the development work is the placement and
connection of every single transistor, in a blueprint that is then shrunk down onto
silicon wafers. The high-level design happens within the confines of the digital
abstraction, but since the end result is a physical artifact, it will be subject to all laws
of physics, not just the ones we’d like to apply: part of the design work is to address
the electrical requirements of maintaining the digital abstraction. The cost of a full
roundtrip from design to physical chip is enormous: depending on the details of
the manufacturing process, it can cost millions of dollars. This is very different
from the world of software, where a full from-scratch compilation of a program is
essentially free.
    The alternative is to develop using a so-called field-programmable gate array, or
FPGA for short. As the name implies, an FPGA is a large number of logic gates
where the connections between the gates can be set “in the field”, i.e. after the
manufacturing process. From the outside, an FPGA looks like any other fixed-layout
chip, but internally, the connections between the gates are configured electronically
from an uploaded schematic. Trying out a new design is as simple as recompiling
the design into its low-level gate-by-gate representation, running a tool that creates
a circuit layout confirming to the intended connections, and uploading this new
layout. Functionally, it’s like having our own chip factory!
    The compromise in FPGAs is that the programmable interconnects are much
more complicated than fixed traces: they use up some of our transistor budget. The
consequence is that an FPGA is more expensive (per unit) and uses more power
than a purpose-built chip. It is also not quite a standalone component: since the
whole point is to keep the configuration dynamic, external support elements are
needed to provide the programming at power-up.
    These drawbacks are less relevant to us in this book:

      • Unit cost: we are not interested in designing for manufacturing, but in creating
        one-off circuits. Furthermore, our designs are simple and small enough that
        they use a small number of components, fitting onto low-tier hobbyist FPGAs
        instead of the expensive, top-of-the-line, very fast, very large offerings.
      • Power consumption: we will not design for embedded applications, and be-
        cause we will be implementing old computers that were very slow compared
        to today, our designs will not need to run anywhere near the power/heat
        limits of today’s FPGAs.
      • Supporting circuitry: tying back to building one-offs, we will use pre-made
        development boards instead of designing our own purpose-built PCBs around

            bare FPGA chips. These off-the-shelf development boards contain everything
            needed to make the FPGA work, freeing us up to care only about the circuit
            design inside the FPGA.

1.2.1 From design to a network of NANDs
      Suppose we design a circuit that has 16 inputs and 25 outputs: the inputs are
      grouped into two 8-bit numbers x and y, and the output consists of the bits of
      (complement x, complement y, x + y). The third component of the output, x + y,
      is 9 bits long, to account for the possibility of carry.
          We have already seen how to use one NAND gate per bit for the complement. For
      the addition, we start with adding just two one-bit values: the so-called half adder:

                             x

                                                  XOR               z
                             y

                                                  AND               c

         To extend this to multiple bits, we need a way to propagate the carry outputs
      from lower bits to higher ones. A full adder has an additional third input for the
      carry-in, i.e. the carry-out from the lower bit-pair:

              c
              x                                         ADD   z                   z

                                 ADD   z                 c
              y                   c

                                                                    OR            c'

          We can build circuits for AND, OR, and XOR using 2, 3 and 4 NANDs respectively.
      This gives us a total NAND count of 6 for the half-adder, and so 15 for the full adder.
      Alternatively, by breaking the abstractions, we can use just 9 NAND gates to implement
      the same functionality (in this diagram, every gate is a NAND gate, so we omit labels
      to save on space):

c

x                                                                                      z
y

                                                                                       c'

   Regardless of which implementation we use for our full adder, we can then
build the 8-bit adder by connecting 8 of our full adders in a so-called ripple-carry
configuration:

                   x7        y7               x1        y1     x0         y0

                   c' ADDC c        ...       c' ADDC c        c    ADD

                        z                          z                 z

          z8            z7                         z1               z0

   We are now ready to assemble our complete circuit, using the components
defined above:

                             8                           8
                                          8xNOT

                             8                           8
                                          8xNOT

                                                         9
                                          ADD8

          The slashes on the lines here emphasize the fact that each line actually corre-
      sponds to multiple (8 or 9) wires. Pretending that we have “wide” (multi-bit) lines
      (called buses) is a very useful abstraction in avoiding clutter. In fact, it is so useful,
      that in the rest of this book we will use it all the time without using these bus marker
      slashes to distinguish them; one-bit lines will be thought of as degenerate buses that
      just happen to be one-bit wide.
          What this final image tells us is that we can take 8 · 1 + 8 · 1 + 8 · 9 = 88 NAND
      gates, connect them in the configuration that we see when all the abstract boxes
      are inlined, and the resulting 16-input 25-output circuit will implement our desired
      behavior.

1.2.2 Lookup tables as basic elements
      Since the complicated part of an FPGA is the electronically configurable routing
      between elements, and of course the more elements we have, the more routing is
      needed between them, it makes sense to reduce that complexity by using fewer,
      larger elements. This is why FPGAs are not called field-programmable transistor
      arrays: although everything is built from transistors, the basic unit of addressing
      is not a single transistor, but larger elements built from it. The idea is that for any
      circuit we would actually want to design, it will have a lot more structure than just
      a network of transistors.
          Looking at our previous example, suppose we also have NOT gates as basic
      elements, still implemented with a single NAND gate internally. While this doesn’t
      save on the total number of NAND gates, it does cut down on the number of junctions:
      in contrast to a NAND element that has three leads connected in a certain way to
      implement a NOT gate, a dedicated NOT element only has two leads. Thus, for the 16
      NOT gates, the number of junctions goes down from 16 · 3 = 48 to 16 · 2 = 32.
          We can save a lot more junctions if we also have full adders as basic elements,
      since now we only need routing between 16 + 8 = 24 elements instead of the original
      88.
          In this hypothetical example, the reduction in routing was achieved by the design
      of the circuit matching the underlying FPGA’s structure perfectly: the FPGA had
      NOT gates and full adders as basic elements, and our circuit trivially decomposed
      into complements and addition. But the whole point of an FPGA is to be versatile.
          The answer to this seeming contradiction is to make the basic elements them-
      selves configurable. On an FPGA, instead of using fixed-function gates like NOT or
      ADD, each basic element is a tiny piece of memory called a lookup table (LUT for short)
      that is initialized together with the inter-element connections. For example, if each
      element is a memory with 3 address bits and 2 data bits, we can put a 3 × 2 lookup
      table into it. That is good for two NOT gates, or one full adder.

    In the following diagram, the 2xNOT, ADD, and ADDC blocks all refer to 3 × 2 LUTs
loaded with the truth table of two parallel NOT gates, a half-adder, and a full adder,
respectively. Unused inputs and outputs (such as the third input of a 2xNOT element)
are omitted.

                 x0
                                                     2xNOT
                 y0

                                        ADD

                 x1
                                                     2xNOT
                 y1

                                        ADDC

                                          ..
                                           .
                 x7
                                                     2xNOT
                 y7

                                        ADDC

    So now we can take just 8 + 8 = 16 elements to implement our circuit, without
requiring the FPGA to be designed with prescience to our intended use case. On the
other hand, we have now introduced additional complexity to the design process
itself. Although our problem statement was “the bits are complemented”, we now

      need to group that into two-bit units just to get better resource utilization. Then
      a new FPGA model comes out with 3-output basic elements, and now we need to
      rework our design to take advantage of being able to put three NOT gates on one
      lookup table.
          What happens in practice is that the details of lookup table dimensions and
      routing distances are hidden from the developer, and handled by vendor- and
      model-specific toolchains. We write our circuit in terms of one-bit NOT gates, and
      let the compiler (commonly called synthesizer in the FPGA context) figure out the
      nicest way to map that onto the elements available on our target FPGA.4

1.2.3 FPGAs as hardware gadgets
      Now that we have an idea of what goes on inside an FPGA, what is it actually, as
      a physical device? Although we include many simulators in this book, ultimately,
      the payoff is in synthesizing and uploading the designs into FPGAs. So what does
      that look like?
           For development purposes, our best bet is to get an FPGA development board
      aimed at educational uses: a standalone hardware gadget that contains the FPGA;
      its support components such as flash ROM that will store its configuration between
      power cycles; some hardware peripherals like pushbuttons, toggle switches, LEDs,
      or seven-segment displays; connectors in standard format for further peripherals
      like USB for input devices or VGA for video output; a USB connector to upload the
      synthesis result from a computer; and some way of powering the board when not
      connected to a computer, usually in the form of a micro-USB socket or simple DC
      input.
           Development boards are useful for us because they take care of all the electronic
      concerns that are outside the scope of this book. For example, lighting an LED on
      the board is as simple as setting the appropriate output pin’s value to high, without
      having to worry about voltage levels and making sure the current won’t be too large
      to fry the LED. They are also satisfyingly tactile: unlike a PC expansion card, we can
      hold the whole thing in our hands, disconnect it from the programming computer,
      and enjoy that it really is a standalone circuit that does everything by its own power.

1.2.4 Toolchains
      In the software development world, we are used to open source, standardized
      compiler toolchains. Unfortunately, this is not at all the case for FPGAs. Each FPGA
          4 Just like in software, squeezing out the maximum performance sometimes requires reaching

      through abstractions and taking into account the specifics of the target device. One advantage of re-
      producing old computers is that in this book, we will not get even close to needing to do that.

      vendor provides its own synthesis toolchain, containing a ton of model-specific
      knowledge.
          The normal way of interacting with the toolchain is by writing the circuit de-
      scription in a hardware description language (commonly abbreviated as HDL). The
      two big players in this space are VHDL and Verilog: both have IEEE standards
      describing them. The VHDL or Verilog input is then processed by vendor-specific
      tools, mapping parts of the circuit to various elements of the given FPGA model,
      and then producing an opaque binary blob called a bitfile, which can be uploaded
      with an (again, vendor-specific) tool to the FPGA.
          Since all intermediate representations are non-standard and proprietary, any-
      thing we want to do will have to go via HDL. We can think of the situation similar
      to how we can use any programming language to run in the browser, as long as it is
      JavaScript. If we want to use some other language, our program has to be translated
      to JavaScript. This translation can be simple and direct, with the output being in
      direct correspondence with the input (e.g. TypeScript); or it can be very involved, as
      in the case of GHCJS that compiles Haskell into JavaScript.
          Due to this non-standard, highly vendor-specific nature of the development
      environments, in this book, we will not look beyond creating the HDL source (and
      we will not even write any HDL by hand), and will assume the reader has read
      up on the specifics in the documentation provided with their FPGA development
      boards.

1.3   Retrocomputing
      The motivating examples in this book all fall into one of two categories: simple
      circuits that demonstrate a single functionality, and complex, fully-worked-out sys-
      tems based on old computers. “Old” can mean different things to different people;
      for us, it means the time period when computers just started entering the lives of
      everyday people: the late seventies arcade machines and home computers.
          It would be a lie to say that this choice has nothing to do with the author’s age and
      childhood. However, there are two objective benefits to studying old computers:

            • CPUs and computers that were considered simple and cheap even in their
              own time were designed by very small teams, sometimes individuals. This
              makes it possible to understand them holistically.

            • The performance gap between then and now is so large, that we can get
              something working without having to worry about doing everything the most
              efficient way. The goal of this book is not to train professional hardware
              designers, but to learn about quaint old computers and to write down what

             we learn in code that is not only functionally correct, but also nicely readable
             and concise for humans.
         None of the techniques explored in this book are specific to retrocomputing;
      however, there are certainly some modern areas we don’t venture into. As an
      example, we never even consider pipelined CPU designs.

1.4   Haskell meets Hardware
      Since Verilog and VHDL, the two standardized hardware description languages, are
      the lingua franca of FPGA toolchains, if we want to use Haskell as a “better HDL”,
      we need a way to meet the toolchains on their own turf. The two approaches to this
      are as an embedded DSL (e.g. Lava), or as a compilation target (e.g. Clash).

1.4.1 Lava
      In the Lava approach5 , the role of Haskell is that of a macro language: the library
      provides types corresponding to circuit fragments, and combinators over these
      types, and the ambient Haskell language can be used in building abstractions for
      how these fragments are put together. Internally, signals are represented as data
      that describes their definitions; to create the HDL output, we write a Haskell pro-
      gram that uses the Lava entry point that traverses that description for the value
      representing our complete circuit design, and then when we run that program, it
      writes out a file containing Verilog or VHDL source.
          Because the primitives exposed by Lava correspond directly to the primitives
      of the target HDL, it is easy to track provenance of the output. Error messages, or
      results from downstream testing tools, are straightforward to interpret in the context
      of the source code. Of course, this correspondence becomes less straightforward as
      the Haskell code that generates that final circuit value becomes more involved; but
      even then, since the HDL output is created by running our program, we can use
      Haskell-runtime debugging tools to do further tracking.
          Pushing further, since we have a Turing-complete macro language with rich types
      in the form of Haskell, we can fully automate source code creation, for example by
      writing an interpreter from our own high-level description into Lava code. Since
      the interpreter runs before the output HDL is consumed, there is no limitation in
      the structures that can be generated, and no interpretation overhead in the resulting
      HDL.
          On the flip side, Lava is a first-order language over primitive HDL types only.
      We can use arbitrary Haskell types to drive our macro code, but the result is com-
         5 There has been several dialects of Lava since its original 1998 paper, resulting in a whole family of

      implementations. At the level of granularity in this chapter, they can all be regarded as the same.

     pletely disconnected from these types. For example, there is no concept of defining
     algebraic datatypes, or pattern matching on them, in Lava. There is no way to lift
     functions on pure values to functions on signals, short of generating a small ROM
     containing the complete graph of the function as a lookup table.

1.4.2 Clash
     The Clash approach uses GHC as a compiler frontend, consuming its Core interme-
     diate language, inlining definitions to dissolve recursion, and mapping the result to
     HDL constructs. In this model, we write straight Haskell code, and then compile it
     with Clash instead of GHC.
        This results in the ability to use all features of Haskell in our circuit descriptions.
     Our circuits can be pure functions, or, if state is needed, we use the built-in Signal
     type constructor, which is an applicative functor, allowing pure Haskell function
     definitions to be lifted to the world of signals. Signals can contain arbitrary Haskell
     types: the Clash compiler applies supercompilation techniques to get rid of in-
     termediate signals of non-representable contents. For example, in something this
     simple:

      (&&) <$> xs <*> ys

     the result of (&&) <$> xs is of type Signal dom (Bool -> Bool), but we don’t need
     to worry about time-varying functions, since the full term is a Signal dom Bool
     where the function is statically known to be the logical-AND function.
         One drawback of this methodology is that some generalizations require quite
     involved type-level programming, compared to the Lava/DSL approach where ul-
     timately, we’re stitching together term-level HDL fragments. We will see quite early
     in this book that for most uses, lists have to be replaced by length-indexed vectors,
     to ensure they can be manipulated with circuits of statically known size. In chap-
     ter 14, we will also encounter a situation where Clash’s supercompilation technique
     is simply not sophisticated enough to deal with certain recursively defined, but
     finite, circuits.
         Nevertheless, this book puts its vote down firmly for Clash. One reason for
     this is that the intended audience is already familiar with Haskell and regards the
     type-level programming bits as fun and not scary at all. The second reason is that
     algebraic datatypes and pattern matching are simply too painful to live without.
     Starting at chapter 6, most of our circuit design will be based on translating input
     signals into a circuit-specific datatype, and consuming values of that datatype in
     the main state transition function.
