                                                   11
                                    Programmable Machines

    Ever since Church and Turing showed that the lambda calculus and Turing ma-
    chines are equivalent in the class of computation they can express, a huge number
    of Turing-complete models of computation has been discovered and invented. From
    Post’s correspondence problem to the collectible card game Magic the Gathering to
    Diophantine equations, there is no shortage of systems that can be used to imple-
    ment computation including universality, i.e. the ability to input the program to run
    as part of the input. However, unless one is specifically researching computability,
    there are three specific models of computation that are widely used:

       • Turing machines are the gold standard when it comes to concrete calcula-
         tions involving program size and execution time. If we want to do meta-
         computational calculations like the Busy Beaver function or upper bounds on
         Kolmogorov complexity and get actual numbers, Turing machines are the way
         to go.
       • Functional programming as a whole is based on the lambda calculus. A lot
         of programming language theory is interested in various restrictions of the
         lambda calculus to avoid divergent programs while still allowing expressing
         a large class of the convergent ones; and a lot of compiler research has gone
         into efficiently implementing functional languages.
       • And then there are RAM machines, which are basically modeling how real
         digital electronic computers work, modulo some mathematical abstractions.

       Based on this characterization, it shouldn’t come as a surprise that the com-
    puters we’ll be implementing in this book, whether independent designs or re-
    implementations of historical computers, are going to be based on the RAM machine
    model.

11.1 RAM machines
    Instead of giving a fully formal definition that nails down all the details of some par-
    ticular variant of RAM machines, here we are going to give an informal description

         of the computational model we’ll be using. Committing to details wouldn’t serve
         us too well because we are not going to implement the RAM machine in hardware;
         instead, in later chapters we are going to implement various practical designs based
         on this model.

11.1.1   Definition
         In its simplest form, a RAM machine consists of a collection of uniform registers
         called the memory, a list of instructions called the program, and a program counter
         indexing into the program.

            • The memory is a numbered list of registers 𝑚 = ⟨𝑚1 , . . .⟩. In theoretical mod-
              els aiming at Turing-completeness, usually a finite number of cells are used,
              with each one holding a natural number; but the opposite approach (an infinite
              number of finitely-sized registers) can also work. Machines that are designed
              to be implemented in the physical world (using e.g. digital electronics) have
              to use a finite register size and a finite number of registers.

            • The program is a finite, numbered list of instructions 𝑝 = ⟨𝑝1 , . . . , 𝑝 𝑘 ⟩. The
              details of the instruction set is the biggest source of variability between var-
              ious models all usually called RAM machines. The basic idea behind RAM
              machines, and what separates them from so-called register machines, is that
              there are instructions that operate via pointer indirection: for example, instead
              of only having instructions that say 𝑚 𝑖 ← 𝑚 𝑖 + 1: “increment by one the value
              of 𝑚 𝑖 ”, we can also have [𝑚 𝑖 ] ← [𝑚 𝑖 ] + 1: “increment by one the value of the
              cell whose number is in 𝑚 𝑖 ”.

            • The program counter is an index into the program, i.e. either a value between
              1 and 𝑘, or some other value in which case there is no way to keep running the
              machine: it is in a halted state. The program counter is incremented by one in
              each step of execution for most instructions; but to be Turing-complete, there
              needs to be at least one instruction that changes the program counter condi-
              tionally. For example, we can have a direct branch if 𝑚 𝑖 = 0 then goto 𝑙 or
              an indirect one if [𝑚 𝑖 ] = 0 then goto 𝑙.

             Some RAM machine models, in an effort to more closely model real-life hard-
         ware, have a separate accumulator register 𝑎, and require arithmetic calculations and
         pointer dereferencing to go through that. In this model, there are no operations
         of the form 𝑚 𝑖 ← 𝑓 (𝑚 𝑗 ); instead, there is a pair of load/store instructions 𝑎 ← 𝑚 𝑖
         and 𝑚 𝑖 ← 𝑎 (and 𝑎 ← [𝑚 𝑖 ] and [𝑚 𝑖 ] ← 𝑎 if indirect addressing is supported), and
         everything else is of the form 𝑎 ← 𝑓 (𝑎).

             This is not a restriction on what computations these machines can express; in
         fact, there is no fundamental extra power from pointer indirection at all. Just the
         following three, direct-addressed instructions are already enough for universality:

            • 𝑚𝑖 ← 𝑚𝑖 + 1
            • 𝑚𝑖 ← 𝑚𝑖 1
            • if 𝑚 𝑖 = 0 then goto 𝑙

            However, indirect operations can greatly increase efficiency, since a single in-
         direct function application — when simulated using direct operations — would
         require 𝑂(𝑛) instructions, and would run in 𝑂(𝑛) steps. In practical terms, this
         speedup comes “for free”, since real-world memory elements support the random-
         access indexing operation needed to implement indirect access.

11.1.2   Harvard vs. von Neumann architecture
         One detail we have completely skipped over in our definition above is where the
         program is stored and how it is accessed.
             In the simpler case, the program “just is”: it is given as an external list of
         instructions, and only the program counter is changing as the machine runs our
         program. This setup, where program is stored somewhere outside the main mem-
         ory, accessed read-only via the program counter, is called the Harvard architecture.
         This approach is commonly used in microcontrollers with internal flash memory
         storing the firmware.
             In contrast, the von Neumann architecture stores its program in main memory,
         so there is no separate program storage and the program counter is just another
         memory address. In this setup, instructions need to have an encoding that allows
         using memory cells to represent them. One exciting aspect of this approach is that
         code becomes data becomes code, opening the door to self-modifying programs.
         Generic-purpose processors usually go with this architecture.

11.2 Memory
         One central feature of all computational models discussed so far is the memory:
         an addressable, mutable container of uniformly typed values. Let’s try writing
         some Clash code that implements such a container. First of all, let’s think about
         an interface that would make sense. The inputs are going to be the read and write
         requests: a read request is simply an address, while a write request (if there is one) is
         a pair of target address and new value. The output is the result of the read request.
             Summarizing the above, our aim is to implement something with the following
         type:

         type R dom addr = Signal dom (Index addr)
         type W dom addr dat = Signal dom (Maybe (Index addr, dat))
         type RAM dom addr dat = R dom addr -> W dom addr dat -> Signal dom dat

11.2.1   Implementing our own RAM
         Perhaps the most straightforward way of implementing memory is to take the
         description of “collection of registers” literally: a memory of 𝑛 cells then becomes
         𝑛 separate registers, each one initialized to some default value, updating when the
         write request targets it, and returning its value when the read address matches its
         index. Then the read output of the whole memory is the read result of the single
         memory cell that is currently selected.

         enable :: (Applicative f) => f Bool -> f a -> f (Maybe a)
         enable en x = mux en (Just <$> x) (pure Nothing)

         ram
             :: (HiddenClockResetEnable dom, KnownNat addr, NFDataX dat)
             => dat
             -> RAM dom addr dat
         ram initial rd wr = foldl (liftA2 fromMaybe) (pure undefined) cells
           where
             cell i = enable (rd .== i) r
               where
                 r = regMaybe initial (update <$> wr)

                    update (Just (addr, val)) | addr == i = Just val
                    update _ = Nothing

               cells = map cell indicesI

             Alternatively, we can turn the design above inside-out, and have a register
         storing all the cell values in a single, large vector. In this approach, reading becomes
         a simple matter of Signal-lifted indexing, and writing is implemented by replacing
         the vector with an updated one.1

         ram
               :: (HiddenClockResetEnable dom, KnownNat addr, NFDataX dat)
               => dat
               -> RAM dom addr dat

             1 Unfortunately, the type of Clash’s replace function is very liberal in what types can be used to pick

         the updated element; hence the need for the type signatures on update and step.

       ram initial rd wr = storage .!!. rd
         where
           storage = register (repeat initial) (update <$> wr <*> storage)

              update :: (KnownNat n) => Maybe (Index n, a) -> Vec n a -> Vec n a
              update = maybe id (uncurry replace)

11.2.2 The need for Clash memory primitives
       If we try using the above two definitions of ram, a multitude of problems arise:

           • Performance of simulation in Clash is bad (especially for our first version)
           • The synthesis tools running after Clash to produce the final FPGA configura-
             tion slow down considerably
           • The resulting FPGA configuration is very wasteful of hardware parts

           This last part is the real kicker: depending on the specifics of the FPGA targeted,
       even a modest RAM of 1000 bytes can be beyond capacity (in practice, the first,
       many-register version of ram seems to be performing worse in this regard as well).
       The two approaches presented in the previous section simply won’t work for pretty
       much anything we would like to build.
           The reason for all these shortcomings is that the building blocks that are used to
       implement an RTL design are simply much more versatile than what we need here.
       A real FPGA hardware has a set amount of circuitry organized in units that each can
       support an RTL design of some limited number of register size and combinational
       circuit depth. Larger RTL registers can be split “horizontally” across such units, and
       deeper combinational circuits can be mapped to multiple units connected serially2 .
       But just because the combinational circuitry is “simple”, this can’t necessarily be
       exploited to use something smaller than whole units.
           Instead, we are going to use the built-in memory primitives of Clash that are
       then implemented by utilizing specialized memory hardware on the FPGA chip.
       These parts have a much simpler and more regular structure than the units usable
       as RTL building blocks, since their circuitry is hardwired for the RAM behavior
       we tried to model above. The total size of these so-called block RAM parts varies
       by FPGA chip, but in general they are always orders of magnitude larger than the
       memory one could possibly implement using general-purpose RTL registers on the
       same chip. If a 1000 bytes of hand-built RAM would take up all space on a chip,
       maybe 100 kilobytes would fit in its block RAM, of course also leaving free all the
       logic parts for the rest of the design.
          2 This increases the propagation delay of the circuit end-to-end, but as we’ve seen earlier, the RTL

       model abstracts that away.

             In summary, we are always going to use the Clash memory primitives instead
         of hand-written RTL models. There are multiple functions provided, for read-only
         vs. mutable memory, for uniformly initialized vs. memory that is initialized to hold
         the contents of a given file, and for synchronous vs. asynchronous memory.

11.2.3   Synchronous vs. asynchronous memory
         Yes, this is the third time in this book that we make a distinction between syn-
         chronous and asynchronous designs of something. It seems for something to be a
         valid area of study in digital electronics, it needs to have its own definition of what
         to call synchronous versus asynchronous.
              In the context of memory design, we call a memory interface asynchronous if
         changing the read address prompts an “immediate” change in the read value. Of
         course, in a real physical circuit nothing is immediate: what is meant here is that
         the change occurs as fast as possible, inside the given clock period. In contrast, a
         synchronous RAM design will respond to changes on its address pins at the next
         clock cycle: the value output by the RAM is what is stored at whatever address was
         put on its input one cycle ago. Working with the synchronous interface is a bit more
         tedious than its asynchronous counterpart, but block RAM hardware implements
         synchronous memory, so that is what we need to use to access it with its benefits:
         large capacity without using up any parts usable for our circuit’s logic.
              A further possibility is to use RAM which is much slower than synchronous,
         i.e. something where there can be quite a large number of cycles of delay between
         a read request and its result being available. This style of memory is what is used
         in all modern computers: CPUs have become significantly faster than memory,
         necessitating multiple levels of caching to get good performance from the complete
         system. This adds substantial complication to CPU design, and we are not going
         to address it in this book. Here, we are interested in the decade of classic home
         computers from the late ’70s to the early ’80s, when RAM and CPU ran in lockstep.

11.2.4 Clash's memory primitives
         Based on what we discussed so far, and planning for implementing computers
         that originally had separate ROM and uninitialized RAM chips, we will use the
         following functions from the Clash Prelude:

         blockRam1
             :: (HiddenClockResetEnable dom, NFDataX a, Enum addr, 1 <= n)
             => ResetStrategy r -> SNat n -> a
             -> Signal dom addr -> Signal dom (Maybe (addr, a)) -> Signal dom a

         romFile
             :: (HiddenClockResetEnable dom, KnownNat n, KnownNat m)
             => SNat n -> FilePath
             -> Signal dom (Unsigned n) -> Signal dom (BitVector m)

             Clash offers more flexibility than what we will need: blockRam1 is very liberal in
         the type used for addressing, accepting any Enumerable type; on the other hand, the
         file-initialized memory primitives insist on exposing their result as a raw BitVector,
         to avoid baking in any convention about how to interpret the initializer file’s contents.
         This initializer file is in a very simple text format, where each line contains 𝑚 number
         of bits, each written as the character 0 or 1.
             Just to show that we haven’t lost anything when moving to using these memory
         primitives, we can massage blockRam1 into exactly the same format as our hand-
         written RAM implementations using mostly just unification, and not initializing the
         cell values at all:

         ram
             :: forall addr dat dom.
                ( HiddenClockResetEnable dom
                , KnownNat addr, 1 <= addr, NFDataX dat)
             => RAM dom addr dat
         ram = blockRam1 NoClearOnReset (SNat @addr) undefined

11.2.5   Memory maps and address decoding
         Let’s suppose we are building a computer based on the von Neumann architecture:
         program is stored in main memory, accessed just like any other cells. We can’t use
         ROM as the main memory, because then the CPU is unable to change anything; we
         might as well not even turn on the machine, since nothing is going to change by
         letting it run. On the other hand, if we use RAM as the main memory, how do we
         get the program we want to run onto the CPU? When we turn the computer on, the
         CPU will start fetching its first instruction from some initial address, but since that
         address is now pointing to uninitialized RAM, it will start executing garbage.
             To get around this, it is quite common on von Neumann architectures to have
         ROM around the address where the CPU fetches its initial instruction, to provide
         enough code to bootstrap the computer; and RAM elsewhere. In fact, the von
         Neumann computers we are going to be building in this book all have extensive
         ROM to contain the code for whole games and operating systems. But this means we
         need extra circuitry called an address decoder that routes memory data lines according
         to the value of the memory address lines. A so-called memory map describes the
         assignment of addresses to RAM or ROM. In a physical device, there might be

      multiple memory chips (for example, implementing 64 kB RAM using four 16 kB
      RAM chips), requiring further address decoding.
          Going by just the definition of a RAM machine, we get a device that keeps
      reading from and writing to memory, but has no effects observable on the outside.
      A physical implementation of such a machine would only produce heat. An easy
      way around this that doesn’t require any change to the computational model, is to
      make memory observable on the outside. Even better, we can avoid the clutter of
      memory cells used as temporary storage by saying that we are going to connect only
      certain parts of memory to the outside world.
          And so we can make a table of outside-observable memory addresses that assigns
      an intended meaning to each cell. We can make it even more flexible by not using
      memory for certain cells at all; instead, we can connect peripheral devices to those
      addresses. Accessing these cells corresponds to sending to or receiving a message
      from the given peripheral device. This is called memory-mapped I/O and it is a very
      straightforward way of doing input and output without having to modify the CPU,
      just by hooking up the peripherals to the address decoder.
          Note that the address decoder can easily have access to the CPU’s write-enable
      output as well, allowing read and write requests to the same address to be serviced
      by different devices, or the same device but with different effect. On some computer
      designs, a read memory access on a peripheral triggers some side-effect on that
      device.
          Some example ideas for memory-mapped I/O, using peripherals we have al-
      ready encountered:

         • Show status information on LEDs. Simply make a single one-cell-sized register
           that is connected to the address decoder’s data lines and some physical pins
           that are routed to LEDs.

         • Similarly, we can connect an array of two-state switches directly to a single,
           read-only cell.

         • Keyboards can be scanned by assigning one write-only address to the column
           selector and one read-only address to the row input. The program running
           on the CPU is responsible for appropriately driving the column selector and
           interpreting the resulting row.

         • A “smarter” keyboard that does its own sweeping and housekeeping and
           exposes a read-only memory area that contains the last scanned key states.

          The address decoder need not be static. In fact, we can even connect it through
      itself to the CPU, so that writing to a specific address changes the address decoder’s
      behavior. This can be used to implement memory bank switching: connecting more

         memory to the CPU than its address space permits. For example, if we have a
         64 kB address space and want to access 64 kB of RAM, but also need 16 kB ROM
         for booting and OS routines, we can use a dynamic address decoder that starts out
         with 48 kB RAM and 16 kB ROM mapped, but allows programs to turn off ROM
         access temporarily by writing to a special memory location, switching to 64 kB RAM
         accessible.

11.3     CPU
         In other chapters, we implement specific pieces of hardware, and then combine them
         into various devices, either designed from scratch, or aiming to match the behavior
         of some existing machine. For CPUs, we have to proceed slightly differently, since
         there is no the CPU we can implement with some parameterization: every CPU
         design is different. Because of this, we are going to sketch here a possible large-
         scale design for CPU circuitry, but the details are going to be filled in when we
         create our first concrete CPU in the next chapter.

11.3.1   The basic shape of a CPU
         The RAM machine model suggests a design for the CPU that has some internal state
         (at the very least, the program counter) and communicates with mutable RAM and
         some store of program (which might be the same as the main RAM, depending on
         the architecture). To execute one program instruction, the CPU must fetch the next
         instruction and interpret it; read from and write to RAM as needed; and update its
         program counter. Since we are aiming to use synchronous memory in lockstep with
         the CPU, most instructions will require execution spanning multiple clock periods:

           1. The next instruction’s address has to be placed on the program store’s address
              input.
           2. The program store’s output now has the next instruction. This needs to be
              decoded by the CPU to figure out what to do next. Depending on the design,
              some or all instructions might be wider than the unit of storage in the program
              store. In this case, it can take several clock periods just to find out what the
              next instruction is.
           3. Some instructions only change the internal state. For example, in an accumu-
              lator design, the instruction 𝑎 ← 𝑓 (𝑎) only changes an internal register. These
              instructions can be done in the same cycle as fetching / decoding. However,
              instructions that read from RAM will need more cycles. For example, 𝑎 ← 𝑚 𝑖
              requires putting 𝑖 on the address input of RAM, and waiting for the next
              period to get the result.

        4. Generic indirect addressing adds yet more latency. For example, to implement
           𝑎 ← [𝑚 𝑖 ], we first request 𝑖 from RAM as in step 3, but then the result 𝑚 𝑖 ,
           once available, is fed back as the next address to become available in the
           subsequent period. This can be avoided if the instruction set only allows for
           indirect addressing in the form of [𝑎], since 𝑎 is a register available to the CPU
           for immediate reading.
        5. The story is similar for writing to RAM. Depending on the specifics of our
           machine, it might be possible to implement direct writes like 𝑚 𝑖 ← 𝑎 in the
           same cycle as the next instruction fetch (but this can get hairy in von Neumann
           machines where a given memory write might affect the next instruction to be
           fetched). But for an indirect write like [𝑚 𝑖 ] ← 𝑎, we need an extra period to
           first read out 𝑚 𝑖 , just like for an indirect read.
        6. The program counter is updated to point at the next instruction. Since the
           program counter is stored internally, this doesn’t need its own clock cycle;
           instead, the program store’s address input can simply be fed from the updated
           program counter, thereby equating this last period with the very first period
           of the next instruction.

          So what do we see in this abstract description of the various clock cycles needed
      for a single instruction?

         • Writing it out as a sequence of steps is easy on paper, but in a circuit each clock
           cycle looks the same, unless we keep track of the various phases of execution.
           The implicit state of “where are we in the process of executing an instruction”
           needs to become an explicit state stored in an explicit register, updated in each
           cycle so that in the next cycle we can dispatch to the correct behavior for that
           period.

         • Some instructions require multiple reads from the program store. For example,
           if we have instructions of the form 𝑎 ← 𝑎 + 𝑘, this might be stored in the
           program store as one word containing the tag for this instruction, and the next
           one containing the value of 𝑘. As we fetch this second word, we still need
           to remember that we are fetching it as an argument to addition; in general,
           already-fetched parts of instructions also need to be stored in some internal
           register.

         • The phase-to-phase transitions are driven by the program itself; for example,
           we go from Fetch to ReadMem only if the fetched instruction has some memory
           access components (e.g. a direct read). If the instruction is an accumulator
           update instead, then we might bump the program counter and go to the next
           Fetch directly.

          • There is a lower bound on each instruction’s length, based on its memory
            access pattern and its data dependencies. For example, in 𝑎 ← [𝑚 𝑖 ], we need
            to wait for 𝑚 𝑖 to be read out before we can start accessing [𝑚 𝑖 ].

11.3.2 CPU state
       Based on these considerations, we can say that we are going to need to store two
       kinds of state in our CPU:

          • Proper registers propagate values between the execution of instructions. This
            can happen explicitly: for example, if the instruction set has an operation to
            “increase the accumulator”, then the accumulator’s initial value is whatever
            it was at the end of the previous instruction, and its new value is what is
            accessible to the next instruction. Other registers are accessed implicitly: the
            program counter is incremented at the end of each (non-branching) instruc-
            tion, setting the scene for the next instruction to be retrieved. Since registers
            are observable directly by the behavior of various instructions, they are part
            of the interface between processor and programmer. Thus, when we are im-
            plementing a CPU with the goal of compatibility with a pre-existing machine,
            the set of registers are decided for us by the original designers.

          • Other state pertains to the phase of execution we find the CPU in. As we have
            seen already, we don’t expect instructions to finish in a single clock period,
            so we will need to keep track of where we are in that process. This state
            is not directly addressable from the program, since programmers work at
            the level of abstraction provided by the machine instructions. As such, CPU
            implementors have greater freedom in this part of the designing.

           It should be noted that in a complete computer system containing a CPU among
       other parts, parts of the internal execution phase can still be observed. For example,
       by looking at the contents of the address bus in each clock period, we can determine
       which phases correspond to memory access.
           In this book, the final chapters will implement computers built around the
       Intel 8080 processor. However, our implementation will make no reference to
       the internal details of the original CPU from 1974. Instead, we will be content
       with just instruction-level compatibility. In other words, the registers will behave
       according to the original processor’s documentation, but there will be no one-to-
       one correspondence in individual clock cycles between our implementation and the
       reference chip. In fact, in the first version, instructions will not even have the same
       clock period length end-to-end.
           For the Space Invaders arcade machine, we can observe that this level of fidelity
       is enough simply by booting up the stock firmware, and trying it out. However,

       the Compucolor II uses precisely orchestrated cooperation between the firmware
       running on the CPU and the floppy drive to implement data transfer from and to the
       floppy disk. This will require us to revisit our original Intel 8080 implementation
       and change its microcode slightly, to ensure each instruction takes the same number
       of periods.
           Going further, the Compucolor II is a user-programmable computer, so just be-
       cause we can get to the boot-up prompt, and load some programs from floppies, that
       doesn’t tell us if there are programs out there that exploit the cycle-by-cycle details
       of instructions to implement some delicate I/O. In particular, the demo scene is noto-
       rious for squeezing out the last bit of performance from old computer platforms by
       playing all kinds of tricks including, but not limited to, precisely timed I/O strobing
       and cycle-counted program design. Programs developed for the Compucolor II
       with this approach may not work correctly on our implementation.3

11.3.3 Phases
       How the behavior of the CPU is broken down into cycles depends on the concrete
       CPU design. In the simplest case, we might be able to execute a full instruction in
       one cycle; in general, however, the execution can be decomposed into the following
       steps, where each might require separate (and maybe even multiple) cycles:

          • Fetch: Arranging for the next instruction to be available to the CPU.

          • Decode: Looking at the just-fetched opcode, decide on what needs to be done.
            Depending on the architecture, some instructions might be wider than others,
            i.e. decoding might result in further fetches.

          • Execute: The effects of an instruction can be RAM access (reading and/or
            writing), changes to the CPU’s internal state (registers), or I/O via special
            CPU pins.

           The flow of information between phases is more than just which phase we are
       in: for example, we can only execute an instruction if we know what instruction it is:
       the result of the decoding phase needs to be passed to the execution phase. Similarly,
       if we detect during decoding that we need to fetch more, we need to also persist the
       already-fetched instruction data. Depending on the specifics of our design, this can
       be done either by persisting the raw memory store contents, or the partial decoding
       results.
           The execution phase can be broken down into further sub-phases for effects
       that require multiple steps. Consider an if 𝑚 𝑖 = 0 then goto 𝑙 conditional jump
          3 This author is not aware of any demo productions for the Compucolor II

         instruction: it requires reading from RAM before (potentially) changing the internal
         program counter register. Like with most things CPU, we will discuss the details of
         this question in later chapters as we encounter various concrete CPU designs.

11.3.4 Hardwired control vs. microcode
         One important split in implementing the details of the execution phase is between
         hardwired and microcoded control. In the first case, instructions directly map to
         internal CPU state transitions to execute the desired effects. For example, we might
         have a datatype for Phase that has enough parameters to capture the behavior of
         all possible instructions, and we pick the right one in the decoding phase. This
         corresponds to hardwired control because if we look through Clash and the RTL
         abstraction, the circuit described this way is a bunch of multiplexers, the output of
         each one feeding into registers directly controlling the various execution functions.
             In contrast, a microcoded CPU is one where the problem of implementing in-
         structions is shifted to instead implementing so-called micro-operations. These
         micro-operations are primitive steps that can be done in a single cycle. Each real
         instruction is then translated into a sequence of multiple micro-operations. For ex-
         ample, if we have an instruction for 𝑚 𝑗 ← 𝑚 𝑖 + 1, we can translate it to the following
         sequence of micro-operations:

            1. Put 𝑖 onto the address bus
            2. Read from the data in bus into the internal (micro-)accumulator
            3. Increment the accumulator’s value
            4. Put 𝑗 onto the address bus and the accumulator’s value on the data out bus
            5. Do nothing for one cycle, to allow synchronous RAM to apply the write request

            In effect, a microcoded CPU is a shell around a smaller, hardwired CPU with
         a simpler instruction set, and a table mapping instructions to multiple micro-
         operations.
            In this book, we will encounter both design approaches: we will use hardwired
         control for the Brainfuck and the CHIP-8 machines, and microcode for the Intel
         8080.

11.3.5   Memory access contention
         Some hardware designs connect multiple devices to the same memory element. A
         common example of this is generating video output based on the contents of specific
         parts of the memory. In this case, both the CPU and the video signal generator need
         to be able to access the same memory. The question then is, what happens if the
         CPU and the video subsystem want to read from different addresses at the same
         time?

           We are going to solve this problem by deciding on a priority order: in this
       example, since we can’t suspend the video signal generator (it needs to produce the
       next pixel’s RGB value as the continuously sweeping electron beam passes over it),
       the CPU will have to wait. The granularity of this conflict resolution depends on
       the granularity of the memory mapping: if the video memory is implemented as
       its own RAM element, mapped to some contiguous region of the CPU’s address
       space, then a conflict arises only when, during the video signal generator’s access,
       the CPU’s address-out bus contains an address that falls into that given region.
           Some designs also allow prioritizing CPU access over the video subsystem, to
       allow uninterrupted calculations at the cost of visual glitches. In chapter 18, we
       will see that the Compucolor II allows programmers to pick the priority scheme, by
       mapping the same video memory to two different address regions: accessing it via
       one region prioritizes the video system (good for interactive applications), while
       accessing it via the other one never stalls the CPU, benefiting operations heavy on
       video memory traffic such as clearing the whole screen.

11.4   Summary
          • The RAM machine model of computation captures the essence of digital
            electronic computers.

          • The program can be stored either in main memory (von Neumann architecture)
            or in dedicated read-only memory (Harvard architecture).

          • Memory requires dedicated primitives and synchronous access to implement
            efficiently on real hardware.

          • A single address space can be used to access multiple memory and non-
            memory elements in a uniform way.

          • The CPU executes instructions by reading/writing memory, accessing inter-
            nal registers and using I/O pins. Most operations involve multiple cycles;
            this needs internal state to keep track of the various phases of execution.

          • Mapping instructions to execution actions can be done via hardwired con-
            trol or by wrapping a smaller micro-CPU and translating instructions into
            microcode running on that smaller CPU.
