                                                        Parting words

The 1970s started with the introduction of cheap, integrated circuit-based pocket
calculators and ended with home computers that made it affordable for individuals
to own a complete computer system. On the way there, video games and arcade
machines changed the entertainment landscape for generations.
    Our journey has taken us through roughly the same stops, hitting the same story
beats; but this version is a modernized retelling of this story, in a (literally) more
modern language.
    Digital electronics hardware has advanced in leaps and bounds since the seven-
ties. With this advancement came more complexity, and less overall visibility for
users and developers into what exactly goes on inside their computer. However,
these advancements are also making it possible for the individual hobbyist to recre-
ate these machines of the past on a sub-$100 FPGA development board, achieving
the deepest level of understanding a computer possible, short of worrying about
the quantum mechanical properties of individual transistors.
    The progress in hardware has also been instrumental in unlocking the full poten-
tial of higher-level programming languages like Haskell. 1985’s Miranda couldn’t
possibly have run on the Commodore 64 released in 1983; in contrast, by the time the
Haskell 98 standard was finalized, the performance of the widespread i386-based
personal computers of the late nineties were wholly adequate to run Haskell 98
implementations like GHC 4.02.
    At the time of writing this, the seventies ended 41 years ago, just as this author
was born. Maybe there will never be again a generation that just stumbles onto the
scene of computers and grows up not just with them, but in tandem with them. How-
ever, hopefully this book helps mitigating that somewhat by explaining the history
of this era with hardware descriptions that are readable, high level, executable, and
synthesizable at the same time — putting the fun of functional programming to use in
the domain of hardware.

