                                 6BPart III: Liveness, Performance, and Testing ‐ 23BChapter 11. Performance and Scalability                      137

Chapter 11. Performance and Scalability
One of the primary reasons to use threads is to improve performance.[1] Using threads can improve resource utilization
by letting applications more easily exploit available processing capacity, and can improve responsiveness by letting
applications begin processing new tasks immediately while existing tasks are still running.
[1] Some might argue this is the only reason we put up with the complexity threads introduce.

This chapter explores techniques for analyzing, monitoring, and improving the performance of concurrent programs.
Unfortunately, many of the techniques for improving performance also increase complexity, thus increasing the
likelihood of safety and liveness failures. Worse, some techniques intended to improve performance are actually
counterproductive or trade one sort of performance problem for another. While better performance is often desirable ‐
and improving performance can be very satisfying ‐ safety always comes first. First make your program right, then make
it fast ‐ and then only if your performance requirements and measurements tell you it needs to be faster. In designing a
concurrent application, squeezing out the last bit of performance is often the least of your concerns.

11.1. Thinking about Performance
Improving performance means doing more work with fewer resources. The meaning of "resources" can vary; for a given
activity, some specific resource is usually in shortest supply, whether it is CPU cycles, memory, network bandwidth, I/O
bandwidth, database requests, disk space, or any number of other resources. When the performance of an activity is
limited by availability of a particular resource, we say it is bound by that resource: CPU‐bound, database‐bound, etc.
While the goal may be to improve performance overall, using multiple threads always introduces some performance
costs compared to the single‐threaded approach. These include the overhead associated with coordinating between
threads (locking, signaling, and memory synchronization), increased context switching, thread creation and teardown,
and scheduling overhead. When threading is employed effectively, these costs are more than made up for by greater
throughput, responsiveness, or capacity. On the other hand, a poorly designed concurrent application can perform even
worse than a comparable sequential one.[2]
[2] A colleague provided this amusing anecdote: he had been involved in the testing of an expensive and complex application that managed its
work via a tunable thread pool. After the system was complete, testing showed that the optimal number of threads for the pool was . . . 1. This
should have been obvious from the outset; the target system was a single‐CPU system and the application was almost entirely CPU‐bound.

In using concurrency to achieve better performance, we are trying to do two things: utilize the processing resources we
have more effectively, and enable our program to exploit additional processing resources if they become available.
From a performance monitoring perspective, this means we are looking to keep the CPUs as busy as possible. (Of
course, this doesn't mean burning cycles with useless computation; we want to keep the CPUs busy with useful work.) If
the program is compute‐bound, then we may be able to increase its capacity by adding more processors; if it can't even
keep the processors we have busy, adding more won't help. Threading offers a means to keep the CPU(s) "hotter" by
decomposing the application so there is always work to be done by an available processor.

11.1.1. Performance Versus Scalability
Application performance can be measured in a number of ways, such as service time, latency, throughput, efficiency,
scalability, or capacity. Some of these (service time, latency) aremeasures of "how fast" a given unit of work can be
processed or acknowledged; others (capacity, throughput) are measures of "how much" work can be performed with a
given quantity of computing resources.

Scalability describes the ability to improve throughput or capacity when additional computing resources (such as
additional CPUs, memory, storage, or I/O bandwidth) are added.

Designing and tuning concurrent applications for scalability can be very different from traditional performance
optimization. When tuning for performance, the goal is usually to do the same work with less effort, such as by reusing
previously computed results through caching or replacing an O(n2) algorithm with an O(n log n) one. When tuning for
scalability, you are instead trying to find ways to parallelize the problem so you can take advantage of additional
processing resources to do more work with more resources.
These two aspects of performance ‐ how fast and how much ‐ are completely separate, and sometimes even at odds
with each other. In order to achieve higher scalability or better hardware utilization, we often end up increasing the
amount of work done to process each individual task, such as when we divide tasks into multiple "pipelined" subtasks.
138    Java Concurrency In Practice

      Ironically, many of the tricks that improve performance in single‐threaded programs are bad for scalability (see Section
      11.4.4 for an example).
      The familiar three‐tier application model ‐ in which presentation, business logic, and persistence are separated and may
      be handled by different systems ‐ illustrates how improvements in scalability often come at the expense of
      performance. A monolithic application where presentation, business logic, and persistence are intertwined would
      almost certainly provide better performance for the first unit of work than would a well‐factored multitier
      implementation distributed over multiple systems. How could it not? The monolithic application would not have the
      network latency inherent in handing off tasks between tiers, nor would it have to pay the costs inherent in separating a
      computational process into distinct abstracted layers (such as queuing overhead, coordination overhead, and data
      copying).
      However, when the monolithic system reaches its processing capacity, we could have a serious problem: it may be
      prohibitively difficult to significantly increase capacity. So we often accept the performance costs of longer service time
      or greater computing resources used per unit of work so that our application can scale to handle greater load by adding
      more resources.
      Of the various aspects of performance, the "how much" aspects ‐ scalability, throughput, and capacity ‐ are usually of
      greater concern for server applications than the "how fast" aspects. (For interactive applications, latency tends to be
      more important, so that users need not wait for indications of progress and wonder what is going on.) This chapter
      focuses primarily on scalability rather than raw single‐threaded performance.

      11.1.2. Evaluating Performance Tradeoffs
      Nearly all engineering decisions involve some form of tradeoff. Using thicker steel in a bridge span may increase its
      capacity and safety, but also its construction cost. While software engineering decisions don't usually involve tradeoffs
      between money and risk to human life, we often have less information with which to make the right tradeoffs. For
      example, the "quicksort" algorithm is highly efficient for large data sets, but the less sophisticated "bubble sort" is
      actually more efficient for small data sets. If you are asked to implement an efficient sort routine, you need to know
      something about the sizes of data sets it will have to process, along with metrics that tell you whether you are trying to
      optimize average‐case time, worst‐case time, or predictability. Unfortunately, that information is often not part of the
      requirements given to the author of a library sort routine. This is one of the reasons why most optimizations are
      premature: they are often undertaken before a clear set of requirements is available.

      Avoid premature optimization. First make it right, then make it fast ‐ if it is not already fast enough.

      When making engineering decisions, sometimes you are trading one form of cost for another (service time versus
      memory consumption); sometimes you are trading cost for safety. Safety doesn't necessarily mean risk to human lives,
      as it did in the bridge example. Many performance optimizations come at the cost of readability or maintainability ‐ the
      more "clever" or non‐obvious code is, the harder it is to understand and maintain. Sometimes optimizations entail
      compromising good object‐oriented design principles, such as breaking encapsulation; sometimes they involve greater
      risk of error, because faster algorithms are usually more complicated. (If you can't spot the costs or risks, you probably
      haven't thought it through carefully enough to proceed.)
      Most performance decisions involve multiple variables and are highly situational. Before deciding that one approach is
      "faster" than another, ask yourself some questions:
          •   What do you mean by "faster"?
          •   Under what conditions will this approach actually be faster? Under light or heavy load? With large or small data
              sets? Can you support your answer with measurements?
          •   How often are these conditions likely to arise in your situation? Can you support your answer with
              measurements?
          •   Is this code likely to be used in other situations where the conditions may be different?
          •   What hidden costs, such as increased development or maintenance risk, are you trading for this improved
              performance? Is this a good tradeoff?
      These considerations apply to any performance‐related engineering decision, but this is a book about concurrency. Why
      are we recommending such a conservative approach to optimization? The quest for performance is probably the single
      greatest source of concurrency bugs. The belief that synchronization was "too slow" led to many clever‐looking but
      dangerous idioms for reducing synchronization (such as double‐checked locking, discussed in Section 16.2.4), and is
      often cited as an excuse for not following the rules regarding synchronization. Because concurrency bugs are among the
                           6BPart III: Liveness, Performance, and Testing ‐ 23BChapter 11. Performance and Scalability      139

most difficult to track down and eliminate, however, anything that risks introducing them must be undertaken very
carefully.
Worse, when you trade safety for performance, you may get neither. Especially when it comes to concurrency, the
intuition of many developers about where a performance problem lies or which approach will be faster or more scalable
is often incorrect. It is therefore imperative that any performance tuning exercise be accompanied by concrete
performance requirements (so you know both when to tune and when to stop tuning) and with a measurement
program in place using a realistic configuration and load profile. Measure again after tuning to verify that you've
achieved the desired improvements. The safety and maintenance risks associated with many optimizations are bad
enough ‐ you don't want to pay these costs if you don't need to ‐ and you definitely don't want to pay them if you don't
even get the desired benefit.

Measure, don't guess.

There are sophisticated profiling tools on the market for measuring performance and tracking down performance
bottlenecks, but you don't have to spend a lot of money to figure out what your program is doing. For example, the free
perfbar application can give you a good picture of how busy the CPUs are, and since your goal is usually to keep the
CPUs busy, this is a very good way to evaluate whether you need performance tuning or how effective your tuning has
been.

11.2. Amdahl's Law
Some problems can be solved faster with more resources ‐ the more workers available for harvesting crops, the faster
the harvest can be completed. Other tasks are fundamentally serial ‐ no number of additional workers will make the
crops grow any faster. If one of our primary reasons for using threads is to harness the power of multiple processors, we
must also ensure that the problem is amenable to parallel decomposition and that our program effectively exploits this
potential for parallelization.
Most concurrent programs have a lot in common with farming, consisting of a mix of parallelizable and serial portions.
Amdahl's law describes how much a program can theoretically be sped up by additional computing resources, based on
the proportion of parallelizable and serial components. If F is the fraction of the calculation that must be executed
serially, then Amdahl's law says that on a machine with N processors, we can achieve a speedup of at most:

                                                                     1

As N approaches infinity, the maximum speedup converges to 1/F, meaning that a program in which fifty percent of the
processing must be executed serially can be sped up only by a factor of two, regardless of how many processors are
available, and a program in which ten percent must be executed serially can be sped up by at most a factor of ten.
Amdahl's law also quantifies the efficiency cost of serialization. With ten processors, a program with 10%serialization
can achieve at most a speedup of 5.3 (at 53% utilization), and with 100 processors it can achieve at most a speedup of
9.2 (at 9% utilization). It takes a lot of inefficiently utilized CPUs to never get to that factor of ten.
Figure 11.1 shows the maximum possible processor utilization for varying degrees of serial execution and numbers of
processors. (Utilization is defined as the speedup divided by the number of processors.) It is clear that as processor
counts increase, even a small percentage of serialized execution limits how much throughput can be increased with
additional computing resources.
140    Java Concurrency In Practice

                   Figure 11.1. Maximum Utilization Under Amdahl's Law for Various Serialization Percentages.

      Chapter 6 explored identifying logical boundaries for decomposing applications into tasks. But in order to predict what
      kind of speedup is possible from running your application on a multiprocessor system, you also need to identify the
      sources of serialization in your tasks.
      Imagine an application where N threads execute doWork in Listing 11.1, fetching tasks from a shared work queue and
      processing them; assume that tasks do not depend on the results or side effects of other tasks. Ignoring for a moment
      how the tasks get onto the queue, how well will this application scale as we add processors? At first glance, it may
      appear that the application is completely parallelizable: tasks do not wait for each other, and the more processors
      available, the more tasks can be processed concurrently. However, there is a serial component as well ‐ fetching the task
      from the work queue. The work queue is shared by all the worker threads, and it will require some amount of
      synchronization to maintain its integrity in the face of concurrent access. If locking is used to guard the state of the
      queue, then while one thread is dequeing a task, other threads that need to dequeue their next task must wait ‐ and this
      is where task processing is serialized.
      The processing time of a single task includes not only the time to execute the task Runnable, but also the time to
      dequeue the task from the shared work queue. If the work queue is a LinkedBlockingQueue, the dequeue operation
      may block less than with a synchronized LinkedList because LinkedBlockingQueue uses a more scalable algorithm,
      but accessing any shared data structure fundamentally introduces an element of serialization into a program.
      This example also ignores another common source of serialization: result handling. All useful computations produce
      some sort of result or side effectif not, they can be eliminated as dead code. Since Runnable provides for no explicit
      result handling, these tasks must have some sort of side effect, say writing their results to a log file or putting them in a
      data structure. Log files and result containers are usually shared by multiple worker threads and therefore are also a
      source of serialization. If instead each thread maintains its own data structure for results that are merged after all the
      tasks are performed, then the final merge is a source of serialization.
                            6BPart III: Liveness, Performance, and Testing ‐ 23BChapter 11. Performance and Scalability      141

Listing 11.1. Serialized Access to a Task Queue.
public class WorkerThread extends Thread {
    private final BlockingQueue<Runnable> queue;

    public WorkerThread(BlockingQueue<Runnable> queue) {
        this.queue = queue;
    }

    public void run() {
        while (true) {
            try {
                Runnable task = queue.take();
                task.run();
            } catch (InterruptedException e) {
                break; /* Allow thread to exit                */
            }
        }
    }
}

All concurrent applications have some sources of serialization; if you think yours does not, look again.

11.2.1. Example: Serialization Hidden in Frameworks
To see how serialization can be hidden in the structure of an application, we can compare throughput as threads are
added and infer differences in serialization based on observed differences in scalability. Figure 11.2 shows a simple
application in which multiple threads repeatedly remove an element from a shared Queue and process it, similar to
Listing 11.1. The processing step involves only thread‐local computation. If a thread finds the queue is empty, it puts a
batch of new elements on the queue so that other threads have something to process on their next iteration. Accessing
the shared queue clearly entails some degree of serialization, but the processing step is entirely parallelizable since it
involves no shared data.
                                    Figure 11.2. Comparing Queue Implementations.
                                                   [View full size image]

The curves in Figure 11.2 compare throughput for two thread‐safe Queue implementations: a LinkedList wrapped with
synchronizedList, and a ConcurrentLinkedQueue. The tests were run on an 8‐way Sparc V880 system running Solaris.
While each run represents the same amount of "work", we can see that merely changing queue implementations can
have a big impact on scalability.
The throughput of ConcurrentLinkedQueue continues to improve until it hits the number of processors and then
remains mostly constant. On the other hand, the throughput of the synchronized LinkedList shows some
improvement up to three threads, but then falls off as synchronization overhead increases. By the time it gets to four or
five threads, contention is so heavy that every access to the queue lock is contended and throughput is dominated by
context switching.
The difference in throughput comes from differing degrees of serialization between the two queue implementations.
The synchronized LinkedList guards the entire queue state with a single lock that is held for the duration of the offer
or remove call; ConcurrentLinkedQueue uses a sophisticated non‐blocking queue algorithm (see Section 15.4.2) that
142    Java Concurrency In Practice

      uses atomic references to update individual link pointers. In one, the entire insertion or removal is serialized; in the
      other, only updates to individual pointers are serialized.

      11.2.2. Applying Amdahl's Law Qualitatively
      Amdahl's law quantifies the possible speedup when more computing resources are available, if we can accurately
      estimate the fraction of execution that is serialized. Although measuring serialization directly can be difficult, Amdahl's
      law can still be useful without such measurement.
      Since our mental models are influenced by our environment, many of us are used to thinking that a multiprocessor
      system has two or four processors, or maybe (if we've got a big budget) as many as a few dozen, because this is the
      technology that has been widely available in recent years. But as multicore CPUs become mainstream, systems will have
      hundreds or even thousands of processors. [3] Algorithms that seem scalable on a four‐way system may have hidden
      scalability bottlenecks that have just not yet been encountered.
      [3] Market update: at this writing, Sun is shipping low‐end server systems based on the 8‐core Niagara processor, and Azul is shipping high‐end
      server systems (96, 192, and 384‐way) based on the 24‐core Vega processor.

      When evaluating an algorithm, thinking "in the limit" about what would happen with hundreds or thousands of
      processors can offer some insight into where scaling limits might appear. For example, Sections 11.4.2 and 11.4.3
      discuss two techniques for reducing lock granularity: lock splitting (splitting one lock into two) and lock striping (splitting
      one lock into many). Looking at them through the lens of Amdahl's law, we see that splitting a lock in two does not get
      us very far towards exploiting many processors, but lock striping seems much more promising because the size of the
      stripe set can be increased as processor count increases. (Of course, performance optimizations should always be
      considered in light of actual performance requirements; in some cases, splitting a lock in two may be enough to meet
      the requirements.)

      11.3. Costs Introduced by Threads
      Single‐threaded programs incur neither scheduling nor synchronization overhead, and need not use locks to preserve
      the consistency of data structures. Scheduling and interthread coordination have performance costs; for threads to
      offer a performance improvement, the performance benefits of parallelization must outweigh the costs introduced by
      concurrency.

      11.3.1. Context Switching
      If the main thread is the only schedulable thread, it will almost never be scheduled out. On the other hand, if there are
      more runnable threads than CPUs, eventually the OS will preempt one thread so that another can use the CPU. This
      causes a context switch, which requires saving the execution context of the currently running thread and restoring the
      execution context of the newly scheduled thread.
      Context switches are not free; thread scheduling requires manipulating shared data structures in the OS and JVM. The
      OS and JVMuse the same CPUs your program does; more CPU time spent in JVM and OS code means less is available for
      your program. But OS and JVM activity is not the only cost of context switches. When a new thread is switched in, the
      data it needs is unlikely to be in the local processor cache, so a context switch causes a flurry of cache misses, and thus
      threads run a little more slowly when they are first scheduled. This is one of the reasons that schedulers give each
      runnable thread a certain minimum time quantum even when many other threads are waiting: it amortizes the cost of
      the context switch and its consequences over more uninterrupted execution time, improving overall throughput (at
      some cost to responsiveness).
      Listing 11.2. Synchronization that has No Effect. Don't Do this.

      synchronized (new Object()) {
          // do something
      }

      When a thread blocks because it is waiting for a contended lock, the JVM usually suspends the thread and allows it to be
      switched out. If threads block frequently, they will be unable to use their full scheduling quantum. A program that does
      more blocking (blocking I/O, waiting for contended locks, or waiting on condition variables) incurs more context
      switches than one that is CPU‐bound, increasing scheduling overhead and reducing throughput. (Non‐blocking
      algorithms can also help reduce context switches; see Chapter 15.)
                                  6BPart III: Liveness, Performance, and Testing ‐ 23BChapter 11. Performance and Scalability             143

The actual cost of context switching varies across platforms, but a good rule of thumb is that a context switch costs the
equivalent of 5,000 to 10,000 clock cycles, or several microseconds on most current processors.
The vmstat command on Unix systems and the perfmon tool on Windows systems report the number of context
switches and the percentage of time spent in the kernel. High kernel usage (over 10%) often indicates heavy scheduling
activity, which may be caused by blocking due to I/O or lock contention.

11.3.2. Memory Synchronization
The performance cost of synchronization comes from several sources. The visibility guarantees provided by
synchronized and volatile may entail using special instructions called memory barriers that can flush or invalidate
caches, flush hardware write buffers, and stall execution pipelines. Memory barriers may also have indirect
performance consequences because they inhibit other compiler optimizations; most operations cannot be reordered
with memory barriers.
When assessing the performance impact of synchronization, it is important to distinguish between contended and
uncontended synchronization. The synchronized mechanism is optimized for the uncontended case (volatile is
always uncontended), and at this writing, the performance cost of a "fast‐path" uncontended synchronization ranges
from 20 to 250 clock cycles for most systems. While this is certainly not zero, the effect of needed, uncontended
synchronization is rarely significant in overall application performance, and the alternative involves compromising safety
and potentially signing yourself (or your successor) up for some very painful bug hunting later.
Modern JVMs can reduce the cost of incidental synchronization by optimizing away locking that can be proven never to
contend. If a lock object is accessible only to the current thread, the JVM is permitted to optimize away a lock
acquisition because there is no way another thread could synchronize on the same lock. For example, the lock
acquisition in Listing 11.2 can always be eliminated by the JVM.
More sophisticated JVMs can use escape analysis to identify when a local object reference is never published to the
heap and is therefore thread‐local. In getStoogeNames in Listing 11.3, the only reference to the List is the local variable
stooges, and stack‐confined variables are automatically thread‐local. A naive execution of getStoogeNames would
acquire and release the lock on the Vector four times, once for each call to add or toString. However, a smart runtime
compiler can inline these calls and then see that stooges and its internal state never escape, and therefore that all four
lock acquisitions can be eliminated.[4]
[4] This compiler optimization, called lock elision, is performed by the IBM JVM and is expected in HotSpot as of Java 7.
Listing 11.3. Candidate for Lock Elision.
public String getStoogeNames() {
    List<String> stooges = new Vector<String>();
    stooges.add("Moe");
    stooges.add("Larry");
    stooges.add("Curly");
    return stooges.toString();
}

Even without escape analysis, compilers can also perform lock coarsening, the merging of adjacent synchronized blocks
using the same lock. For getStooge-Names, a JVM that performs lock coarsening might combine the three calls to add
and the call to toString into a single lock acquisition and release, using heuristics on the relative cost of
synchronization versus the instructions inside the synchronized block.[5] Not only does this reduce the synchronization
overhead, but it also gives the optimizer a much larger block to work with, likely enabling other optimizations.
[5] A smart dynamic compiler can figure out that this method always returns the same string, and after the first execution recompile
getStoogeNames to simply return the value returned by the first execution.

Don't worry excessively about the cost of uncontended synchronization. The basic mechanism is already quite fast, and
JVMs can perform additional optimizations that further reduce or eliminate the cost. Instead, focus optimization efforts
on areas where lock contention actually occurs.

Synchronization by one thread can also affect the performance of other threads. Synchronization creates traffic on the
shared memory bus; this bus has a limited bandwidth and is shared across all processors. If threads must compete for
synchronization bandwidth, all threads using synchronization will suffer.[6]
[6] This aspect is sometimes used to argue against the use of non‐blocking algorithms without some sort of backoff, because under heavy
contention, non‐blocking algorithms generate more synchronization traffic than lock‐based ones. See Chapter 15.
144    Java Concurrency In Practice

      11.3.3. Blocking
      Uncontended synchronization can be handled entirely within the JVM (Bacon et al., 1998); contended synchronization
      may require OS activity, which adds to the cost. When locking is contended, the losing thread(s) must block. The JVM
      can implement blocking either via spin‐waiting (repeatedly trying to acquire the lock until it succeeds) or by suspending
      the blocked thread through the operating system. Which is more efficient depends on the relationship between context
      switch overhead and the time until the lock becomes available; spin‐waiting is preferable for short waits and suspension
      is preferable for long waits. Some JVMs choose between the two adaptively based on profiling data of past wait times,
      but most just suspend threads waiting for a lock.
      Suspending a thread because it could not get a lock, or because it blocked on a condition wait or blocking I/O operation,
      entails two additional context switches and all the attendant OS and cache activity: the blocked thread is switched out
      before its quantum has expired, and is then switched back in later after the lock or other resource becomes available.
      (Blocking due to lock contention also has a cost for the thread holding the lock: when it releases the lock, it must then
      ask the OS to resume the blocked thread.)

      11.4. Reducing Lock Contention
      We've seen that serialization hurts scalability and that context switches hurt performance. Contended locking causes
      both, so reducing lock contention can improve both performance and scalability.
      Access to resources guarded by an exclusive lock is serializedonly one thread at a time may access it. Of course, we use
      locks for good reasons, such as preventing data corruption, but this safety comes at a price. Persistent contention for a
      lock limits scalability.

      The principal threat to scalability in concurrent applications is the exclusive resource lock.

      Two factors influence the likelihood of contention for a lock: how often that lock is requested and how long it is held
      once acquired.[7] If the product of these factors is sufficiently small, then most attempts to acquire the lock will be
      uncontended, and lock contention will not pose a significant scalability impediment. If, however, the lock is in
      sufficiently high demand, threads will block waiting for it; in the extreme case, processors will sit idle even though there
      is plenty of work to do.
      [7] This is a corollary of Little's law, a result from queuing theory that says "the average number of customers in a stable system is equal to their
      average arrival rate multiplied by their average time in the system". (Little, 1961)

      There are three ways to reduce lock contention:
      • Reduce the duration for which locks are held;
      • Reduce the frequency with which locks are requested; or
      • Replace exclusive locks with coordination mechanisms that permit greater concurrency.

      11.4.1. Narrowing Lock Scope ("Get in, Get Out")
      An effective way to reduce the likelihood of contention is to hold locks as briefly as possible. This can be done by moving
      code that doesn't require the lock out of synchronized blocks, especially for expensive operations and potentially
      blocking operations such as I/O.
      It is easy to see how holding a "hot" lock for too long can limit scalability; we saw an example of this in
      SynchronizedFactorizer in Chapter 2. If an operation holds a lock for 2 milliseconds and every operation requires that
      lock, throughput can be no greater than 500 operations per second, no matter how many processors are available.
      Reducing the time the lock is held to 1 millisecond improves the lock‐induced throughput limit to 1000 operations per
      second.[8]
      [8] Actually, this calculation understates the cost of holding locks for too long because it doesn't take into account the context switch overhead
      generated by increased lock contention.

      AttributeStore in Listing 11.4 shows an example of holding a lock longer than necessary. The userLocationMatches
      method looks up the user's location in a Map and uses regular expression matching to see if the resulting value matches
      the supplied pattern. The entire userLocationMatches method is synchronized, but the only portion of the code that
      actually needs the lock is the call to Map.get.
                                6BPart III: Liveness, Performance, and Testing ‐ 23BChapter 11. Performance and Scalability    145

Listing 11.4. Holding a Lock Longer than Necessary.

@ThreadSafe
public class AttributeStore {
    @GuardedBy("this") private final Map<String, String>
            attributes = new HashMap<String, String>();

     public synchronized     boolean userLocationMatches(String name,
                                                         String regexp) {
           String key = "users." + name + ".location";
           String location = attributes.get(key);
           if (location == null)
               return false;
           else
               return Pattern.matches(regexp, location);
     }
}

BetterAttributeStore in Listing 11.5 rewrites AttributeStore to reduce significantly the lock duration. The first step
is to construct the Map key associated with the user's location, a string of the form users.name.location. This entails
instantiating a StringBuilder object, appending several strings to it, and instantiating the result as a String. After the
location has been retrieved, the regular expression is matched against the resulting location string. Because
constructing the key string and processing the regular expression do not access shared state, they need not be executed
with the lock held. BetterAttributeStore factors these steps out of the synchronized block, thus reducing the time
the lock is held.
Listing 11.5. Reducing Lock Duration.
@ThreadSafe
public class BetterAttributeStore {
    @GuardedBy("this") private final Map<String, String>
            attributes = new HashMap<String, String>();

     public boolean userLocationMatches(String name, String regexp) {
         String key = "users." + name + ".location";
         String location;
         synchronized (this) {
             location = attributes.get(key);
         }
         if (location == null)
             return false;
         else
             return Pattern.matches(regexp, location);
     }
}

Reducing the scope of the lock in userLocationMatches substantially reduces the number of instructions that are
executed with the lock held. By Amdahl's law, this removes an impediment to scalability because the amount of
serialized code is reduced.
Because AttributeStore has only one state variable, attributes, we can improve it further by the technique of
delegating thread safety (Section 4.3). By replacing attributes with a thread‐safe Map (a Hashtable, synchronizedMap,
or ConcurrentHashMap), AttributeStore can delegate all its thread safety obligations to the underlying thread‐safe
collection. This eliminates the need for explicit synchronization in AttributeStore, reduces the lock scope to the
duration of the Map access, and removes the risk that a future maintainer will undermine thread safety by forgetting to
acquire the appropriate lock before accessing attributes.
While shrinking synchronized blocks can improve scalability, a synchronized block can be too smalloperations that
need to be atomic (such updating multiple variables that participate in an invariant) must be contained in a single
synchronized block. And because the cost of synchronization is nonzero, breaking one synchronized block into
multiple synchronized blocks (correctness permitting) at some point becomes counterproductive in terms of
performance.[9] The ideal balance is of course platform‐dependent, but in practice it makes sense to worry about the
size of a synchronized block only when you can move "substantial" computation or blocking operations out of it.
[9] If the JVM performs lock coarsening, it may undo the splitting of synchronized blocks anyway.

11.4.2. Reducing Lock Granularity
The other way to reduce the fraction of time that a lock is held (and therefore the likelihood that it will be contended) is
to have threads ask for it less often. This can be accomplished by lock splitting and lock striping, which involve using
146       Java Concurrency In Practice

      separate locks to guard multiple independent state variables previously guarded by a single lock. These techniques
      reduce the granularity at which locking occurs, potentially allowing greater scalabilitybut using more locks also increases
      the risk of deadlock.
      As a thought experiment, imagine what would happen if there was only one lock for the entire application instead of a
      separate lock for each object. Then execution of all synchronized blocks, regardless of their lock, would be serialized.
      With many threads competing for the global lock, the chance that two threads want the lock at the same time increases,
      resulting in more contention. So if lock requests were instead distributed over a larger set of locks, there would be less
      contention. Fewer threads would be blocked waiting for locks, thus increasing scalability.
      If a lock guards more than one independent state variable, you may be able to improve scalability by splitting it into
      multiple locks that each guard different variables. This results in each lock being requested less often.
      ServerStatus in Listing 11.6 shows a portion of the monitoring interface for a database server that maintains the set of
      currently logged‐on users and the set of currently executing queries. As a user logs on or off or query execution begins
      or ends, the ServerStatus object is updated by calling the appropriate add or remove method. The two types of
      information are completely independent; ServerStatus could even be split into two separate classes with no loss of
      functionality.
      Instead of guarding both users and queries with the ServerStatus lock, we can instead guard each with a separate
      lock, as shown in Listing 11.7. After splitting the lock, each new finer‐grained lock will see less locking traffic than the
      original coarser lock would have. (Delegating to a thread‐safe Set implementation for users and queries instead of
      using explicit synchronization would implicitly provide lock splitting, as each Set would use a different lock to guard its
      state.)
      Splitting a lock into two offers the greatest possibility for improvement when the lock is experiencing moderate but not
      heavy contention. Splitting locks that are experiencing little contention yields little net improvement in performance or
      throughput, although it might increase the load threshold at which performance starts to degrade due to contention.
      Splitting locks experiencing moderate contention might actually turn them into mostly uncontended locks, which is the
      most desirable outcome for both performance and scalability.
      Listing 11.6. Candidate for Lock Splitting.
      @ThreadSafe
      public class ServerStatus {
          @GuardedBy("this") public final Set<String> users;
          @GuardedBy("this") public final Set<String> queries;
          ...
          public synchronized void addUser(String u) { users.add(u); }
          public synchronized void addQuery(String q) { queries.add(q); }
          public synchronized void removeUser(String u) {
              users.remove(u);
          }
          public synchronized void removeQuery(String q) {
              queries.remove(q);
          }
      }

      Listing 11.7. ServerStatus Refactored to Use Split Locks.
      @ThreadSafe
      public class ServerStatus {
          @GuardedBy("users") public final Set<String> users;
          @GuardedBy("queries") public final Set<String> queries;
          ...
          public void addUser(String u) {
              synchronized (users) {
                  users.add(u);
              }
          }

             public void addQuery(String q) {
                 synchronized (queries) {
                     queries.add(q);
                 }
             }
             // remove methods similarly refactored to use split locks
      }

      11.4.3. Lock Striping
      Splitting a heavily contended lock into two is likely to result in two heavily contended locks. While this will produce a
      small scalability improvement by enabling two threads to execute concurrently instead of one, it still does not
                                   6BPart III: Liveness, Performance, and Testing ‐ 23BChapter 11. Performance and Scalability                      147

dramatically improve prospects for concurrency on a system with many processors. The lock splitting example in the
ServerStatus classes does not offer any obvious opportunity for splitting the locks further.

Lock splitting can sometimes be extended to partition locking on a variablesized set of independent objects, in which
case it is called lock striping. For example, the implementation of ConcurrentHashMap uses an array of 16 locks, each of
which guards 1/16 of the hash buckets; bucket N is guarded by lock N mod 16. Assuming the hash function provides
reasonable spreading characteristics and keys are accessed uniformly, this should reduce the demand for any given lock
by approximately a factor of 16. It is this technique that enables ConcurrentHashMap to support up to 16 concurrent
writers. (The number of locks could be increased to provide even better concurrency under heavy access on high‐
processor‐count systems, but the number of stripes should be increased beyond the default of 16 only when you have
evidence that concurrent writers are generating enough contention to warrant raising the limit.)
One of the downsides of lock striping is that locking the collection for exclusive access is more difficult and costly than
with a single lock. Usually an operation can be performed by acquiring at most one lock, but occasionally you need to
lock the entire collection, as when ConcurrentHashMap needs to expand the map and rehash the values into a larger set
of buckets. This is typically done by acquiring all of the locks in the stripe set.[10]
[10] The only way to acquire an arbitrary set of intrinsic locks is via recursion.

StripedMap in Listing 11.8 illustrates implementing a hash‐based map using lock striping. There are N_LOCKS locks, each
guarding a subset of the buckets. Most methods, like get, need acquire only a single bucket lock. Some methods may
need to acquire all the locks but, as in the implementation for clear, may not need to acquire them all
simultaneously.[11]
[11] Clearing the Map in this way is not atomic, so there is not necessarily a time when the Striped-Map is actually empty if other threads are
concurrently adding elements; making the operation atomic would require acquiring all the locks at once. However, for concurrent collections that
clients typically cannot lock for exclusive access, the result of methods like size or isEmpty may be out of date by the time they return anyway,
so this behavior, while perhaps somewhat surprising, is usually acceptable.

11.4.4. Avoiding Hot Fields
Lock splitting and lock striping can improve scalability because they enable different threads to operate on different
data (or different portions of the same data structure) without interfering with each other. A program that would
benefit from lock splitting necessarily exhibits contention for a lock more often than for the data guarded by that lock. If
a lock guards two independent variables X and Y, and thread A wants to access X while B wants to access Y (as would be
the case if one thread called addUser while another called addQuery in ServerStatus), then the two threads are not
contending for any data, even though they are contending for a lock.
148       Java Concurrency In Practice

      Listing 11.8. Hash­based Map Using Lock Striping.
      @ThreadSafe
      public class StripedMap {
          // Synchronization policy: buckets[n] guarded by locks[n%N_LOCKS]
          private static final int N_LOCKS = 16;
          private final Node[] buckets;
          private final Object[] locks;

             private static class Node { ... }

             public StripedMap(int numBuckets) {
                 buckets = new Node[numBuckets];
                 locks = new Object[N_LOCKS];
                 for (int i = 0; i < N_LOCKS; i++)
                     locks[i] = new Object();
             }

             private final int hash(Object key) {
                 return Math.abs(key.hashCode() % buckets.length);
             }

             public Object get(Object key) {
                 int hash = hash(key);
                 synchronized (locks[hash % N_LOCKS]) {
                     for (Node m = buckets[hash]; m != null; m = m.next)
                         if (m.key.equals(key))
                              return m.value;
                 }
                 return null;
             }

             public void clear() {
                 for (int i = 0; i < buckets.length; i++) {
                     synchronized (locks[i % N_LOCKS]) {
                         buckets[i] = null;
                     }
                 }
             }
             ...
      }

      Lock granularity cannot be reduced when there are variables that are required for every operation. This is yet another
      area where raw performance and scalability are often at odds with each other; common optimizations such as caching
      frequently computed values can introduce "hot fields" that limit scalability.
      If you were implementing HashMap, you would have a choice of how size computes the number of entries in the Map.
      The simplest approach is to count the number of entries every time it is called. A common optimization is to update a
      separate counter as entries are added or removed; this slightly increases the cost of a put or remove operation to keep
      the counter up‐to‐date, but reduces the cost of the size operation from O(n) to O(1).
      Keeping a separate count to speed up operations like size and isEmpty works fine for a single‐threaded or fully
      synchronized implementation, but makes it much harder to improve the scalability of the implementation because
      every operation that modifies the map must now update the shared counter. Even if you use lock striping for the hash
      chains, synchronizing access to the counter reintroduces the scalability problems of exclusive locking. What looked like a
      performance optimization ‐ caching the results of the size operation ‐ has turned into a scalability liability. In this case,
      the counter is called a hot field because every mutative operation needs to access it.
      ConcurrentHashMap avoids this problem by having size enumerate the stripes and add up the number of elements in
      each stripe, instead of maintaining a global count. To avoid enumerating every element, ConcurrentHashMap maintains
      a separate count field for each stripe, also guarded by the stripe lock.[12]
      [12] If size is called frequently compared to mutative operations, striped data structures can optimize for this by caching the collection size in a
      volatile whenever size is called and invalidating the cache (setting it to ‐1) whenever the collection is modified. If the cached value is
      nonnegative on entry to size, it is accurate and can be returned; otherwise it is recomputed.

      11.4.5. Alternatives to Exclusive Locks
      A third technique for mitigating the effect of lock contention is to forego the use of exclusive locks in favor of a more
      concurrency‐friendly means of managing shared state. These include using the concurrent collections, read‐write locks,
      immutable objects and atomic variables.
      ReadWriteLock (see Chapter 13) enforces a multiple‐reader, single‐writer locking discipline: more than one reader can
      access the shared resource concurrently so long as none of them wants to modify it, but writers must acquire the lock
                                  6BPart III: Liveness, Performance, and Testing ‐ 23BChapter 11. Performance and Scalability                           149

exclusively. For read‐mostly data structures, ReadWriteLock can offer greater concurrency than exclusive locking; for
read‐only data structures, immutability can eliminate the need for locking entirely.
Atomic variables (see Chapter 15) offer a means of reducing the cost of updating "hot fields" such as statistics counters,
sequence generators, or the reference to the first node in a linked data structure. (We used AtomicLong to maintain the
hit counter in the servlet examples in Chapter 2.) The atomic variable classes provide very fine‐grained (and therefore
more scalable) atomic operations on integers or object references, and are implemented using low‐level concurrency
primitives (such as compare‐and‐swap) provided by most modern processors. If your class has a small number of hot
fields that do not participate in invariants with other variables, replacing them with atomic variables may improve
scalability. (Changing your algorithm to have fewer hot fields might improve scalability even more ‐ atomic variables
reduce the cost of updating hot fields, but they don't eliminate it.)

11.4.6. Monitoring CPU Utilization
When testing for scalability, the goal is usually to keep the processors fully utilized. Tools like vmstat and mpstat on
Unix systems or perfmon on Windows systems can tell you just how "hot" the processors are running.
If the CPUs are asymmetrically utilized (some CPUs are running hot but others are not) your first goal should be to find
increased parallelism in your program. Asymmetric utilization indicates that most of the computation is going on in a
small set of threads, and your application will not be able to take advantage of additional processors.
If the CPUs are not fully utilized, you need to figure out why. There are several likely causes:
Insufficient load. It may be that the application being tested is just not subjected to enough load. You can test for this by
increasing the load and measuring changes in utilization, response time, or service time. Generating enough load to
saturate an application can require substantial computer power; the problem may be that the client systems, not the
system being tested, are running at capacity.
I/O‐bound. You can determine whether an application is disk‐bound using iostat or perfmon, and whether it is
bandwidth‐limited by monitoring traffic levels on your network.
Externally bound. If your application depends on external services such as a database or web service, the bottleneck
may not be in your code. You can test for this by using a profiler or database administration tools to determine how
much time is being spent waiting for answers from the external service.
Lock contention. Profiling tools can tell you how much lock contention your application is experiencing and which locks
are "hot". You can often get the same information without a profiler through random sampling, triggering a few thread
dumps and looking for threads contending for locks. If a thread is blocked waiting for a lock, the appropriate stack frame
in the thread dump indicates "waiting to lock monitor . . . " Locks that are mostly uncontended rarely show up in a
thread dump; a heavily contended lock will almost always have at least one thread waiting to acquire it and so will
frequently appear in thread dumps.
If your application is keeping the CPUs sufficiently hot, you can use monitoring tools to infer whether it would benefit
from additional CPUs. A program with only four threads may be able to keep a 4‐way system fully utilized, but is unlikely
to see a performance boost if moved to an 8‐way system since there would need to be waiting runnable threads to take
advantage of the additional processors. (You may also be able to reconfigure the program to divide its workload over
more threads, such as adjusting a thread pool size.) One of the columns reported by vmstat is the number of threads
that are runnable but not currently running because a CPU is not available; if CPU utilization is high and there are always
runnable threads waiting for a CPU, your application would probably benefit from more processors.

11.4.7. Just Say No to Object Pooling
In early JVM versions, object allocation and garbage collection were slow,[13] but their performance has improved
substantially since then. In fact, allocation in Java is now faster than malloc is in C: the common code path for new
Object in HotSpot 1.4.x and 5.0 is approximately ten machine instructions.

[13] As was everything else ‐ synchronization, graphics, JVM startup, reflection ‐ predictably so in the first version of an experimental technology.

To work around "slow" object lifecycles, many developers turned to object pooling, where objects are recycled instead
of being garbage collected and allocated anew when needed. Even taking into account its reduced garbage collection
overhead, object pooling has been shown to be a performance loss[14] for all but the most expensive objects (and a
serious loss for light‐ and medium‐weight objects) in single‐threaded programs (Click, 2005).
150     Java Concurrency In Practice

      [14] In addition to being a loss in terms of CPU cycles, object pooling has a number of other problems, among them the challenge of setting pool
      sizes correctly (too small, and pooling has no effect; too large, and it puts pressure on the garbage collector, retaining memory that could be used
      more effectively for something else); the risk that an object will not be properly reset to its newly allocated state, introducing subtle bugs; the risk
      that a thread will return an object to the pool but continue using it; and that it makes more work for generational garbage collectors by
      encouraging a pattern of old‐to‐young references.

      In concurrent applications, pooling fares even worse. When threads allocate new objects, very little inter‐thread
      coordination is required, as allocators typically use thread‐local allocation blocks to eliminate most synchronization on
      heap data structures. But if those threads instead request an object from a pool, some synchronization is necessary to
      coordinate access to the pool data structure, creating the possibility that a thread will block. Because blocking a thread
      due to lock contention is hundreds of times more expensive than an allocation, even a small amount of pool‐induced
      contention would be a scalability bottleneck. (Even an uncontended synchronization is usually more expensive than
      allocating an object.) This is yet another technique intended as a performance optimization but that turned into a
      scalability hazard. Pooling has its uses,[15] but is of limited utility as a performance optimization.
      [15] In constrained environments, such as some J2ME or RTSJ targets, object pooling may still be required for effective memory management or to
      manage responsiveness.

      Allocating objects is usually cheaper than synchronizing.

      11.5. Example: Comparing Map Performance
      The single‐threaded performance of ConcurrentHashMap is slightly better than that of a synchronized HashMap, but it is
      in concurrent use that it really shines. The implementation of ConcurrentHashMap assumes the most common
      operation is retrieving a value that already exists, and is therefore optimized to provide highest performance and
      concurrency for successful get operations.
      The major scalability impediment for the synchronized Map implementations is that there is a single lock for the entire
      map, so only one thread can access the map at a time. On the other hand, ConcurrentHashMap does no locking for most
      successful read operations, and uses lock striping for write operations and those few read operations that do require
      locking. As a result, multiple threads can access the Map concurrently without blocking.
      Figure 11.3 illustrates the differences in scalability between several Map implementations: ConcurrentHashMap,
      ConcurrentSkipListMap, and HashMap and treeMap wrapped with synchronizedMap. The first two are thread‐safe by
      design; the latter two are made thread‐safe by the synchronized wrapper. In each run, N threads concurrently execute a
      tight loop that selects a random key and attempts to retrieve the value corresponding to that key. If the value is not
      present, it is added to the Map with probability p = .6, and if it is present, is removed with probability p = .02. The tests
      were run under a pre‐release build of Java 6 on an 8‐way Sparc V880, and the graph displays throughput normalized to
      the onethread case for ConcurrentHashMap. (The scalability gap between the concurrent and synchronized collections is
      even larger on Java 5.0.)
      The data for ConcurrentHashMap and ConcurrentSkipListMap shows that they scale well to large numbers of threads;
      throughput continues to improve as threads are added. While the numbers of threads in Figure 11.3 may not seem
      large, this test program generates more contention per thread than a typical application because it does little other than
      pound on the Map; a real program would do additional thread‐local work in each iteration.
                                           Figure 11.3. Comparing Scalability of Map Implementations.
                                                                    [View full size image]
                                 6BPart III: Liveness, Performance, and Testing ‐ 23BChapter 11. Performance and Scalability                           151

The numbers for the synchronized collections are not as encouraging. Performance for the one‐thread case is
comparable to ConcurrentHashMap, but once the load transitions from mostly uncontended to mostly contended ‐
which happens here at two threads ‐ the synchronized collections suffer badly. This is common behavior for code whose
scalability is limited by lock contention. So long as contention is low, time per operation is dominated by the time to
actually do the work and throughput may improve as threads are added. Once contention becomes significant, time per
operation is dominated by context switch and scheduling delays, and adding more threads has little effect on
throughput.

11.6. Reducing Context Switch Overhead
Many tasks involve operations that may block; transitioning between the running and blocked states entails a context
switch. One source of blocking in server applications is generating log messages in the course of processing requests; to
illustrate how throughput can be improved by reducing context switches, we'll analyze the scheduling behavior of two
logging approaches.
Most logging frameworks are thin wrappers around println; when you have something to log, just write it out right
then and there. Another approach was shown in LogWriter on page 152: the logging is performed in a dedicated
background thread instead of by the requesting thread. From the developer's perspective, both approaches are roughly
equivalent. But there may be a difference in performance, depending on the volume of logging activity, how many
threads are doing logging, and other factors such as the cost of context switching.[16]
[16] Building a logger that moves the I/O to another thread may improve performance, but it also introduces a number of design complications,
such as interruption (what happens if a thread blocked in a logging operation is interrupted?), service guarantees (does the logger guarantee that a
successfully queued log message will be logged prior to service shutdown?), saturation policy (what happens when the producers log messages
faster than the logger thread can handle them?), and service lifecycle (how do we shut down the logger, and how do we communicate the service
state to producers?).

The service time for a logging operation includes whatever computation is associated with the I/O stream classes; if the
I/O operation blocks, it also includes the duration for which the thread is blocked. The operating system will deschedule
the blocked thread until the I/O completes, and probably a little longer. When the I/O completes, other threads are
probably active and will be allowed to finish out their scheduling quanta, and threads may already be waiting ahead of
us on the scheduling queue ‐ further adding to service time. Alternatively, if multiple threads are logging simultaneously,
there may be contention for the output stream lock, in which case the result is the same as with blocking I/O ‐ the
thread blocks waiting for the lock and gets switched out. Inline logging involves I/O and locking, which can lead to
increased context switching and therefore increased service times.
Increasing request service time is undesirable for several reasons. First, service time affects quality of service: longer
service times mean someone is waiting longer for a result. But more significantly, longer service times in this case mean
more lock contention. The "get in, get out" principle of Section 11.4.1 tells us that we should hold locks as briefly as
possible, because the longer a lock is held, the more likely that lock will be contended. If a thread blocks waiting for I/O
while holding a lock, another thread is more likely to want the lock while the first thread is holding it. Concurrent
systems perform much better when most lock acquisitions are uncontended, because contended lock acquisition means
more context switches. A coding style that encourages more context switches thus yields lower overall throughput.
Moving the I/O out of the request‐processing thread is likely to shorten the mean service time for request processing.
Threads calling log no longer block waiting for the output stream lock or for I/O to complete; they need only queue the
message and can then return to their task. On the other hand, we've introduced the possibility of contention for the
message queue, but the put operation is lighter‐weight than the logging I/O (which might require system calls) and so is
less likely to block in actual use (as long as the queue is not full). Because the request thread is now less likely to block, it
is less likely to be context‐switched out in the middle of a request. What we've done is turned a complicated and
uncertain code path involving I/O and possible lock contention into a straight‐line code path.
To some extent, we are just moving the work around, moving the I/O to a thread where its cost isn't perceived by the
user (which may in itself be a win). But by moving all the logging I/O to a single thread, we also eliminate the chance of
contention for the output stream and thus eliminate a source of blocking. This improves overall throughput because
fewer resources are consumed in scheduling, context switching, and lock management.
Moving the I/O from many request‐processing threads to a single logger thread is similar to the difference between a
bucket brigade and a collection of individuals fighting a fire. In the "hundred guys running around with buckets"
approach, you have a greater chance of contention at the water source and at the fire (resulting in overall less water
152    Java Concurrency In Practice

      delivered to the fire), plus greater inefficiency because each worker is continuously switching modes (filling, running,
      dumping, running, etc.). In the bucket‐brigade approach, the flow of water from the source to the burning building is
      constant, less energy is expended transporting the water to the fire, and each worker focuses on doing one job
      continuously. Just as interruptions are disruptive and productivity‐reducing to humans, blocking and context switching
      are disruptive to threads.

      Summary
      Because one of the most common reasons to use threads is to exploit multiple processors, in discussing the
      performance of concurrent applications, we are usually more concerned with throughput or scalability than we are with
      raw service time. Amdahl's law tells us that the scalability of an application is driven by the proportion of code that must
      be executed serially. Since the primary source of serialization in Java programs is the exclusive resource lock, scalability
      can often be improved by spending less time holding locks, either by reducing lock granularity, reducing the duration for
      which locks are held, or replacing exclusive locks with nonexclusive or non‐blocking alternatives.
