Chapter 8. Firmware Implementation
Guidance
The guidance section is non-normative, and covers certain implementation choices, suggestions,
historical context, etc.

8.1. Recipes Guidance
8.1.1. BRS-I Recipe Guidance

Systems compliant to BRS-I can successfully boot an existing generic operating system image
without system-specific customizations, yet this might result in an unoptimized experience and
non-functioning I/O devices until further software updates are activated.

The best analogy would be a typical Intel Architecture motherboard from the early 2000s: you
could install an OS on it, but the built-in graphics might be low-resolution and the sound, built-in
network port or power management might not work out of the box. You could subsequently load
the right drivers from the media coming with the board or fetch newest ones using a well-
supported network adapter.

8.2. UEFI Implementation Guidance
UEFI implementations run in 64-bit S-Mode, VS-Mode or HS-Mode, depending on whether
virtualization is supported or used.

8.2.1. Privilege Levels

Different portions of system firmware might target a specific privilege level. In contrast, UEFI
drivers, OS loaders and pre-boot applications need to operate in supervisor mode (either (V)S-Mode
or HS-Mode), because they are UEFI-compliant executable images.

As an implementation choice, a UEFI firmware implementation may start execution in M-Mode.
However it must switch to supervisor mode as part of initializing boot and runtime services for
UEFI drivers and applications.

8.2.2. Firmware Update

UpdateCapsule() is only required before ExitBootServices() is called. The UpdateCapsule()
implementation is expected to be suitable for use by generic firmware update services like fwupd
and Windows Update. Both fwupd and Windows Update read the ESRT table to determine what
firmware can be updated and use an EFI helper application to call UpdateCapsule() before
ExitBootServices() is called.

8.2.3. PCIe

Every implementation of the EFI_PCI_ROOT_BRIDGE_IO_PROTOCOL provides the correct Address

Translation Offset field to translate between the hart MMIO and bus addresses.

EFI_PCI_ROOT_BRIDGE_IO_PROTOCOL_CONFIGURATION structures report resources produced by the PCIe
root bridges, not resources consumed by their register maps. In the cases where there are
unpopulated PCIe slots behind a root bridge, EFI_PCI_ROOT_BRIDGE_IO_PROTOCOL_CONFIGURATION
reports valid resources assigned (e.g. for hot plug), or reports no resources assigned.

Firmware MUST always initialize PCIe root complexes, even if booting from non-PCIe devices, and
should not assume the OS knows how to configure root complex hardware (including, for example,
inbound and outbound address translation windows). In fact, ECAM-compatible PCIe segments are
assumed by operating systems to just work as per their hardware descriptions in ACPI and DT.
Furthermore, firmware MUST perform BAR resource assignment, bridge bus number and window
assignments and other reasonable device setting configuration (e.g. Max Payload Size) and not
assume operating systems to be capable of full PCIe resource configuration, or to expect full
reconfiguration to be necessary.

8.2.4. UEFI Runtime Services

Systems without an RTC and with an equivalent alternate source for current time, that is not
trivially accessible from a UEFI implementation after the UEFI boot services are shut down (e.g.
network time), can implement GetTime() using the time CSR. The time, of course, needs to be
synchronized before the boot services are shut down.

8.3. ACPI Implementation Guidance
ACPI information is structured as tables with the address of the root of these tables known as Root
System Description Table (RSDP) passed to the OS via a EFI_ACPI_20_TABLE_GUID configuration table
in the UEFI firmware. The Operating System uses this address to locate all other ACPI tables.

Certain implementations may make use of the RISC-V Functional Fixed Hardware Specification [21].

8.3.1. 64-bits Clean

ACPI started as a specification for 32-bit systems, so certain tables with physical address pointers
(e.g. RSDP, FADT) allow for reporting either 32-bit or 64-bit values using different fields. For the sake
of simplicity and consistency, the BRS disallows the use 32-bit address fields in such structures and
disallows the use of 32-bit only structures (thus, RSDT must not be implemented, as the XSDT is a
direct replacement). Thus, the ACPI tables are allowed to be located in any part of the physical
address space.

8.3.2. Hardware-Reduced ACPI

Compliant RISC-V systems only implement the hardware-reduced ACPI model [3] (Section 4.1). This
means the hardware portion of [3] (Section 4) is not required or supported. All functionality is
instead provided through equivalent software-defined interfaces and the complexity in supporting
ACPI is reduced.

8.3.3. Table Guidance

Table 4 summarizes the minimum set of structures that must exist to support basic booting of RISC-
V system with ACPI support. Table 5 lists additional possible ACPI tables based on the optional
features that can be supported. The latter is not meant to be exhaustive and mostly focuses on
tables that have specific guidance or that are expected to be frequently implemented.

  Table 4. Minimum required ACPI System Description Tables

   ACPI Table                               ACPI Section              Note

   Root System Description Pointer (RSDP) 5.2.5                       See high-level
                                                                      requirements.

   Extended System Description Table        5.2.8                     Contains pointers to other
   (XSDT)                                                             tables.

   Fixed ACPI Description Table (FADT)      5.2.9                     See ACPI_020, Section 8.3.2
                                                                      and the notes below.

   Differentiated System Description        5.2.11.1                  See Section 6.1 and the
   Table (DSDT)                                                       notes below.

   Multiple APIC Description Table          5.2.12                    See the notes below
   (MADT)

   RISC-V Hart Capabilities Table (RHCT)    New                       Communicates
                                                                      information about certain
                                                                      capabilities like ISA
                                                                      string, cache and MMU
                                                                      info.

   Processor Properties Topology Table      5.2.29                    See ACPI_030
   (PPTT)

  Table 5. Additional ACPI System Description Tables based on feature support.

   ACPI Table                               ACPI Section              Note

   Memory-mapped Configuration space        [17]                      See ACPI_040 and the
   (MCFG)                                                             notes below

   Secondary System Description Table       5.2.11.2                  See Section 6.1 and the
   (SSDT)                                                             notes below.

   Serial Port Console Redirection (SPCR)   [19]                      See ACPI_060 and the
                                                                      notes below

   ACPI Table for TPM 2.0 (TPM2)            [22]                      If the system supports
                                                                      TPM 2.0

   System Resource Affinity Table (SRAT)    5.2.16                    If the system supports
                                                                      NUMA

   System Locality Information Table        5.2.17                    If the system supports
   (SLIT)                                                             NUMA

   Boot Error Record Table (BERT)           18.3.1                    If APEI is supported

     ACPI Table                              ACPI Section                Note

     Error Injection Table (EINJ)            18.6.1                      If APEI is supported

     Error Record Serialization Table (ERST) 18.5                        If APEI is supported

     Hardware Error Source Table (HEST)      18.3.2                      If APEI is supported

     RISC-V IO Mapping Table (RIMT)          New                         If the system supports
                                                                         IOMMU

8.3.4. DSDT and SSDTs

The ACPI name space describes devices which cannot be enumerated by any other standard ways.
These typically include SoC embedded memory-mapped I/O devices, such as UARTs, PCIe or CXL
root complexes, GPIO controllers, etc.

It’s an implementation choice if the ACPI name space is defined solely with a DSDT or with any
additional SSDTs. For example, a UEFI implementation may choose to use SSDTs to:

 • describe devices that vary across SoC SKUs, revisions or variants.

 • describe devices, where the backing AML is generated or patched at boot time.

8.3.5. FADT

[3] (Section 5.2.9) provides guidance on filling the Fixed ACPI Description Table for HW-reduced
ACPI.

Don’t forget to select an appropriate Preferred PM Profile.

8.3.6. MADT

RINTC (per-hart) structures are mandatory. Depending on the interrupt controller implemented by
the system, the MADT will also contain either PLIC or APLIC structures.

Entry ordering can be correlated with initialization order by an OS, but should not be taken to
reflect affinity in resource sharing, e.g. sockets, caches, etc. RINTC hart ID and ACPI Processor UID
should not be decoded in a system-specific manner to divine CPU topology. The PPTT Processor
Properties Topology Table (PPTT) is to be used to describe affinities.

8.3.7. PLIC/APLIC Namespace Devices

Here’s an example of an ASL excerpt satisfying AML_100 and AML_080 requirements.

  Scope (\_SB)
  {
     Device (IC00)
     {
         Name (_HID, "RSCV0001") // _HID: Hardware ID
         Name (_UID, Zero) // _UID: Unique ID
         Method(_GSB) {

               Return (0x10) // Global System Interrupt Base for this PLIC starts at 16
            }
            Name (_CRS, ResourceTemplate () // _CRS: Current Resource Settings
            {
                Memory32Fixed (ReadWrite,
                  0x0C000000,         // Address Base.
                  0x00220000,         // Address Length
                  )
            })
      }
      Device (DEV1)
      {
        ...
        Name (_CRS, ResourceTemplate () // _CRS: Current Resource Settings
        {
            Memory32Fixed (ReadWrite,
              0x10010000,         // Address Base.
              0x00010000,         // Address Length
              )
            Interrupt (ResourceConsumer, Level, ActiveHigh, Exclusive, ,,)
            {
              0x10,
            }
        })
      }
  }

8.3.8. PCIe

On some architectures, it became an industry accepted norm to describe PCIe implementations not
compliant to the PCI Firmware Specification [17] using specification-defined ACPI tables and objects.
RISC-V systems compliant to the BRS must only expose ECAM-compatible implementations using
the MCFG and the standard AML Hardware ID (_HID) PNP0A08 and Compatible ID (_CID) PNP0A03, and
must not rely on ACPI table header information or other out-of-band means of detecting quirked
behavior.

Some minor incompatibilities, such as incorrect CFG0 filtering, broken BARs/capabilities for RCs,
embedded switches/bridges or embedded endpoints can be handled by emulating ECAM accesses in
privileged firmware (e.g. M-mode) or similar facilities (e.g. a hypervisor).

Non-compliant implementations must be exposed using vendor-specific mechanisms (e.g. AML
object with custom _HID, custom vendor-specific ACPI table if necessary). In cases where such PCIe
implementations are only used to expose a fixed non-removable device (e.g. USB host controller or
NVMe), the device could be exposed via a DSDT/SSDT MMIO device object without making the OS
aware of the underlying PCIe connection.

8.3.9. SPCR

Early serial console can be implemented using either an NS16550 UART (SPCR Interface Type 0x12),

a PL011 UART (SPCR Interface Type 0x03), or an SBI console (SPCR Interface Type 0x15). When
SPCR describes SBI console, the OS must use the SBI Probe extension (FID #3) to detect the Debug
Console Extension (DBCN).

The new Precise Baud Rate field, introduced in [19] rev. 4, allows describing rates faster than
115200 baud for NS16550-compatible UARTS.

Hardware not capable of interrupt-driven operation and SBI console should be described with
Interrupt Type of 0 and Global System Interrupt of 0.

8.4. SMBIOS Implementation Guidance
Note the DMTF requirements on the 64-bit SMBIOS 3.0 entry point ([9] Section 5.2.2), and the
conformance guidelines ([9] Annex A).

8.4.1. Type 44 Processor-Specific Data

The Machine Vendor ID, Machine Architecture ID, and Machine Implementation ID fields typically
reflect the mvendorid, marchid and mimpid CSRs respectively.

