2 The need for standardization
In the days of the old DOS operating system, it was often possible to combine development
tools from different vendors with few compatibility problems. With 32-bit Windows, the
situation has gone completely out of hand. Different compilers use different data
representations, different function calling conventions, and different object file formats.
While static link libraries have traditionally been considered compiler-specific, the
widespread use of dynamic link libraries (DLL's) has made the distribution of function
libraries in binary form more common. Unfortunately, the standardization of data
representation and calling conventions that would make DLL's compatible is still lacking.

In the Linux, BSD and Mac operating systems, there are fewer compatibility problems
because a more or less official standard is defined. Most of this standard is followed by Gnu
compilers version 3.x and later and by Clang compilers. Earlier versions of the Gnu compiler
are not compatible with this.

Fortunately, there is a growing recognition of the need for standardization of application
binary interfaces (ABI's). The ABI's for the 64-bit operating systems are specified in much
more detail than we have seen in older operating systems. However, some of these ABI's
still lack specification of name mangling schemes and other details. Traditionally, compiler
vendors have not published or standardized their name mangling schemes. A common
excuse was that the object files would not be compatible anyway because of differences in
data formats and calling conventions. Now that data formats and calling conventions are
specified in the ABI's, there is no excuse any more for not publishing and standardizing
name mangling schemes as well. It is my hope that this document will be a contribution
towards this end.

Compilers and other development tools is an area where de facto standards play an
important role. Almost all compilers for UNIX-like x86 platforms are designed to be
compatible with the Gnu compiler. And the calling "conventions" of the Microsoft compiler
has almost become a de facto standard for the Windows operating system. The C++
compilers from Intel, Symantec, Digital Mars and Codeplay are all designed to be binary
compatible with Microsoft's C++ compiler, despite the fact that Microsoft has refused to
publish important details. At least some of these compiler makers have relied on reverse
engineering for obtaining the necessary information. There is a pressing need for publishing
the relevant standards, and the present document is my contribution towards this end.

It is highly recommended that designers of development tools follow all available standards.
Where no official standard exists, use an existing compiler for reference. Use the Microsoft
compiler as a reference for Windows systems and the Gnu compiler as a reference for
UNIX-like systems. For features that are not supported by these compilers, use the Intel
compiler for reference. The calling conventions of these compilers may be considered de
facto standards for Windows and UNIX platforms.

