pointer is always 8 modulo 16 at the entry of a procedure. A procedure must subtract an
odd multiple of 8 from the stack pointer before any call instruction. A procedure can rely on
these rules when storing XMM data that require 16-byte alignment. This applies to all 64 bit
systems (Windows, Linux, BSD).

Where at least one function parameter of type __m256 is transferred on the stack, Unix
systems (32 and 64 bit) align the parameter by 32 and the called function can rely on the
stack being aligned by 32 before the call (i.e. the stack pointer is 32 minus the word size
modulo 32 at the function entry). This does not apply if the parameter is transferred in a
register.

Various methods for aligning the stack are described in Intel's application note AP 589
"Software Conventions for Streaming SIMD Extensions", "Data Alignment and Programming
Issues for the Streaming SIMD Extensions with the Intel® C/C++ Compiler", and "IA-32 Intel
® Architecture Optimization Reference Manual".

6 Register usage
Table 4. Register usage
                  16 bit          32 bit             32 bit        64 bit           64 bit
                  DOS,            Windows            Linux,        Windows          Linux,
                  Windows                            BSD, Mac                       BSD, Mac
                                                     OS                             OS
  scratch        AX, BX, CX,     EAX, ECX,          EAX, ECX,     RAX, RCX,        RAX, RCX,
  registers      DX, ES,         EDX,               EDX,          RDX, R8-R11,     RDX, RSI,
                 ST(0)-ST(7)     ST(0)-             ST(0)-        ST(0)-           RDI,
                                 ST(7),             ST(7),        ST(7),           R8-R11,
                                 XMM0-XMM7,         XMM0-XMM7,    K0-K7,           ST(0)-
                                 YMM0-YMM7,         YMM0-YMM7,    XMM0-XMM5,       ST(7)
                                 ZMM0-ZMM7,         ZMM0-ZMM7,    All YMM/ZMM      K0-K7,
                                 K0-K7              K0-K7         registers        XMM0-
                                                                  except the       XMM15,
                                                                  lower 128        YMM0-YMM15
                                                                                   ZMM0-ZMM31
                                                                  bits of XMM6-
                                                                  XMM15
  callee-save    SI, DI, BP,     EBX, ESI,          EBX, ESI,     RBX, RSI,        RBX, RBP,
  registers      DS              EDI, EBP           EDI, EBP      RDI, RBP,        R12-R15
                                                                  R12-R15,
                                                                  XMM6-XMM15,
                                                                  but nothing
                                                                  beyond the
                                                                  lower 128
                                                                  bits of vector
                                                                  registers
  registers      see table 5     see table 5        see table 5   RCX, RDX,        RDI, RSI,
  for                                                             R8, R9,          RDX, RCX,
  parameter                                                       XMM0-XMM3,       R8, R9,
  transfer                                                        YMM0-YMM3,       XMM0-XMM7,
                                                                  ZMM0-ZMM3        YMM0-YMM7,
                                                                                   ZMM0-ZMM7
  registers      AX, DX,         EAX, EDX,          EAX,          RAX, ST(0),      RAX, RDX,
  for return     ST(0)           ST(0),             ST(0),        XMM0, YMM0,      ST(0),
                                 XMM0, YMM0,        XMM0, YMM0,   ZMM0             XMM0, YMM0,
                                 ZMM0               ZMM0                           ZMM0

The rules for register usage depend on the operating system, as shown in table 4. Scratch
registers are registers that can be used for temporary storage without restrictions (also
called caller-save or volatile registers). Callee-save registers are registers that you have to
save before using them and restore after using them (also called non-volatile registers). You
can rely on these registers having the same value after a call as before the call. For
example, a function using EBP may look like this

     FunctionUsingEBP PROC NEAR
             push    ebp
             mov     ebp, esp
             sub     esp, 52
             ...
             mov     eax, [ebp+8]
             push    eax
             call    AnotherFunction
             mov     esp, ebp
             pop     ebp
             ret
     FunctionUsingEBP ENDP

Here, EBP is saved on the stack in the beginning of the function and restored in the end. The
code relies on EBP being unchanged after the call to AnotherFunction. EAX is also used,
but doesn't have to be saved.

It is more efficient to use registers for transferring parameters to a function and for receiving
the return value than to store these values on the stack. Some calling conventions use
certain registers for parameter transfer, but the rules for which registers to use are compiler-
specific in 16-bit and 32-bit systems. In 64-bit systems, the use of registers for parameter
transfer is standardized. All systems use registers for return values if the returned object fits
into the registers that are assigned for this purpose. See the next chapter for details.

Segment registers
You only have to care about segment registers in 16-bit mode. DS has to be saved and
restored if you change it. ES can be changed freely. In DOS programs, ES can have any
value. In 16-bit Windows, ES can only have values that are valid segment descriptors. It is
not allowed to use ES for other purposes.

In 32-bit and 64-bit mode, it is not allowed to change any segment register, not even
temporarily. CS, DS, ES and SS all point to the flat segment group. FS is used for a thread
environment block in Windows and for thread specific data in Linux. GS is used for a
processor control region in 64-bit Windows. It is unused but reserved in 32-bit Windows. It is
probably unused in 32-bit Linux.

Arithmetic flags
The rules for the arithmetic flags (zero flag, carry flag, etc.) are the same as for scratch
registers. These flags need not be saved. Some programming languages (not C++) use the
carry flag for Boolean returns.

Direction flag
The rules for the direction flag is the same in all systems. The direction flag is cleared by
default. If the direction flag is set, then it must be cleared again before any call or return.
Some compilers and subroutine libraries rely on the direction flag always being clear
(Microsoft, Watcom, Digital Mars) while other systems use the double-safe strategy of
always leaving the direction flag cleared, but not relying on receiving it cleared (Borland,
Gnu).

There is a slight possibility that some programmers may have ignored the rule for the
direction flag. Therefore, it may be wise to use the double-safe strategy and clear the
direction flag before using it if the code will be linked together with modules from unreliable
sources.

Interrupt flag
It is not allowed to turn off the interrupt flag in programs running in multi-user systems
because this would make it possible to steal unlimited amounts of CPU time from other
processes. It may be possible to turn off the interrupt flag in console mode programs
running under Windows 98 and earlier operating systems without network. But since
programs written for old operating systems are likely to be run under newer operating
systems, it is reasonable to say that it is never possible to turn off the interrupt flag in
application programs.

Floating point registers
The floating point registers ST(0)-ST(7) need not be saved. The register stack must be
emptied before any call or return, except for registers used for return values. The 64-bit
Microsoft compiler does not use ST(0)-ST(7).

MMX registers
The MM0-MM7 registers are aliased on the lower 64 bits of the floating point x87 registers
ST(0)-ST(7). There is no callee save rule, so the MMX registers can be used freely in a
function that doesn't use the floating point registers. The register set must be left in x87
mode. Therefore, it is required to issue an EMMS instruction (or FEMMS) before calling any
other (ABI compliant) function and before returning. Unfortunately, not all compilers do so.
Therefore, the use of MMX registers and the __m64 type should be avoided if possible. The
64-bit Microsoft compiler does not use MM0-MM7.

Floating point control word and MXCSR register
The floating point control word and bit 6-15 of the MXCSR register must be saved and
restored before any call or return by any procedure that needs to modify them, except for
procedures that have the purpose of changing these.

Deviating from the conventions
It is possible to deviate from the register usage conventions in an isolated section of code
as long as all interfaces to other parts of the code conform to the conventions. Some
compilers do this in a process known as whole program optimization. Any deviation from the
conventions must be well documented. Deviations from good programming practice are
justified only if a significant gain in speed can be obtained.

ABI for 64 bit Windows has been changed
Early versions of the 64 bit Windows ABI specified that only the lower 64 bits of XMM6-XMM15
have callee-save status while later versions specify that all 128 bits must be saved. An
MSDN document dated June 14, 2004 specifies the now-obsolete rule while a later version
dated February 18, 2005 specifies the new rule without comments on the change. The
change is mentioned in Intel compiler manuals. The 2005 standard is supported by Intel
C++ compiler version 8.1.015 and later. My tests show that Microsoft compiler version
14.00.2228.2 uses the obsolete convention, while version 14.00.40310.41 uses the new
convention. I have no information about Microsoft compiler versions between these two
numbers.

Microsoft 16-bit compiler
The 16-bit Microsoft compiler returns float and double through a static memory location
pointed to by AX. long double is returned in ST(0).

Watcom compiler
The Watcom compiler doesn't conform to the register usage conventions in table 4. The
only scratch register is EAX. All other general purpose registers are callee-save, except for
EBX, ECX, EDX when used for parameter transfer, and ESI when used for return pointer. (In
16-bit mode, ES is also a scratch register). It is possible to specify any other register usage
by the use of pragmas in the Watcom compiler.

How many registers should be callee-save?
I have never seen a study of the optimal ratio of caller-save to callee-save registers. Scratch
registers are preferred for temporary values that do not have to be saved across a function
call. Functions that do not call any other functions (leaf functions) and functions that have a
low probability of calling other functions (effective leaf functions) will prefer to use scratch
registers. If a function has more than one call to other functions or calls another function
inside a loop, and if it needs to store values of local variables across these function calls,
then the function becomes simpler by using callee-save registers. If the called functions
need to use the same registers, then there is no advantage in speed, but possibly in size. If
the called functions can use other registers, then there is an advantage in speed as well.
Since leaf functions are the most likely ones to be speed-critical, it is reasonable to have as
many scratch registers as are typically needed in a leaf function. Functions that call other
functions, on the other hand, are likely to have more variables and thus need more
registers. Balancing these considerations, I would expect the optimal fraction of scratch
registers to be between a half and two thirds for architectures that have few registers, and
somewhat lower if there are plenty of registers.

Some compilers have capabilities for whole-program-optimization, and we can expect such
features to become more common in the future. If the compiler has information about the
register needs of both caller and callee at the same time, then it can allocate different
registers to the two functions so that no registers need to be saved. In this case, the optimal
solution is to define callee-save registers only for system functions, device drivers and
library functions.

The size of vector registers will be increased to 512 bits in the future AVX-512 instruction
set, and probably increased later to 1024 or 2048 bits. These extensions will use automatic
zero-extension of the 256-bit YMM registers. It is therefore not useful to have callee-save
status for registers that can be expected to be bigger in future instruction sets if compatibility
with existing code is needed.

6.1 Can x87 floating point registers be used in 64-bit Windows?
There was originally some confusion about whether 64-bit Windows allows the use of the
floating point registers ST(0)-ST(7) and the MM0 - MM7 registers that are aliased upon
these. One early technical document found at Microsoft's website says "x87/MMX registers
are unavailable to Native Windows64 applications" (Rich Brunner: Technical Details Of
Microsoft® Windows® For The AMD64 Platform, Dec. 2003). An AMD document says: "64-
bit Microsoft Windows does not strongly support MMX and 3Dnow! instruction sets in the
64-bit native mode" (Porting and Optimizing Multimedia Codecs for AMD64 architecture on
Microsoft® Windows®, July 21, 2004). A document in Microsoft's MSDN says: "A caller
must also handle the following issues when calling a callee: [...] Legacy Floating-Point
Support: The MMX and floating-point stack registers (MM0-MM7/ST0-ST7) are volatile. That
is, these legacy floating-point stack registers do not have their state preserved across
context switches" (MSDN: Kernel-Mode Driver Architecture: Windows DDK: Other Calling
Convention Process Issues. Preliminary, June 14, 2004; February 18, 2005). This
description is nonsense because it confuses saving registers across function calls and
saving registers across context switches. Some versions of the Microsoft assembler ml64
(e.g. v. 8.00.40310) gives the following message when attempts are made to use floating
point registers in 64 bit mode: "error A2222: x87 and MMX instructions disallowed; legacy
FP state not saved in Win64".
However, a public discussion forum quotes the following answers from Microsoft engineers
regarding this issue: "From: Program Manager in Visual C++ Group, Sent: Thursday, May
26, 2005 10:38 AM. It does preserve the state. It's the DDK page that has stale information,
which I've requested it to be changed. Let them know that the OS does preserve state of
x87 and MMX registers on context switches." and "From: Software Engineer in Windows
Kernel Group, Sent: Thursday, May 26, 2005 11:06 AM. For user threads the state of legacy
floating point is preserved at context switch. But it is not true for kernel threads. Kernel
mode drivers can not use legacy floating point instructions."
(www.planetamd64.com/index.php?showtopic=3458&st=100).

The issue has finally been resolved with the long overdue publication of a more detailed ABI
for x64 Windows in the form of a document entitled "x64 Software Conventions", well hidden
in the bin directory (not the help directory) of some compiler packages. This document says:
"The MMX and floating-point stack registers (MM0-MM7/ST0-ST7) are preserved across
context switches. There is no explicit calling convention for these registers. The use of
these registers is strictly prohibited in kernel mode code." The same text has later appeared
at the Microsoft website (msdn2.microsoft.com/en-us/library/a32tsf7t(VS.80).aspx).

My tests indicate that these registers are saved correctly during task switches and thread
switches in 64-bit mode, even in an early beta version of x64 Windows.

The Microsoft C++ compiler version 14.0 never uses these registers in 64-bit mode, and
doesn't support long double precision. The Intel C++ compiler for x64 Windows supports
long double precision and __m64 in version 9.0 and later, while earlier versions do not.

The conclusion is that it is safe to use floating point registers and MMX registers in 64-bit
Windows, except in kernel mode drivers.

6.2 YMM vector registers
The 128-bit XMM registers are extended to 256-bit YMM registers in the AVX instruction
set. The use of YMM registers is supported in Windows 7, Windows Server 2008 R2 and
Linux kernel version 2.6.30 and later.

A preliminary ABI published by Intel (see literature p. 59) is supported by operating systems
and compilers. The YMM registers do not have callee-save status, except for the lower half
of YMM6-YMM15 in 64-bit Windows, where XMM6-XMM15 have callee-save status. None
of the vector registers have callee save status in Linux.

The corresponding vector types are named __m256, __m256d, __m256i. These should
preferably be aligned by 32, but some systems allow alignment by 16. The System V ABI for
64-bit Unix systems requires alignment by 32. The System V ABI for 32-bit Unix does not
mention __m256, but tests show that it is aligned by 32. Apparently, Windows allows
alignment by 16. In both Windows and Linux, these registers are aligned by 32 when
transferred on the stack as function parameters.

6.3 Transitions between VEX and non-VEX code
All instructions with 128-bit vector registers have two versions: a legacy version that leaves
the bits beyond 128 unchanged, and a version with VEX prefix that sets the remaining bits
to zero if the vector register has more than 128 bits. The first Intel processors with 256-bit
vectors had different states where the 256-bit registers were split into two halves when
executing legacy 128-bit instructions, and merged into full 256-bit registers when executing
256-bit instructions. These state transitions were quite costly (70 clock cycles). A
recommended way to avoid the cost of these state transitions was to issue the instruction
VZEROUPPER to clear the upper half of all vector registers or VZEROALL to clear the whole

registers. Good performance requires that a VZEROUPPER instruction is used when leaving
any code that uses 256-bit or 512-bit vectors if there is any risk that the subsequent code
will use non-VEX 128-bit instructions.

The recommendation from Intel is that any function that uses YMM or ZMM registers should
issue the instruction VZEROUPPER or VZEROALL before calling any ABI compliant function and
before returning to any ABI compliant function. VZEROUPPER is used if the ABI specifies that
some of the XMM registers must be preserved (64-bit Windows) or if an XMM register is
used for parameter transfer or return value. VZEROALL can optionally be used instead of
VZEROUPPER in other cases. Neither VZEROUPPER nor VZEROALL is needed before calling a
function that uses YMM or ZMM registers for parameter transfer or before returning from a
function that uses the YMM0 or ZMM0 register for return value. Failure to use VZEROUPPER or
VZEROALL will result in poor performance but no error. See manual 2: "Optimizing
subroutines in assembly language" for an explanation, and the discussion in Intel's Forum:
https://software.intel.com/en-us/forums/intel-isa-extensions/topic/301853

The high cost of transition between VEX and non-VEX states is found in Intel Sandy Bridge,
Ivy Bridge, Haswell, and Broadwell processors. The Skylake processor also has different
states, but the state transitions are fast. Any instruction that touches an YMM or ZMM
register will set the Skylake processor in a state where the vector registers are regarded as
having a dirty upper half. Any non-VEX instruction that writes to an XMM register on the
Skylake will have a false dependence on the previous value of this register. This can cause
a performance loss if there is no VZEROUPPER after VEX code on the Skylake and probably
on later Intel processors as well.

Unfortunately, the first Intel processor with 512-bit registers, called Knights Landing, has
very inefficient VZEROUPPER and VZEROALL instructions. The Knights Landing processor has
no false dependence when mixing VEX and non-VEX code. The recommendation for the
Knights Landing is not to use VZEROUPPER or VZEROALL. (Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures
Optimization Reference Manual, 2016). This requires a separate code version for Knights
Landing.

The Skylake, and supposedly also future Intel processors with AVX512, are treating the new
registers zmm16-zmm31 separately so that you can avoid the need for VZEROUPPER by
using only zmm16-zmm31, and not zmm0-zmm15. See the discussion on
https://software.intel.com/en-us/forums/intel-isa-extensions/topic/704023.

Current AMD processors have no such problems, and VZEROUPPER is not needed on any
currently known AMD processors, but it is likely that it will be needed on future AMD
processors.

6.4 ZMM vector registers
The size of vector registers is 512 bits in the AVX512F instruction set, and it is possible that
it will be increased to 1024 bits or more in some future processors.

The AVX512 instruction set increases the number of vector registers in 64-bit mode to 32
registers named ZMM0 - ZMM31. In 32-bit mode, there are only 8 ZMM registers. The 512-
bit ZMM registers are stored to memory locations aligned by 64, according to the ABI’s,
although unaligned access is possible.

In addition, there are eight new mask registers named k0 - k7. These registers are specified
as 64 bits. Only 16 bits are used in AVX512F, while all 64 bits are used in AVX512BW.

None of the mask registers have callee save status in Linux or Windows. The AVX512F
instruction set has no instruction for storing all 64 bits of a mask register. Therefore, it is

impossible to use these registers in an interrupt handler under AVX512F in a way that is
compatible with AVX512BW, unless the entire register state is saved.

The mask registers are treated as integers in function calls. Integer registers are used when
mask registers are specified as function parameters or return.

The Intel memory protection instructions, MPX, adds another four new registers, BND0-
BND3 of 2x64 bits each.

6.5 Register usage in kernel code
Register use is more restricted in device drivers and kernel code than in application code.
The operating system may save time by not saving all registers during interrupts and task
switches.

The FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions can save the x87, MMX and XMM registers during a
task switch, but not the YMM or ZMM registers. Instead, it is necessary to use the XSAVE
and XRESTOR instructions for saving the YMM/ZMM registers and future larger registers
during a task switch. It is not sufficient to store each vector register individually because this
would be incompatible with future extensions of the register size. Any instruction that writes
to a YMM/ZMM register will clear all bits beyond 256/512 in future register extensions larger
than 256/512 bits. Using XSAVE and XRESTOR is the only way of saving the vector registers
that is compatible with future extensions. The operating system must use CPUID to
determine the necessary size of the save buffer.

Interrupt service routines under Windows and Linux
Interrupt service routines should be fast. It would take too much time to save and restore all
registers in an interrupt service routine. The use of x87 and vector registers is prohibited in
interrupt service routines in most operating systems, including Linux and 32-bit Windows. It
may be possible to use the XMM registers, but not the YMM registers, in interrupt service
routines in 64-bit Windows, but it is not recommended to use XMM registers here because
of the extra cost of changing the YMM register state.

Device drivers under Windows
The x87 floating point registers can be used in device drivers in 32-bit Windows if saved and
restored with KeSaveFloatingPointState and KeRestoreFloatingPointState. It is strictly
prohibited to use x87 registers and MMX registers in 64-bit Windows device drivers.

XMM registers can be used in Windows device drivers. In 32-bit Windows it is necessary to
save these registers using KeSaveFloatingPointState and KeRestoreFloatingPointState or
KeSaveExtendedProcessorState and KeRestoreExtendedProcessorState. In 64-bit Windows
device drivers it is sufficient to obey the general register usage rules when using XMM
registers.

YMM registers can be used in 32-bit and 64-bit Windows device drivers if saved and
restored with KeSaveExtendedProcessorState and KeRestoreExtendedProcessorState. These
functions will allocate a buffer of sufficient size in case of future register extensions.

Device drivers under Linux
Linux systems use lazy saving of floating point registers and vector registers. This means
that these registers are not saved and restored on every task switch. Instead they are
saved/restored on the first access after a task switch. This method saves time in case no
more than one thread uses these registers. The lazy saving scheme is not supported in
kernel mode. Any device driver that attempts to use these registers improperly will cause an
exception that will probably make the system crash. A device driver that needs to use vector
registers must first save these registers by calling the function kernel_fpu_begin() and

