restore the registers by calling kernel_fpu_end() before returning or sleeping. These
functions also prevent pre-emptive interruption of the device driver which could otherwise
mess up the registers. kernel_fpu_begin() saves all floating point registers and vector
registers if available.

There is no red zone in 64-bit Linux kernel mode.

The programmer should be aware of these restrictions if calling any other library than the
system kernel libraries from a device driver.

7 Function calling conventions
Table 5. Function calling conventions
segment    calling conven-       parameters        parameter    stack        comments
word       tion, operating       in registers      order on     cleanup
size       system, compiler                        stack        by
16 bit     cdecl                                   C            caller
           pascal                                  Pascal       function
           fastcall Microsoft    ax, dx, bx        Pascal       function     return pointer in bx
           (non-member)
           fastcall Microsoft    ax, dx            Pascal       function     this on stack low
           (member function)                                                 address.
                                                                             return pointer in ax
           fastcall Borland      ax, dx, bx        Pascal       function     this on stack low
                                                                             address.
                                                                             return ptr on stack high
                                                                             addr.
           Watcom                ax, dx, bx, cx    C            function     return pointer in si
32 bit     cdecl                                   C            caller
           stdcall                                 C            function
           pascal                                  Pascal       function
           Gnu                                     C            hybrid       Stack possibly aligned by
                                                                             16. See p. 9
           fastcall Microsoft    ecx, edx          C            function     return pointer on stack if
                                                                             not member function
           fastcall Gnu          ecx, edx          C            function
           fastcall Borland      eax, edx, ecx     Pascal       function
           thiscall Microsoft    ecx               C            function     default for member
                                                                             functions
           Watcom                eax, edx,         C            function     return pointer in esi
                                 ebx, ecx
64 bit     Windows               rcx/zmm0,         C            caller       Stack aligned by 16.
           (Microsoft, Intel)    rdx/zmm1,                                   32 bytes shadow space
                                 r8/zmm2,                                    on stack. The specified
                                 r9/zmm3                                     registers can only be
                                                                             used for parameter
                                                                             number 1, 2, 3 and 4,
                                                                             respectively.
           Linux, BSD, Mac       rdi, rsi,         C            caller       Stack aligned by 16.
           (Gnu, Intel)          rdx, rcx, r8,                               Red zone below stack.
                                 r9, zmm0-7

The way of transferring parameters to a function is not always as well standardized as we
would wish, as table 5 shows. In many cases it is possible to specify a particular calling
convention in a C++ declaration, for example:
int __stdcall SomeFunction (float a);
In 16 bit and 32 bit mode, we have the same calling conventions in different operating
systems, but some differences between different brands of compilers, especially for the
__fastcall convention and for member functions. In 64 bit mode, the different operating
systems use different calling conventions, but I would not expect differences between
different compilers because all details are defined in the official ABI's.

The entries in table 5 need some explanations. Segment word size defines the hardware
platform. 16 bit refers to DOS and Windows 3.x and earlier. 32 bit refers to Windows 95 and
later, Linux and BSD for the 32-bit x86 processors. 64 bit refers to Windows, Linux and BSD
for the x64 processor architecture.

Calling convention is the name of the calling convention. __cdecl, __stdcall, __pascal and
__fastcall can be specified explicitly in C++ function declarations for compilers that support
these conventions. __cdecl is the default for applications and static libraries. __stdcall is
the default for system calls (including Windows API calls) and recommended for library
DLL's in 32-bit Windows. __thiscall is used by default in Microsoft compilers for member
functions in 16 and 32 bit mode. Microsoft, Borland, Watcom and Gnu are brands of
compilers. Intel compilers for Windows are compatible with Microsoft. Intel compilers for
Linux are compatible with Gnu. Symantec, Digital Mars and Codeplay compilers are
compatible with Microsoft. In 64 bit mode, there is one default calling convention for each
operating system, while other calling conventions are rare in 64 bit mode.

Parameters in registers specifies which registers are used for transferring parameters. ecx,
edx means that the first parameter goes into ecx, the second parameter goes into edx, and
subsequent parameters are stored on the stack. Parameter types that do not fit into the
registers are stored on the stack. In general, all integer types, bool, enum and pointers can
be transferred in the general purpose registers. References are treated as identical to
pointers in all respects. Arrays are transferred as pointers. Float and double types are
transferred in XMM registers in 64 bit mode, otherwise on the stack. Long doubles,
structures, classes and unions may be transferred on the stack or through pointers if they
do not fit into registers. The rules for deciding whether an object is transferred in registers,
on the stack, or through a pointer are explained below. Where no register is specified in
table 5, all parameters go on the stack. Return parameters are returned in registers as
specified in chapter 6. Composite objects are returned as specified below.

Parameter order on stack. The Pascal order means that the first parameter has the highest
address on the stack and the last parameter has the lowest address, immediately above the
return address. If parameters are put on the stack by push instructions then the first
parameter is pushed first because the stack grows downwards. The C order is opposite:
The first parameter has the lowest address, immediately above the return address, and the
last parameter has the highest address. This method was introduced with the C language in
order to make it possible to call a function with a variable number of parameters, such as
printf.

Each parameter must take a whole number of stack entries. If a parameter is smaller than
the stack word size then the rest of that stack entry is unused. Likewise, if a parameter is
transferred in a register that is too big, then the rest of that register is unused.

If the type of a parameter is not specified explicitly because the function has no prototype or
because it has varargs (...), then parameters of type float are converted to double, char
and short int are converted to int.

Stack cleanup by. Specifies whether the stack space used by parameters is freed by the
caller or by the called function. If n bytes of stack space is used for parameters and the
called function has the responsibility for stack cleanup, then this function must return with a
ret n instruction, otherwise ret 0. The 32-bit Gnu compiler uses a hybrid of these two
methods: An object return pointer (see below) must be removed from the stack by the called
function, all other parameters are removed by the caller.

If stack cleanup is the responsibility of the caller, and if speed is important, then it may be
advantageous for the caller to leave the stack pointer where it is after the call and put
parameters for a subsequent function call on the stack by mov instructions rather than by
push instructions.

Further rules
Member functions (Applies to all C++ compilers and operating systems). All member
functions receive a pointer to the object as an implicit parameter, known as this in C++.
This pointer comes before the explicit parameters, usually as the first parameter.
Constructors must return this in the return register.

Returning objects (Applies to all compilers and operating systems). Objects that do not fit
into the return registers are returned to a storage space supplied by the caller. The caller
must supply a return pointer as an implicit parameter to the called function if this is
necessary. The same pointer is returned in the return register. The rules for deciding
whether an object is returned in registers or through a return pointer are explained below for
each platform.

A member function that returns an object can have two implicit parameters, a return pointer
and a this pointer. In Microsoft compilers and 64 bit Windows, the this pointer is the first
parameter, the return pointer is the second parameter, and all explicit parameters come
thereafter. In Borland and Gnu compilers and in 64 bit Linux and BSD, the return pointer is
the first parameter, the this pointer is the second parameter, and all explicit parameters
come thereafter (this order is compatible with C).

Prolog and epilog. Some systems have specific rules for how the function prolog and epilog
should be constructed in order to support stack unwinding. See chapter 9.

64 bit Windows has more rules. The first parameter goes into rcx or xmm0; the second
parameter goes into rdx or xmm1, etc. This means that if the first parameter is a float in xmm0
and the second parameter is an integer, then the latter goes into rdx, while rcx is unused.
The maximum number of parameters that can be transferred in registers is four in total, not
four integers plus four floats.

The caller must reserve 32 bytes of stack space as "shadow space" for register parameters,
even if there are no parameters. The 32 bytes of shadow space come immediately after the
return address. Any parameters on the stack come after the 32 empty bytes. The intended
purpose of the shadow space is as a "home address" for the register parameters which the
called function can use for storing the register parameters in case the registers are used for
something else. The caller does not need to put anything into the shadow space. Since the
shadow space is owned by the called function, it is safe to use these 32 bytes of shadow
space for any purpose by the called function. Even a function without parameters can rely
on having 32 bytes of storage space after the return address.

The shadow space is often used by compilers for storing the register parameters. I haven't
seen a compiler using the shadow space for anything else, although it would be perfectly
legal to do so.

If the type of a parameter is not specified explicitly because the function has no prototype or
because it has varargs (...), and a parameter of type double is passed in an XMM register
(float is converted to double), then the corresponding integer register must contain the
same value (not converted to int). This does not apply to parameters passed on the stack.
64 bit Linux, BSD and Mac. This system has six integer registers and eight XMM registers
for parameter transfer. This means that a maximum of 14 parameters can be transferred in
registers in 64 bit Linux, BSD and Mac, while 64 bit Windows allows only 4. There is no
shadow space on the stack. Instead there is a "red zone" below the stack pointer that can
be used for temporary storage. The red zone is the space from [rsp-128] to [rsp-8]. A
function can rely on this space being untouched by interrupt and exception handlers (except
in kernel code). It is therefore safe to use this space for temporary storage as long as you
don't do any push or call instructions. Everything stored in the red zone is destroyed by
function calls. The red zone is not available in Windows.

If the type of a parameter is not specified explicitly because the function has no prototype or
because it has varargs (...), then rax must indicate the number of XMM registers used for
parameter transfer. Valid values are 0 - 8. A value of rax that is higher than the actual
number of XMM registers used is allowed as long as it doesn't exceed 8.

sysenter calls use r10 instead of rcx for parameter transfer and rax for function number.

Hot patching support
Hot patching is a mechanism in Windows that allows any function to be replaced by a
security patch without restarting the process that uses the function. If support for hot
patching is desired then there must be at least 6 unused bytes before the function entry,
and the first instruction in the function must be at least two bytes long. In 32-bit Windows,
the compiler may insert a 2-bytes NOP (MOV EDI,EDI) in the beginning of the function. In
64-bit Windows the compiler inserts a REX.W prefix before the first instruction if it is a push
instruction to make it two bytes long.

7.1 Passing and returning objects
Table 6. Methods for passing structure, class and union objects
  segment word size                              16 bit                                          32 bit                                                        64 bit
 compiler
                                     Microsoft

                                                  Borland

                                                             Watcom

                                                                      Microsoft

                                                                                  Borland

                                                                                            Borland

                                                                                                                 Gnu v.3 or later

                                                                                                                                               Watcom

                                                                                                                                                         Windows

                                                                                                                                                                       Linux, BSD, Mac

 calling convention
                                     all

                                                  all

                                                                      all

                                                                                  default

                                                                                            fastcall

                                                                                                       default

                                                                                                                                    fastcall

                                                                                                                                               default

 max number of integer registers     0           0           2        0           0         1          0                            1          1         1         2
 used for transfer of an object
 max number of XMM registers         0           0           0        0           0         0          0                            0          0         0         2
 used for transfer of an object
 simple structure, class or union    S           S           I        S           S         I          S                            I          I         IZ        R
 size not a power of 2               S           S           S        S           S         S          S                            S          S         PI        R
 contains mixed int and f.p.         S           S           S        S           S         S          S                            S          S         IZ        R
 contains long double                S           S           S        S           S         S          S                            S          S         IZ        S
 has member function                 S           S           I        S           S         I          S                            I          I         IZ        R

  has constructor                       S    S     I    S     S    S      S    I    I     IZ    R
  has copy constructor                  S    S     PI S       S    S      PS PI PI PI PI
  has destructor                        S    S     PI S       S    I      PS PI PI IZ           PI
  has virtual                           S    S     PI S       S    S      PS PI PI PI PI
  has inheritance                       S    S     I    S     S    I      S    I    I     IZ    R
  has no data                           S    S     I    S     S    I      S    I    I     IZ    S
Symbols:
S:      Copy of entire object transferred on the stack.
PI:     Temporary copy referenced by pointer in register. If no vacant register, use PS.
PS:     Temporary copy referenced by pointer on stack.
I:      Entire object transferred in integer registers. Use S if too big or not enough vacant
        registers.
IZ:     Entire object transferred in integer register, zero-extended to register size. Use PI if
        too big. Use PS if no vacant register.
R:      Entire object is transferred in integer registers and/or XMM registers if the size is no
        bigger than 128 bits, otherwise on the stack. Each 64-bit part of the object is
        transferred in an XMM register if it contains only float or double, or in an integer
        register if it contains integer types or mixed integer and float. Two consecutive floats
        can be packed into the lower half of one XMM register. Consecutive doubles are not
        packed. No more than 64 bits of each XMM register is used. Use S if not enough
        vacant registers for the entire object. Examples: int and float: RDI, int and double:
        EDI and XMM0, four floats: XMM0 and XMM1.

There are several different methods to transfer a parameter to a function if the parameter is
a structure, class or union object. A copy of the object is always made, and this copy is
transferred to the called function either in registers, on the stack, or by a pointer, as
specified in table 6. The symbols in the table specify which method to use. S takes
precedence over I and R. PI and PS take precedence over all other passing methods.

As table 6 tells, an object cannot be transferred in registers if it is too big or too complex.
For example, an object that has a copy constructor cannot be transferred in registers
because the copy constructor needs an address of the object. The copy constructor is
called by the caller, not the callee.

Objects passed on the stack are aligned by the stack word size, even if higher alignment
would be desired. Objects passed by pointers are not aligned by any of the compilers
studied, even if alignment is explicitly requested. The 64bit Windows ABI requires that
objects passed by pointers be aligned by 16.

An array is not treated as an object but as a pointer, and no copy of the array is made,
except if the array is wrapped into a structure, class or union.

The 64 bit compilers for Linux differ from the ABI (version 0.97) in the following respects:
Objects with inheritance, member functions, or constructors can be passed in registers.
Objects with copy constructor, destructor or virtual are passed by pointers rather than on the
stack.

The Intel compilers for Windows are compatible with Microsoft. Intel compilers for Linux are
compatible with Gnu.

Table 7. Methods for returning structure, class and union objects
(except intrinsic vectors __m64, __m128, __m256, __m512)
  segment word size                                   16 bit                                                   32 bit                                        64 bit
 compiler

                                          Microsoft

                                                          Borland

                                                                        Watcom

                                                                                     Microsoft

                                                                                                     Borland

                                                                                                                   Watcom
                                                                                                                            Mac OS
                                                                                                                            Gnu except

                                                                                                                                             Mac OS

                                                                                                                                                          Windows
                                                                                                                                                                    Mac
                                                                                                                                                                    Linux, BSD,
 max number of integer registers      0               2             2            2               1             1             2           2            1              2
 used for return
 max number of ZMM registers          0               0             0            0               0             0             0           0            0              2
 used for return
 max number of f.p. registers         0               0             0            0               0             0             0(1)        0            0              1
 used for return
 simple structure, class or union     P               I             I            I               I             I             I           I            I              R
 bigger than max registers            P               PF            PSI          PS              P             PSI           P           P            P              P
 size not a power of 2                P               PF            PSI          PS              P             PSI           P           I            P              R,X
 contains only f.p.                   P               I             I            I               I             I             P(F         I?           I              X
                                                                                                                             1)
 contains mixed int and f.p.          P               PF            PSI          I               P             PSI           I           I            I              R
 contains mixed float and double      P               PF            PSI          PS              P             PSI           P           P            P              X
 contains only one long double        P               PF            PSI          I               P             PSI           P(F         P            I              F
                                                                                                                             1)
 contains only one SIMD type                                                     P                                           P           P            P              Y
 contains mixed long double and       P               PF            PSI          PS              P             PSI           P           P            P              P
 other
 has member function                  P               I             I            I               I             I             P(I)        I            I              R
 has inheritance                      P               I             I            P               I             I             P(I)        I            P              R
 has constructor                      P               PF            I            P               P             I             P(I)        I            P              R
 has copy constructor                 P               PF            PA           P               P             PA            P           P            P              P
                                                                    X                                          X
 has destructor                       P               PF            PA           P               P             PA            P           P            P              P
                                                                    X                                          X
 has virtual                          P               PF            PA           P               P             PA            P           P            P              P
                                                                    X                                          X
  has no data                           P       I            0      I
                                                                    I              P(0) P        0             I                                                     I
Symbols:
I       Returned in integer registers
X       Returned in XMM registers
Y       Returned in XMM0 or YMM0 or ZMM0
F       Returned in ST(0) register
F1      If one float, double or long double, use ST(0), otherwise I.
R       The entire object is returned in integer registers RAX and RDX, and/or XMM registers
        XMM0 and XMM1, if the size is no bigger than 128 bits, otherwise on the stack. Each
        64-bit part of the object is transferred in an XMM register if it contains only float or
        double, or in an integer register if it contains integer types or mixed integer and float.
        Two consecutive float's can be packed into the lower half of one XMM register.
        Consecutive double's are not packed. No more than 64 bits of each XMM register is
        used. Use P if not enough vacant registers. Examples: int and float: RAX, int and
        double: EAX and XMM0, four floats: XMM0 and XMM1.
P       Pointer to temporary memory space passed to function. Pointer may be passed in
        register if fastcall or 64-bit mode, otherwise on stack. Same pointer is returned in
        AX, EAX or RAX.

PS     Pointer to temporary memory space passed to function. Pointer is passed on stack,
       even if fastcall. Same pointer is returned in EAX.
PF     Far pointer to temporary memory space passed on stack and returned in DX:AX.
PAX    Pointer to temporary memory space passed to function in AX/EAX and returned
       unchanged in AX/EAX.
PSI    Pointer to temporary memory space passed to function in SI/ESI and returned
       unchanged in AX/EAX.
0      Nothing passed or returned.

A struct, class or union object can be returned from a function in registers only if it is
sufficiently small and not too complex. If the object is too complex or doesn't fit into the
appropriate registers then the caller must supply storage space for the object and pass a
pointer to this space as a parameter to the function. The pointer can be passed in a register
or on the stack. The same pointer is returned by the function. The detailed rules are given in
table 7.

P and PF take precedence over all other. PS takes precedence over all but P. PAX takes
precedence over PSI, which takes precedence over I.

The storage space pointed to by return pointers is aligned by 16 in the 64 bit Gnu compiler
and the 64 bit MS compiler. The 32 bit Microsoft compiler can align this space if explicitly
requested.

The Gnu compiler version 2.x and some implementations of version 3.x differ, as indicated
by the parentheses.

The Intel compilers for Windows are compatible with Microsoft. Intel compilers for Linux are
compatible with Gnu.

The 64 bit Gnu compiler differs from the ABI (version 0.97) by using only one floating point
register for return.

7.2 Passing and returning SIMD types
Table 8. Methods for passing and returning SIMD data types
  segment word size                            32 bit                        64 bit
  operating system                   Windows       Linux           Windows        Linux
 __m64 parameters transferred in       3 mmx          3 mmx         4 g. p.         8 xmm
 registers                           registers      registers      registers      registers
                                                                                 (0 in gcc v.
                                                                                    ≤ 3.3)
 alignment of __m64 parameters            4             8              8               8
 on stack
 __m64 returned in register             mm0            mm0            rax           xmm0
                                                                                 (mm0 in gcc
                                                                                   v. ≤ 3.3)
 __m128 parameters transferred          3 xmm          3 xmm      transferred       8 xmm
 in registers                         registers      registers     by pointer     registers
 alignment of __m128 parameters          16             16             16             16
 on stack
 __m128 returned in register            xmm0           xmm0          xmm0           xmm0
 __m256 parameters transferred          3 ymm          3 ymm      transferred       8 ymm
 in registers                         registers      registers     by pointer     registers
 alignment of __m256 parameters       16 or 32          32             32            32
 on stack

    __m256 returned in register         ymm0           ymm0           ymm01          ymm0
    __m512 parameters transferred        3 zmm         3 zmm       transferred       8 zmm
    in registers                       registers     registers      by pointer     registers
    alignment of __m512 parameters        64            64              64            64
    on stack
    __m512 returned in register         zmm0           zmm0           zmm01          zmm0

The types __m64, __m128, __m256 and __m512 define the SIMD data types that fit into the 64-
bit mmx registers, the 128-bit xmm registers, the 256-bit ymm registers or the 512-bit zmm
registers, respectively. Most compilers supports these types as intrinsic types. There are
special rules for passing and returning function parameters of the these types as shown in
table 8. Some compilers have options for either treating these types as intrinsic types, using
the passing methods defined in table 8, or treating them as structures according to the rules
in table 6 and table 7. The types __m128d, __m128i, __m256d, __m256i, __m512d and __m512i
are treated in the same way as __m128, __m256 and __m512.

Under 32-bit Windows and 32-bit Linux, the first three parameters of type __m64 are
transferred in registers MM0 - MM2. Any additional parameters of type __m64 are transferred
on the stack aligned by 4. Under 64-bit Linux, __m64 parameters are passed on the stack.
__m64 may not be supported in some 64-bit Windows compilers (see p. 13). Return values of
type __m64 are transferred in RAX in 64-bit Windows, and in MM0 on all other platforms.

Under 32-bit Windows and 32-bit Linux, the first three parameters of type __m128 are
transferred in registers XMM0 - XMM2. Any additional parameters of type __m128 are
transferred on the stack aligned by 16. This alignment is accomplished as follows: If there
are more than three parameters of type __m128 then the stack must be aligned by 16 before
the call instruction. Consequently, the value of the stack pointer is 12 modulo 16 at the entry
of the called function. The parameter space on the stack is padded, if necessary, to align
the parameters of type __m128 by 16. In 64-bit Windows, parameters of type __m128 are
passed by a pointer to an aligned copy. In 64-bit Linux, the first eight parameters of type
__m128 are transferred in registers XMM0 - XMM7. Any additional parameters of type __m128
are transferred on the stack aligned by 16. If there are more than eight parameters of type
__m128 then the stack space is padded, if necessary, to align the parameters. Return values
of type __m128 are transferred in XMM0 on all platforms. __m256 and __m512 parameters are
transferred analogously to __m128 parameters, except for the fact that in some systems they
are aligned by 16, in other systems by 32/64, when transferred on the stack.

The __vectorcall convention in Windows allows up to six vector registers to be used for
function parameters (ZMM0 - ZMM5), and up to four vector registers to be used for function
return. A shadow space of 8 bytes is allocated for each vector register parameter. See
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/cpp/vectorcall for details.

1
    Gcc compiler 9.0 has a bug here.
