            PUSH    EBP
            MOV     EBP, ESP
            ...
            MOV     ESP, EBP
            POP     EBP
            RET
    _FunctionWithFramePointer ENDP

Additional information about destructors to be called may be provided either by the function
itself or by data in a static data segment designed for only this purpose.

If a structured exception or longjmp or thread termination can happen inside a function or
any of its child functions, then it is not allowed to use BP/EBP/RBP for any other purpose
than a frame pointer in systems that rely on BP being a frame pointer.

Detailed information about specification of the unwind mechanism for x64 systems can be
found in the respective ABI's. See literature, page 59. I don't have the detailed information
for 32-bit systems.

10 Initialization and termination functions
A C++ module may contain global objects with constructors that must be called before main
is called, and destructors to be called after main has returned. There may be other
initialization and termination tasks to perform, too. For this purpose, the compiler provides a
list of pointers to initialization functions and termination functions. These lists of function
pointers are stored in separate data segments designed for only this purpose. These lists
may contain additional information about the priority or order in which the initialization and
termination functions should be called. The names of these segments and the format of
these tables are different for different compilers.

11 Virtual tables and runtime type identification
A class with virtual member functions always has a virtual table. This is a table of member
function pointers used for finding the right version of a polymorphous function. Each
instance of the class has a pointer to the virtual table. Microsoft, Borland and Gnu version
3.x compilers place the pointer to the virtual table at the beginning of the object, while
Watcom and Gnu version 2.x compilers place it at the end of the object. This affects the
offset of all data members of the class so that member functions may be incompatible
between compilers.

Information for runtime type identification is usually stored in connection with the virtual
table.

The "Itanium C++ ABI" includes more detailed information about the representation of virtual
tables and runtime type identification. This information may apply to other platforms as well.

12 Communal data
Communal data are data that may occur identically in more than one module, but the final
executable should contain no more than one instance of this redundant information. The
linker may check that all instances are identical and store only one instance in the
executable file. Communal data are used for virtual tables, template instantiations, and
possibly for global data.

