Certain system functions can be accessed at fixed 64-bit addresses in the so-called
commpage.

It is possible to place code at addresses below 231 and reduce the size of pagezero so that
32-bit absolute addresses can be used, but this is rarely done.

13.6 64-bit memory models in Cygwin
Cygwin is a system that emulates the behavior of Linux tools under Windows. Cygwin64 is
using a medium memory model by default. This means that static data are accessed by 64-
bit absolute addresses. The purpose of this memory model is to make it possible to address
a data object in another executable file, as described on page 51 below. The performance is
reduced considerably by the medium memory model. This performance cost can be avoided
by compiling with the option -mcmodel=small with a gcc or Clang compiler, except in the
rare case where you are linking directly to a data object in another executable file.

It is recommended to use Mingw64(msys2) instead of Cygwin when performance is critical.
Mingw64 is using a standard Windows memory model.

14 Relocation of executable code
Most operating systems use the same, or almost the same, file type for executable files and
object files. An executable file may need relocation when it is loaded into memory,
depending on the load address. The load address or image base is the virtual memory
address at which the beginning of the executable file is placed. Relocation is a process
where all cross-references using absolute memory addresses in the file are modified
according to the load address.

The executable file may be relocated by the linker to a preferred load address. If the
preferred load address is not vacant then the executable file has to be relocated again by
the loader to another load address.

The most common values for the preferred load address are: 0x400000 for 32-bit and 64-bit
Windows and 64-bit Linux systems; 0x8048000 for 32-bit Linux; 0x1000 for 32-bit Mach-O
systems; 0x100000000 for 64-bit Mach-O systems. Other positive values can be used as
well. The linker can adjust all cross references in the exe file according to the preferred load
address. If a process has only one executable file, then the operating system can map the
physical memory address at which this file is loaded to the desired virtual address, e.g.
0x400000. A load address less than 231 = 0x80000000 makes it possible to use a small
memory model where 32-bit signed absolute addresses can be used in 64-bit systems.
Negative addresses are reserved for the operating system kernel.

A dynamically linked library or shared object will need relocation at load time if the preferred
load address is occupied by another library. A dynamic library will usually need at least two
memory pages: a shared memory page for the code section and possibly read-only data,
and a non-shared memory page for the writable data section. The size of a memory page is
either 4 kbytes or 2 Mbytes.

Relocation in Windows
The preferred load address for the main executable is traditionally 0x400000, but other
addresses are possible. The preferred load address for a DLL differs. A DLL may be loaded
at an address higher than 231 in 64-bit mode. There is no compiler option to distinguish
between main executables and DLLs. Therefore, 32-bit absolute addresses are rarely used
in 64-bit Windows. Instead, code and data within the same executable or DLL are accessed
with 32-bit addresses relative to the instruction pointer (rip-relative) or relative to the load
address (image-relative).

Multiple processes can use the same virtual memory addresses mapped to different
physical addresses. When a DLL is shared between multiple processes, the sections
typically have the same virtual addresses in all processes when the DLL is loaded at the
preferred address. If relocation is needed in the code section then there will be multiple
instances of the code section, while only explicitly shared data sections will be shared.

Relocation in Linux
The preferred load address for the main executable is often 0x8048000 in 32-bit mode and
0x400000 in 64-bit mode.

Shared objects may be loaded at negative addresses in 32-bit mode, but not in 64-bit mode
where addresses above 231 are used for shared objects.

When a shared object is shared between multiple processes, the same sections have
different virtual addresses in the different processes. The distance between the code
section and the data section is the same for all processes so that relative addresses can be
used. The code section of a shared object is shared between processes unless it is
modified by relocation. A shared object is usually compiled as position-independent code
(option -fpic) to avoid relocations in the code section.

32-bit absolute addresses are used in the main executable, but not in shared objects in 64-
bit mode. A 64-bit shared object must therefore be compiled as position-independent code
(option -fpic or -fpie) to avoid 32-bit absolute addresses.

Shared objects usually have global offset tables (GOT) with pointers to static and global
data, and procedure linkage tables (PLT) with pointers to global functions. All global
symbols are accessed through these pointer tables when the compiler option -fpic is used.
In 32-bit mode, the GOT is also used for local variables. The purpose of these tables is to
mimic the behavior of static libraries. If a function in the main executable has the same
name as a function in the shared object then the version in the main executable will be
used, even when called from the shared object. The same applies to global variables. This
feature that allows local access inside the shared object to be redirected comes at a high
price because all accesses must go through the GOT and PLT tables. See the chapter
"Static versus dynamic libraries" in manual 1: "Optimizing software in C++" for tips about
how to avoid these pointer tables.

Relocation in BSD
This is similar to Linux.

Relocations in Mac OS X
Position-independent code is used by default even for the main executable, though this is
not necessary. It is possible to speed up the main executable in 32-bit mode by making the
code position-dependent (option -fno-pic).

In 64-bit mode, most addresses use a 32-bit signed offset relative to the instruction pointer
or to an arbitrary reference point.

Shared objects rarely use global offset tables (GOT). Procedure linkage tables are not used
for internal references.

When a shared object is shared between multiple processes, the same sections have the
same virtual addresses in the different processes.

Relocations in 16-bit systems
16-bit DOS and Windows 3.x systems use segmented memory models where all memory
addresses are of the segment:offset kind. Executable files must be relocated when loaded

