because the operating system cannot map the image to an arbitrary address. Only the
segment part of a segment:offset address needs to be relocated. In DOS, the segment
address is modified in the executable code. In Windows 3.x the segment descriptor table is
modified.

The 16-bit systems do not use the same file format for executable files as for object files.

Relocations in Cygwin
Cygwin tools run under Windows and use the same relocation process as Windows. An
undocumented extra step called pseudo-relocation is added when an executable file (.exe
or .dll) is loaded. The pseudo-relocation makes it possible to get direct access from one
executable file to a data object in another executable file. The purpose of this is to emulate
the behavior of Linux shared objects. This feature comes at a high price, when we consider
that direct access to a data object in another executable must be considered bad program-
ming practice by modern standards.

14.1 Import tables
Almost all executable files contain function calls to functions in other DLLs or shared
objects. In most cases, these function calls go via an import table in the executable file. The
loader fills the import table with the addresses of the external functions when the program
and the DLLs or shared objects are loaded. The implementation of the import table differs
among systems.

Some systems allow lazy binding of external references. Lazy binding means that the
address of the external function is not inserted in the import table until the first time the
function is called. The advantage of lazy binding is that the address of an external function
needs not be calculated in case the function is never called. The disadvantage is a
considerable delay the first time each external function is called.

It is often possible to use static linking instead of dynamic linking for calls to library
functions. The idea of static linking is that the required library functions, but not the entire
function library, are copied into the executable file by the linker. The references to these
functions can then be resolved at link time rather than at load time.

15 Object file formats
There are at least four different object file formats in common use for x86 platforms. These
are OMF, COFF also called PE, ELF and Mach-O format. The old a.out format is rarely
used any more.

15.1 OMF format
OMF stands for Object Module Format. This format is also called Microsoft 8086
relocatable. The OMF format is used for 16-bit operating systems (DOS, Windows 3.x and
earlier). Some compilers (Borland, Watcom, Symantec, Digital Mars) also use OMF format
for 32-bit Windows.

This format was originally designed for the segmented memory model of the 16-bit 8088
microprocessor, used in the first IBM PCs. The OMF format allows the resolution of
addresses relative to an arbitrary reference frame representing a segment or group of
segments. A reference frame starts at an address divisible by 16 and can span 64 kbytes.
Reference frames are allowed to overlap. Overlays are supported (i.e. allowing multiple
pieces of code to share the same memory space).

The OMF object file consists of a chain of records where the first byte of each record
indicates the type of data contained in the record. No record can contain more than 1 kbyte
of data.

The OMF format was designed for compactness at the time of the first IBM PCs where the
only means of storage was one or two 360 kbytes floppy disk drives. The OMF format
allows several different methods for compressing bytes that are zero or repeated, not only in
the binary code and data, but also in relocation tables. Repeat-blocks can be nested to an
unlimited depth. These compression features make the interpretation of OMF files
complicated and error-prone. The method for compressing repeated relocation information
is hardly used any more, if it ever was. Repeat-blocks in data segments are still used by
some tools. The Microsoft assembler can generate relocations in repeated data although
this is discouraged and not supported by all linkers.

The OMF standard also specifies a format for static libraries. The OMF library uses a hash
table for listing the public symbols of all modules in the library. Other formats use a simple
sorted list or even an unsorted list for the same purpose. The use of a hash table requires
that all linkers and library managers use exactly the same hashing algorithm. Unfortunately,
the official definition of the hashing algorithm is not as clear and stringent as one could wish
for. The gain in efficiency from using a hash table rather than a sorted list is minimal, and
not enough to justify the considerable increase in complexity, in my opinion.

An OMF library can have an optional "extended dictionary" in addition to the hash table. The
extended dictionary specifies dependencies between modules in order to facilitate one-pass
linking. There are two different and incompatible formats for the extended dictionary. The
original IBM/Microsoft format and a proprietary format used by Borland. Extended
dictionaries are rarely used.

Limitations:
Segment word size: 16 or 32 bits. Can be mixed.
Segment alignment: Supports only 1, 2, 4, 16, and either 256 or 4096.
Max identifier length: 255 characters.
Max external symbols: 64 k.
Max number of segments: 64 k.
Max segment size: 4 Gbytes.
Max number of modules in library: < 64 k.
Some old linkers limit the size of the library hash table to 251 blocks of 37 buckets each.
This limits the number of public symbols in a library to between 251 and 9287, depending
on the lengths of the names. Even for linkers that allow more than 251 blocks there are
somewhat unpredictable limitations in the hash table.

15.2 COFF format
COFF stands for Common Object File Format. This format was first used in UNIX system V,
but later superseded by ELF. A modification of the COFF format is used in Windows. The
Windows version of COFF is also called PE (Portable Executable). The 64-bit version is
called PE32+. The same format is used for object files and executable files. The COFF
format used under windows is a Microsoft adaptation of the COFF format used on certain
other platforms.

The COFF format is used for object files in 32-bit and 64-bit Windows by Microsoft, Intel,
Gnu, and Clang compilers. The Codeplay compiler for 32-bit Windows can use the OMF,
COFF or ELF32 formats.

The COFF format uses many different data structures, which makes it somewhat
complicated. The definition of the data structures is not in agreement with the default
alignment rules of modern compilers.
Different object file formats differ in the way self-relative references are implemented, due to
the way the CPU calculates relative addresses. The CPU calculates self-relative addresses
relative to the value of the instruction pointer after the instruction, not relative to the position
of the address field in the instruction code. The distance from the position of the address
field (relocation source) to the reference point used by the CPU is 2 in 16-bit code, 4 in 32-
bit code, and 4, 5, 6 or 8 in 64-bit code. The COFF and OMF formats have different
relocation codes for each of these distances so that the necessary correction can be
inserted by the linker. The ELF and Mach-O formats have no inherent recognition of this
difference, so that the correction must be inserted as an explicit addend in the object file.

The COFF format allows the specification of image-relative references, which are not
available on other platforms. Image-relative references are used in 32-bit mode for debug
information. 32-bit image-relative references are used in 64-bit mode for exception handling
information and in general for saving space where 64-bit pointers would otherwise be
needed.

Limitations:
Segment word size: 32 or 64 bits.
Max number of sections: 32 k.
Max file size: 4 Gbytes.
Max section size: 4 Gbytes.
Max relocations per section: 64 k.
Max library size: 4 Gbytes.

15.3 ELF format
ELF stands for Executable and Linkable Format. This format has replaced older formats like
a.out and COFF in Linux and BSD. Gnu tools running under Linux and BSD often accept
several other formats, not including the formats used under Windows. Gnu tools running
under Windows accept COFF and ELF formats.

The ELF format is designed to be flexible and expandable. The sizes of all data structures
are specified explicitly so that they can be expanded without losing backwards compatibility.
This makes the ELF format far more clear and robust than other formats.

Limitations:
Segment word size: 32 or 64 bits.
Max number of sections: 64 k.
Max file size: 4 Gbytes for 32 bits, 264 bytes for 64 bits.
Max section size: 4 Gbytes for 32 bits, 264 bytes for 64 bits.
Max string table size: 4 Gbytes.
Max number of symbols: 16 M for 32 bits, 4 G for 64 bits.
Max library size: 4 Gbytes.

15.4 Mach-O format
Mach-O stands for Mach Object. This format is used in Mac OS systems for object files and
executable files. The following description applies only to the Intel-based Mac OS X
(Darwin) system.

Mach-O object files have only one segment record comprising several section records.
Mach-O executable files have several segment records.

The Mach-O format allows the specification of addresses relative to an arbitrary reference
point in an arbitrary section. This addressing method, which is not available in the other
object file formats, is used for position-independent code.
Position-independent code and lazy binding is used by default by the Gnu compiler for 32-
bit Mac OS X. This makes code execution less efficient. Position-independent code is
required only for shared objects (dynamic link libraries) in Mac OS X.

Local symbols are referenced by their addresses rather than by their names in 32-bit Mach-
O files, where the COFF and ELF formats have symbol table entries for local symbols.

Limitations:
Section name length: 16 characters.
Max file size: 4 GB.
Max section size: 16 MB for position-independent code, 4 GB for 32 bits, 264 bytes for 64
bits.
Max number of sections: 16 M.
Max number of symbols: 16 M.
Max library size: 4 GB.

15.5 a.out format
a.out stands for Assembler Output. This format is used in older versions of UNIX and similar
systems. The name a.out remains as the default name for linker output files, even though
these files are not in a.out format any more. Some linkers still support the a.out format.

15.6 Comparison of object file formats
The ELF format stands out as the most consistent, clear, robust and flexible of the object file
formats. The other formats are full of patches and appear kludgy in comparison. I would
recommend the ELF format for new applications. The OMF format should be used only for
16-bit applications.

15.7 Conversion between object file formats
It may be possible to convert object files from one format to another in simple cases. A tool
for this purpose named objconv is available at www.agner.org/optimize. This tool can also
be used as a cross-platform library manager. See the objconv manual for details and
mentioning of other relevant tools.

Conversion of an object file will fail if the file contains references of a type that is not
supported by the target format, e.g. image-relative references in COFF files or position-
independent code in Mach-O files.

An object file that has been converted from one platform to another will work on the target
platform only if all calling conventions etc. are the same on both platforms and there is no
reference to platform-specific library functions or system functions.

Differences in name-mangling conventions can be fixed by using extern "C" declarations or
by using objconv to change symbol names in the object file.

The use of converted object files can fail to work for many reasons. All the compatibility
problems described in the present document should be considered in order to predict
whether object file conversion is likely to work. While the calling conventions are almost the
same in all 32-bit x86 systems, they are quite different in 64-bit systems. A call stub is
needed for converted functions in 64-bit systems.

Conversion of compiler-generated object files should be used only as a last resort when the
source code is not available. Conversion of object files made from assembly code can be

