19 Available C++ Compilers
19.1 Microsoft
Microsoft Visual C++ comes in several different versions. The professional edition, which is
relatively expensive, includes integrated development environment (IDE) and many tools
including debugger and profiler. A limited edition is available for free. The Visual Studio IDE
can use other compilers as plugins, including Clang and Intel.

19.2 Borland/Embarcadero
Borland C++ compilers and development tools were once very popular. After several years
where the compiler was not properly maintained, they have switched to using the Clang
compiler front end.

19.3 Watcom
Watcom C++ is no longer sold commercially, but it has been continued as an open source
project. The Watcom compiler is available from www.openwatcom.org, including integrated
development environment, debugger, profiler, assembler, disassembler, and other tools.
The compiler is currently not up to date.

Users of this compiler should be aware that register usage and calling conventions differ
from other compilers. You must fix these problems by using #pragma's when defining or
calling DLL functions and when combining with tools from other vendors.

19.4 Gnu
Gnu C++ is an open source compiler that comes with most distributions of Linux, BSD and
Mac OS. Various Windows versions are available. The version from www.msys2.org is
recommended. Also available is an assembler (GAS) which uses the AT&T syntax by
default.

19.5 Clang
Clang is a front end for the Low Level Virtual Machine (LLVM) open source compiler
available for all x86 platforms. It is the default compiler for newer versions of x86-based Mac
OS. A Windows version is available as a plugin to Microsoft Visual Studio.

19.6 Digital Mars
Digital Mars C++ compiler is a continuation of Zortech C++ and Symantec C++, available
from www.digitalmars.com. The compiler package is cheap, and a command line version is
available for free. Both Symantec C++ and Digital Mars C++ are binary compatible with
Microsoft C++ in most respects, including calling conventions and name mangling. The
compiler is not up to date. The latest version is from 2013, supporting only 32-bit Windows.

19.7 Codeplay
The Codeplay VectorC C++ compiler is no longer available.

19.8 Intel C++ compiler Classic
Intel compilers are available for Windows, Linux, and Intel-based Mac OS X. This legacy
compiler is now named “Classic”. It used to be a relatively expensive compiler, but is now
available for free together with the newer Intel LLVM-based compiler. The Windows version
is binary compatible with Microsoft compilers. The Linux version is binary compatible with
Gnu compilers. Code produced with the Intel Classic compiler has reduced performance
when running on a non-Intel processor. The Intel Classic compiler is not recommended for
new projects.

19.9 Intel oneAPI C++ compiler, LLVM based
This is a forking of the Clang compiler with added Intel features and Intel function libraries. It
performs better than the Intel Classic compiler. It is possible to generate code that works
well on non-Intel microprocessors.

