                                                                                       2 ETHERNET

We now turn to a deeper analysis of the ubiquitous Ethernet LAN protocol. Current user-level Ethernet today
(2013) is usually 100 Mbps, with Gigabit and 10 Gigabit Ethernet standard in server rooms and backbones,
but because the potential for collisions makes Ethernet speeds scale in odd ways, we will start with the 10
Mbps formulation. While the 10 Mbps speed is obsolete, and while even the Ethernet collision mechanism
is largely obsolete, collision management itself continues to play a significant role in wireless networks.
The original Ethernet specification was the 1976 paper of Metcalfe and Boggs, [MB76]. The data rate was
10 megabits per second, and all connections were made with coaxial cable instead of today’s twisted pair.
The authors described their architecture as follows:
      We cannot afford the redundant connections and dynamic routing of store-and-forward packet
      switching to assure reliable communication, so we choose to achieve reliability through sim-
      plicity. We choose to make the shared communication facility passive so that the failure of an
      active element will tend to affect the communications of only a single station.
Classic Ethernet was indeed simple, and – mostly – passive. In its most basic form, the Ethernet medium was
one long piece of coaxial cable, onto which stations could be connected via taps. If two stations happened
to transmit at the same time – most likely because they were both waiting for a third station to finish – their
signals were lost to the resultant collision. The only active components besides the stations were repeaters,
originally intended simply to make end-to-end joins between cable segments.
Repeaters soon evolved into multiport devices, allowing the creation of arbitrary tree (that is, loop-free)
topologies. At this point the standard wiring model shifted from one long cable, snaking from host to host,
to a “star” network, where each host connected directly to a central multipoint repeater. This shift allowed
for the replacement of expensive coaxial cable by the much-cheaper twisted pair; links could not be as long,
but they did not need to be.
Repeaters, which forwarded collisions, soon gave way to switches, which did not (2.4 Ethernet Switches).
Switches thus partitioned an Ethernet into disjoint collision domains, or physical Ethernets, through which
collisions could propagate; an aggregation of physical Ethernets connected by switches was then sometimes
known as a virtual Ethernet. Collision domains became smaller and smaller, eventually down to individual
links and then vanishing entirely.
Throughout all these changes, Ethernet never implemented true redundant connections, in that at any one
instant the topology was always required to be loop-free. However, Ethernet did adopt a mechanism by
which idle backup links can quickly be placed into service after a primary link fails; 2.5 Spanning Tree
Algorithm and Redundancy.

2.1 10-Mbps Classic Ethernet

Originally, Ethernet consisted of a long piece of cable (possibly spliced by repeaters). When a station
transmitted, the data went everywhere along that cable. Such an arrangement is known as a broadcast
bus; all packets were, at least at the physical layer, broadcast onto the shared medium and could be seen,
theoretically, by all other nodes. Logically, however, most packets would appear to be transmitted point-to-
point, not broadcast. This was because between each station CPU and the cable there was a peripheral device

(that is, a card) known as a network interface, which would take care of the details of transmitting and
receiving. The network interface would (and still does) decide when a received packet should be forwarded
to the host, via a CPU interrupt.

                A                   B                   C                   D

                NI                  NI                  NI                   NI

Whenever two stations transmitted at the same time, the signals would collide, and interfere with one an-
other; both transmissions would fail as a result. Proper handling of collisions was an essential part of the
access-mediation strategy for the shared medium. In order to minimize collision loss, each station imple-
mented the following:
     1. Before transmission, wait for the line to become quiet
     2. While transmitting, continually monitor the line for signs that a collision has occurred; if a collision
        is detected, cease transmitting
     3. If a collision occurs, use a backoff-and-retransmit strategy
These properties can be summarized with the CSMA/CD acronym: Carrier Sense, Multiple Access, Colli-
sion Detect. (The term “carrier sense” was used by Metcalfe and Boggs as a synonym for “signal sense”;
there is no literal carrier frequency to be sensed.) It should be emphasized that collisions are a normal event
in Ethernet, well-handled by the mechanisms above.

 IEEE 802 Network Standards

 The IEEE network standards all begin with 802: 802.3 is Ethernet, 802.11 is Wi-Fi, 802.16 is WiMAX,
 and there are many others. One sometimes encounters the claim that 802 represents the date of an early
 meeting: February 1980. However, the IEEE has a continuous stream of standards (with occasional
 gaps): 799: Handling and Disposal of Transformer PCBs, 800: D-C Aircraft Rotating Machines, 803:
 Recommended Practice for Unique Identification in Power Plants, etc.

Classic Ethernet came in version 1 [1980, DEC-Intel-Xerox], version 2 [1982, DIX], and IEEE 802.3. There
are some minor electrical differences between these, and one rather substantial packet-format difference,
below. In addition to these, the Berkeley Unix trailing-headers packet format was used for a while.
There were three physical formats for 10 Mbps Ethernet cable: thick coax (10BASE-5), thin coax (10BASE-
2), and, last to arrive, twisted pair (10BASE-T). Thick coax was the original; economics drove the successive
development of the later two. The cheaper twisted-pair cabling eventually almost entirely displaced coax, at
least for host connections.
The original specification included support for repeaters, which were in effect signal amplifiers although
they might attempt to clean up a noisy signal. Repeaters processed each bit individually and did no buffering.
In the telecom world, a repeater might be called a digital regenerator. A repeater with more than two ports
was commonly called a hub; hubs allowed branching and thus much more complex topologies.

It was the rise of hubs that enabled star topologies in which each host connects directly to the hub rather
than to one long run of coax. This in turn enabled twisted-pair cable: while this supported maximum runs
of about 100 meters, versus the 500 meters of thick coax, each run simply had to go from the host to the
central hub in the wiring closet. This was much more convenient than having to snake coax all around the
building. A hub failure would bring the network down, but hubs proved largely reliable.
Bridges – later known as switches – came along a short time later. While repeaters act at the bit layer, a
switch reads in and forwards an entire packet as a unit, and the destination address is consulted to deter-
mine to where the packet is forwarded. Except for possible collision-related performance issues, hubs and
switches are interchangeable. Eventually, most wiring-closet hubs were replaced with switches.
Hubs propagate collisions; switches do not. If the signal representing a collision were to arrive at one port of
a hub, it would, like any other signal, be retransmitted out all other ports. If a switch were to detect a collision
one one port, no other ports would be involved; only packets received successfully are ever retransmitted
out other ports.
Originally, switches were seen as providing interconnection (“bridging”) between separate physical Ether-
nets; a switch for such a purpose needed just two ports. Later, a switched Ethernet was seen as one large
“virtual” Ethernet, composed of smaller collision domains. Although the term “switch” is now much more
common than “bridge”, the latter is still in use, particularly by the IEEE. For some, a switch is a bridge with
more than two ports, though that distinction is relatively meaningless as it has been years since two-port
bridges were last manufactured. We return to switching below in 2.4 Ethernet Switches.
In the original thick-coax cabling, connections were made via taps, often literally drilled into the coax
central conductor. Thin coax allowed the use of T-connectors to attach hosts. Twisted-pair does not allow
mid-cable attachment; it is only used for point-to-point links between hosts, switches and hubs. Mid-
cable attachment, however, was always simply a way of avoiding the need for active devices like hubs and
switches.
There is still a role for hubs today when one wants to monitor the Ethernet signal from A to B (eg for
intrusion detection analysis), although some switches now also support a form of monitoring.
All three cable formats could interconnect, although only through repeaters and hubs, and all used the same
10 Mbps transmission speed. While twisted-pair cable is still used by 100 Mbps Ethernet, it generally needs
to be a higher-performance version known as Category 5, versus the 10 Mbps Category 3.
Data in 10 Mbps Ethernets was transmitted using Manchester encoding; see 4.1.3 Manchester. This meant
that the electronics had to operate, in effect, at 20 Mbps. Faster Ethernets use different encodings.

2.1.1 Ethernet Packet Format

Here is the format of a typical Ethernet packet (DIX specification); it is still used for newer, faster Ethernets:

        dest addr   src addr type                       data                         CRC

The destination and source addresses are 48-bit quantities; the type is 16 bits, the data length is variable up
to a maximum of 1500 bytes, and the final CRC checksum is 32 bits. The checksum is added by the Ethernet
hardware, never by the host software. There is also a preamble, not shown: a block of 1 bits followed by a

0, in the front of the packet, for synchronization. The type field identifies the next higher protocol layer; a
few common type values are 0x0800 = IP, 0x8137 = IPX, 0x0806 = ARP.
The IEEE 802.3 specification replaced the type field by the length field, though this change never caught on.
The two formats can be distinguished as long as the type values used are larger than the maximum Ethernet
length of 1500 (or 0x05dc); the type values given in the previous paragraph all meet this condition.
The Ethernet maximum packet length of 1500 bytes worked well in the past, but can seem inconveniently
small at 10 Gbit speeds. But 1500 bytes has become the de facto maximum packet size throughout the
Internet, not just on Ethernet LANs; increasing it would be difficult. TCP TSO (12.5 TCP Offloading) is
one alternative.
Each Ethernet card has a (hopefully unique) physical address in ROM; by default any packet sent to this
address will be received by the board and passed up to the host system. Packets addressed to other physical
addresses will be seen by the card, but ignored (by default). All Ethernet devices also agree on a broadcast
address of all 1’s: a packet sent to the broadcast address will be delivered to all attached hosts.
It is sometimes possible to change the physical address of a given card in software. It is almost universally
possible to put a given card into promiscuous mode, meaning that all packets on the network, no matter
what the destination address, are delivered to the attached host. This mode was originally intended for
diagnostic purposes but became best known for the security breach it opens: it was once not unusual to find
a host with network board in promiscuous mode and with a process collecting the first 100 bytes (presumably
including userid and password) of every telnet connection.

2.1.2 Ethernet Multicast

Another category of Ethernet addresses is multicast, used to transmit to a set of stations; streaming video
to multiple simultaneous viewers might use Ethernet multicast. The lowest-order bit in the first byte of
an address indicates whether the address is physical or multicast. To receive packets addressed to a given
multicast address, the host must inform its network interface that it wishes to do so; once this is done, any
arriving packets addressed to that multicast address are forwarded to the host. The set of subscribers to a
given multicast address may be called a multicast group. While higher-level protocols might prefer that the
subscribing host also notifies some other host, eg the sender, this is not required, although that might be the
easiest way to learn the multicast address involved. If several hosts subscribe to the same multicast address,
then each will receive a copy of each multicast packet transmitted.
We are now able to list all cases in which a network interface forwards a received packet up to its attached
host:
     • if the destination address of the received packet maches the physical address of the interface
     • if the destination address of the received packet is the broadcast address
     • if the interface is in promiscuous mode
     • if the destination address of the received packet is a multicast address and the host has told the network
       interface to accept packets sent to that multicast address
If switches (below) are involved, they must normally forward multicast packets on all outbound links, exactly
as they do for broadcast packets; switches have no obvious way of telling where multicast subscribers might
be. To avoid this, some switches do try to engage in some form of multicast filtering, sometimes by snooping

on higher-layer multicast protocols. Multicast Ethernet is seldom used by IPv4, but plays a larger role in
IPv6 configuration.

2.1.3 Ethernet Address Internal Structure

The second-to-lowest-order bit of a physical Ethernet address indicates whether that address is believed to
be globally unique or if it is only locally unique; this is known as the Universal/Local bit. For real Ethernet
physical addresses, the multicast and universal/local bits of the first byte should both be 0.
When (global) Ethernet IDs are assigned to physical Ethernet cards by the manufacturer, the first three
bytes serve to indicate the manufacturer. They are allocated by the IEEE, and are officially known
as organizationally unique identifiers. These can be looked up at any of several sites on the Internet
to identify the manufacturer associated with any given Ethernet address; the official IEEE site is stan-
dards.ieee.org/develop/regauth/oui/public.html (OUIs must be entered here without colons).
As long as the manufacturer involved is diligent in assigning the second three bytes, every manufacturer-
provided Ethernet address should be globally unique. Lapses, however, are not unheard of.
Ethernet addresses for virtual machines must be distinct from the Ethernet address of the host system, and
may be (eg with so-called “bridged” configurations) as visible on the LAN as that host system’s address.
The first three bytes of virtual Ethernet addresses are often taken from the OUI assigned to the manufacturer
whose card is being emulated; the last three bytes are then either set randomly or via configuration. In
principle, the universal/local bit should be 1, as the address is only locally unique, but this is often ignored.
It is entirely possible for virtual Ethernet addresses to be assigned so as to have some local meaning, though
this appears not to be common.

2.1.4 The LAN Layer

The LAN layer, at its upper end, supplies to the network layer a mechanism for addressing a packet and
sending it from one station to another. At its lower end, it handles interactions with the physical layer. The
LAN layer covers packet addressing, delivery and receipt, forwarding, error detection, collision detection
and collision-related retransmission attempts.
In IEEE protocols, the LAN layer is divided into the media access control, or MAC, sublayer and a
higher logical link control, or LLC, sublayer for higher-level flow-control functions that today have moved
largely to the transport layer. For example, the HDLC protocol (4.1.5.1 HDLC) supports sliding windows
(6.2 Sliding Windows) as an option, as did the early X.25 protocol. ATM, 3.5 Asynchronous Transfer
Mode: ATM, also supports some higher-level functions, though not sliding windows.
Because the LLC layer is so often insignificant, and because the most well-known LAN-layer functions are
in fact part of the MAC sublayer, it is common to identify the LAN layer with its MAC sublayer, especially
for IEEE protocols where the MAC layer has official standing. In particular, LAN-layer addresses are
perhaps most often called MAC addresses.
Generally speaking, much of the operation of the LAN/MAC layer takes place in the network card. Host
systems (including drivers) are, for example, generally oblivious to collisions (although they may query the
card for collision statistics). In some cases, eg with Wi-Fi rate scaling (3.7.2 Dynamic Rate Scaling), the
host-system driver may get involved.

2.1.5 The Slot Time and Collisions

The diameter of an Ethernet is the maximum distance between any pair of stations. The actual total length
of cable can be much greater than this, if, for example, the topology is a “star” configuration. The maximum
allowed diameter, measured in bits, is limited to 232 (a sample “budget” for this is below). This makes
the round-trip-time 464 bits. As each station involved in a collision discovers it, it transmits a special jam
signal of up to 48 bits. These 48 jam bits bring the total above to 512 bits, or 64 bytes. The time to send
these 512 bits is the slot time of an Ethernet; time intervals on Ethernet are often described in bit times but
in conventional time units the slot time is 51.2 µsec.
The value of the slot time determines several subsequent aspects of Ethernet. If a station has transmitted
for one slot time, then no collision can occur (unless there is a hardware error) for the remainder of that
packet. This is because one slot time is enough time for any other station to have realized that the first
station has started transmitting, so after that time they will wait for the first station to finish. Thus, after one
slot time a station is said to have acquired the network. The slot time is also used as the basic interval for
retransmission scheduling, below.
Conversely, a collision can be received, in principle, at any point up until the end of the slot time. As a result,
Ethernet has a minimum packet size, equal to the slot time, ie 64 bytes (or 46 bytes in the data portion). A
station transmitting a packet this size is assured that if a collision were to occur, the sender would detect it
(and be able to apply the retransmission algorithm, below). Smaller packets might collide and yet the sender
not know it, ultimately leading to greatly reduced throughput.
If we need to send less than 46 bytes of data (for example, a 40-byte TCP ACK packet), the Ethernet packet
must be padded out to the minimum length. As a result, all protocols running on top of Ethernet need to
provide some way to specify the actual data length, as it cannot be inferred from the received packet size.
As a specific example of a collision occurring as late as possible, consider the diagram below. A and B are
5 units apart, and the bandwidth is 1 byte/unit. A begins sending “helloworld” at T=0; B starts sending just
as A’s message arrives, at T=5. B has listened before transmitting, but A’s signal was not yet evident. A
doesn’t discover the collision until 10 units have elapsed, which is twice the distance.

     T=0    A                                           B   A just starting to send
                h
     T=1    A                                           B
                    e   h
     T=2    A                                           B
                    l       e   h
     T=3    A                                           B
                    l       l       e   h
     T=4    A                                           B
                    o       l       l       e   h
     T=4.99 A                                           B   just before collision, B sees line is idle
                    o       l       l       e       h
     T=5    A                                           B   B transmits; COLLISION!
                    w       o       l       l
     T=6    A                                           B   collision propagates back to A
                    o       w       o
     T=7    A                                           B
                    r       o
     T=8    A                                           B
                    l
     T=9    A                                           B
                d
     T=10   A                                           B   A detects the collision

Here are typical maximum values for the delay in 10 Mbps Ethernet due to various components. These

are taken from the Digital-Intel-Xerox (DIX) standard of 1982, except that “point-to-point link cable” is
replaced by standard cable. The DIX specification allows 1500m of coax with two repeaters and 1000m
of point-to-point cable; the table below shows 2500m of coax and four repeaters, following the later IEEE
802.3 Ethernet specification. Some of the more obscure delays have been eliminated. Entries are one-way
delay times, in bits. The maximum path may have four repeaters, and ten transceivers (simple electronic
devices between the coax cable and the NI cards), each with its drop cable (two transceivers per repeater,
plus one at each endpoint).
Ethernet delay budget

         item                  length     delay, in bits          explanation (c = speed of light)
         coax                  2500 m     110 bits                23 meters/bit (.77c)
         transceiver cables    500 m      25 bits                 19.5 meters/bit (.65c)
         transceivers                     40 bits, max 10 units   4 bits each
         repeaters                        25 bits, max 4 units    6+ bits each (DIX 7.6.4.1)
         encoders                         20 bits, max 10 units   2 bits each (for signal generation)

The total here is 220 bits; in a full accounting it would be 232. Some of the numbers shown are a little high,
but there are also signal rise time delays, sense delays, and timer delays that have been omitted. It works out
fairly closely.
Implicit in the delay budget table above is the “length” of a bit. The speed of propagation in copper is about
0.77ˆc, where c=3ˆ108 m/sec = 300 m/µsec is the speed of light in vacuum. So, in 0.1 microseconds (the
time to send one bit at 10 Mbps), the signal propagates approximately 0.77ˆcˆ10-7 = 23 meters.
Ethernet packets also have a maximum packet size, of 1500 bytes. This limit is primarily for the sake
of fairness, so one station cannot unduly monopolize the cable (and also so stations can reserve buffers
guaranteed to hold an entire packet). At one time hardware vendors often marketed their own incompatible
“extensions” to Ethernet which enlarged the maximum packet size to as much as 4 kB. There is no technical
reason, actually, not to do this, except compatibility.
The signal loss in any single segment of cable is limited to 8.5 db, or about 14% of original strength.
Repeaters will restore the signal to its original strength. The reason for the per-segment length restriction
is that Ethernet collision detection requires a strict limit on how much the remote signal can be allowed to
lose strength. It is possible for a station to detect and reliably read very weak remote signals, but not at the
same time that it is transmitting locally. This is exactly what must be done, though, for collision detection
to work: remote signals must arrive with sufficient strength to be heard even while the receiving station is
itself transmitting. The per-segment limit, then, has nothing to do with the overall length limit; the latter is
set only to ensure that a sender is guaranteed of detecting a collision, even if it sends the minimum-sized
packet.

2.1.6 Exponential Backoff Algorithm

Whenever there is a collision the exponential backoff algorithm – operating at the MAC layer – is used
to determine when each station will retry its transmission. Backoff here is called exponential because the
range from which the backoff value is chosen is doubled after every successive collision involving the same
packet. Here is the full Ethernet transmission algorithm, including backoff and retransmissions:
   1. Listen before transmitting (“carrier detect”)

     2. If line is busy, wait for sender to stop and then wait an additional 9.6 microseconds (96 bits). One
        consequence of this is that there is always a 96-bit gap between packets, so packets do not run together.
     3. Transmit while simultaneously monitoring for collisions
     4. If a collision does occur, send the jam signal, and choose a backoff time as follows: For transmission
        N, 1ďNď10 (N=0 represents the original attempt), choose k randomly with 0 ď k < 2N . Wait k slot
        times (kˆ51.2 µsec). Then check if the line is idle, waiting if necessary for someone else to finish,
        and then retry step 3. For 11ďNď15, choose k randomly with 0 ď k < 1024 (= 210 )
     5. If we reach N=16 (16 transmission attempts), give up.
If an Ethernet sender does not reach step 5, there is a very high probability that the packet was delivered
successfully.
Exponential backoff means that if two hosts have waited for a third to finish and transmit simultaneously,
and collide, then when N=1 they have a 50% chance of recollision; when N=2 there is a 25% chance, etc.
When Ně10 the maximum wait is 52 milliseconds; without this cutoff the maximum wait at N=15 would
be 1.5 seconds. As indicated above in the minimum-packet-size discussion, this retransmission strategy
assumes that the sender is able to detect the collision while it is still sending, so it knows that the packet
must be resent.
In the following diagram is an example of several stations attempting to transmit all at once, and using the
above transmission/backoff algorithm to sort out who actually gets to acquire the channel. We assume we
have five prospective senders A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5, all waiting for a sixth station to finish. We will
assume that collision detection always takes one slot time (it will take much less for nodes closer together)
and that the slot start-times for each station are synchronized; this allows us to measure time in slots. A solid
arrow at the start of a slot means that sender began transmission in that slot; a red X signifies a collision. If
a collision occurs, the backoff value k is shown underneath. A dashed line shows the station waiting k slots
for its next attempt.

             T=0            T=1            T=2            T=3            T=4            T=5
                   Slot 1         Slot 2         Slot 3         Slot 4         Slot 5         Slot 6

     A1
                     k=1                            k=2

     A2
                     k=1                            k=1

     A3
                     k=0             k=3

     A4
                     k=0             k=0            k=6

     A5
                     k=1                            k=3

             : Attempt to transmit                    : collision

At T=0 we assume the transmitting station finishes, and all the Ai transmit and collide. At T=1, then, each
of the Ai has discovered the collision; each chooses a random k<2. Let us assume that A1 chooses k=1, A2
chooses k=1, A3 chooses k=0, A4 chooses k=0, and A5 chooses k=1.

Those stations choosing k=0 will retransmit immediately, at T=1. This means A3 and A4 collide again, and
at T=2 they now choose random k<4. We will Assume A3 chooses k=3 and A4 chooses k=0; A3 will try
again at T=2+3=5 while A4 will try again at T=2, that is, now.
At T=2, we now have the original A1, A2, and A5 transmitting for the second time, while A4 trying again
for the third time. They collide. Let us suppose A1 chooses k=2, A2 chooses k=1, A5 chooses k=3, and A4
chooses k=6 (A4 is choosing k<8 at random). Their scheduled transmission attempt times are now A1 at
T=3+2=5, A2 at T=4, A5 at T=6, and A4 at T=9.
At T=3, nobody attempts to transmit. But at T=4, A2 is the only station to transmit, and so successfully
seizes the channel. By the time T=5 rolls around, A1 and A3 will check the channel, that is, listen first, and
wait for A2 to finish. At T=9, A4 will check the channel again, and also begin waiting for A2 to finish.
A maximum of 1024 hosts is allowed on an Ethernet. This number apparently comes from the maximum
range for the backoff time as 0 ď k < 1024. If there are 1024 hosts simultaneously trying to send, then,
once the backoff range has reached k<1024 (N=10), we have a good chance that one station will succeed in
seizing the channel, that is; the minimum value of all the random k’s chosen will be unique.
This backoff algorithm is not “fair”, in the sense that the longer a station has been waiting to send, the lower
its priority sinks. Newly transmitting stations with N=0 need not delay at all. The Ethernet capture effect,
below, illustrates this unfairness.

2.1.7 Capture effect

The capture effect is a scenario illustrating the potential lack of fairness in the exponential backoff algorithm.
The unswitched Ethernet must be fully busy, in that each of two senders always has a packet ready to
transmit.
Let A and B be two such busy nodes, simultaneously starting to transmit their first packets. They collide.
Suppose A wins, and sends. When A is finished, B tries to transmit again. But A has a second packet, and
so A tries too. A chooses a backoff k<2 (that is, between 0 and 1 inclusive), but since B is on its second
attempt it must choose k<4. This means A is favored to win. Suppose it does.
After that transmission is finished, A and B try yet again: A on its first attempt for its third packet, and B
on its third attempt for its first packet. Now A again chooses k<2 but B must choose k<8; this time A is
much more likely to win. Each time B fails to win a given backoff, its probability of winning the next one
is reduced by about 1/2. It is quite possible, and does occur in practice, for B to lose all the backoffs until
it reaches the maximum of N=16 attempts; once it has lost the first three or four this is in fact quite likely.
At this point B simply discards the packet and goes on to the next one with N reset to 1 and k chosen from
{0,1}.
The capture effect can be fixed with appropriate modification of the backoff algorithm; the Binary Logarith-
mic Arbitration Method (BLAM) was proposed in [MM94]. The BLAM algorithm was considered for the
then-nascent 100 Mbps Fast Ethernet standard. But in the end a hardware strategy won out: Fast Ethernet
supports “full-duplex” mode which is collision-free (see 2.2 100 Mbps (Fast) Ethernet, below). While
Fast Ethernet continues to support the original “half-duplex” mode, it was assumed that any sites concerned
enough about performance to be worried about the capture effect would opt for full-duplex.

2.1.8 Hubs and topology

Ethernet hubs (multiport repeaters) change the topology, but not the fundamental constraints. Hubs enabled
the model in which each station now had its own link to the wiring closet. Loops are still forbidden. The
maximum diameter of an Ethernet consisting of multiple segments joined by hubs is still constrained by
the round-trip-time, and the need to detect collisions before the sender has completed sending, as before.
However, the network “diameter”, or maximum distance between two hosts, is no longer synonymous with
“total length”. Because twisted-pair links are much shorter, about 100 meters, the diameter constraint is
often immaterial.

2.1.9 Errors

Packets can have bits flipped or garbled by electrical noise on the cable; estimates of the frequency with
which this occurs range from 1 in 104 to 1 in 106 . Bit errors are not uniformly likely; when they occur,
they are likely to occur in bursts. Packets can also be lost in hubs, although this appears less likely. Packets
can be lost due to collisions only if the sending host makes 16 unsuccessful transmission attempts and gives
up. Ethernet packets contain a 32-bit CRC error-detecting code (see 5.4.1 Cyclical Redundancy Check:
CRC) to detect bit errors. Packets can also be misaddressed by the sending host, or, most likely of all, they
can arrive at the receiving host at a point when the receiver has no free buffers and thus be dropped by a
higher-layer protocol.

2.1.10 CSMA persistence

A carrier-sense/multiple-access transmission strategy is said to be nonpersistent if, when the line is busy,
the sender waits a randomly selected time. A strategy is p-persistent if, after waiting for the line to clear,
the sender sends with probability pď1. Ethernet uses 1-persistence. A consequence of 1-persistence is that,
if more than one station is waiting for line to clear, then when the line does clear a collision is certain.
However, Ethernet then gracefully handles the resulting collision via the usual exponential backoff. If N
stations are waiting to transmit, the time required for one station to win the backoff is linear in N.
When we consider the Wi-Fi collision-handling mechanisms in 3.7 Wi-Fi, we will see that collisions cannot
be handled quite as cheaply: for one thing, there is no way to detect a collision in progress, so the entire
packet-transmission time is wasted. In the Wi-Fi case, p-persistence is used with p<1.
An Ethernet broadcast storm was said to occur when there were too many transmission attempts, and most
of the available bandwidth was tied up in collisions. A properly functioning classic Ethernet had an effective
bandwidth of as much as 50-80% of the nominal 10Mbps capacity, but attempts to transmit more than this
typically resulted in successfully transmitting a good deal less.

2.1.11 Analysis of Classic Ethernet

How much time does Ethernet “waste” on collisions? A paradoxical attribute of Ethernet is that raising the
transmission-attempt rate on a busy segment can reduce the actual throughput. More transmission attempts
can lead to longer contention intervals between packets, as senders use the transmission backoff algorithm
to attempt to acquire the channel. What effective throughput can be achieved?

It is convenient to refer to the time between packet transmissions as the contention interval even if there is no
actual contention, that is, even if the network is idle; we cannot tell if stations are not transmitting because
they have nothing to send, or if they are simply waiting for their backoff timer to expire. Thus, a timeline
for Ethernet always consists of alternating packet transmissions and contention intervals:

                                                                                                  ...
 contention   packet       contention   packet   contention    packet       contention   packet

              Ethernet packet transmissions alternating with contention intervals

As a first look at contention intervals, assume that there are N stations waiting to transmit at the start of the
interval. It turns out that, if all follow the exponential backoff algorithm, we can expect O(N) slot times
before one station successfully acquires the channel; thus, Ethernets are happiest when N is small and there
are only a few stations simultaneously transmitting. However, multiple stations are not necessarily a severe
problem. Often the number of slot times needed turns out to be about N/2, and slot times are short. If N=20,
then N/2 is 10 slot times, or 640 bytes. However, one packet time might be 1500 bytes. If packet intervals
are 1500 bytes and contention intervals are 640 byes, this gives an overall throughput of 1500/(640+1500)
= 70% of capacity. In practice, this seems to be a reasonable upper limit for the throughput of classic
shared-media Ethernet.

2.1.11.1 The ALOHA models

Another approach to analyzing the Ethernet contention interval is by using the ALOHA model that was a
precursor to Ethernet. In the ALOHA model, stations transmit packets without listening first for a quiet line
or monitoring the transmission for collisions (this models the situation of several ground stations transmitting
to a satellite; the ground stations are presumed unable to see one another). Similarly, during the Ethernet
contention interval, stations transmit one-slot packets under what are effectively the same conditions (we
return to this below).
The ALOHA model yields roughly similar throughput values to the O(N) model of the previous section.
We make, however, a rather artificial assumption: that there are a very large number of active senders, each
transmitting at a very low rate. The model may thus have limited direct applicability to typical Ethernets.
To model the success rate of ALOHA, assume all the packets are the same size and let T be the time to send
one (fixed-size) packet; T represents the Aloha slot time. We will find the transmission rate that optimizes
throughput.
The core assumption of this model is that that a large number N of hosts are transmitting, each at a relatively
low rate of s packets/slot. Denote by G the average number of transmission attempts per slot; we then have
G = Ns. We will derive an expression for S, the average rate of successful transmissions per slot, in terms of
G.
If two packets overlap during transmissions, both are lost. Thus, a successful transmission requires everyone
else quiet for an interval of 2T: if a sender succeeds in the interval from t to t+T, then no other node can have
tried to begin transmission in the interval t–T to t+T. The probability of one station transmitting during an
interval of time T is G = Ns; the probability of the remaining N–1 stations all quiet for an interval of 2T is
(1–s)2(N–1) . The probability of a successful transmission is thus
      S = Ns*(1–s)2(N–1)

      = G(1–G/N)2N

 Math Warning

 Finding the limit of G(1–G/N)2N and finding the maximum of Ge-2G realistically requires a little back-
 ground in calculus. However, these are not central to applying the model.

As N gets large, the second line approaches Ge-2G . The function S = G e-2G has a maximum at G=1/2,
S=1/2e. The rate G=1/2 means that, on average, a transmission is attempted every other slot; this yields the
maximum successful-transmission throughput of 1/2e. In other words, at this maximum attempt rate G=1/2,
we expect about 2e–1 slot times worth of contention between successful transmissions. What happens to
the remaining G–S unsuccessful attempts is not addressed by this model; presumably some higher-level
mechanism (eg backoff) leads to retransmissions.
A given throughput S<1/2e may be achieved at either of two values for G; that is, a given success rate may
be due to a comparable attempt rate or else due to a very high attempt rate with a similarly high failure rate.

2.1.11.2 ALOHA and Ethernet

The relevance of the Aloha model to Ethernet is that during one Ethernet slot time there is no way to detect
collisions (they haven’t reached the sender yet!) and so the Ethernet contention phase resembles ALOHA
with an Aloha slot time T of 51.2 microseconds. Once an Ethernet sender succeeds, however, it continues
with a full packet transmission, which is presumably many times longer than T.
The average length of the contention interval, at the maximum throughput calculated above, is 2e–1 slot
times (from ALOHA); recall that our model here supposed many senders sending at very low individual
rates. This is the minimum contention interval; with lower loads the contention interval is longer due to
greater idle times and with higher loads the contention interval is longer due to more collisions.
Finally, let P be the time to send an entire packet in units of T; ie the average packet size in units of T. P is
thus the length of the “packet” phase in the diagram above. The contention phase has length 2e–1, so the
total time to send one packet (contention+packet time) is 2e–1+P. The useful fraction of this is, of course, P,
so the effective maximum throughput is P/(2e–1+P).
At 10Mbps, T=51.2 microseconds is 512 bits, or 64 bytes. For P=128 bytes = 2*64, the effective bandwidth
becomes 2/(2e-1+2), or 31%. For P=512 bytes=8*64, the effective bandwidth is 8/(2e+7), or 64%. For
P=1500 bytes, the model here calculates an effective bandwidth of 80%.
These numbers are quite similar to our earlier values based on a small number of stations sending constantly.

2.2 100 Mbps (Fast) Ethernet

Classic Ethernet, at 10 Mbps, is quite slow by modern standards, and so by 1995 the IEEE had created
standards for Ethernet that operated at 100 Mbps. Ethernet at this speed is commonly known as Fast
Ethernet; this name is used even today as “Fast” Ethernet is being supplanted by Gigabit Ethernet (below).
By far the most popular form of 100 Mbps Ethernet is officially known as 100BASE-TX; it operates over
twisted-pair cable.

In the previous analysis of 10 Mbps Ethernet, the bandwidth, minimum packet size and maximum network
diameter were all interrelated, in order to ensure that collisions could always be detected by the sender.
Increasing the speed means that at least one of the other constraints must be scaled as well. For example, if
the network physical diameter were to remain the same when moving to 100 Mbps, then the Fast-Ethernet
round-trip time would be the same in microseconds but would be 10-fold larger measured in bits; this might
mean a minimum packet size of 640 bytes instead of 64 bytes. (Actually, the minimum packet size might
be somewhat smaller, partly because the “jam signal” doesn’t have to become longer, and partly because
some of the numbers in the 10 Mbps delay budget above were larger than necessary, but it would still be
large enough that a substantial amount of bandwidth would be consumed by padding.) The designers of Fast
Ethernet felt that such a large minimum-packet size was impractical.
However, Fast Ethernet was developed at a time (~1995) when reliable switches (below) were widely avail-
able; the quote above at 2 Ethernet from [MB76] had become obsolete. Large “virtual” Ethernet networks
could be formed by connecting small physical Ethernets with switches, effectively eliminating the need to
support large-diameter physical Ethernets. So instead of increasing the minimum packet size, the decision
was made to ensure collision detectability by reducing the network diameter instead. The network diameter
chosen was a little over 400 meters, with reductions to account for the presence of hubs. At 2.3 meters/bit,
400 meters is 174 bits, for a round-trip of 350 bits. The slot time (and minimum packet size) remains 512
bits – now 5.12 µsec – which is safely large enough to ensure collision detection.
This 400-meter diameter, however, may be misleading: the specific 100BASE-TX standard, which uses
so-called Category 5 twisted-pair cabling (or better), limits the length of any individual cable segment to
100 meters. The maximum 100BASE-TX network diameter – allowing for hubs – is just over 200 meters.
The 400-meter distance does apply to optical-fiber-based 100BASE-FX in half-duplex mode, but this is not
common.
The 100BASE-TX network-diameter limit of 200 meters might seem small; it amounts in many cases to
a single hub with multiple 100-meter cable segments radiating from it. In practice, however, such “star”
configurations could easily be joined with switches. As we will see below in 2.4 Ethernet Switches,
switches partition an Ethernet into separate “collision domains”; the network-diameter rules apply to each
domain separately but not to the aggregated whole. In a fully switched (that is, no hubs) 100BASE-TX
LAN, each collision domain is simply a single twisted-pair link, subject to the 100-meter maximum length.
Fast Ethernet also introduced the concept of full-duplex Ethernet: two twisted pairs could be used, one
for each direction. Full-duplex Ethernet is limited to paths not involving hubs, that is, to single station-to-
station links, where a station is either a host or a switch. Because such a link has only two potential senders,
and each sender has its own transmit line, full-duplex Ethernet is entirely collision-free.
Fast Ethernet (at least the 100BASE-TX form) uses 4B/5B encoding, covered in 4.1.4 4B/5B. This means
that the electronics have to handle 125 Mbps, versus the 200 Mbps if Manchester encoding were still used.
Fast Ethernet 100BASE-TX does not particularly support links between buildings, due to the maximum-
cable-length limitation. However, fiber-optic point-to-point links are an effective alternative here, provided
full-duplex is used to avoid collisions. We mentioned above that the coax-based 100BASE-FX standard
allowed a maximum half-duplex run of 400 meters, but 100BASE-FX is much more likely to use full duplex,
where the maximum cable length rises to 2,000 meters.

2.2 100 Mbps (Fast) Ethernet                                                                                 57

2.3 Gigabit Ethernet

The problem of scaling Ethernet to handle collision detection gets harder as the transmission rate increases.
If we were continue to maintain the same 51.2 µsec slot time but raise the transmission rate to 1000 Mbps,
the maximum network diameter would now be 20-40 meters. Instead of that, Gigabit Ethernet moved to
a 4096-bit (512-byte, or 4.096 µsec) slot time, at least for the twisted-pair versions. Short frames need to
be padded, but this padding is done by the hardware. Gigabit Ethernet 1000Base-T uses so-called PAM-
5 encoding, below, which supports a special pad pattern (or symbol) that cannot appear in the data. The
hardware pads the frame with these special patterns, and the receiver can thus infer the unpadded length as
set by the host operating system.

 Gigabit vs Disks

 Once a network has reached Gigabit speed, the network is generally as fast as reading from or writing to
 a disk. Keeping data on another node no longer slows things down. This greatly expands the range of
 possibilities for constructing things like clustered databases.

However, the Gigabit Ethernet slot time is largely irrelevant, as full-duplex (bidirectional) operation is almost
always supported. Combined with the restriction that each length of cable is a station-to-station link (that
is, hubs are no longer allowed), this means that collisions simply do not occur and the network diameter is
no longer a concern. (10 Gigabit Ethernet has officially abandoned any pretense of supporting collisions;
everything must be full-duplex.)
There are actually multiple Gigabit Ethernet standards (as there are for Fast Ethernet). The different stan-
dards apply to different cabling situations. There are full-duplex optical-fiber formulations good for many
miles (eg 1000Base-LX10), and even a version with a 25-meter maximum cable length (1000Base-CX),
which would in theory make the original 512-bit slot practical.
The most common gigabit Ethernet over copper wire is 1000BASE-T (sometimes incorrectly referred to
as 1000BASE-TX. While there exists a TX, it requires Category 6 cable and is thus seldom used; many
devices labeled TX are in fact 1000BASE-T). For 1000BASE-T, all four twisted pairs in the cable are used.
Each pair transmits at 250 Mbps, and each pair is bidirectional, thus supporting full-duplex communication.
Bidirectional communication on a single wire pair takes some careful echo cancellation at each end, using
a circuit known as a “hybrid” that in effect allows detection of the incoming signal by filtering out the
outbound signal.
On any one cable pair, there are five signaling levels. These are used to transmit two-bit symbols at a rate
of 125 symbols/µsec, for a data rate of 250 bits/µsec. Two-bit symbols in theory only require four signaling
levels; the fifth symbol allows for some redundancy which is used for error detection and correction, for
avoiding long runs of identical symbols, and for supporting a special pad symbol, as mentioned above. The
encoding is known as 5-level pulse-amplitude modulation, or PAM-5. The target bit error rate (BER) for
1000BASE-T is 10-10 , meaning that the packet error rate is less than 1 in 106 .
In developing faster Ethernet speeds, economics plays at least as important a role as technology. As new
speeds reach the market, the earliest adopters often must take pains to buy cards, switches and cable known
to “work together”; this in effect amounts to installing a proprietary LAN. The real benefit of Ethernet,
however, is arguably that it is standardized, at least eventually, and thus a site can mix and match its cards
and devices. Having a given Ethernet standard support existing cable is even more important economically;

the costs of replacing inter-office cable often dwarf the costs of the electronics.
As Ethernet speeds continue to climb, it has become harder and harder for host systems to keep up. As a
result, it is common for quite a bit of higher-layer processing to be offloaded onto the Ethernet hardware, for
example, TCP checksum calculation. See 12.5 TCP Offloading.

2.4 Ethernet Switches

Switches join separate physical Ethernets (or sometimes Ethernets and other kinds of networks). A switch
has two or more Ethernet interfaces; when a packet is received on one interface it is retransmitted on one or
more other interfaces. Only valid packets are forwarded; collisions are not propagated. The term collision
domain is sometimes used to describe the region of an Ethernet in between switches; a given collision
propagates only within its collision domain.
Switches have revolutionized Ethernet layout: all the collision-detection rules, including the rules for maxi-
mum network diameter, apply only to collision domains, and not to the larger “virtual Ethernets” created by
stringing collision domains together with switches. As we shall see below, a switched Ethernet also offers
much more resistance to eavesdropping than a non-switched (eg hub-based) Ethernet.

 Switch Costs

 In the 1980’s the author once installed a two-port 10-Mbps Ethernet switch (then called a “bridge”) that
 cost $3000; cf the [MB76] quote at 2 Ethernet. Today a wide variety of multiport 100-Mbps Ethernet
 switches are available for around $10, and almost all installed Ethernets are fully switched.

Like simpler unswitched Ethernets, the topology for a switched Ethernet is in principle required to be loop-
free. In practice, however, most switches support the spanning-tree loop-detection protocol and algorithm,
2.5 Spanning Tree Algorithm and Redundancy, which automatically “prunes” the network topology to
make it loop-free while allowing the pruned links to be placed back in service if a primary link fails.
While a switch does not propagate collisions, it must maintain a queue for each outbound interface in case it
needs to forward a packet at a moment when the interface is busy; on (rare) occasion packets are lost when
this queue overflows.

2.4.1 Ethernet Learning Algorithm

Traditional Ethernet switches use datagram forwarding as described in 1.4 Datagram Forwarding; the trick
is to build their forwarding tables without any cooperation from ordinary, non-switch hosts. Indeed, to the
extent that a switch is to act as a drop-in replacement for a hub, it cannot count on cooperation from other
switches.
The solution is for the switch to start out with an empty forwarding table, and then incrementally build the
table through a learning process. If a switch does not have an entry for a particular destination, it will
fall back to flooding: it will forward the packet out every interface other than the one on which the packet
arrived. This is sometimes also called “unknown unicast flooding”; it is equivalent to treating the destination
as a broadcast address. The availability of fallback-to-flooding for unknown destinations is what makes it

2.4 Ethernet Switches                                                                                       59

possible for Ethernet switches to learn their forwarding tables without any switch-to-switch or switch-to-
host communication or coordination. This learning process is now part of the IEEE 802.1D standard, and is
occasionally referred to as transparent bridging.
A switch learns address locations as follows: for each interface, the switch maintains a table of physical
(MAC) addresses that have appeared as source addresses in packets arriving via that interface. The switch
thus knows that to reach these addresses, if one of them later shows up as a destination address, the packet
needs to be sent only via that interface. Specifically, when a packet arrives on interface I with source address
S and destination unicast address D, the switch enters xS,Iy into its forwarding table.
To actually deliver the packet, the switch also looks up the destination D in the forwarding table. If there is
an entry xD,Jy with J‰I – that is, D is known to be reached via interface J – then the switch forwards the
packet out interface J. If J=I, that is, the packet has arrived on the same interfaces by which the destination
is reached, then the packet does not get forwarded at all; it presumably arrived at interface I only because
that interface was connected to a shared Ethernet segment that also either contained D or contained another
switch that would bring the packet closer to D. If there is no entry for D, the switch must flood the packet out
all interfaces J with J‰I; this represents the unknown-destination fallback to flooding. After a short while,
the fallback-to-flooding alternative is needed less and less often, as switches learn where the active hosts are
located. (However, in some switch implementations, forwarding tables also include timestamps, and entries
are removed if they have not been used for, say, five minutes.)
If the destination address D is the broadcast address, or, for many switches, a multicast address, broadcast
(flooding) is required. Some switches try to keep track of multicast groups, so as to forward multicast traffic
only out interfaces with known subscribers; see 2.1.2 Ethernet Multicast.

          A           B                 A             B               A,C           B
  A            S1                            S2                              S3           B
                                             C

                                             A
                                        C                             A,C
                                 C           S4                              S5

                     Five learning bridges after three packet transmissions

In the diagram above, each switch’s tables are indicated by listing near each interface the destinations (iden-
tified by MAC addresses) known to be reachable by that interface. The entries shown are the result of the
following packets:
      • A sends to B; all switches learn where A is
      • B sends to A; this packet goes directly to A; only S3, S2 and S1 learn where B is
      • C sends to B; S4 does not know where B is so this packet goes to S5; S2 does know where B is so the
        packet does not go to S1.
It is worth observing that, at the application layer, hosts do not commonly identify one another by their MAC
addresses. In an IPv4-based network, the use of ARP (7.9 Address Resolution Protocol: ARP) to translate
from IPv4 to MAC addresses would introduce additional broadcasts, which would cause the above scenario

to play out differently. See exercise 11.0.
Switches do not automatically discover directly connected neighbors; S1 does not learn about A until A
transmits a packet.
Once all the switches have learned where all (or most of) the hosts are, each packet is forwarded rather
than flooded. At this point packets are never sent on links unnecessarily; a packet from A to B only travels
those links that lie along the (unique) path from A to B. (Paths must be unique because switched Ethernet
networks cannot have loops, at least not active ones. If a loop existed, then a packet sent to an unknown
destination would be forwarded around the loop endlessly.)
Switches have an additional privacy advantage in that traffic that does not flow where it does not need to flow
is much harder to eavesdrop on. On an unswitched Ethernet, one host configured to receive all packets can
eavesdrop on all traffic. Early Ethernets were notorious for allowing one unscrupulous station to capture,
for instance, all passwords in use on the network. On a fully switched Ethernet, a host physically sees
only the traffic actually addressed to it; other traffic remains inaccessible. This switch-based eavesdropping
protection is, however, potentially vulnerable to attackers flooding the network with fake source addresses,
forcing switches into fallback-to-flooding mode.
Typical large switches have room for a forwarding table with 104 - 105 entries, though fully switched net-
works at the upper end of this size range are not common. The main size limitations specific to switching are
the requirement that the topology must be loop-free (thus disallowing duplicate paths which might otherwise
provide redundancy), and that all broadcast traffic must always be forwarded everywhere. As a switched
Ethernet grows, broadcast traffic comprises a larger and larger percentage of the total traffic, and the or-
ganization must at some point move to a routing architecture (eg as in 7.6 IPv4 Subnets). A common
recommendation is to have no more than 1000 hosts per LAN (or VLAN, 2.6 Virtual LAN (VLAN)).

2.4.2 Switch Hardware

One of the differences between an inexpensive Ethernet switch and a pricier one is the degree of internal
parallelism it can support. If three packets arrive simultaneously on ports 1, 2 and 3, and are destined for
respective ports 4, 5 and 6, can the switch actually transmit the packets simultaneously? A “yes” answer
here is the gold performance standard for an Ethernet switch: to keep up with packets as fast as they arrive.
The worst-case load, for a switch with 2N ports, is for packets to arrive continuously on N ports, and depart
on a different N ports. This means that, in the time required to transmit one packet, the switch must internally
forward N packets in parallel.
This is sometimes much faster than necessary. If all the load is departing (or arriving) via just one of the
ports – for example, the port connected to the server, or to the Internet – then the above standard is N times
faster than necessary; the switch need only handle one packet at a time. Such a switch may be forced to
queue outbound packets on that one port, but that does not represent a lack of performance on the part of the
switch. Still, greater parallelism is generally viewed as a good thing in switches.
The simplest switch architecture – used whenever a switch is built around a “standard” computer – is the
shared-memory model. Such a system consists of a single CPU, single memory and peripheral busses, and
multiple Ethernet cards. When a packet arrives, the CPU must copy the packet from the arrival interface
into RAM, determine the forwarding, and then copy the packet to the output interface. To keep up with
one-at-a-time 100 Mbps transmission, the internal transfer rate must therefore be at least 200 Mbps.

2.4 Ethernet Switches                                                                                        61

The maximum speed of such a device depends largely on the speed of the peripheral-to-RAM bus (the so-
called front-side bus). The USB 3.0 bus operates at 5 Gbps. At an Ethernet speed of 100 Mbps, such a
bus can theoretically transfer 5 Gbps/200 Mbps = 25 packets in and out in the time it takes one packet to
arrive, supporting up to 50 ports total. However, with gigabit Ethernet, only two packets can be handled.
For commodity five-port switches, this is enough, and such switches can generally handle this degree of
parallelism.
Bus speeds go up at least ten-fold, but 10 Gbps and even 40 Gbps Ethernet is now common in datacenters,
and 24 ports is a bare minimum. As a result, the shared-memory architecture is generally not regarded as
adequate for high-performance switches. When a high degree of parallelism is required, there are various
architectures – known as switch fabrics – that can be implemented.
One common solution to this internal-bottleneck problem is a so-called crossbar switch fabric, consisting
of a grid of NˆN normally open switch nodes that can be closed under CPU control. Packets travel, via a
connected path through the crossbar, directly from one Ethernet interface to another. The crossbar allows
parallel connections between any of N inputs and any of N outputs.

              1

              2

     Inputs   3

              4

              5

                         1     2     3       4   5
                                   Outputs

                       
         5×5 crossbar with 5 parallel connections
           1 1, 2 3, 3 5, 4 2, 5 4

The diagram above illustrates a 5ˆ5 crossbar, with 5 inputs and 5 separate outputs. (In a real Ethernet
switch, any port can be an input or an output, but this is a relatively inessential difference). There are 5
parallel connections shown, from inputs 1-5 to outputs 1,3,5, 2 and 4 respectively; the large dots represent
solid-state switching elements in the closed state. Packets are transmitted serially through each switch path.
We saw in 1.7 Congestion that, for any switch (or router), if packets arrive over time for a given output
port faster than they can be transmitted by that port, then the excess packets will need to be queued at that
output port. However, in this crossbar example, if multiple packets destined for the same output arrive
simultaneously, all but one will also have to be queued briefly at the input side: packets cannot be delivered
in parallel to the same output-port queue. The same is true for most other switch fabrics as well, including
the simple shared-memory switch discussed above. So, while the “primary” queues of switches (and routers)
are at the output side, as packets wait their turn for transmission, there is also a need for smaller input-side
queues, as packets wait their turn to enter the switch fabric.
Crossbars, and variations, are one common approach in the design of high-speed switches that support

multiple parallel transfers.
The other hardware innovation often used by high-performance switches is Content-Addressable Memory,
or CAM; this allows for the search of the forwarding table in a single memory load. In a shared-memory
switch, each destination address must be looked up in a hash table or other data structure; including the
calculation of the hash value, this process may take as long as several tens of memory loads.
On some brands of switches, the forwarding table is often referred to as the CAM table.
CAM memory consists of a large number N of memory registers all attached to a common data-input bus;
for Ethernet switching, the data width of the bus and registers needs to be at least as large as the 48-bit
address size. When the input bus is activated, each memory register simultaneously compares the value on
the bus with its own data value; if there is a match, the register triggers its output line. A binary-encoder
circuit then converts the number k<N of that register to a binary value representing the address k of the
register. It is straightforward to have the encoder resolve ties by choosing, for example, the number of the
first register to match.

In the diagram above, the data width is 6, and there are 16 vertically oriented registers numbered (in hex)
0-f. Register 6 contains the entry 100011 matching the data input, and enables its signal into the encoder.
The output of the encoder is the corresponding address, 0110.
A common variant of CAM is Ternary CAM, or TCAM, in which each memory register is paired with a
corresponding “mask” register. For any given bit, a match is declared only if the bus bit matches the register
bit, or the corresponding mask bit is 0. A mask bit of 0 thus represents a wildcard value, matching any input.
TCAM is most useful when the addresses being looked up are IP addresses rather than Ethernet addresses,
in which case the goal is to match only the address bits corresponding to the network prefix (1.10 IP -
Internet Protocol). In this setting the mask contents represents the IP address mask (7.6 IPv4 Subnets). In
order to implement the longest-match rule (10.1 Classless Internet Domain Routing: CIDR) it is essential
that addresses with shorter prefixes – longer runs of terminal wildcard bits – appear before addresses with
longer prefixes (and also that, in the event of multiple matches, the encoder prefers the righthand – that
is, longer – match). This implies that new TCAM entries must be inserted in relatively specific positions,
which may involve a significant amount of shifting the positions of existing entries. See 7.5.1 Efficient
Forwarding-Table Lookup.

2.4 Ethernet Switches                                                                                      63

2.5 Spanning Tree Algorithm and Redundancy

In theory, if you form a loop with Ethernet switches, any packet with destination not already present in
the forwarding tables will circulate endlessly, consuming most available throughput. Some early switches
would actually do this; it was generally regarded as catastrophic failure.
In practice, however, loops allow redundancy – if one link breaks there is still 100% connectivity – and so
can be desirable. As a result, Ethernet switches have incorporated a switch-to-switch protocol to construct
a subset of the switch-connections graph that has no loops and yet allows reachability of every host, known
in graph theory as a spanning tree. Once the spanning tree is built, links that are not part of the tree are
disabled, even if they would represent the most efficient path between two nodes. If a link that is part of
the spanning tree fails, partitioning the network, a new tree is constructed, and some formerly disabled links
may now return to service.
One might ask, if switches can work together to negotiate a a spanning tree, whether they can also work
together to negotiate loop-free forwarding tables for the original non-tree topology, thus keeping all links
active. The difficulty here is not the switches’ ability to coordinate, but the underlying Ethernet broadcast
feature. As long as the topology has loops and broadcast is enabled, broadcast packets might circulate
forever. And disabling broadcast is not a straightforward option; switches rely on the broadcast-based
fallback-to-flooding strategy of 2.4.1 Ethernet Learning Algorithm to deliver to unknown destinations.
However, we will return to this point in 2.8 Software-Defined Networking. See also exercise 10.0.
The presence of hubs and other unswitched Ethernet segments slightly complicates the switch-connections
graph. In the absence of these, the graph’s nodes and edges are simply the hosts (including switches) and
links of the Ethernet itself. If unswitched multi-host Ethernet segments are present, then each of these
becomes a single node in the graph, with a graph edge to each switch to which it directly connects. (Any
Ethernet switches not participating in the spanning-tree algorithm would be treated as hubs.)
Every switch has an ID, eg its smallest Ethernet address, and every edge that attaches to a switch does so via
a particular, numbered interface. The goal is to disable redundant (cyclical) paths while retaining the ability
to deliver to any segment. The algorithm is due to Radia Perlman, [RP85].
The switches first elect a root node, eg the one with the smallest ID. Then, if a given segment connects to two
switches that both connect to the root node, the switch with the shorter path to the root is used, if possible; in
the event of ties, the switch with the smaller ID is used. The simplest measure of path cost is the number of
hops, though current implementations generally use a cost factor inversely proportional to the bandwidth (so
larger bandwidth has lower cost). Some switches permit other configuration here. The process is dynamic,
so if an outage occurs then the spanning tree is recomputed. If the outage should partition the network into
two pieces, both pieces will build spanning trees.
All switches send out regular messages on all interfaces called bridge protocol data units, or BPDUs (or
“Hello” messages). These are sent to the Ethernet multicast address 01:80:c2:00:00:00, from the Ethernet
physical address of the interface. (Note that Ethernet switches do not otherwise need a unique physical
address for each interface.) The BPDUs contain
     • The switch ID
     • the ID of the node the switch believes is the root
     • the path cost (eg number of hops) to that root

These messages are recognized by switches and are not forwarded naively. Switches process each message,
looking for
    • a switch with a lower ID than any the receiving switch has seen before (thus becoming the new root)
    • a shorter path to the existing root
    • an equal-length path to the existing root, but via a neighbor switch with a lower ID (the tie-breaker
      rule). If there are two ports that connect to that switch, the port number is used as an additional
      tie-breaker.
In a heterogeneous Ethernet we would also introduce a preference for faster paths, but we will assume here
that all links have the same bandwidth.
When a switch sees a new root candidate, it sends BPDUs on all interfaces, indicating the distance. The
switch includes the interface leading towards the root.
Once this process has stabilized, each switch knows
    • its own path to the root
    • which of its ports any further-out switches will be using to reach the root
    • for each port, its directly connected neighboring switches
Now the switch can “prune” some (or all!) of its interfaces. It disables all interfaces that are not enabled by
the following rules:
   1. It enables the port via which it reaches the root
   2. It enables any of its ports that further-out switches use to reach the root
   3. If a remaining port connects to a segment to which other “segment-neighbor” switches connect as well,
      the port is enabled if the switch has the minimum cost to the root among those segment-neighbors, or,
      if a tie, the smallest ID among those neighbors, or, if two ports are tied, the port with the smaller ID.
   4. If a port has no directly connected switch-neighbors, it presumably connects to a host or segment, and
      the port is enabled.
Rules 1 and 2 construct the spanning tree; if S3 reaches the root via S2, then Rule 1 makes sure S3’s port
towards S2 is open, and Rule 2 makes sure S2’s corresponding port towards S3 is open. Rule 3 ensures that
each network segment that connects to multiple switches gets a unique path to the root: if S2 and S3 are
segment-neighbors each connected to segment N, then S2 enables its port to N and S3 does not (because
2<3). The primary concern here is to create a path for any host nodes on segment N; S2 and S3 will create
their own paths via Rules 1 and 2. Rule 4 ensures that any “stub” segments retain connectivity; these would
include all hosts directly connected to switch ports.

2.5.1 Example 1: Switches Only

We can simplify the situation somewhat if we assume that the network is fully switched: each switch port
connects to another switch or to a (single-interface) host; that is, no repeater hubs (or coax segments!) are
in use. In this case we can dispense with Rule 3 entirely.
Any switch ports directly connected to a host can be identified because they are “silent”; the switch never
receives any BPDU messages on these interfaces because hosts do not send these. All these host port ends

2.5 Spanning Tree Algorithm and Redundancy                                                                  65

up enabled via Rule 4. Here is our sample network, where the switch numbers (eg 5 for S5) represent their
IDs; no hosts are shown and interface numbers are omitted.

     S1              S2               S3

     S4              S5               S6

S1 has the lowest ID, and so becomes the root. S2 and S4 are directly connected, so they will enable the
interfaces by which they reach S1 (Rule 1) while S1 will enable its interfaces by which S2 and S4 reach it
(Rule 2).
S3 has a unique lowest-cost route to S1, and so again by Rule 1 it will enable its interface to S2, while by
Rule 2 S2 will enable its interface to S3.
S5 has two choices; it hears of equal-cost paths to the root from both S2 and S4. It picks the lower-numbered
neighbor S2; the interface to S4 will never be enabled. Similarly, S4 will never enable its interface to S5.
Similarly, S6 has two choices; it selects S3.
After these links are enabled (strictly speaking it is interfaces that are enabled, not links, but in all cases here
either both interfaces of a link will be enabled or neither), the network in effect becomes:

     S1              S2               S3

     S4              S5               S6

2.5.2 Example 2: Switches and Segments

As an example involving switches that may join via unswitched Ethernet segments, consider the following
network; S1, S2 and S3, for example, are all segment-neighbors via their common segment B. As before, the
switch numbers represent their IDs. The letters in the clouds represent network segments; these clouds may
include multiple hosts. Note that switches have no way to detect these hosts; only (as above) other switches.

                                               2               1        2
                                   1
                                       S6                 K        S7           H
                       3   G
              S2                                                                    3
          1
                   2
                                                                            1   S3
                                                                                    2
                                       B

      A                                                                         E

                                                                                    2
                   5
          1
                       4                   1          3       D             1
              S1               C               S4                               S5
          2            3
                                               2

              F                                J

Eventually, all switches discover S1 is the root (because 1 is the smallest of {1,2,3,4,5,6}). S2, S3 and S4
are one (unique) hop away; S5, S6 and S7 are two hops away.

 Algorhyme

 I think that I shall never see
 a graph more lovely than a tree.
 A tree whose crucial property
 is loop-free connectivity.
 A tree that must be sure to span
 so packet can reach every LAN.
 First, the root must be selected.
 By ID, it is elected.
 Least-cost paths from root are traced.
 In the tree, these paths are placed.
 A mesh is made by folks like me,
 then bridges find a spanning tree.

       Radia Perlman

For the switches one hop from the root, Rule 1 enables S2’s port 1, S3’s port 1, and S4’s port 1. Rule 2
enables the corresponding ports on S1: ports 1, 5 and 4 respectively. Without the spanning-tree algorithm
S2 could reach S1 via port 2 as well as port 1, but port 1 has a smaller number.
S5 has two equal-cost paths to the root: S5ÝÑS4ÝÑS1 and S5ÝÑS3ÝÑS1. S3 is the switch with the

2.5 Spanning Tree Algorithm and Redundancy                                                               67

lower ID; its port 2 is enabled and S5 port 2 is enabled.
S6 and S7 reach the root through S2 and S3 respectively; we enable S6 port 1, S2 port 3, S7 port 2 and S3
port 3.
The ports still disabled at this point are S1 ports 2 and 3, S2 port 2, S4 ports 2 and 3, S5 port 1, S6 port 2
and S7 port 1.
Now we get to Rule 3, dealing with how segments (and thus their hosts) connect to the root. Applying Rule
3,
     • We do not enable S2 port 2, because the network (B) has a direct connection to the root, S1
     • We do enable S4 port 3, because S4 and S5 connect that way and S4 is closer to the root. This enables
       connectivity of network D. We do not enable S5 port 1.
     • S6 and S7 are tied for the path-length to the root. But S6 has smaller ID, so it enables port 2. S7’s
       port 1 is not enabled.
Finally, Rule 4 enables S4 port 2, and thus connectivity for host J. It also enables S1 port 2; network F has
two connections to S1 and port 2 is the lower-numbered connection.
All this port-enabling is done using only the data collected during the root-discovery phase; there is no
additional negotiation. The BPDU exchanges continue, however, so as to detect any changes in the topology.
If a link is disabled, it is not used even in cases where it would be more efficient to use it. That is, traffic
from F to B is sent via B1, D, and B5; it never goes through B7. IP routing, on the other hand, uses the
“shortest path”. To put it another way, all spanning-tree Ethernet traffic goes through the root node, or along
a path to or from the root node.
The traditional (IEEE 802.1D) spanning-tree protocol is relatively slow; the need to go through the tree-
building phase means that after switches are first turned on no normal traffic can be forwarded for ~30
seconds. Faster, revised protocols have been proposed to reduce this problem.
Another issue with the spanning-tree algorithm is that a rogue switch can announce an ID of 0 (or some
similar artificially small value), thus likely becoming the new root; this leaves that switch well-positioned
to eavesdrop on a considerable fraction of the traffic. One of the goals of the Cisco “Root Guard” feature
is to prevent this. Another goal of this and related features is to put the spanning-tree topology under some
degree of administrative control. One likely wants the root switch, for example, to be geographically at least
somewhat centered, and for the high-speed backbone links to be preferred to slow links.

2.6 Virtual LAN (VLAN)

What do you do when you have different people in different places who are “logically” tied together? For
example, for a while the Loyola University CS department was split, due to construction, between two
buildings.
One approach is to continue to keep LANs local, and use IP routing between different subnets. However,
it is often convenient (printers are one reason) to configure workgroups onto a single “virtual” LAN, or
VLAN. A VLAN looks like a single LAN, usually a single Ethernet LAN, in that all VLAN members will
see broadcast packets sent by other members and the VLAN will ultimately be considered to be a single IP
subnet (7.6 IPv4 Subnets). Different VLANs are ultimately connected together, but likely only by passing

through a single, central IP router. Broadcast traffic on one VLAN will generally not propagate to any other
VLAN; this isolation of broadcast traffic is another important justification for VLAN use.
VLANs can be visualized and designed by using the concept of coloring. We logically assign all nodes on
the same VLAN the same color, and switches forward packets accordingly. That is, if S1 connects to red
machines R1 and R2 and blue machines B1 and B2, and R1 sends a broadcast packet, then it goes to R2 but
not to B1 or B2. Switches must, of course, be told the color of each of their ports.

  R1                                                                                          R3
  B1           S1                               S2                                S3
                                                                                              B3
  B2

               R2

                                                S4             Router R

                         One network of switches S1-S4 divided into two VLANs, red and blue

In the diagram above, S1 and S3 each have both red and blue ports. The switch network S1-S4 will deliver
traffic only when the source and destination ports are the same color. Red packets can be forwarded to the
blue VLAN only by passing through the router R, entering R’s red port and leaving its blue port. R may
apply firewall rules to restrict red–blue traffic.
When the source and destination ports are on the same switch, nothing needs to be added to the packet; the
switch can keep track of the color of each of its ports. However, switch-to-switch traffic must be additionally
tagged to indicate the source. Consider, for example, switch S1 above sending packets to S3 which has nodes
R3 (red) and B3 (blue). Traffic between S1 and S3 must be tagged with the color, so that S3 will know to
what ports it may be delivered. The IEEE 802.1Q protocol is typically used for this packet-tagging; a 32-bit
“color” tag is inserted into the Ethernet header after the source address and before the type field. The first
16 bits of this field is 0x8100, which becomes the new Ethernet type field and which identifies the frame as
tagged. A separate 802.3 amendment allows Ethernet packets to be slightly larger, to accommodate the tags.
Double-tagging is possible; this would allow an ISP to have one level of tagging and its customers to have
another level.
Finally, most commercial-grade switches do provide some way of selectively allowing traffic between dif-
ferent VLANs; with such switches, for example, rules could be created to allow R1 to connect to B3 without
the use of the router R. One difficulty with this approach is that there is often little standardization among
switch manufacturers. This makes it difficult to create, for example, authorization applications that al-
low opening inter-VLAN connections on the fly. Another issue is that some switches allow inter-VLAN
rules based only on MAC addresses, and not, for example, on TCP port numbers. The OpenFlow protocol
(2.8.1 OpenFlow Switches) has the potential to create the necessary standardization here. Even without
OpenFlow, however, some specialty access-and-authentication systems have been developed that do enable
host access by dynamic creation of the appropriate switch rules.

2.6 Virtual LAN (VLAN)                                                                                      69

2.7 TRILL and SPB

As Ethernets get larger, the spanning-tree algorithm becomes more and more a problem, primarily because
useful links are disabled and redundancy is lost. In a high-performance network, such as within a datacenter,
disabled links are a wasted resource. A secondary issue is that, in the event of link failure, the spanning-tree
approach can take many seconds to create a new tree and restore connectivity.
To address these problems, there are now protocols which allow Ethernet to have active loops in the topology,
making first-class use of all links. The idea is to generate forwarding tables within the Ethernet switches – or
at least within some of them – that route every packet along the shortest path – or at least an approximation
to the shortest path – based on all available links. This has long been a staple in the IP world (9 Routing-
Update Algorithms), but is definitely a break with tradition at the LAN layer.
There are two competing protocols here: TRILL (TRansparent Interconnection of Lots of Links) and SPB
(Shortest-Path Bridging). TRILL is documented in [RP04] and RFC 6325 and companions, while SPB is
standardized by IEEE 802.1aq. We will focus here on TRILL.
Both TRILL and SPB envision that, initially, only a few switches will be smart enough to do shortest-path
routing, just as, once upon a time, only a few switches implemented the spanning-tree algorithm. But,
with time, it is likely that eventually most if not all Ethernet switches will be shortest-path aware. In high-
performance datacenters it is particularly likely that forwarding will be based on TRILL or SPB.
In TRILL, the Ethernet switches that are TRILL-aware are known as Router-Bridges, or RBridges (the terms
RSwitches and TRILL Switches might also be appropriate). In between the RBridges are Legacy Ethernets
(called “links” in [RP04] and RFC 6325, though this term is misleading); Legacy Ethernets consist of
maximal subnetworks of Ethernet hosts and non-TRILL-aware switches. The intent is for the RBridges to
partition the entire Ethernet into relatively small Legacy Ethernets. In the ultimate case where all switches
are RBridges, the Legacy Ethernets are simply individual hosts. In the diagram below, four RBridges isolate
Legacy Ethernets 1, 2, 3 and 4, though Legacy Ethernet 5 represents a degree of partitioning inefficiency.

      LE1           RB1                              RB4           LE4

                                    LE5

      LE2           RB2                              RB3           LE3

Each Legacy Ethernet elects a single connected RBridge to represent it. There is a unique choice for LE1
through LE4 above, but LE5 must make a decision. This elected RBridge is known as the Designated
RBridge, or DRB. Each Legacy Ethernet then builds its own spanning tree, perhaps (though not necessarily)
rooted at its Designated RBridge.
Traffic from a Legacy Ethernet to the outside will generally be forwarded through its Designated RBridge;
connections to other RBridges will not be used. The idea is for packets from one Legacy Ethernet to another
to be delivered first to the source node’s DRB, and then to the destination node’s DRB via true shortest-path
forwarding between the RBridges, and from there to the destination node. Of course, in the ultimate case

where every switch is an RBridge, traffic will take the shortest path from start to finish.
The one exception to this rule about forwarding through the Designated RBridge is that the DRB can dele-
gate this forwarding task to other RBridges for different VLANs within the Legacy Ethernet. If this is done,
each VLAN will always use the same RBridge for all its outside traffic.
The second part of the process is for the RBridges each to figure out the overall topology; that is, each builds
a complete map of all the RBridges and their interconnections. This is done using a link-state routing-update
protocol, described in 9.5 Link-State Routing-Update Algorithm. Of the two primary link-state protocols,
IS-IS and OSPF, TRILL has selected the former, as it is more easily adapted to a setting in which, as here,
nodes do not necessarily have IP addresses. The RBridges each send out appropriate “link-state packets”,
using multicast and using per-RBridge databases to ensure that these packets are not re-forwarded endlessly.
These link-state packets can be compared to spanning-tree Hello messages. As is fundamental to link-state
forwarding, once each RBridge has a complete map of all the RBridges, each RBridge can calculate an
optimal route to any other RBridge.
As Designated RBridges see packets from their Legacy Ethernets, they learn the MAC addresses of the
active hosts within, via the usual Ethernet learning protocol. They then share these addresses with other
RBridges, using the IS-IS link-state protocol, so other RBridges eventually learn how to reach most if not
all Ethernet addresses present in the overall network.
Delivery still must make use of fallback-to-flooding, however, to deliver to previously unknown destinations.
To this end, the RBridges negotiate among themselves a spanning tree covering all the RBridges. Any packet
with unknown destination is flooded along this spanning tree, and then, as the packet reaches a Designated
RBridge for a Legacy Ethernet, is flooded along the spanning tree of that Ethernet. This process is also used
for delivery of broadcast and multicast packets.
As RBridges talk to one another, they negotiate compact two-byte addresses – known as “nicknames” – for
one another, versus the standard Ethernet six-byte addresses. This saves space in the RBridge-to-RBridge
communications.
As packets travel between RBridges, a special TRILL header is added. This header includes a hopcount
field, otherwise not present in Ethernet, which means any packets caught in transient routing loops will
eventually be discarded. IS-IS may occasionally generate such routing loops, though they are rare.
The TRILL header also includes the nicknames of the source and destination RBridges. This means that
actual packet forwarding between RBridges does not involve the MAC address of the destination host; that
is used only after the packet has reached the Designated RBridge for the destination Legacy Ethernet, at
which point the TRILL header is removed.
If a link between two RBridges fails, then the link’s endpoints send out IS-IS update messages to notify all
the other RBridges of the failure. The other RBridges can then recalculate their forwarding tables so as not
to use the broken link. Recovery time is typically under 0.1 seconds, a roughly hundredfold improvement
over spanning-tree recovery times.
TRILL supports the use of multiple equal-cost paths to improve throughput between two RBridges; cf
9.7 ECMP. In a high-performance datacenter, this feature is very important.
Like TRILL, SPB uses IS-IS between the SPB-aware bridges to find shortest paths, and encapsulates packets
with a special header as they travel between RBridges. SPB does not include a hopcount in the encapsulation
header; instead, it more carefully controls forwarding. SPB also uses the original destination MAC address
for inter-RBridge forwarding.

2.7 TRILL and SPB                                                                                            71

2.8 Software-Defined Networking

While TRILL and SPB offer one way to handle to the scaling problems of spanning trees, Software-Defined
Networking, or SDN, offers another, much more general, approach. The core idea of SDN is to place the
forwarding mechanism of each participating switch under the aegis of a controller, a user-programmable
device that is capable of giving each switch instructions on how to forward packets. Like TRILL and SPB,
this approach also allows forwarding and redundant links to coexist. The controller can be a single node on
the network, or can be a distributed set of nodes. The controller manages the forwarding tables of each of
the switches.
To handle legitimate broadcast traffic, the controller can, at startup, probe the switches to determine their
layout, and, from this, construct a suitable spanning tree. The switches can then be instructed to flood
broadcast traffic only along the links of this spanning tree. Links that are not part of the spanning tree can
still be used for forwarding to known destinations, however, unlike conventional switches using the spanning
tree algorithm.
Typically, if a switch sees a packet addressed to an unknown destination, it reports it to the controller, which
then must figure out what to do next. One option is to have traffic to unknown destinations flooded along
the same spanning tree used for broadcast traffic. This allows fallback-to-flooding to coexist safely with the
full use of loop topologies.
Switches are often configured to report new source addresses to the controller, so that the controller can tell
all the other switches the best route to that new source.
SDN controllers can be configured as simple firewalls, disallowing forwarding between selected pairs of
nodes for security reasons. For example, if a datacenter has customers A and B, each with multiple nodes,
then it is possible to configure the network so that no node belonging to customer A can send packets to a
node belonging to customer B. See also the following section.
At many sites, the SDN implementation is based on standardized modules. However, controller software
can also be developed locally, allowing very precise control of network functionality. This control, rather
than the ability to combine loop topologies with Ethernet, is arguably SDN’s most important feature. See
[FRZ13].

2.8.1 OpenFlow Switches

At the heart of SDN is the ability of controllers to tell switches how to forward packets. We next look at
the packet-forwarding architecture for OpenFlow switches; OpenFlow is a specific SDN standard created
by the Open Networking Foundation. See [MABPPRST08] and the OpenFlow switch specification (2015
version).
OpenFlow forwarding is built around one or more flow tables. The primary components of a flow-table
entry are a set of match fields and a set of packet-response instructions, or actions, if the match succeeds.
Some common actions include
     • dropping the packet
     • forwarding the packet out a specified single interface
     • flooding the packet out a set of interfaces

    • forwarding the packet to the controller
    • modifying some field of the packet
    • processing the packet at another (higher-numbered) flow table
The match fields can, of course, be a single entry for the destination Ethernet address. But it can also include
any other packet bit-field, and can include the ingress interface number. For example, the forwarding can
be done entirely (or partially) on IP addresses rather than Ethernet addresses, thus allowing the OpenFlow
switch to act as a so-called Layer 3 switch (7.6.3 Subnets versus Switching), that is, resembling an IP router.
Matching can be by the destination IP address and the destination TCP port, allowing separate forwarding
for different TCP-based applications. In 9.6 Routing on Other Attributes we define policy-based routing;
arbitrary such routing decisions can be implemented using OpenFlow switches. In SDN settings the policy-
based-routing abilities are sometimes used to segregate real-time traffic and large-volume “elephant” flows.
In the l2_pairs.py example of the following section, matching is done on both Ethernet source and
destination addresses.
Flow tables bear a rough similarity to forwarding tables, with the match fields corresponding to destinations
and the actions corresponding to the next_hop. In simple cases, the match field contains a single destination
address and the action is to forward out the corresponding switch port.
Normally, OpenFlow switches handle broadcast packets by flooding them; that is, by forwarding them out
all interfaces other than the arrival interface. It is possible, however, to set the NO_FLOOD attribute on
specific interfaces, which means that packets designated for flooding (broadcast or otherwise) will not be
sent out on those interfaces. This is typically how spanning trees for broadcast traffic are implemented (see
18.9.6 l2_multi.py for a Mininet example). An interface marked NO_FLOOD, however, may still be used
for unicast traffic. Generally, broadcast flooding does not require a flow-table entry.
Match fields are also assigned a priority value. In the event that a packet matches two or more flow-table
entries, the entry with the highest priority wins. The table-miss entry is the entry with no match fields
(thereby matching every packet) and with priority 0. Often the table-miss entry’s action is to forward the
packet to the controller, although a packet that matches no entry is simply dropped.
Flow-table instructions can also involve modifying (“mangling”) packets. One Ethernet-layer application
might be VLAN coloring (2.6 Virtual LAN (VLAN)); at the IPv4 layer, this could be used to decrement the
TTL and update the checksum (7.1 The IPv4 Header).
In addition to match fields and instructions, flow tables also include counters, flags, and a last_used time.
The latter allows flows to be removed if no matching packets have been seen for a while. The counters allow
the OpenFlow switch to implement Quality-of-Service constraints – eg bandwidth limiting – on the traffic.

2.8.2 Learning Switches in OpenFlow

Suppose we want to implement a standard Ethernet learning switch (2.4.1 Ethernet Learning Algorithm).
The obvious approach is to use flows matching only on the destination address. But we encounter a problem
because, by default, packets are reported to the controller only when there is no flow-entry match. Suppose
switch S sees a packet from host B to host A and reports it to the controller, which installs a flow entry in S
matching destination B (much as a real learning switch would do). If a packet now arrives at S from a third
host C to B, it would simply be forwarded, as it would match the B flow entry, and therefore would not be
reported to the controller. This means the controller would never learn about address C, and would never
install a flow entry for C.

2.8 Software-Defined Networking                                                                              73

One straightforward alternative approach that avoids this problem is to match on Ethernet xdestaddr,srcaddry
pairs. If a packet from A to B arrives at switch S and does not match any existing flow entry at S, it is
reported to the controller, which now learns that A is reached via the port by which the packet arrived at S.

                       port 1       port 2
       A                        S                   B

In the network above, suppose A sends a packet to B (or broadcasts a packet meant for B), and the flow table
of S is empty. S will report the packet to the controller (not shown in the diagram), which will send it back
to S to be flooded. However, the controller will also record that A can be reached from S via port 1.
Next, suppose B responds. When this packet from B arrives at S, there are still no flow-table entries, and
so S again reports the packet to the controller. But this time the controller knows, because it learned from
the first packet, that S can reach A via port 1. The controller also now knows, from the just-arrived packet,
that B can be reached via port 2. Knowing both of these forwarding rules, the controller now installs two
flow-table entries in S:
      dst=B,src=A: forward out port 2
      dst=A,src=B: forward out port 1
If a packet from a third host C now arrives at S, addressed to B, it will not be forwarded, even though its
destination address matches the first rule above, as its source address does not match A. It will instead be
sent to the controller (and ultimately be flooded). When B responds to C, the controller will install rules for
dst=C,src=B and dst=B,src=C. If the packet from C were not reported to the controller – perhaps because
S had a flow rule for dst=B only – then the controller would never learn about C, and would never be in a
position to install a flow rule for reaching C.
The pairs approach to OpenFlow learning is pretty much optimal, if a single flow-entry table is available.
The problem with this approach is that it does not scale well; with 10,000 addresses on the network, we will
need 100,000,000 flowtable-entry pairs to describe all the possible forwarding. This is prohibitive.
We examine a real implementation (in Python) of the pairs approach in 18.9.2             l2_pairs.py, using the
Mininet network emulator and the Pox controller (18 Mininet).
A more compact approach is to use multiple flow tables: one for matching the destination, and one for
matching the source. In this version, the controller never has to remember partial forwarding information,
as the controller in the version above had to do after receiving the first packet from A. When a packet arrives,
it is matched against the first table, and any actions specified by the match are carried out. One of the actions
may be a request to repeat the match against the second table, which may lead to a second set of actions.
We repeat the AÑB, BÑA example above, letting T0 denote the first table and T1 denote the second.
Initially, before any packets are seen, the controller installs the following low-priority match rules in S:
      T0 : match nothing: flood, send to T1
      T1 : match nothing: send to controller
These are in effect default rules: because there are no packet fields to match, they match all packets. The
low priority ensures that better-matching rules are always used when available.
When the packet from A to B arrives, the T0 rule above means the packet is flooded to B, while the T1 rule
means the packet is sent to the controller. The controller then installs the following rules in S:

      T0 : match dst=A: forward via port 1, send to T1
      T1 : match src=A: do nothing
Now B sends its reply to A. The first rule above matches, so the packet is forwarded by S to A, and is
resubmitted to T1 . The T1 rule immediately above, however, does not match. The only match is to the
original default rule, and the packet is sent to the controller. The controller then installs another two rules in
S:
      T0 : match dst=B: forward via port 2, send to T1
      T1 : match src=B: do nothing
At this point, as A and B continue to communicate, the T0 rules ensure proper forwarding, while the T1
rules ensure that no more packets from this flow are sent to the controller.
Note that the controller always installs the same address in the T0 table and the T1 table, so the list of
addresses present in these two tables will always be identical. The T0 table always matches destinations,
though, while the T1 table matches source addresses.
The Mininet/Pox version of this appears in 18.9.3 l2_nx.py.
Another application for multiple flow tables involves switches that make quality-of-service prioritization
decisions. A packet’s destination would be found using the first flow table, while its priority would be found
by matching to the second table. The packet would then be forwarded out the port determined by the first
table, using the priority determined by the second table. Like building a learning switch, this can be done
with a single table by listing all combinations of xdestaddr,priorityy, but sometimes that’s too many entries.
We mentioned above that SDN controllers can be used as firewalls. At the Ethernet-address level this is
tedious to configure, but by taking advantage of OpenFlow’s understanding of IP addresses, it is straight-
forward, for example, to block traffic between different IP subnets, much like a router might do. OpenFlow
also allows blocking all such traffic except that between specific pairs of hosts using specific protocols. For
example, we might want customer A’s web servers to be able to communicate with A’s database servers
using the standard TCP port, while still blocking all other web-to-database traffic.

2.8.3 Other OpenFlow examples

After emulating a learning switch, perhaps the next most straightforward OpenFlow application, concep-
tually, is the support of Ethernet topologies that contain loops. This can be done quite generically; the
controller does not need any special awareness of the network topology.
On startup, switches are instructed by the controller to report their neighboring switches. With this informa-
tion the controller is then able to form a complete map of the switch topology. (One way to implement this
is for the controller to order each switch to send a special marked packet out each of its ports, and then for
the receiving switches to report these packets back to the controller.) Once the controller knows the switch
topology, it can calculate a spanning tree, and then instruct each switch that flooded packets should be sent
out only via ports that correspond to links on the spanning tree.
Once the location of a destination host has been learned by the controller (that is, the controller learns
which switch the host is directly connected to), the controller calculates the shortest (or lowest-cost, if the
application supports differential link costs) path from each switch to that host. The controller then instructs
each switch how to forward to that host. Forwarding will likely use links that are not part of the spanning
tree, unlike traditional Ethernet switches.

2.8 Software-Defined Networking                                                                                75

We outline an implementation of this strategy in 18.9.6 l2_multi.py.

2.8.3.1 Interconnection Fabric

The previous Ethernet-loop example is quite general; it works for any switch topology. Many other Open-
Flow applications require that the controller contains some prior knowledge of the switch topology. As an
example of this, we present what we will refer to as an interconnection fabric. This is the S1-S5 network
illustrated below, in which every upper (S1-S2) switch connects directly to every lower (S3-S5) switch. The
bottom row in the diagram represents server racks, as interconnection fabrics are very common in datacen-
ters. (For a real-world datacenter example, see here, although real-world interconnection fabrics are often
joined using routing rather than switching.) The red and blue numbers identify the switch ports.

                     0                           0
                    S1                      S2
                1   2 3                    1 2       3

         0 1                  0        1                     0 1
         S3                       S4                          S5
     2   3 4              2       3 4                    2    3 4

The first two rows here contain many loops, eg S1–S3–S2–S4–S1 (omitting the S3-S5 row, and having S1
and S2 connect directly to the server racks, does not eliminate loops). In the previous example we described
how we could handle loops in a switched network by computing a spanning tree and then allowing packet
flooding only along this spanning tree. This is certainly possible here, but if we allow the spanning-tree
algorithm to prune the loops, we will lose most of the parallelism between the S1-S2 and S3-S5 layers; see
exercise 8.5. This generic spanning-tree approach is not what we want.
If we use IP routing at S1 through S5, as in 9 Routing-Update Algorithms, we then need the three clusters
of server racks below S3, S4 and S5 to be on three separate IP subnets (7.6 IPv4 Subnets). While this is
always technically possible, it can be awkward, if the separate subnets function for most other purposes as a
single unit.
One OpenFlow approach is to assume that the three clusters of server racks below S3-S4-S5 form a single
IP subnet. We can then configure S1-S5 with OpenFlow so that traffic from the subnet is always forwarded
upwards while traffic to the subnet is always forwarded downwards.
But an even simpler solution – one not requiring any knowledge of the server subnet – is to use OpenFlow to
configure the switches S1-S5 so that unknown-destination traffic entering on a red (upper) port is flooded out
only on the blue (lower) ports, and vice-versa. This eliminates loops by ensuring that all traffic goes through
the interconnection fabric either upwards-only or downwards-only. After the destination server below S3-S5
has replied, of course, S1 or S2 will learn to which of S3-S5 it should forward future packets to that server.
This example works the way it does because the topology has a particular property: once we eliminate paths

that both enter and leave S1 or S2 via blue nodes, or that enter and leave S3, S4 and S5 via red nodes, there is
a unique path between any input port (red upper port) and any output port (towards the server racks). From
there, it is easy to avoid loops. Given a more general topology, on the other hand, in which unique paths
cannot be guaranteed by such a rule, the OpenFlow controller has to choose a path. This in turn generally
entails path discovery, shortest-path selection and loop avoidance, as in the previous example.

2.8.3.2 Load Balancer

The previous example was quite local, in that all the OpenFlow actions are contained within the intercon-
nection fabric. As a larger-scale (and possiby more typical) special-purpose OpenFlow example, we next
describe how to achieve server load-balancing via SDN; that is, users are connected transparently to one of
several identical servers. Each server handles only its assigned fraction of the total load. For this example,
the controller must not only have knowledge of the topology, but also of the implementation goal.
To build the load-balancer, imagine that the SDN controller is in charge of, in the diagram of the previous
section, all switches in the interconnection fabric and also all switches among the server racks below. At
this point, we configure all the frontline servers within the server racks identically, including giving them
all identical IPv4 addresses. When an incoming TCP connection request arrives, the controller picks a
server (perhaps using round robin, perhaps selecting the server with the lowest load) and sets up OpenFlow
forwarding rules so all traffic on that TCP connection arriving from the outside world is sent to the designated
server, and vice-versa. Different servers with the same IPv4 address are not allowed to talk directly with
one another at all, thereby averting chaos. The lifetime of the OpenFlow forwarding rule can be adjusted as
desired, eg to match the typical lifetime of a user session.
When the first TCP packet of a connection arrives at the selected server, the server may or may not need
to use ARP to figure out the appropriate internal LAN address to which to send its reply. Sometimes ARP
needs to be massaged a bit to work acceptably in an environment in which some hosts have the same IPv4
address.
At no point is the fact that multiple servers have been assigned the same IPv4 address directly exposed: not
to other servers, not to internal routers, and not to end users. (Servers never initiate outbound connections
to users, so there is no risk of two servers contacting the same user.)
For an example of this sort of load balancing implemented in Mininet and Pox, see 18.9.5               loadbal-
ance31.py.
The identical frontline servers might need to access a common internal database cluster. This can be im-
plemented by assigning each server a second IPv4 address for this purpose, not shared with other servers,
or by using the common public-facing IPv4 address and a little more OpenFlow cleverness in setting up
appropriate forwarding rules. If the latter approach is taken, it is now in principle possible that two servers
would connect to the database using the same TCP port, by coincidence. This would expose the identical
IPv4 addresses, and the SDN controllers would have to take care to ensure that this did not happen. One
approach, if supported, would be to have the OpenFlow switches “mangle” the server IPv4 addresses or
ports, as is done with NAT (7.7 Network Address Translation).
There are also several “traditional” strategies for implementing load balancing. For example, one can give
each server its own IPv4 address but then use round-robin DNS (7.8 DNS) to assign different users to
different servers. Alternatively, one can place a device called a load balancer at the front of the network that
assigns incoming connection requests to an internal server and then takes care of setting up the appropriate
forwarding. Forwarding can be at the IP layer (that is, via routing), or at the TCP layer, or at the application

2.8 Software-Defined Networking                                                                              77

layer. The load balancer can be thought of as NAT-like (7.7 Network Address Translation) in that it
maintains a table of associations between external-user connections and a internal servers; once a user
connects, the association with the chosen server remains in place for a period of time. One advantage of
the SDN approach described here is that the individual front-line servers need no special configuration; all
of the load-sharing awareness is contained within the SDN network. Furthermore, the SDN switches do
virtually no additional work beyond ordinary forwarding; they need only involve the controller when the
first new TCP packet of each connection arrives.

2.9 Epilog

Ethernet dominates the LAN layer, but is not one single LAN protocol: it comes in a variety of speeds
and flavors. Higher-speed Ethernet seems to be moving towards fragmenting into a range of physical-layer
options for different types of cable, but all based on switches and point-to-point linking; different Ethernet
types can be interconnected only with switches. Once Ethernet finally abandons physical links that are
bi-directional (half-duplex links), it will be collision-free and thus will no longer need a minimum packet
size.
Other wired networks have largely disappeared (or have been renamed “Ethernet”). Wireless networks,
however, are here to stay, and for the time being at least have inherited the original Ethernet’s collision-
management concerns.

2.10 Exercises

Exercises are given fractional (floating point) numbers, to allow for interpolation of new exercises. Exercise
2.5 is distinct, for example, from exercises 2.0 and 3.0. Exercises marked with a ♢ have solutions or hints
at 24.2 Solutions for Ethernet.
1.0. Simulate the contention period of five Ethernet stations that all attempt to transmit at T=0 (presumably
when some sixth station has finished transmitting), in the style of the diagram in 2.1.6 Exponential Backoff
Algorithm. Assume that time is measured in slot times, and that exactly one slot time is needed to detect a
collision (so that if two stations transmit at T=1 and collide, and one of them chooses a backoff time k=0,
then that station will transmit again at T=2). Use coin flips or some other source of randomness.
2.0. Suppose we have Ethernet switches S1 through S3 arranged as below; each switch uses the learning
algorithm of 2.4 Ethernet Switches. All forwarding tables are initially empty.

S1            S2            S3     D

A             B             C

(a). If A sends to B, which switches see this packet?
(b). If B then replies to A, which switches see this packet?
(c). If C then sends to B, which switches see this packet?
(d). If C then sends to D, which switches see this packet?

2.7.♢ Suppose we have the Ethernet switches S1 through S4 arranged as below. All forwarding tables are
empty; each switch uses the learning algorithm of 2.4 Ethernet Switches.

                     B

                     S4

A    S1              S2          S3     C

                     D

Now suppose the following packet transmissions take place:
    • A sends to D
    • D sends to A
    • A sends to B
    • B sends to D
For each switch S1-S4, list what source addresses (eg A,B,C,D) it has seen (and thus what nodes it has
learned the location of).
3.0. Repeat the previous exercise (2.7), with the same network layout, except that instead the following
packet transmissions take place:
    • A sends to B
    • B sends to A
    • C sends to B
    • D sends to A
For each switch, list what source addresses (eg A,B,C,D) it has seen (and thus what nodes it has learned the
location of).
4.0. In the switched-Ethernet network below, find two packet transmissions so that, when a third transmis-
sion AÝÑD occurs, the packet is seen by B (that is, it is flooded out all ports by S2), but is not similarly
seen by C (because it is forwarded to D, not flooded, by S3). All forwarding tables are initially empty, and
each switch uses the learning algorithm of 2.4 Ethernet Switches.

                     B           C

A    S1              S2          S3     D

Hint: Destination D must be in S3’s forwarding table, but must not be in S2’s. So there must have been a
packet sent by D that was seen by S3 but not by S2.
5.0. Given the Ethernet network with learning switches below, with (disjoint) unspecified parts represented
by ?, explain why it is impossible for a packet sent from A to B to be forwarded by S1 directly to S2, but to
be flooded by S2 out all of S2’s other ports.

2.10 Exercises                                                                                            79

        ?                      ?
        |                      |
A       S1                     S2       B

6.0. In the diagram below, from 2.4.1 Ethernet Learning Algorithm, suppose node D is connected to S5.
Now, with the tables as shown by the labels in the diagram (that is, S5 knows about A and C, etc), D sends
to B.

             A                  B               A        B        A,C          B
    A                 S1                            S2                   S3          B
                                                    C

                                                    A
                                                C                 A,C
                                            C       S4                   S5          D

Which switches will see this DÑB packet, and thus learn about D? Of these switches, which do not already
know where B is and will use fallback-to-flooding?
7.0. Suppose two Ethernet switches are connected in a loop as follows; S1 and S2 have their interfaces 1
and 2 labeled. These switches do not use the spanning-tree algorithm.

                                    1                    1

         A                 0    S1                       S2
                                    2                    2

Suppose A attempts to send a packet to destination B, which is unknown. S1 will therefore flood the packet
out interfaces 1 and 2. What happens then? How long will A’s packet circulate?
8.0. The following network is like that of 2.5.1 Example 1: Switches Only, except that the switches are
numbered differently. Again, the ID of switch Sn is n, so S1 will be the root. Which links end up “pruned”
by the spanning-tree algorithm, and why? Diagram the network formed by the surviving links.

S1               S4             S6

S3               S5             S2

8.5. Consider the network below, consisting of just the first two rows from the datacenter diagram in
2.8.1 OpenFlow Switches:

                S1                  S2

      S3                  S4                   S5

(a).♢ Give network of surviving links after application of the spanning-tree algorithm. Assume the ID of
switch Sn is n. In this network, what is the path of traffic from S2 to S5?
(b). Do the same as part (a) except assuming S4 has ID 0, and so will be the root, while the ID for the other
Sn remains n. What will be the path of traffic from S1 to S5?

9.0. Suppose you want to develop a new protocol so that Ethernet switches participating in a VLAN all keep
track of the VLAN “color” associated with every destination in their forwarding tables. Assume that each
switch knows which of its ports (interfaces) connect to other switches and which may connect to hosts, and
in the latter case knows the color assigned to that port.

(a). Suggest a way by which switches might propagate this destination-color information to other switches.
(b). What must be done if a port formerly reserved for connection to another switch is now used for a host?

10.0. (This exercise assumes some familiarity with Distance-Vector routing as in 9 Routing-Update Algo-
rithms.)

(a). Suppose switches are able to identify the non-switch hosts that are directly connected, that is,
reachable without passing through another switch. Explain how the algorithm of 9.1 Distance-Vector
Routing-Update Algorithm could be used to construct optimal Ethernet forwarding tables even if loops
were present in the network topology.

(b). Suppose switches are allowed to “mark” packets; all packets are initially unmarked. Give a mechanism
that allows switches to detect which non-switch hosts are directly connected.

(c). Explain why Ethernet broadcast (and multicast) would still be a problem.

11.0. Consider the scenario from 2.4.1 Ethernet Learning Algorithm:

2.10 Exercises                                                                                            81

          A              B                  A         B                A,C        B
  A            S1                               S2                           S3        B
                                                C

                                                A
                                            C                          A,C
                                   C            S4                           S5

                        Five learning bridges after three packet transmissions

      • A sends to B
      • B sends to A
      • C sends to B
Now suppose that, before each packet transmission above, the sender first sends a broadcast packet, and
the destination then sends a unicast reply packet (this is roughly the ARP protocol, used to translate from
IPv4 addresses to Ethernet physical addresses, 7.9 Address Resolution Protocol: ARP). After the three
transmissions listed above, what destinations do the switches S1-S5 have in their forwarding tables?
12.0.♢ Consider the following arrangement of three hosts h1, h2, h3 and one OpenFlow switch S with ports
1, 2 and 3 and controller C (not shown)

                    1         2
        h1               S             h2
                         3

                         h3

Four packets are then transmitted:
        (a). h1Ñh2
        (b). h2Ñh1
        (c). h3Ñh1
        (d). h2Ñh3
Assume that S reports to C all packets with unknown destination, that is, all packets for which S does
not have a forwarding entry for that packet’s destination. Packet reports include the source and destination
addresses and the arrival port. On receiving a report, if the source address is previously unknown then
C installs on S a forwarding-table entry for that source address. At that point S uses its forwarding table
(including any new entries) to forward the packet, if a suitable entry exists. Otherwise S floods the packet
as usual.
For the four packets above, indicate
     1. whether S reports the packet to C

   2. if so, any new forwarding entry C installs on S
   3. whether S is then able to forward the packet using its table, or must fall back to flooding.
(If S does not report the packet to C then S must have had a forwarding-table entry for that destination, and
so S is able to forward the packet normally.)
12.2. Consider again the arrangement of exercise 12.0 of three hosts h1, h2, h3 and one OpenFlow switch S
with ports 1, 2 and 3 and controller C (not shown)

                 1        2
       h1             S            h2
                     3

                     h3

The same four packets are transmitted:
      (a). h1Ñh2
      (b). h2Ñh1
      (c). h3Ñh1
      (d). h2Ñh3
This time, assume that S reports to C all packets with unknown destination or unknown source (that is, S
does not have a forwarding entry for either the packet’s source or destination address). For the four packets
above, indicate
   1. whether S reports the packet to C
   2. if so, any new forwarding entry C installs on S
   3. whether S is then able to forward the packet using its table, or must fall back to flooding.
As before, packet reports include the source and destination addresses and the arrival port. On receiving
a report, if the source address is previously unknown then C installs on S a forwarding-table entry for that
source address. At that point S uses its forwarding table (including any new entries) to forward the packet, if
a suitable entry exists. Otherwise S floods the packet as usual. Again, if S does not report a packet to C then
S must have had a forwarding-table entry for that destination, and so is able to forward the packet normally.
13.0 Consider the following arrangement of three switches S1-S3, three hosts h1-h3 and one OpenFlow
controller C.

      h1             h2          h3

      S1             S2          S3

                     C

2.10 Exercises                                                                                              83

As with exercise 12.0, assume that the switches report packets to C only if they do not already have a
forwarding-table entry for the packet’s destination. After each report, C installs a forwarding-table entry on
the reporting switch for reaching the packet’s source address via the arrival port. At that point the switch
floods the packet (as the destination must not have been known). If a switch can forward a packet without
reporting to C, no new forwarding entries are installed.
Packets are now sent as follows:
      h1Ñh2
      h2Ñh1
      h1Ñh3
      h3Ñh1
      h2Ñh3
      h3Ñh2
At the end, what are the forwarding tables on S1♢, S2 and S3?
14.0 Here are the switch rules for the multiple-flow-table example in 2.8.2 Learning Switches in OpenFlow:

                   Table    match field    match action               no-match default
                   T0       destaddr       forward and send to T1     flood and send to T1
                   T1       srcaddr        do nothing                 send to controller

Give a similar table where the matches are reversed; that is, T0 matches the srcaddr field and T1 matches the
destaddr field.

