                                                          10 LARGE-SCALE IP ROUTING

In the previous chapter we considered two classes of routing-update algorithms: distance-vector and link-
state. Each of these approaches requires that participating routers have agreed first to a common protocol,
and then to a common understanding of how link costs are to be assigned. We will address this further
below in 10.6 Border Gateway Protocol, BGP, but a basic problem is that if one site prefers the hop-count
approach, assigning every link a cost of 1, while another site prefers to assign link costs in proportion to
their bandwidth, then meaningful path cost comparisons between the two sites simply cannot be done.
The term routing domain is used to refer to a set of routers under common administration, using a common
link-cost assignment. Another term for this is autonomous system. While use of a common routing-
update protocol within the routing domain is not an absolute requirement – for example, some subnets may
internally use distance-vector while the site’s “backbone” routers use link-state – we can assume that all
routers have a uniform view of the site’s topology and cost metrics.
One of the things included in the term “large-scale” IP routing is the coordination of routing between mul-
tiple routing domains. Even in the earliest Internet there were multiple routing domains, if for no other
reason than that how to measure link costs was (and still is) too unsettled to set in stone. However, another
component of large-scale routing is support for hierarchical routing, above the level of subnets; we turn to
this next.

10.1 Classless Internet Domain Routing: CIDR

CIDR is the mechanism for supporting hierarchical routing in the Internet backbone. Subnetting moves the
network/host division line further rightwards; CIDR allows moving it to the left as well. With subnetting,
the revised division line is visible only within the organization that owns the IP network address; subnetting
is not visible outside. CIDR allows aggregation of IP address blocks in a way that is visible to the Internet
backbone.
When CIDR was introduced in 1993, the following were some of the justifications for it, all relating to the
increasing size of the backbone IP forwarding tables, and expressed in terms of the then-current Class A/B/C
mechanism:
    • The Internet is running out of Class B addresses (this happened in the mid-1990’s)
    • There are too many Class C’s (the most numerous) for backbone forwarding tables to be efficient
    • Eventually IANA (the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority) will run out of IP addresses (this hap-
      pened in 2011)
Assigning non-CIDRed multiple Class C’s in lieu of a single Class B would have helped with the first point
in the list above, but made the second point worse.
Ironically, the current (2013) very tight market for IP address blocks is likely to lead to larger and larger
backbone IP forwarding tables, as sites are forced to use multiple small address blocks instead of one large
block.

By the year 2000, CIDR had essentially eliminated the Class A/B/C mechanism from the backbone Internet,
and had more-or-less completely changed how backbone routing worked. You purchased an address block
from a provider or some other IP address allocator, and it could be whatever size you needed, from /32 to
/15.
What CIDR enabled is IP routing based on an address prefix of any length; the Class A/B/C mechanism of
course used fixed prefix lengths of 8, 16 and 24 bits. Furthermore, CIDR allows different routers, at different
levels of the backbone, to route on prefixes of different lengths. If organization P were allocated a /10 block,
for example, then P could suballocate into /20 blocks. At the top level, routing to P would likely be based
on the first 10 bits, while routing within P would be based on the first 20 bits.
CIDR was formally introduced by RFC 1518 and RFC 1519. For a while there were strategies in place to
support compatibility with non-CIDR-aware routers; these are now obsolete. In particular, it is no longer
appropriate for large-scale routers to fall back on the Class A/B/C mechanism in the absence of CIDR
information; if the latter is missing, the routing should fail.
One way to look at the basic strategy of CIDR is as a mechanism to consolidate multiple network blocks
going to the same destination into a single entry. Suppose a router has four class C’s all to the same destina-
tion:
      200.7.0.0/24 ÝÑ foo
      200.7.1.0/24 ÝÑ foo
      200.7.2.0/24 ÝÑ foo
      200.7.3.0/24 ÝÑ foo
The router can replace all these with the single entry
      200.7.0.0/22 ÝÑ foo
It does not matter here if foo represents a single ultimate destination or if it represents four sites that just
happen to be routed to the same next_hop.
It is worth looking closely at the arithmetic to see why the single entry uses /22. This means that the first 22
bits must match 200.7.0.0; this is all of the first and second bytes and the first six bits of the third byte. Let
us look at the third byte of the network addresses above in binary:
      200.7.000000 00.0/24 ÝÑ foo
      200.7.000000 01.0/24 ÝÑ foo
      200.7.000000 10.0/24 ÝÑ foo
      200.7.000000 11.0/24 ÝÑ foo
The /24 means that the network addresses stop at the end of the third byte. The four entries above cover
every possible combination of the last two bits of the third byte; for an address to match one of the entries
above it suffices to begin 200.7 and then to have 0-bits as the first six bits of the third byte. This is another
way of saying the address must match 200.7.0.0/22.
Most implementations actually use a bitmask, eg 255.255.252.0, rather than the number 22. Note 252 is, in
binary, 1111 1100, with 6 leading 1-bits, so 255.255.252.0 has 8+8+6=22 1-bits followed by 10 0-bits.
The IP delivery algorithm of 7.5 The Classless IP Delivery Algorithm still works with CIDR, with the
understanding that the router’s forwarding table can now have a network-prefix length associated with any
entry. Given a destination D, we search the forwarding table for network-prefix destinations B/k until we

find a match; that is, equality of the first k bits. In terms of masks, given a destination D and a list of table
entries xprefix,masky = xB[i],M[i]y, we search for i such that (D & M[i]) = B[i].
But what about the possibility of multiple matches? For subnets, avoiding this was the responsibility of the
subnetting site, but responsibility for avoiding this with CIDR is much too distributed to be declared illegal
by IETF mandate. Instead, CIDR introduced the longest-match rule: if destination D matches both B1 /k1
and B2 /k2 , with k1 < k2 , then the longer match B2 /k2 match is to be used. (Note that if D matches two
distinct entries B1 /k1 and B2 /k2 then either k1 < k2 or k2 < k1 ).

10.2 Hierarchical Routing

Strictly speaking, CIDR is simply a mechanism for routing to IP address blocks of any prefix length; that is,
for setting the network/host division point to an arbitrary place within the 32-bit IP address.
However, by making this network/host division point variable, CIDR introduced support for routing on
different prefix lengths at different places in the backbone routing infrastructure. For example, top-level
routers might route on /8 or /9 prefixes, while intermediate routers might route based on prefixes of length
14. This feature of routing on fewer bits at one point in the Internet and more bits at another point is exactly
what is meant by hierarchical routing.
We earlier saw hierarchical routing in the context of subnets: traffic might first be routed to a class-B site
147.126.0.0/16, and then, within that site, to subnets such as 147.126.1.0/24, 147.126.2.0/24, etc. But with
CIDR the hierarchy can be much more flexible: the top level of the hierarchy can be much larger than the
“customer” level, lower levels need not be administratively controlled by the higher levels (as is the case
with subnets), and more than two levels can be used.
CIDR is an address-block-allocation mechanism; it does not directly speak to the kinds of policy we might
wish to implement with it. Here are four possible applications; the latter two involve hierarchical routing:
    • Application 1 (legacy): CIDR allows the allocation of multiple blocks of Class C, or fragments of a
      Class A, to a single customer, so as to require only a single forwarding-table entry for that customer
    • Application 2 (legacy): CIDR allows opportunistic aggregation of routes: a router that sees the four
      200.7.x.0/24 routes above in its table may consolidate them into a single entry.
    • Application 3 (current): CIDR allows huge provider blocks, with suballocation by the provider. This
      is known as provider-based routing.
    • Application 4 (hypothetical): CIDR allows huge regional blocks, with suballocation within the re-
      gion, somewhat like the original scheme for US phone numbers with area codes. This is known as
      geographical routing.
Each of these has the potential to achieve a considerable reduction in the size of the backbone forwarding
tables, which is arguably the most important goal here. Each involves using CIDR to support the creation of
arbitrary-sized address blocks and then routing to them as a single unit. For example, the Internet backbone
might be much happier if all its routers simply had to maintain a single entry x200.0.0.0/8, R1y, versus 256
entries x200.x.0.0/16, R1y for every value of x. (As we will see below, this is still useful even if a few of the
x’s have a different next_hop.) Secondary CIDR goals include bringing some order to IP address allocation
and (for the last two items in the list above) enabling a routing hierarchy that mirrors the actual flow of most
traffic.

10.2 Hierarchical Routing                                                                                   301

Hierarchical routing does introduce one new wrinkle: the routes chosen may no longer be globally optimal,
at least if we also apply the routing-update algorithms hierarchically. Suppose, for example, at the top level
forwarding is based on the first eight bits of the address, and all traffic to 200.0.0.0/8 is routed to router
R1. At the second level, R1 then routes traffic (hierarchically) to 200.20.0.0/16 via R2. A packet sent
to 200.20.1.2 by an independent router R3 might therefore pass through R1, even if there were a lower-
cost path R3ÑR4ÑR2 that bypassed R1. The top-level forwarding entry x200.0.0.0/8,R1y, in other words,
may represent a simplification of the real situation. Prohibiting “back-door” routes like R3ÑR4ÑR2 is
impractical (and would not be helpful either); customers are independent entities.
This non-optimal routing issue cannot happen if all routers agree upon one of the shortest-path mechanisms
of 9 Routing-Update Algorithms; in that case R3 would learn of the lower-cost R3ÑR4ÑR2 path. But then
the potential hierarchical benefits of decreasing the size of forwarding tables would be lost. More seriously,
complete global agreement of all routers on one common update protocol is simply not practical; in fact,
one of the goals of hierarchical routing is to provide a workable alternative. We will return to this below in
10.4.3 Hierarchical Routing via Providers.

10.3 Legacy Routing

Back in the days of NSFNet, the Internet backbone was a single routing domain. While most customers did
not connect directly to the backbone, the intervening providers tended to be relatively compact, geograph-
ically – that is, regional – and often had a single primary routing-exchange point with the backbone. IP
addresses were allocated to subscribers directly by the IANA, and the backbone forwarding tables contained
entries for every site, even the Class C’s.
Because the NSFNet backbone and the regional providers did not necessarily share link-cost information,
routes were even at this early point not necessarily globally optimal; compromises and approximations were
made. However, in the NSFNet model routers generally did find a reasonable approximation to the shortest
path to each site referenced by the backbone tables. While the legacy backbone routing domain was not
all-encompassing, if there were differences between two routes, at least the backbone portions – the longest
components – would be identical.

10.4 Provider-Based Routing

In provider-based routing, large CIDR blocks are allocated to large-scale providers. The different providers
each know how to route to one another. Subscribers (usually) obtain their IP addresses from within their
providers’ blocks; thus, traffic from the outside is routed first to the provider, and then, within the provider’s
routing domain, to the subscriber. We may even have a hierarchy of providers, so packets would be routed
first to the large-scale provider, and eventually to the local provider. There may no longer be a central
backbone; instead, multiple providers may each build parallel transcontinental networks.
Here is a simpler example, in which providers have unique paths to one another. Suppose we have providers
P0, P1 and P2, with customers as follows:
    • P0: customers A,B,C
    • P1: customers D,E
    • P2: customers F,G

We will also assume that each provider has an IP address block as follows:
    • P0: 200.0.0.0/8
    • P1: 201.0.0.0/8
    • P2: 202.0.0.0/8
Let us now allocate addresses to the customers:
      A: 200.0.0.0/16
      B: 200.1.0.0/16
      C: 200.2.16.0/20 (16 = 0001 0000)

      D: 201.0.0.0/16
      E: 201.1.0.0/16

      F: 202.0.0.0/16
      G: 202.1.0.0/16

The routing model is that packets are first routed to the appropriate provider, and then to the customer.
While this model may not in general guarantee the shortest end-to-end path, it does in this case because
each provider has a single point of interconnection to the others. Here is the network diagram:

              P0                           P1                         P2

     A         B        C              D          E               F          G

With this diagram, P0’s forwarding table looks something like this:

                                        P0
                                        destination     next_hop
                                        200.0.0.0/16    A
                                        200.1.0.0/16    B
                                        200.2.16.0/20   C
                                        201.0.0.0/8     P1
                                        202.0.0.0/8     P2

That is, P0’s table consists of

10.4 Provider-Based Routing                                                                         303

    • one entry for each of P0’s own customers
    • one entry for each other provider
If we had 1,000,000 customers divided equally among 100 providers, then each provider’s table would have
only 10,099 entries: 10,000 for its own customers and 99 for the other providers. Without CIDR, each
provider’s forwarding table would have 1,000,000 entries.
CIDR enables hierarchical routing by allowing the routing decision to be made on different prefix lengths
in different contexts. For example, when a packet is sent from D to A, P1 looks at the first 8 bits while P0
looks at the first 16 bits. Within customer A, routing might be made based on the first 24 bits.
Even if we have some additional “secondary” links, that is, additional links that do not create alterna-
tive paths between providers, the routing remains relatively straightforward. Shown here are the private
customer-to-customer links C–D and E–F; these are likely used only by the customers they connect. Two
customers, A and E, are multihomed; that is, they have connections to alternative providers: A–P1 and
E–P2. (The term “multihomed” is often applied to any host with multiple network interfaces on different
LANs, which includes any router; here we mean more specifically that there are multiple network interfaces
connecting to different providers.)
Typically, though, while A and E may use their alternative-provider links all they want for outbound traffic,
their respective inbound traffic would still go through their primary providers P0 and P1 respectively.

              P0                           P1                          P2

      A       B        C               D         E                 F          G

10.4.1 Internet Exchange Points

The long links joining providers in these diagrams are somewhat misleading; providers do not always like
sharing long links and the attendant problems of sharing responsibility for failures. Instead, providers of-
ten connect to one another at Internet eXchange Points or IXPs; the link P0            P1 might actually be
P0     IXP P1, where P0 owns the left-hand link and P1 the right-hand. IXPs can either be third-party
sites open to all providers, or private exchange points. The term “Metropolitan Area Exchange”, or MAE,
appears in the names of the IXPs MAE-East, originally near Washington DC, and MAE-West, originally in
San Jose, California; each of these is now actually a set of IXPs. MAE in this context is now a trademark.

10.4.2 CIDR and Staying Out of Jail

Suppose we want to change providers. One way we can do this is to accept a new IP-address block from the
new provider, and change all our IP addresses. The paper Renumbering: Threat or Menace [LKCT96] was

frequently cited – at least in the early days of CIDR – as an intimation that such renumbering was inevitably
a Bad Thing. In principle, therefore, we would like to allow at least the option of keeping our IP address
allocation while changing providers.
An address-allocation standard that did not allow changing of providers might even be a violation of the
US Sherman Antitrust Act; see American Society of Mechanical Engineers v Hydrolevel Corporation, 456
US 556 (1982). The IETF thus had the added incentive of wanting to stay out of jail, when writing the
CIDR standard so as to allow portability between providers (actually, antitrust violations usually involve
civil penalties).
The CIDR longest-match rule turns out to be exactly what we (and the IETF) need. Suppose, in the diagrams
above, that customer C wants to move from P0 to P1, and does not want to renumber. What routing changes
need to be made? One solution is for P0 to add a route x200.2.16.0/20, P1y that routes all of C’s traffic to
P1; P1 will then forward that traffic on to C. P1’s table will be as follows, and P1 will use the longest-match
rule to distinguish traffic for its new customer C from traffic bound for P0.

                                          P1
                                          destination      next_hop
                                          200.0.0.0/8      P0
                                          202.0.0.0/8      P2
                                          201.0.0.0/16     D
                                          201.1.0.0/16     E
                                          200.2.16.0/20    C

This does work, but all C’s inbound traffic except for that originating in P1 will now be routed through
C’s ex-provider P0, which as an ex-provider may not be on the best of terms with C. Also, the routing is
inefficient: C’s traffic from P2 is routed P2ÑP0ÑP1 instead of the more direct P2ÑP1.
A better solution is for all providers other than P1 to add the route x200.2.16.0/20, P1y. While traffic to
200.0.0.0/8 otherwise goes to P0, this particular sub-block is instead routed by each provider to P1. The
important case here is P2, as a stand-in for all other providers and their routers: P2 routes 200.0.0.0/8 traffic
to P0 except for the block 200.2.16.0/20, which goes to P1.
Having every other provider in the world need to add an entry for C has the potential to cost some money,
and, one way or another, C will be the one to pay. But at least there is a choice: C can consent to renumbering
(which is not difficult if they have been diligent in using DHCP and perhaps NAT too), or they can pay to
keep their old address block.
As for the second diagram above, with the various private links (shown as dashed lines), it is likely that the
longest-match rule is not needed for these links to work. A’s “private” link to P1 might only mean that
    • A can send outbound traffic via P1
    • P1 forwards A’s traffic to A via the private link
P2, in other words, is still free to route to A via P0. P1 may not advertise its route to A to anyone else.

10.4 Provider-Based Routing                                                                                   305

10.4.3 Hierarchical Routing via Providers

With provider-based routing, the route taken may no longer be end-to-end optimal; we have replaced the
problem of finding an optimal route from A to B with the two problems of finding an optimal route from A
to B’s provider P, and then from P’s entry point to B. This strategy mirrors the two-stage hierarchical routing
process of first routing on the address bits that identify the provider, and then routing on the address bits
including the subscriber portion.
This two-stage strategy may not yield the same result as finding the globally optimal route. The result will
be the same if B’s customers can only be reached through P’s single entry-point router RP, which models
the situation that P and its customers look like a single site. However, either or both of the following can
disrupt this model:
    • There may be multiple entry-point routers into provider P’s network, eg RP1 , RP2 and RP3 , with
      different costs from A.
    • P’s customer B may have an alternative connection to the outside world via a different provider, as in
      the second diagram in 10.4 Provider-Based Routing.
Consider the following example representing the first situation (the more important one in practice), in which
providers P1 and P2 have three interconnection points IX1, IX2, IX3 (from Internet eXchange, 10.4.1 In-
ternet Exchange Points). Links are labeled with costs; we assume that P1’s costs happen to be comparable
with P2’s costs.

                                                                A
              Provider P1
                                                                0
                                     7                  5           3
                       R1                      R2               R       R3
                                                                         0
                       1                         1                      IX3

                                                                         1
                       IX1                     IX2
                       0                         0
                             3           4                  8
                       S1        S             S2                       S3
                                 0

                                 B           Provider P2

The globally shortest path between A and B is via the R2–IX2–S2 crossover, with total length 5+1+0+4=10.
However, traffic from A to B will be routed by P1 to its closest crossover to P2, namely the R3–IX3–S3 link.
The total path is 3+0+1+8+4=16. Traffic from B to A will be routed by P2 via the R1–IX1–S1 crossover,
for a length of 3+0+1+7+5=16. This routing strategy is sometimes called hot-potato routing; each provider
tries to get rid of any traffic (the potatoes) as quickly as possible, by routing to the closest exit point.
Not only are the paths taken inefficient, but the AÝÑB and BÝÑA paths are now asymmetric. This can be
a problem if forward and reverse timings are critical, or if one of P1 or P2 has significantly more bandwidth
or less congestion than the other. In practice, however, route asymmetry is seldom important.
As for the route inefficiency itself, this also is not necessarily a significant problem; the primary reason
routing-update algorithms focus on the shortest path is to guarantee that all computed paths are loop-free.

As long as each half of a path is loop-free, and the halves do not intersect except at their common midpoint,
these paths too will be loop-free.
The BGP “MED” value (10.6.6.3 MULTI_EXIT_DISC) offers an optional mechanism for P1 to agree that
AÝÑB traffic should take the r1–s1 crossover. This might be desired if P1’s network were “better” and
customer A was willing to pay extra to keep its traffic within P1’s network as long as possible.

10.4.4 IP Geolocation

In principle, provider-based addressing may mean that consecutive IP addresses are scattered all over a
continent. In practice, providers (even many mobile providers) do not do this; any given small address
block – perhaps /24 – is used in a limited geographical area. Different blocks are used in different areas. A
consequence of this is that it is possible in principle to determine, from a given IP address, the corresponding
approximate geographical location; this is known as IP geolocation. Even satellite-Internet users can be
geolocated, although sometimes only to within a couple hundred miles. Several companies have created
detailed geolocation maps, identifying many locations roughly down to the zip code, and typically available
as an online service.
IP geolocation was originally developed so that advertisers could serve up regionally appropriate advertise-
ments. It is, however, now used for a variety of purposes including identification of the closest CDN edge
server (1.12.2 Content-Distribution Networks), network security, compliance with national regulations,
higher-level user tracking, and restricting the streaming of copyrighted content.

10.5 Geographical Routing

The classical alternative to provider-based routing is geographical routing; the archetypal model for this is
the telephone area code system. A call from anywhere in the US to Loyola University’s main switchboard,
773-274-3000, would traditionally be routed first to the 773 area code in Chicago. From there the call would
be routed to the north-side 274 exchange, and from there to subscriber 3000. A similar strategy can be used
for IP routing.
Geographical addressing has some advantages. Figuring out a good route to a destination is usually straight-
forward, and close to optimal in terms of the path physical distance. Changing providers never involves
renumbering (though moving may). And approximate IP address geolocation (determining a host’s location
from its IP address) is automatic.
Geographical routing has some minor technical problems. First, routing may be inefficient between imme-
diate neighbors A and B that happen to be split by a boundary for larger geographical areas; the path might
go from A to the center of A’s region to the center of B’s region and then to B. Another problem is that some
larger sites (eg large corporations) are themselves geographically distributed; if efficiency is the goal, each
office of such a site would need a separate IP address block appropriate for its physical location.
But the real issue with geographical routing is apparently the business question of who carries the traffic.
The provider-based model has a very natural answer to this: every link is owned by a specific provider. For
geographical IP routing, my local provider might know at once from the prefix that a packet of mine is to be
delivered from Chicago to San Francisco, but who will carry it there? My provider might have to enter into
different traffic contracts for multiple different regions. If different local providers make different arrange-
ments for long-haul packet delivery, the routing efficiency (at least in terms of table size) of geographical

10.5 Geographical Routing                                                                                  307

routing is likely lost. Finally, there is no natural answer for who should own those long inter-region links. It
may be useful to recall that the present area-code system was created when the US telephone system was an
AT&T monopoly, and the question of who carried traffic did not exist.
That said, the top five Regional Internet Registries represent geographical regions (usually continents), and
provider-based addressing is below that level. That is, the IANA handed out address blocks to the geograph-
ical RIRs, and the RIRs then allocated address blocks to providers.
At the intercontinental level, geography does matter: some physical link paths are genuinely more expensive
than other (shorter) paths. It is much easier to string terrestrial cable than undersea cable. However, within
a continent physical distance does not always matter as much as might be supposed. Furthermore, a large
geographically spread-out provider can always divide up its address blocks by region, allowing internal
geographical routing to the correct region.
Here is a diagram of IP address allocation as of 2006: http://xkcd.com/195.

10.6 Border Gateway Protocol, BGP

In 9 Routing-Update Algorithms, we considered interior routing-update protocols: those in which all the
routers involved are under common management. That management can then dictate the routing-update
protocol to be used, and also the rules for assigning per-link costs. For both Distance-Vector and Link State
methods, the per-link cost played an essential role: by trying to minimize the cost, we were assured that no
routing loops would be present in a stable network (9.3 Observations on Minimizing Route Cost).
But now consider the problem of exterior routing; that is, of choosing among routes that pass through inde-
pendent organizations. In the diagram below, suppose that A, B, C and D are each managed independently;
it may be useful to think of A, B and C as three ISPs and D as some destination.

                            B

      A                                             D

                            C

Organization (or ISP) A has two routes to destination D – one via B and one via C – and must choose
between them.
If A wanted to use one of the interior routing-update protocols to choose its path to D, it would face several
purely technical problems. First, what if B uses distance-vector while C speaks only in link-state LSP
messages? Second, what if B measures its path costs using the hopcount metric, while C assigns costs based
on bandwidth, or congestion, or pecuniary considerations?
The mixing of unrelated metrics isn’t necessarily useless: all that is required for the shortest-path-is-loop-
free result mentioned above is that the two ends of each link agree on the cost assigned to that link. But
apples-and-oranges comparison of different metrics would completely undermine the intended use of those

metrics to influence the selection of which links should carry the most traffic. Sharing link-cost information
without a common administrative policy to set those costs does not, in practical terms, make sense.
But A also faces a larger issue: to reach D it must rely on having its traffic carried by an outsider – either
B or C. Outsiders are likely not inclined to offer this service without some form of compensation, either
monetary or through reciprocal exchange. If A reaches an understanding with B on this matter of traffic
carriage, then A does not want its traffic routed via C even if that latter route is of lower technical cost. If A
is paying B, it is going to expect to use B. If A is not paying C, C is going to expect that A not use C.
The Border Gateway Protocol, or BGP, is assigned the job of handling exterior routing; that is, of handling
exchange of routing information between neighboring independent organizations. The current version is
BGP-4, documented in RFC 4271.
BGP’s primary goal is to provide support for what are sometimes called routing policies; that is, for choos-
ing routes based on managerial or administrative input. We address this below in 10.6.4 BGP Filtering and
Routing Policies. (Routing policies have nothing to do with the policy-based routing described in 9.6 Rout-
ing on Other Attributes, in which different packets with the same destination address may be routed differ-
ently because a site has a “policy” to take packet attributes other than destination into account. With BGP,
once a site’s policies to choose a route to a given destination are applied, all traffic to that destination takes
that single route.)
Ultimately, the administrative input used by BGP very likely relates to who is paying what for the traffic
carried. It is also possible, though less common, to use BGP to implement other preferences, such as for
domestic traffic to remain within national boundaries.
The BGP term for a routing domain under coordinated administration, and using one consistent interior pro-
tocol and link-cost metric throughout, is Autonomous System, or AS. That said, all that is strictly required
is that all BGP routers within an AS have the same consistent view of routing, and in fact some Autonomous
Systems do run multiple routing protocols and may even use different metrics at different points. As indi-
cated above, BGP does not support the exchange of link-cost information between Autonomous Systems.
Autonomous Systems are identified by a globally unique AS number, originally 16 bits but now extended
to 32 bits.
A site needs to run BGP (and so needs to have an AS number) if it connects to (or might connect to) more
than one other AS; sites that connect only to a single ISP do not need BGP. Every site running BGP will
have one or more BGP speakers: the devices that run BGP. If there is more than one, they must remain
coordinated with one another so as to present a consistent view of the site’s connections and advertisements;
this coordination process is sometimes called internal BGP to distinguish it from the communication with
neighboring Autonomous Systems. The latter process is then known as external BGP.
The BGP speakers of a site are often not the busy border routers that connect directly to the neighboring AS,
though they are usually located near them and are often on the same subnet. Each interconnection point with
a neighboring AS generally needs its own BGP speaker. Connections between BGP speakers of neighboring
Autonomous Systems – sometimes called BGP peers – are generally configured administratively; they are
not subject to a “neighbor discovery” process like that used by most interior routers.
The BGP speakers must maintain a database of all routes received, not just of the routes actually used. How-
ever, the speakers forward to their neighbors only routes they (and thus their AS) actually use themselves;
this is a firm BGP rule.
Many BGP implementations support Equal-Cost Multi-Path routing (9.7 ECMP), by which two (or
more) links to the same neighbor may be treated as one. The Internet Draft draft-lapukhov-bgp-ecmp-

considerations-01 addresses this further.

10.6.1 AS-paths

At its most basic level, BGP involves the exchange of lists of reachable destinations, like distance-vector
routing without the distance information. But that strategy, alone, cannot detect routing loops. BGP solves
the loop problem by having routers exchange, not just destination information, but also the entire path used
to reach each destination. Paths including each router would be cumbersome; instead, BGP abbreviates the
path to the list of ASes traversed. This is called the AS-path. This allows routers to make sure their routes
do not traverse any AS more than once, and thus do not have loops.
As an example of this, consider the network below, in which we consider Autonomous Systems also to be
destinations. Initially, we will assume that each AS discovers its immediate neighbors. AS3 and AS5 will
then each advertise to AS4 their routes to AS2, but AS4 will have no reason at this level to prefer one route
to the other (BGP does use the shortest AS-path as part of its tie-breaking rule, but, before falling back on
that rule, AS4 is likely to have a commercial preference for which of AS3 and AS5 it uses to reach AS2).

      AS1             AS2                   AS3

                      AS5                   AS4

Also, AS2 will advertise to AS3 its route to reach AS1; that advertisement will contain the AS-path
xAS2,AS1y. Similarly, AS3 will advertise this route to AS4 and then AS4 will advertise it to AS5.
When AS5 in turn advertises this AS1-route to AS2, it has the potential to create a loop. It does not, however,
because it will include the entire AS-path xAS5,AS4,AS3,AS2,AS1y in the advertisement it sends to AS2.
AS2 will know not to use this route because it will see that it is a member of the AS-path. Thus, BGP is
spared the kind of slow-convergence problem that traditional distance-vector approaches were subject to.
It is theoretically possible that the shortest path (in the sense, say, of the hopcount metric) from one host to
another traverses some AS twice. If so, BGP will not allow this route.
AS-paths potentially add considerably to the size of the AS database. The number of paths a site must keep
track of is proportional to the number of ASes, because there will be one AS-path to each destination AS.
(Actually, an AS may have to record many times that many AS-paths, as an AS may hear of AS-paths that
it elects not to use.) As of 2019 there were about 80 thousand ASes in the world. Let A be the number of
ASes. Typically the average length of an AS-path is about log(A), although this depends on connectivity; in
2019 this average length was about six. The amount of memory required by BGP is
       CˆAˆlog(A) + KˆN,
where C and K are constants.
The other major goal of BGP is to allow administrative input to what, for interior routing, is largely a
technical calculation (though an interior-routing administrator can set link costs). BGP is the interface
between ISPs (and between ISPs and their larger customers), and can be used to implement contractual
agreements made regarding which ISPs will carry other ISPs’ traffic. If ISP2 tells ISP1 it has a route to

destination D, but ISP1 chooses not to send traffic to ISP2, BGP can be used to implement this. Perhaps
more likely, if ISP2 has a route to D but does not want ISP1 to use it until they pay for the privilege, BGP
can be used to implement this as well.
Despite the exchange of AS-path information, temporary routing loops may still exist. This is because BGP
may first decide to use a route and only then export the new AS-path; the AS on the other side may realize
there is a problem as soon as the AS-path is received but by then the loop will have at least briefly been in
existence. See the first example below in 10.6.10 Examples of BGP Instability.
BGP’s predecessor was EGP, which guaranteed loop-free routes by allowing only a single route to any AS,
thus forcing the Internet into a tree topology, at least at the level of Autonomous Systems. The AS graph
could contain no cycles or alternative routes, and hence there could be no redundancy provided by alternative
paths. EGP also thus avoided having to make decisions as to the preferred path; there was never more than
one choice. EGP was sometimes described as a reachability protocol; its only concern was whether a given
network was reachable.

10.6.2 AS-Paths and Route Aggregation

There is some conflict between the goal of reporting precise AS-paths to each destination, and of consoli-
dating as many address prefixes as possible into a single prefix (single CIDR block). Consider the following
network:

     AS1             AS2                 AS3

                                         AS4

Suppose AS2 has paths
      path=xAS2y, destination 200.0.0/23
      path=xAS2,AS3y, destination 200.0.2/24
      path=xAS2,AS4y, destination 200.0.3/24
If AS2 wants to optimize address-block aggregation using CIDR, it may prefer to aggregate the three des-
tinations into the single block 200.0.0/22. In this case there would be two options for how AS2 reports its
routes to AS1:
    • Option 1: report 200.0.0/22 with path xAS2y. But this ignores the ASes AS3 and AS4! These
      are legitimately part of the AS-paths to some of the destinations within the block 200.0.0/22; loop
      detection could conceivably now fail.
    • Option 2: report 200.0.0/22 with path xAS2,AS3,AS4y, which is not a real path but which does
      include all the ASes involved. This ensures that the loop-detection algorithm works, but artificially
      inflates the length of the AS-path, which is used for certain tie-breaking decisions.
As neither of these options is ideal, the concept of the AS-set was introduced. A list of Autonomous Systems
traversed in order now becomes an AS-sequence. In the example above, AS2 can thus report net 200.0.0/22
with
    • AS-sequence=xAS2y

    • AS-set={AS3,AS4}
AS2 thus both achieves the desired aggregation and also accurately reports the AS-path length.
The AS-path can in general be an arbitrary list of AS-sequence and AS-set parts, but in cases of simple
aggregation such as the example here, there will be one AS-sequence followed by one AS-set.
RFC 6472 now recommends against using AS-sets entirely, and recommends that aggregation as above be
avoided. One consequence of this recommendation is that every IP-address prefix announced by any public
Autonomous System will result in a corresponding entry in the forwarding tables of the backbone routers.

10.6.3 Transit Traffic

It is helpful to distinguish between two kinds of traffic, as seen from a given AS. Local traffic is traffic that
either originates or terminates at that AS; this is traffic that “belongs” to that AS. At leaf sites (that is, sites
that connect only to their ISP and not to other sites), all traffic is local.
The other kind of traffic is transit traffic; the AS is forwarding it along on behalf of some nonlocal party.
For ISPs, most traffic is transit traffic. A large almost-leaf site might also carry a small amount of transit
traffic for one particular related (but autonomous!) organization.
The decision as to whether to carry transit traffic is a classic example of an administrative choice, im-
plemented by BGP’s support for routing policies. Most real-world BGP configuration issues relate to the
carriage (or non-carriage) of transit traffic.

10.6.4 BGP Filtering and Routing Policies

As stated above, one of the goals of BGP is to support routing policies; that is, routing based on managerial
or administrative concerns in addition to technical ones. A BGP speaker may be aware of multiple routes to
a destination. To choose the one route that we will use, it may combine a mixture of optimization rules and
policy rules. Some examples of policy rules might be:
    • do not use AS13 as we have an adversarial relationship with them
    • do not allow transit traffic
BGP implements policy through filtering rules – that is, rules that allow rejection of certain routes – at three
different stages:
   1. Import filtering is applied to the lists of routes a BGP speaker receives from its neighbors.
   2. Best-path selection is then applied as that BGP speaker chooses which of the routes accepted by the
      first step it will actually use.
   3. Export filtering is done to decide what routes from the previous step a BGP speaker will actually
      advertise. A BGP speaker can only advertise paths it uses, but does not have to advertise every such
      path.
While there are standard default rules for all these (accept everything imported, use simple tie-breakers,
export everything), a site will usually implement at least some policy rules through this filtering process (eg
“prefer routes through the ISP we have a contract with”).

As an example of import filtering, a site might elect to ignore all routes from a particular neighbor, or to
ignore all routes whose AS-path contains a particular AS, or to ignore temporarily all routes from a neighbor
that has demonstrated too much recent “route instability” (that is, rapidly changing routes). Import filtering
can also be done in the best-path-selection stage, by having the best-path-selection process ignore routes
from selected neighbors.

 BGP Breakdowns

 In the real world, it sometimes happens that a small regional ISP is misconfigured to attempt to report to
 some high-level provider that it can reach, say, every site in the world. Export filtering on the part of the
 small ISP and best-path selection and import filtering on the part of the large ISP often – though not always
 – catches this. Occasionally, such incidents represent malicious BGP hijacking. See 10.6.11 BGP
 Security and Route Registries for one approach to addressing the problems of BGP security.

The next stage is best-path selection, to pick the preferred routes from among all those just imported. The
first step is to eliminate AS-paths with loops. Even if the neighbors have been diligent in not advertising
paths with loops, an AS will still need to reject routes that contain itself in the associated AS-path.
The next step in the best-path-selection stage, generally the most important in BGP configuration, is to
assign a local_preference, or weight, to each route received. An AS may have policies that add a certain
amount to the local_preference for routes that use a certain AS, etc. Very commonly, larger sites will have
preferences based on contractual arrangements with particular neighbors. Provider ASes, for example, will
in general prefer routes learned from their customers, as these are “cheaper”. A smaller ISP that connects to
two larger ones might be paying to route the majority of its outbound traffic through a particular one of the
two; its local_preference values will then implement this choice. After BGP calculates the local_preference
value for every route, the routes with the best local_preference are then selected.
Domains are free to choose their local_preference rules however they wish. In principle this can involve
rather strange criteria; for example, in 10.6.10 Examples of BGP Instability we will consider an example
where AS1 prefers routes with AS-path xAS3,AS2y to the strictly shorter path xAS2y. That example, how-
ever, demonstrates instability; domains are encouraged to set their rules in accordance with some standard
principles, below, to avoid this.
Local_preference values are communicated internally via the LOCAL_PREF path attribute, below. They
are not shared with other Autonomous Systems.
In the event of ties – two routes to the same destination with the same local_preference – a first tie-breaker
rule is to prefer the route with the shorter AS-path. While this superficially resembles a shortest-path
algorithm, the real work should have been done in administratively assigning local_preference values.
The shorter-AS-path tie-breaker is perhaps best thought of as similar in spirit to the smaller-AS-number
tie-breaker (although the sometimes-significant Multi-Exit-Discriminator tie-breaker, next, comes between
them).
The final significant step of the route-selection phase is to apply the Multi-Exit-Discriminator value,
10.6.6.3 MULTI_EXIT_DISC. A site may very well choose to ignore this value entirely.
Finally we get to the trivial tie-breaker rules, though if a tie-breaker rule assigns significant traffic to one
AS over another then it may have economic consequences and shouldn’t be considered “trivial”. If this
situation is detected, it would probably be addressed in the local-preferences phase. The trivial tie-breakers

take into account the internal routing cost, the numeric value of the AS number, and the numeric value of
the neighbor’s IP address.
After the best-path-selection stage is complete, the BGP speaker has now selected the routes its own Au-
tonomous System will use. These routes are then communicated to the actual routers, which are often
different devices.
The final stage is to decide what rules will be exported to which neighbors. Only routes the BGP speaker
has decided it will use – that is, routes that have made it to this point – can be exported; a site cannot route
to destination D through AS1 but export a route claiming D can be reached through AS2.
It is at the export-filtering stage that an AS can enforce no-transit rules. If it does not wish to carry transit
traffic to destination D, it will not advertise D to any of its AS-neighbors.
The export stage can lead to anomalies. Suppose, for example, that AS1 reaches D and AS5 via AS2, and
announces this to AS4.

                           AS2

   AS4           AS1                  AS5      D

                           AS3

Later, we imagine, AS1 switches to reaching D via AS3, but is forbidden by policy to announce to AS4
any routes with AS-path containing AS3; such a policy is straightforward to implement via export filtering.
Then AS1 must simply withdraw the announcement to AS4 that it could reach D at all, even though the
route to D via AS2 is still there.

10.6.5 BGP Table Size

In principle, there is a one-to-one correspondence between IP address prefixes announced by public Au-
tonomous Systems and entries in the backbone IP forwarding table. (The now-obsolete technique of route
aggregation, 10.6.2 AS-Paths and Route Aggregation, used to create a modest discrepancy here.)
The set of all routes received by a BGP speaker, after import filtering, is sometimes called the Routing Infor-
mation Base, or RIB. The resultant forwarding table created after best-path selection is then the Forwarding
Information Base, or FIB, although the full FIB may also contain routes learned via non-BGP protocols.
Each FIB entry will also contain the actual next-hop router, versus the next-AS information actually received
via BGP. For simplicity, we will refer to the forwarding table generated from BGP records only as the BGP
FIB.
The size of the IPv4 BGP FIB – that is, the number of distinct prefixes in a backbone IPv4 forwarding table
– is plotted in the chart below, based on data courtesy of bgp.potaroo.net, with some modest smoothing
applied.

   800000

   700000

   600000

   500000

   400000

   300000

   200000

   100000

        0
        1988      1991      1994      1997       2000      2003      2006      2009       2012      2015      2018   2021

The time range is from 1994 to July 2019; at the end, there are 788 thousand IP prefixes from (not shown
in the graph) around 65 thousand Autonomous Systems. The graph is flat from 2001 to 2002, reflecting the
aftereffects of the so-called dot-com bubble. Overall the increase with time is roughly quadratic, but in the
last decade has been closer to linear.
The graph does not entirely represent growth of the Internet; it also represents fragmentation. In recent years,
only smaller address blocks have been available, and so many sites and providers have cobbled together their
Internet presence from multiple such blocks, where they might have preferred a single block.

10.6.6 BGP Path attributes

BGP supports the inclusion of various path attributes when exchanging routing information. Attributes
exchanged with neighbors can be transitive or non-transitive; the difference is that if a neighbor AS does
not recognize a received path attribute then it should pass it along anyway if it is marked transitive, but not
otherwise. Some path attributes are entirely local, that is, internal to the AS of origin. Other flags are used
to indicate whether recognition of a path attribute is required or optional, and whether recognition can be

partial or must be complete.
The AS-path itself is perhaps the most fundamental path attribute. Here are a few other common attributes:

10.6.6.1 NEXT_HOP

This mandatory external attribute allows BGP speaker B1 of AS1 to inform its BGP peer B2 of AS2 what
actual router to use to reach a given destination. If B1, B2 and AS1’s actual border router R1 are all on the
same subnet, B1 will include R1’s IP address as its NEXT_HOP attribute. If B1 is not on the same subnet
as B2, it may not know R1’s IP address; in this case it may include its own IP address as the NEXT_HOP
attribute. Routers on AS2’s side will then look up the “immediate next hop” they would use as the first step
to reach B1, and forward traffic there. This should either be R1 or should lead to R1, which will then route
the traffic properly (not necessarily on to B1).

           Rest of AS1

           B1            R1                   B2

                AS1                          AS2
                                 AS border

10.6.6.2 LOCAL_PREF

If one BGP speaker in an AS has been configured with local_preference values, used in the best-path-
selection phase above, it uses the LOCAL_PREF path attribute to share those preferences with all other
BGP speakers at a site. In other words, once one BGP speaker has determined the local_preference value of
a given route, the LOCAL_PREF attribute is used to distribute that value uniformly throughout the AS.

10.6.6.3 MULTI_EXIT_DISC

The Multi-Exit Discriminator, or MED, attribute allows one AS to learn something of the internal structure
of another AS, should it elect to do so. Using the MED information provided by a neighbor has the potential
to cause an AS to incur higher costs, as it may end up carrying traffic for longer distances internally; MED
values received from a neighboring AS are therefore only recognized when there is an explicit administrative
decision to do so.
Specifically, if an autonomous system AS1 has multiple links to neighbor AS2, then AS1 can, when adver-
tising an internal destination D to AS2, have each of its BGP speakers provide associated MED values so
that AS2 can know which link AS1 would prefer that AS2 use to reach D. This allows AS2 to route traffic
to D so that it is carried primarily by AS2 rather than by AS1. The alternative is for AS2 to use only the
closest gateway to AS1, which means traffic is likely carried primarily by AS1.

MED values are considered late in the best-path-selection process; in this sense the use of MED values is a
tie-breaker when two routes have the same local_preference.
As an example, consider the following network (from 10.4.3 Hierarchical Routing via Providers, with
providers now replaced by Autonomous Systems); the numeric values on links are their relative costs. We
will assume that each site has three BGP speakers co-located at the exchange points IX1, IX2 and IX3.

                                                                A
                  AS1
                                                                0
                                    7                 5             3
                      R1                      R2                R       R3
                                                                         0
                      1                         1                       IX3

                                                                         1
                      IX1                     IX2
                      0                         0
                            3           4                   8
                      S1        S             S2                        S3
                                0

                                B                    AS 2

In the absence of the MED, AS1 will send traffic from A to B via the R3–IX3–S3 link, and AS2 will return
the traffic via S1–IX1–R1. These are the links that are closest to R and S, respectively, representing AS1
and AS2’s desire to hand off the outbound traffic as quickly as possible.
However, AS1’s BGP speakers at IX1, IX2 and IX3 can provide MED values to AS2 when advertising
destination A, indicating a preference for AS2ÑAS1 traffic to use the rightmost link:
    • IX1: destination A has MED 200
    • IX2: destination A has MED 150
    • IX3: destination A has MED 100
If this is done, and AS2 abides by this information, then AS2 will route traffic from B to A via IX3; that
is, via the exchange point with the lowest MED value. Note the importance of fact that AS2 is allowed to
ignore the MED; use of it may shift costs from AS1 to AS2!
The relative order of the MED values for R1 and R2 is irrelevant, unless the IX3 exchange becomes disabled,
in which case the numeric MED values above would mean that AS2 should then prefer IX2 for reaching A.
We cannot use MED values to cause A–B traffic to take the path through IX2; that path has minimal cost
only in the global sense, and the only way to achieve global cost minimization is for the two ASes to agree
to use a common distance metric and a common metric-based routing algorithm, in effect becoming one AS.
While AS1 does provide different numeric MED values for the three exchange points, they are used only in
ranking precedence, not as numeric measures of cost (though they are sometimes derived from that).
In the example above, importing and using MED values raises AS2’s costs, by causing it to route AS2-
to-AS1 traffic so that it stays for a longer path within AS2’s network. This is, in fact, almost always the
case when using MED values. Why, then, would AS2 agree to this? One simple reason might be that AS2
and AS1 have, together, negotiated this arrangement; perhaps AS1 gives AS2 a break on interconnection
(“peering”) fees in exchange for AS2’s accepting and using AS1’s MED data. It is also possible that AS2’s

use of AS1’s MED data may improve the quality of service AS2 can offer to its customers; we will return
to an example of this in 10.6.7.1 MED values and traffic engineering.
Also in the example above, the MED values are used to decide between multiple routes to the same desti-
nation that all pass through the same AS, namely AS1. Some BGP implementations allow the use of MED
values to decide between different routes through different neighbor ASes. The different neighbors must all
have the same local_preference values. For example, AS2 might connect to AS3 and AS4 and receive the
following BGP information:
    • AS3: destination A has MED 200
    • AS4: destination A has MED 100
Assuming AS2 assigns the same local_preference to AS3 and AS4, it might be configured to use these MED
values as the tie-breaker, and thus routing traffic to A via AS3. On Cisco routers, the always-compare-med
command is used to create this behavior.
MED values are not intended to be used to communicate routing preferences to non-neighboring ASes.
Additional information on the use of MED values can be found in RFC 4451.

10.6.6.4 COMMUNITY

This is simply a tag to attach to routes. Routes can have multiple tags corresponding to member-
ship in multiple communities. Some communities are defined globally; for example, NO_EXPORT and
NO_ADVERTISE. A route marked with one of these two communities will not be shared further. Other
communities may be relevant only to a particular AS.
The importance of communities is that they allow one AS to place some of its routes into specific categories
when advertising them to another AS; the categories must have been created and recognized by the receiving
AS. The receiving AS is not obligated to honor the community memberships, of course, but doing so has
the effect of allowing the original AS to “configure itself” without involving the receiving AS in the pro-
cess. Communities are often used, for example, by (large) customers of an ISP to request specific routing
treatment.
A customer would have to find out from the provider what communities the provider defines, and what their
numeric codes are. At that point the customer can place itself into the provider’s community at will.
Here are some of the community values once supported by a no-longer-extant ISP that we shall call AS1.
The full community value would have included AS1’s AS-number.

               value    action
               90       set local_preference used by AS1 to 90
               100      set local_preference used by AS1 to 100, the default
               105      set local_preference used by AS1 to 105
               110      set local_preference used by AS1 to 110
               990      the route will not leave AS1’s domain; equivalent to NO_EXPORT
               991      route will only be exported to AS1’s other customers

10.6.7 BGP and Traffic Engineering

BGP is the mechanism for inter-autonomous-system traffic engineering. The first-line tools are import and
export filtering and best-path selection. For autonomous systems with multiple interconnection points, the
Multi-Exit Discriminator above also may play a large role.
After establishing basic connectivity, perhaps the most important decision a site makes via its BGP config-
uration is whether or not it will accept transit traffic. As a first example of this, let us consider the case of
configuring a private link, such as the dashed link1 below between “friendly” but unaffiliated sites A and B
(link1 can be either a shared “real” link or a short “jumper” link within an Internet exchange point):

                                               ISP1          A

              The Internet                                       link1

                                               ISP2          B

Suppose A exports its link1 route to B to its provider ISP1. Then ISP1 may in turn announce this route to
the Internet at large, and so some or all of B’s inbound traffic may be routed through ISP1 (paid by A) and
through A itself. Similarly, B may end up paying to carry A’s traffic if B exports its link1 route to A to ISP2.
Economically, carrying someone else’s transit traffic not desirable unless you are compensated for it. The
primary issue here is the use of the ISP1–A link by B and the ISP2–B link by A; use of the shared link1 might
be a secondary issue depending on the relative bandwidths and A and B’s understandings of appropriate uses
for link1.
Two common options A and B might agree to regarding link1 are no-transit and backup.
For the no-transit option, A and B simply do not export the route to their respective ISPs at all. This is done
via export filtering. If ISP1 does not know A can reach B, it will not send any of B’s traffic to A.
For the backup option, the intent is that traffic to A will normally arrive via ISP1, but if the ISP1 link is down
then A’s traffic will be allowed to travel through ISP2 and B. To achieve this, A and B can export their link1-
route to each other, but arrange for ISP1 and ISP2 respectively to assign this route a low local_preference
value. As long as ISP1 hears of a route to B from its upstream provider, it will reach B that way, and will
not advertise the existence of the link1 route to B; ditto ISP2. However, if the ISP2 route to B fails, then A’s
upstream provider will stop advertising any route to B, and so ISP1 will begin to use the link1 route to B
and begin advertising it to the Internet. The link1 route will be the primary route to B until ISP2’s service is
restored.
A and B must convince their respective ISPs to assign the link1 route a low local_preference; they cannot
mandate this directly. However, if their ISPs recognize community attributes that, as above, allow customers
to influence their local_preference value, then A and B can use this to create the desired local_preference.
To use the shared link for backup outbound traffic, A and B will need a way to send through one another if
their own ISP link is down. If A detects that its ISP link is down, it can simply change its default route to
point to B. One way to automate this is for A and B to view their default-route path (eg to 0.0.0.0/0) to be a
concrete destination within BGP. ISP1 advertises this to A, using BGP, but so does B, and A has configured
its import rules so B’s route to 0.0.0.0/0 has a higher cost. Then A will route to 0.0.0.0/0 through ISP1 – that

is, will use ISP1 as its default route – as long as it is available, and will switch to B when it is not.
A and B might also wish to use their shared private link for load balancing, but for this BGP offers limited
help. If ISP1 and ISP2 both export routes to A, then A has lost all control over how other sites will prefer
one to the other. A may be able to make one path artificially appear more expensive, perhaps by duplicating
one of the ISPs in the AS-path. A might then be able to keep tweaking this cost until the inbound loads are
comparable, but there is no guarantee (or even likelihood) this will be stable. Outbound load-balancing is
up to A and B’s respective internal routers.
Providers in the business of carrying transit traffic must also make decisions about exactly whose traffic they
will carry; these decisions are again implemented with BGP. In the diagram below, two transit-providing
Autonomous Systems B and C connect to individual sites (or regional ISPs) A and D.

                                 Transit B

      A        IXP1                                       IXP2          D

                                 Transit C

In the diagram above, the left and right interconnections are shown taking place at Internet exchange points
IXP1 and IXP2 (10.4.1 Internet Exchange Points). IXPs are typically where such interconnections take
place but are not required; the essential topology is simply this:

                        Transit B

          A                                      D

                        Transit C

B would like to make sure C does not attempt to save on its long-haul transit costs by forwarding AÝÑD
traffic over to B at IXP1, and DÝÑA traffic over to B at IXP2. B avoids this problem by not advertising to
C that it can reach A and D, and similarly with C. Transit providers are quite careful about not advertising
reachability to any other AS for whom they do not intend to provide transit service, because to do so is likely
to mean getting stuck with that traffic.
If B advertises to A that it can reach D, then A may accept that route, and send all its D-bound traffic via B,
with C not involved at all. B is not likely to do this unless A pays for the privilege. If B and C both advertise
to A that they can reach D, then A has a choice, which it will make via its best-path-selection rules. But in
such a case A will want to be sure that it does not end up paying full price to both B and C to carry its traffic
while using only one of them. Site A might, for example, agree to payment based on the actual volume of
carried traffic, meaning that if it prefers B’s route then it will pay only B.
It is quite possible that B advertises to A that it can reach D, but does not advertise to D that it can reach A.
As we have seen, B advertises to A that it can reach D only if A has paid for this privilege; perhaps D prefers
to do business with C rather than with B. In that case, A-to-D traffic would travel via B, while D-to-A traffic
would travel via C.
In the unlikely event that B and C both advertise to one another at IXP1 their route to D, a routing loop may
even be created. B might forward D-bound traffic to C while C forwards it back to B. But in that case B

would state, in its next BGP advertisement to C at IXP1, that it reaches D via an AS-path that begins with
C, and C would do similarly. B and C would then see themselves in the AS-paths they receive and would
stop using these routes.

10.6.7.1 MED values and traffic engineering

Let us now address why an AS would bother with importing and using MED values, given that doing so
will almost always increase the site’s cost. Consider the following diagram of autonomous systems AS1 and
AS2, with link costs shown:

                                                              DC
                   AS1
                                                              0
                                            12                        2
                       R1                                      R          R2
                                                                           0
                       1
                                                                          IX2
                                                                           1
                       IX1
                       0
                             3         4           3              4
                       S1        S          S3           S4               S2
                                 0

                                 A                     AS 2

Site DC in the diagram above is a datacenter that wants its user – at site A – to experience high-performance
downloads. Perhaps DC delivers high-performance streaming video, and needs to minimize both congestion
and packet losses. In order to achieve this superior quality, it builds a particularly robust network R1–R–R2,
shown above as AS1.
A first step is to have AS1 connect (or peer) directly to customer networks such as AS2, rather than relying
on the Internet backbone. Two such interconnection points are shown above, IX1 and IX2.
At this point, traffic from A to DC will take IX1 (on the shortest path from A to AS1), and so will travel
most of the way in AS1. This is good, but traffic from A to DC is probably mostly acknowledgments; these
are unlikely to benefit from the special network. The actual data, sent from DC to A, will take IX2, because
that is AS1’s shortest path to reach AS2. The data will thus travel most of the way in AS2, bypassing AS1’s
high-performance network. This is not what DC wants.
However, the picture changes if AS1 agrees to accept MED information from AS2 (and other providers).
If AS2 tells AS1 that AS2’s preferred link for reaching A is via IX1, then traffic from DC to A will travel
through R1 to IX1, and from there onto A. This keeps DC’s outbound traffic in the AS1 network as long as
possible, instead of handing it off to the other network of lower quality. This is what DC wants; this is why
DC built the high-performance network.
Rather than building its own high-performance network, DC might simply contract with an existing high-
performance network. That would make AS1’s business model the following:
    • peering with as many potential customer networks as possible
    • importing and using the MED information from those networks

    • advertising to potential customers like DC that their network will give DC’s users a better experience

10.6.8 BGP and Anycast

In 7.8.5 DNS and CDNs we discussed how some CDNs use DNS tricks to arrange for user traffic to be
delivered to the closest edge server. Another CDN option is anycast: using the same IP address for all the
edge servers, and arranging for routers to deliver to the closest server. IPv6 routers can be configured to
have some awareness of anycast delivery, but in IPv4 this must be done more passively, using BGP.
To implement the anycast approach, the CDN uses the same IP address block at each of its datacenter
locations. Each customer has a server at each CDN datacenter, and each of these servers is assigned the
same IP address. It is up to the CDN to make sure that the content made available at each server is identical.
At each of its locations, the CDN then announces this address block to its local BGP neighbors. Reachability
information for the address block then propagates, via BGP, throughout the Internet. An AS connected to
a single CDN datacenter will route the CDN’s address block to that datacenter. If AS1 hears about the
CDN from neighbors AS2 and AS3, then AS1 will apply its usual best-path-selection process to determine
whether to route the CDN’s block via AS2 or AS3. Ultimately, every AS on the Internet will deploy exactly
one route to the CDN. Each such route will lead to one of the CDN’s datacenters, but different ASes may
deploy routes to different datacenters.
One advantage to the anycast approach, over the DNS approach, is that users who use a geographically
distant DNS resolver will not pay a penalty. Another is that the BGP best-path-selection process is likely
to produce better routes in general than a process based solely on geographical distance; for example, ASes
may choose best paths based on available bandwidth rather than distance. In IP routing, geography is not
destiny.
It may at first seem odd to have multiple servers with the same public IP address, given that such config-
uration within an organization usually represents a dire error. However, none of the CDN’s data centers
will use these addresses to talk to one another; the CDN will arrange for the use of other IP addresses for
inter-datacenter traffic.

10.6.9 BGP Relationships

Arbitrarily complex policies may be created through BGP, and, as we shall see in the following section,
convergence to a stable set of routes is not guaranteed. Nonconvergence does not mean distance-vector’s
“slow convergence to infinity”, but rather a regular oscillation of routes among competing alternatives.
It turns out, however, that if some constraints are applied to the different AS-to-AS relationships, then better
behavior is obtained. The paper [LG01] analyzed BGP networks in which each AS-to-AS relationship fit
one of the following three business patterns, discussed further below:
   1. Customer to provider (the most common pattern)
   2. Peer to peer (eg two top-level providers mutually exchanging traffic)
   3. Sibling to sibling (for very close AS-to-AS relationships)
A major consequence these relationships is the extent to which the autonomous systems involved accept one
another’s “non-customer” routes (below), and hence the extent to which they provide each other with transit
services. We start with the most basic case, that of customer and provider.

If autonomous systems C and P have a customer-to-provider relationship, with C as the customer and P
as the provider, then C is paying P to carry some or all of its traffic to the “outside world”. P may not
carry all such traffic, because C may also be a customer of another provider P1 . C may also have its own
sub-customers, such as C1 :

         P            P?

         C

         C?

In offering itself as a provider, P will export all the routes it has, from all sources, to C, in effect telling C
“this is what I can reach”. If C has no other providers it might accept these routes in the form of a single
default-route entry pointing to P; if C has another provider P1 then it might accept some routes from P and
some from P1 .
Similarly, C will always export its own routes to P. If C has customers of its own, such as C1 , then it will also
export those routes to P. Collectively, we will say that C’s own routes and the routes of its own customers
and sub-customers are its customer routes.
But what about non-customer routes, eg routes learned from other providers? These C generally does not
export. If C were to export to P a route to destination D that it learned from second provider P1 , then C might
end up providing transport service to P, carrying P’s D-bound traffic to P1 . As a customer, this is probably
not what C intends.
To summarize, a provider does export its non-customer routes to its customer, but a customer generally
does not export its non-customer routes to its providers. This rule is not, in the world of real business
relationships, absolute; ASes may negotiate all sorts of special arrangements. A nominal customer might,
for example, agree to provide transit service for some set of destinations, in exchange for a lower-priced rate
for the handling of its other traffic. Nonetheless, the rule is largely accurate, and provides a helpful starting
point to understanding customer-provider relationships. Below, in 10.6.9.1 BGP No-Valley Theorem, we
will in effect use this rule as a definition of customer-provider relationships.
Now let us consider a peer-to-peer relationship, which is a connection between two transit providers that
have agreed to exchange all their customer traffic with each other; thus carrying transit traffic for one another.
Often the idea is for the interconnection to be seen as equally valuable by both parties (eg because the parties
exchange comparable volumes of traffic); in such a case the relationship would likely be “settlement-free”,
that is, involving no monetary exchange. If, however, the volume flow is significantly asymmetric then
compensation can certainly be negotiated, making the relationship more like customer-to-provider.
As with customers and providers, two peers P1 and P2 each export all their customer routes to the other; that
way, P2 knows it how to reach P1’s customers and vice-versa. By doing this, P1 and P2 each carry transit
traffic for their own customers.
Peers do not, however, generally export their non-customer routes, in either direction. If P1 learns of a route
to destination D from another peer (or provider) P3, it does not export this to P2. If it were to do so, then
P1 would carry non-customer transit traffic from P2 to P3. Instead, P2 is expected also to peer with P3, and
learn of P3’s route to D that way. Alternatively, P3 can become a customer of P1, and thus pay for P1’s

transit carriage of P3’s traffic.
The so-called tier-1 providers are those that are not customers of anyone; these represent the top-level
“backbone” providers. Each tier-1 AS must, as a rule, peer with every other tier-1 AS, though ASes are free
to negotiate exceptions.
Finally, some autonomous system relationships that do not fit the customer-to-provider or peer-to-peer pat-
terns can be characterized as sibling-to-sibling. Siblings are ISPs that have a close relationship; often
siblings are ASes that, due to mergers, are now part of the same organization. Siblings may also be nominal
competitors who intend to use their mutual link as a cooperative backup, as in 10.6.7 BGP and Traffic
Engineering. Two siblings may or may not have the same upstream ISP as provider.
Siblings typically export everything to one another – both customer and non-customer routes – and thus do
potentially use their connection for transit traffic in both directions (although they may rank routes through
one another at low preference, so as to use the shared link only when nothing else is available).
We can summarize the three kinds of relationships in terms of how they export non-customer routes:
    • in peer-to-peer relationships, non-customer routes are not exported in either direction.
    • in customer-to-provider relationships, non-customer routes are exported only from the provider to the
      customer.
    • in sibling-to-sibling relationships, non-customer routes are exported in both directions.
It is possible to make at least some inferences about BGP relationships from sites’ actual export information,
though accuracy is imperfect because sites may negotiate non-standard arrangements; see [LG01].
In the real world, BGP sibling relationships are relatively rare, probably because they do not really fit the
model of traffic carriage as a service. This may be fortunate, as sibling relationships, with universal and
bidirectional route export, tend to introduce the greatest complexity. The non-convergence examples of
10.6.10 Examples of BGP Instability all require sibling relationships.
One problematic sibling case is the following, in which P1 and P2 are providers for C1 and C2, respectively,
and C1 and C2 are siblings:

      P1                      P2

           C1 siblings C2

Suppose P1 exports to C1 a route to destination D. C1 then exports it to sibling C2. If C2 treats this as a
customer route, it will export it to P2, in which case C1 and C2 are now providing transit service to traffic
from P2 bound for D.
Sibling relationships can be tamed considerably, however, if we adopt a requirement that collections of
linked siblings act as a unit, keeping track of the original non-sibling source (that is, customer, provider or
peer) of each route. Let us say that autonomous systems S and S1 are in the same sibling family if there
is a chain of autonomous systems S0 . . . Sn so that S=S0 , Sn =S1 , and each consecutive Si-1 and Si , iďn, are
siblings. We can then define the following property:
       Selective Export Property: A sibling family satisfies this property if, whenever one member
       of the family learns of a route from a provider (respectively peer or customer) then all other

      members of the family treat the route as a provider (respectively peer or customer) route when
      deciding whether to export.
In other words, in the situation diagrammed above, in which C1 has learned of a route to D from its provider
P1, C2 will also treat this route as a non-customer route and will not export it to P2.
In the real world, BGP relationships may not fit any of the above three categories, or else there may be many
sibling relationships for which the selective-export property fails. However, quite often these relationships
do hold to a useful degree.
We can also specialize the relationships to a particular set of destinations, or even to an individual destina-
tion; for example, autonomous systems C and P might be said to have a customer-to-provider relationship
for destination D if C learned its route to D from a non-customer, does not export this route to P, and P does
export to C its own route to D.
BGP certainly allows for complicated variations: if a regional provider is a customer of a large transit
backbone, then the backbone might only announce routes listed in transit agreement (rather than all routes,
as above). There is a supposition here that the regional provider has multiple connections, and has contracted
with that particular transit backbone only for certain routes. But we can fit this into the classification above
either by restricting attention to the set of routes listed in the agreement, or by declaring that in principle the
transit provider exports all routes, but the regional customer doesn’t import the ones it hasn’t paid for.

10.6.9.1 BGP No-Valley Theorem

A consequence of adherence to the above classification and attendant export rules is the no-valley theorem
of [LG01]: Suppose every pair of adjacent ASes has a relationship described by the customer-provider,
peer-to-peer or sibling rules above (now taken to be definitions of these three relationships). In addition,
every sibling family abides by the selective-export property. Let A=A0 be an autonomous system that has
received a route to destination D with AS-path xA1 ,A2 ,. . . ,An y. Then: in this AS-path, there is at most one
peer-to-peer link. Links to the left of the peer-to-peer link (that is, closer to A) are either customerÑprovider
links or siblingÑsibling links; that is, they are non-downwards. To the right of the peer-to-peer link, there
are only providerÑcustomer or siblingÑsibling links; that is, these are non-upwards. If there is no peer-to-
peer link, then we can still divide the AS-path into a non-downwards first part and a non-upwards second
part.
Intuitively, autonomous systems on the right (non-upwards) part of the path export the route to D as a
customer route. Autonomous systems on the left (non-downwards) part of the path export the route from
provider to customer.
The no-valley theorem can be seen as an illustration of the power of the restrictions built into the customer-
to-provider and peer-to-peer export rules.
We give an informal argument for the case in which the AS-path has no peer-to-peer link. First, note that
BGP rules mean that each autonomous system ASi in the path has received the route to D from neighbor
ASi+1 with AS-path xAi+1 ,. . . ,An y.
If the no-valley theorem were to fail, then somewhere along the AS-path in order of increasing i we would
have a downward link followed by, eventually, an upward link. Choose the largest i for which this arrange-
ment appears, and let k be the position of the first subsequent upward link, so that
    • Ai to Ai+1 is provider-to-customer

    • Aj to Aj+1 is sibling-to-sibling for i<j<k-1
    • Ak-1 to Ak is customer-to-provider.
Then the route to D was acquired by Ak-1 from its provider Ak , and so is a provider route. The set
{Ai+1 ,. . . ,Ak-1 } is a sibling family, and so by the selective-export rule Ai+1 also treats this route to D as
a provider route. It therefore cannot export this non-customer route to different provider Ai , a contradiction.
For the case with a peer-to-peer edge, see exercise 12.0.
If the hypotheses of the no-valley theorem hold only for routes involving a particular destination or set of
destinations, then the theorem is still true for those routes.
The hypotheses of the no-valley theorem are not quite sufficient to guarantee convergence of the BGP
system to a stable set of routes. To ensure convergence in the case without sibling relationships, it is shown
in [GR01] that the following simple local_preference rule suffices:
      If AS1 gets two routes r1 and r2 to a destination D, and the first AS of the r1 route is a customer
      of AS1, and the first AS of r2 is not, then r1 will be assigned a higher local_preference value
      than r2.
More complex rules exist that allow for cases when the local_preference values can be equal; one such rule
states that strict inequality is only required when r2 is a provider route. Other straightforward rules handle
the case of sibling relationships, eg by requiring that siblings have local_preference rules consistent with the
use of their shared connection only for backup.
As a practical matter, whether or not actual BGP relationships are consistent with the rules above, arrange-
ments resulting in actual BGP instability appear rare on the Internet.

10.6.10 Examples of BGP Instability

What if the “normal” rules regarding BGP preferences are not followed? It turns out that BGP allows
genuinely unstable situations to occur; this is a consequence of allowing each AS a completely independent
hand in selecting preference functions. Here are two simple examples, from [GR01].
Example 1: A stable state exists, but convergence to it is not guaranteed. Consider the following network
arrangement:

            AS1

                                AS0           D

            AS2

We assume AS1 prefers AS-paths to destination D in the following order:
      xAS2,AS0y, xAS0y
That is, xAS2,AS0y is preferred to the direct path xAS0y (one way to express this preference might be
“prefer routes for which the AS-PATH begins with AS2”; perhaps the AS1–AS0 link is more expensive).
Similarly, we assume AS2 prefers paths to D in the order xAS1,AS0y, xAS0y. Both AS1 and AS2 start out

using path xAS0y; they advertise this to each other. As each receives the other’s advertisement, they apply
their preference order and therefore each switches to routing D’s traffic to the other; that is, AS1 switches
to the route with AS-path xAS2,AS0y and AS2 switches to xAS1,AS0y. This, of course, causes a routing
loop! However, as soon as they export these paths to one another, they will detect the loop in the AS-path
and reject the new route, and so both will switch back to xAS0y as soon as they announce to each other the
change in what they use.
This oscillation may continue indefinitely, as long as both AS1 and AS2 switch away from xAS0y at the
same moment. If, however, AS1 switches to xAS2,AS0y while AS2 continues to use xAS0y, then AS2 is
“stuck” and the situation is stable. In practice, therefore, eventual convergence to a stable state is likely.
AS1 and AS2 might choose not to export their D-route to each other to avoid this instability. Because they
do export this route to one another, they are siblings in the sense of the previous section.
Example 2: No stable state exists. This example is from [VGE00]. Assume that the destination D is attached
to AS0, and that AS0 in turn connects to AS1, AS2 and AS3 as in the following diagram:

                 AS1

                 AS0

                  D
   AS2                          AS3

AS1-AS3 each have a direct route to AS0, but we assume each prefers the AS-path that takes their clockwise
neighbor; that is, AS1 prefers xAS3,AS0y to xAS0y; AS3 prefers xAS2,AS0y to xAS0y, and AS2 prefers
xAS1,AS0y to xAS0y. This is a peculiar, but legal, example of input filtering.
Suppose all initially adopt AS-path xAS0y, and advertise this, and AS1 is the first to look at the incoming
advertisements. AS1 switches to the route xAS3,AS0y, and announces this to AS2 and AS3.
At this point, AS2 sees that AS1 uses xAS3,AS0y; if AS2 switches to AS1 then its path would be
xAS1,AS3,AS0y rather than xAS1,AS0y and so it does not make the switch.
But AS3 does switch: it prefers xAS2,AS0y and this is still available. Once it makes this switch, and
advertises it, AS1 sees that the route it had been using, xAS3,AS0y, has become xAS3,AS1,AS0y. At this
point AS1 switches back to xAS0y.
Now AS2 can switch to using xAS1,AS0y, and does so. After that, AS3 finds it is now using xAS2,AS1,AS0y
and it switches back to xAS0y. This allows AS1 to switch to the longer route, and then AS2 switches back
to the direct route, and then AS3 gets the longer route, then AS2 again, etc, forever rotating clockwise.
Because each of AS1, AS2 and AS3 export their route to D to both their neighbors, they must all be siblings
of one another.

10.6.11 BGP Security and Route Registries

As indicated in the sidebar BGP Breakdowns in 10.6.4 BGP Filtering and Routing Policies, it is quite easy
for a site to advertise a route to a destination that it in fact cannot reach; BGP neighbors who accept such a
route will find that destination unreachable. BGP is traditionally based on trust, and security is difficult.
One strategy for preventing false BGP claims is to crosscheck destinations advertised by BGP neighbors
with public databases of information about autonomous systems and about assignments of IP address blocks.
Such databases are managed by multiple Internet registries, including the top-level regional registries ARIN,
RIPE, APNIC, AfriNIC and LACNIC mentioned in 1.10.2 The Future of IPv4 and many more sub-
registries. These databases are known as Internet Routing Registries, or IRRs. It is common for some
IRRs to mirror the data held by others. The term “IRR”, in the singular, is sometimes used to denote the
collective union of all the individual IRRs.
Any BGP route report indicates, by virtue of the AS-path, the origin AS for the IP destination address block.
The most basic form of BGP security is origin validation: ensuring that the origin AS appearing in the
AS-path is in fact entitled to be the origin AS for that IP address block; that is, the origin AS either owns the
block or is the designated ISP for the owner of the block.
Origin validation would prevent an autonomous system from advertising itself as the origin AS for someone
else’s active block of IP addresses, thus preventing access to that block; this is known as BGP hijacking. It
would also prevent an AS from finding a block of IP addresses nobody is actually using, and fraudulently
claiming it as its own; this is known as IP-prefix squatting and is surprisingly common.
Origin validation would not, by itself, prevent an AS, say Q, from claiming to have a direct connection to
another AS, say R, that is the valid owner of an IP address block D. If Q is not in fact connected to R, then
traffic routed to D via Q will be lost. While Q could thus block access to D, it would not be able to make
use of those addresses. Ideally, we also want some form of path validation; one form of this might be
verification that each AS along an AS-path is properly connected to the adjacent ASes in the AS-path.
IRR-based validation is intended for customer-provider AS relationships in the sense of 10.6.9 BGP Re-
lationships. Let P be an AS and let Q be its customer; we outline how P can use IRRs – and some modest
coercion – to validate routes received by Q. From the definition of the customer-provider relationship, Q
will only advertise to P its “customer routes”: its own routes, and the customer routes of its own customers.
If Q advertises to P a route to one of its own address blocks A, P ÐQ-A, then P can use the IRR data to
confirm that A is in fact owned by Q; an example of address-block lookup appears in the next section. It is
quite possible that Q will not have listed A with any IRR, so P may elect to require such listing by adopting
a policy that routes from customers will not be accepted without matching IRR address-block records. In
the absence of such requirements, IRR data is notoriously incomplete, though it may still be useful.
Now suppose R is a customer of Q that advertises address block B to Q, and Q in turn advertises B to P:
P ÐQ R-B. The first step is origin validation: P will need to find an IRR record establishing R as the
owner of B. This time, however, for complete validation P will also need evidence that R is a customer of Q.
This second verification – path validation – is beyond the scope of origin validation. However, if this is not
established, Q might potentially be attempting to block access to B, at least partially, by claiming a route to
B via a false connection to R. One approach to path validation is for P to require that Q provides a list of its
customers, in the form of an “AS Set”, below.
There is one additional, though less malicious, common error: accidentally and mistakenly offering transit
service. This happens if an autonomous system, say Q, has a valid route to a non-customer address block

D (which might even be the entire Internet), and unintentionally advertises this route to a neighboring AS
P. P may now route all its traffic to D via Q, which the latter may be ill-prepared to handle. This is known
as a route leak. IRR validation can prevent route leaks as well as hijacking and prefix squatting: if Q
accidentally advertises to P a non-customer route, then the IRR data can be used to recognize it as such, and
P can then decline to accept it.
If the BGP relationship between Q and P is one of siblings, rather than customer and provider, then Q will
export to P all its routes (and vice-versa). It is probably impractical for P to validate every route it receives
from Q. However, sibling ASes typically have a much closer relationship than provider-customer ASes; P
here might be inclined simply to trust the routes exported by Q.

10.6.11.1 IRR Lookups

IRR records can be accessed by using the whois command, although sometimes other interfaces are also
provided. While whois is perhaps most commonly used to look up information about domains (eg whois
luc.edu), it also supports multiple other query types. Advanced uses of whois usually require specifying
a particular whois server, via the -h option, in addition to the query. In the examples here, we will use the
whois.radb.net server. IRR records are created using the Routing Policy Specification Language,
RPSL, defined in RFC 2622 and with companion usage document RFC 2650; the created records are then
uploaded to the appropriate IRR.
Loyola University owns the 147.126.0.0/16 address block, and advertises this block to its BGP peers. To
use whois to query about this block, we can use the command

whois -h whois.radb.net 147.126.0.0/16

We get back a list of information, including the AS number and the owner (the output here has been abbre-
viated):

route:           147.126.0.0/16
origin:          AS7968
descr:           Loyola University Chicago

We can also ask about a specific IP address, eg 147.126.2.45. It turns out that Loyola has records for multiple
sub-blocks of 147.126.0.0/16 (to accommodate the assignment of IP addresses to different campuses), and
for this query we get back records for both the top-level /16 block and for 147.126.0.0/20. (Reading closely,
we also find that, while these sub-block records are managed directly by Loyola, the top-level 147.126.0.0/16
block is managed (as of 2020) by proxy by XO Communications.)
We can also query the AS number itself. AS8, in the following example (from the RADB documentation),
belongs to Rice University.

whois -h whois.radb.net as8

The abbreviated output (as of 2020) is

aut-num:         AS8
as-name:         RICE
descr:           Rice University AS
import:          from AS2914

                action pref=700;
                accept ANY AND NOT {0.0.0.0/0}
import:         from AS3356 4.30.109.33 at 4.30.109.34
                action pref=700; med=20;
                accept ANY

export:         to AS2914 128.241.2.165 at 128.241.2.166
                announce RS-RICE-PUBLIC-SUBNETS
export:         to AS3356 4.7.145.189 at 4.7.145.190
                announce RS-RICE-PUBLIC-SUBNETS
export:         to AS3356 4.30.109.33 at 4.30.109.34
                announce RS-RICE-PUBLIC-SUBNETS

In this example we see both import and export rules, corresponding to the BGP import and export fil-
ters. The first import rule says that from AS2914 (NTT Communications) we accept any route except a
default route (0.0.0.0/0). The second import rule, for AS3356 (Level3/CenturyLink) includes MED values
(10.6.6.3 MULTI_EXIT_DISC). In addition to validating address blocks, the provider ASes can use the
declared import and export rules to crosscheck against the advertisements received via BGP.
The export rules here contain a Route Set RS-RICE-PUBLIC-SUBNETS (Route Set names must begin
with “RS-“); we can query for more information about this route set with whois -h whois.radb.
net '!iRS-RICE-PUBLIC-SUBNETS'. The use of Route Sets makes export rules easier to write (and
maintain!) when multiple IP-address blocks are being exported.
It is also possible to define AS Sets, which are lists of ASes. This is the preferred way for an AS to supply
to its provider a list of its customers. For example, if we look up AS19754 (The Fusion Network), we get
(among other things)

import:         from AS19754:AS-CUSTOMERS   accept PeerAS
export:         to AS1299   announce AS-TFNNET
export:         to AS19754:AS-CUSTOMERS   announce ANY

The PeerAS keyword stands for the recipient’s AS number. AS-TFNNET is a single-level AS Set name;
AS19754:AS-CUSTOMERS is a hierarchical AS Set name (AS Set names must be globally unique, so
prepending ones AS-number is often useful). The third line above means that all routes are announced to
the local AS-CUSTOMERS list; that is, transit services are provided to the AS’s customers, as expected.
Any higher-level provider can retrieve this AS-CUSTOMERS list, eg by using the “!i” flag in the whois
query as with the Route Set example above. Note that, in the context of a customer-provider relationship,
a higher-level provider can reasonably infer that any AS to which AS19754 provides transit services is a
customer, and thus that the AS19754:AS-CUSTOMERS AS Set is in fact a customer list for AS19754; the
fact that “CUSTOMER” appears in the name is conventional but not essential.
These and other commands can give a good description, for a given AS, of what networks and what ASes
are its customers, and for whom it provides transit services, assuming the AS has taken care to create the
appropriate records. With suitable automated processing, and suitable BGP support, this approach can be
very effective in validating the information received via BGP.
The organization MANRS (Mutually Agreed Norms for Routing Security) was created in 2014 to improve
routing security and to encourage best practices. One of those best practices is the use of IRR data for BGP
validation.

10.6.11.2 RPKI

Another, newer, approach to BGP integrity is Resource Public Key Infrastructure, or RPKI, described in
RFC 6840. The idea here is to set up a mechanism by which ASes can obtain cryptographically signed
assurances – known as certificates, and very similar to the certificates of 22.10.2 TLS and 22.10.2.1 Cer-
tificate Authorities – that a given IP address block is in fact owned by the AS that claims to be the origin of
routes to that address block. This achieves the origin validation described above, though other attacks may
still be possible.
An AS wanting to participate in RPKI bundles its AS number and IP address blocks into a “certificate
request”, which it then submits to an appropriate authority for digital signing. Once the request is signed, it
becomes a Route Origin Authorization, or ROA, which other ASes can then use to verify that the first AS
is properly the origin of its claimed address blocks.
The signers of ROAs – akin to certificate authorities, as in 22.10.2.1 Certificate Authorities – are largely
the same organizations that run IRRs: the IANA, the five regional registries ARIN, RIPE, APNIC, AfriNIC
and LACNIC mentioned in 1.10.2 The Future of IPv4, and any local registries delegated by one of these.
Because these are the organizations that hand out IP address blocks, they are in a strong position to verify
address-block ownership.
But IP-address ownership is a legal concern, not a technical one. If an AS sells an address block to someone
else, must the transfer be approved by the appropriate route registry? Most registries have always required
this on paper, but IRRs and RPKI give teeth to this policy. What if an IP-address transfer is part of a legal
action valid in the country of the ASes involved, but is not recognized in the country of the registrar? Who
might be liable if access to someone’s site is blocked due to an improperly signed ROA? For these and other
reasons, ARIN has a somewhat daunting Relying Party Agreement that ASes must sign before being allowed
to participate in ROA creation. An analysis in [YW19] suggests that legal considerations have slowed RPKI
adoption.
The verification of ROAs, along with access to ROAs and IRRs generally, is not part of the BGP protocol.
If an AS wants to use an IRR or ROA to validate its routing decisions, it must obtain the appropriate
information outside of BGP itself. Typically this is done by having the local BGP router communicate with
a local “validation server”, which handles the details of verifications for newly seen routes.

10.7 Epilog

CIDR was a deceptively simple idea. At first glance it is a straightforward extension of the subnet concept,
moving the net/host division point to the left as well as to the right. But it has ushered in true hierarchical
routing, most often provider-based. While CIDR was originally offered as a solution to some early crises in
IPv4 address-space allocation, it has been adopted into the core of IPv6 routing as well.
Interior routing – using either distance-vector or link-state protocols – is neat and mathematical. Exterior
routing with BGP is messy and arbitrary. Perhaps the most surprising thing about BGP is that the Internet
works as well as it does, given the complexity of provider interconnections. The business side of routing
almost never has an impact on ordinary users. To an extent, BGP works well because providers volun-
tarily limit the complexity of their filtering preferences, but that seems to be largely because the business
relationships of real-world ISPs do not seem to require complex filtering.

10.7 Epilog                                                                                               331

10.8 Exercises

Exercises are given fractional (floating point) numbers, to allow for interpolation of new exercises. Exercise
5.5 is distinct, for example, from exercises 5.0 and 6.0. Exercises marked with a ♢ have solutions or hints
at 24.9 Solutions for Large-Scale IP Routing.
0.5.♢ Consider the following IP forwarding table that uses CIDR.

                                         destination      next_hop
                                         200.0.0.0/8      A
                                         200.64.0.0/10    B
                                         200.64.0.0/12    C
                                         200.64.0.0/16    D

For each of the following IP addresses, indicate to what destination it is forwarded. 64 is 0x40, or 0100
0000 in binary.
      (i) 200.63.1.1
      (ii) 200.80.1.1
      (iii) 200.72.1.1
      (iv) 200.64.1.1
1.0. Consider the following IP forwarding table that uses CIDR. IP address bytes are in hexadecimal here,
so each hex digit corresponds to four address bits. This makes prefixes such as /12 and /20 align with
hex-digit boundaries. As a reminder of the hexadecimal numbering, “:” is used as the separator rather than
“.”

                                         destination      next_hop
                                         81:30:0:0/12     A
                                         81:3c:0:0/16     B
                                         81:3c:50:0/20    C
                                         81:40:0:0/12     D
                                         81:44:0:0/14     E

For each of the following IP addresses, give the next_hop for each entry in the table above that it matches.
If there are multiple matches, use the longest-match rule to identify where the packet would be forwarded.
      (i) 81:3b:15:49
      (ii) 81:3c:56:14
      (iii) 81:3c:85:2e
      (iv) 81:4a:35:29
      (v) 81:47:21:97
      (vi) 81:43:01:c0
2.0. Consider the following IP forwarding table, using CIDR. As in exercise 1, IP address bytes are in
hexadecimal, and “:” is used as the separator as a reminder.

                                          destination     next_hop
                                          00:0:0:0/2      A
                                          40:0:0:0/2      B
                                          80:0:0:0/2      C
                                          c0:0:0:0/2      D

(a). To what next_hop would each of the following be routed? 63:b1:82:15, 9e:00:15:01, de:ad:be:ef
(b). Explain why every IP address is routed somewhere, even though there is no default entry. Hint: convert
the first bytes to binary.

3.0. Give an IPv4 forwarding table – using CIDR – that will route all Class A addresses (first bit 0) to
next_hop A, all Class B addresses (first two bits 10) to next_hop B, and all Class C addresses (first three bits
110) to next_hop C.
4.0. Suppose a router using CIDR has the following entries. Address bytes are in decimal except for the
third byte, which is in binary.

                                     destination                next_hop
                                     37.149.0000 0000.0/18      A
                                     37.149.0100 0000.0/18      A
                                     37.149.1000 0000.0/18      A
                                     37.149.1100 0000.0/18      B

If the next_hop for the last entry were also A, we could consolidate these four into a single entry
37.149.0.0/16 Ñ A. But with the final next_hop as B, how could these four be consolidated into two entries?
You will need to assume the longest-match rule.
5.0. Suppose P, Q and R are ISPs with respective CIDR address blocks (with bytes in decimal) 51.0.0.0/8,
52.0.0.0/8 and 53.0.0.0/8. P then has customers A and B, to which it assigns address blocks as follows:
      A: 51.10.0.0/16
      B: 51.23.0.0/16
Q has customers C and D and assigns them address blocks as follows:
      C: 52.14.0.0/16
      D: 52.15.0.0/16

(a).♢ Give forwarding tables for P, Q and R assuming they connect to each other and to each of their own
customers.
(b). Now suppose A switches from provider P to provider Q, and takes its address block with it. Give the
changes to the forwarding tables for P, Q and R; the longest-match rule will be needed to resolve conflicts.

5.5 Let P, Q and R be the ISPs of exercise 5.0. This time, suppose customer C switches from provider Q to

10.8 Exercises                                                                                             333

provider R. R will now have a new entry 52.14.0.0/16 Ñ C. Give the changes to the forwarding tables of P
and Q.
6.0. Suppose P, Q and R are ISPs as in exercise 5.0. This time, P and R do not connect directly; they
route traffic to one another via Q. In addition, customer B is multihomed and has a secondary connection
to provider R; customer D is also multihomed and has a secondary connection to provider P. R and P use
these secondary connections to send to B and D respectively; however, these secondary connections are not
advertised to other providers. Give forwarding tables for P, Q and R.
7.0. Consider the following network of providers P-S, all using BGP. The providers are the horizontal lines;
each provider is its own AS.

                                Provider P

          Provider Q

      net NQ                                        Provider R

                                                                    net NR
                                                 net NS
                           Provider S

(a).♢ What routes to network NS will P receive, assuming each provider exports all its routes to its
neighbors without filtering? For each route, list the AS-path.
(b). What routes to network NQ will P receive? For each route, list the AS-path.
(c). Suppose R now uses export filtering so as not to advertise any of its routes to P, though it does continue
to advertise its routes to S. What routes to network NR will P receive, with AS-paths?

8.0. Consider the following network of Autonomous Systems AS1 through AS6, which double as destina-
tions. When AS1 advertises itself to AS2, for example, the AS-path it provides is xAS1y.

AS1            AS2             AS3
                                :
                                :
                                :
AS4            AS5             AS6

(a). If neither AS3 nor AS6 exports their AS3–AS6 link to their neighbors AS2 and AS5 to the left, what
routes will AS2 receive to reach AS5? Specify routes by AS-path.
(b). What routes will AS2 receive to reach AS6?
(c). Suppose AS3 exports to AS2 its link to AS6, but AS6 continues not to export the AS3–AS6 link to
AS5. How will AS5 now reach AS3? How will AS2 now reach AS6? Assume that there are no local
preferences in use in BGP best-path selection, and that the shortest AS-path wins.

9.0. Suppose that Internet routing in the US used geographical routing, and the first 12 bits of every IP
address represent a geographical area similar in size to a telephone area code. Megacorp gets the prefix
12.34.0.0/16, based geographically in Chicago, and allocates subnets from this prefix to its offices in all 50
states. Megacorp routes all its internal traffic over its own network.

(a). Assuming all Megacorp traffic must enter and exit in Chicago, what is the route of traffic to and from
the San Diego office to a client also in San Diego?
(b). Now suppose each office has its own link to a local ISP, but still uses its 12.34.0.0/16 IP addresses.
Now what is the route of traffic between the San Diego office and its neighbor?
(c). Suppose Megacorp gives up and gets a separate geographical prefix for each office, eg 12.35.1.0/24 for
San Diego and 12.37.3.0/24 for Boston. Traffic into and out of Megacorp will now take geographically
reasonable paths. However, how must Megacorp now configure its internal IP forwarding tables to ensure
that its internal traffic is still routed entirely over its own network?

10.0. Suppose we try to use BGP’s strategy of exchanging destinations plus paths as an interior routing-
update strategy, perhaps replacing distance-vector routing. No costs or hop-counts are used, but routers
attach to each destination a list of the routers used to reach that destination. Routers can also have route
preferences, such as “prefer my link to B whenever possible”.
(a). Consider the network of 9.2 Distance-Vector Slow-Convergence Problem:

D               A                B

The D–A link breaks, and B offers A what it thinks is its own route to D. Explain how exchanging path
information prevents a routing loop here.
(b). Suppose the network is as below, and initially each router knows about itself and its immediately
adjacent neighbors. What sequence of router announcements can lead to A reaching F via
AÑDÑEÑBÑCÑF, and what individual router preferences would be necessary? (Initially, for example,
A would reach B directly; what preference might make it prefer AÑDÑEÑB?)

A           B            C

D           E            F

(c). Explain why this method is equivalent to using the hopcount metric with either distance-vector or
link-state routing, if routers are not allowed to have preferences and if the router-path length is used as a
tie-breaker.
11.0. In the following AS-path from AS0 to AS4, with customers lower than providers, how far can a
customer route of AS0 be exported towards AS4? How far can a customer route of AS4 be exported towards
AS0?

10.8 Exercises                                                                                           335

        AS1
       /    \
     /       \
    /          AS2--peer--AS3
  /                          \
AS0                            AS4

12.0. Complete the proof of the no-valley theorem of 10.6.9 BGP Relationships to include peer-to-peer
links.
(a). Show that the existing argument also works if the Ai -to-Ai+1 link was peer-to-peer rather than provider-
to-customer, establishing that an upwards link cannot appear to the right of a peer-to-peer link.
(b). Show that the existing argument works if the Ak-1 -to-Ak link was peer-to-peer rather than customer-to-
provider, establishing that a downwards link cannot appear to the left of a peer-to-peer link.
(c). Show that there cannot be two peer-to-peer links.

