                                                                         14 DYNAMICS OF TCP

In this chapter we introduce, first and foremost, the possibility that there are other TCP connections out
there competing with us for throughput. In 6.3 Linear Bottlenecks (and in 13.7 TCP and Bottleneck Link
Utilization) we looked at the performance of TCP through an uncontested bottleneck; now we allow for
competition.
We also look more carefully at the long-term behavior of TCP Reno (and Reno-like) connections, as the
value of cwnd increases and decreases according to the TCP sawtooth. In particular we analyze the av-
erage cwnd; recall that the average cwnd divided by the RTT is the connection’s average throughput (we
momentarily ignore here the fact that RTT is not constant, but the error this introduces is usually small).
Although the focus of this chapter is on TCP Reno, many, though not all, of the ideas presented here
apply to non-Reno TCPs as well, and even to non-TCP mechanisms such as QUIC. Several non-Reno TCP
alternatives are presented in the following chapter. The section on TCP Friendliness addresses how to
compare TCP Reno’s competitive behavior to other alternatives.
We also consider some router-based mechanisms such as RED and ECN that take advantage of TCP’s
behavior to provide better overall performance.
The chapter closes with a summary of the central real-world performance problems faced by TCP today;
this then serves to introduce the proposed TCP fixes in the following chapter.

14.1 A First Look At Queuing

In what order do we transmit the packets in a router’s outbound-interface queue? The conventional answer
is in the order of arrival; technically, this is FIFO (First-In, First-Out) queuing. What happens to a packet
that arrives at a router whose queue for the desired outbound interface is full? The conventional answer is
that it is dropped; technically, this is known as tail-drop.
While FIFO tail-drop remains very important, there are alternatives. In an admittedly entirely different
context (the IPv6 equivalent of ARP), RFC 4681 states, “When a queue overflows, the new arrival SHOULD
replace the oldest entry.” This might be called “head drop”; it is not used for router queues.

 Queuing Theory

 While there are lots of queues in this chapter, we avoid the language of traditional queuing theory. That’s
 because queues created through sliding windows are highly deterministic in terms of both arrivals and
 departures (so-called “D/D/1” queues). From a queuing-theory perspective, interesting queues tend to
 have random (eg Poisson) arrival or service times, or both; eg “M/M/1” queues. The advantage, for us, of
 sliding-windows queues is that they are a good deal more tractable than the general case. When analyzing
 independent messages, however, M/M/1 queuing is much more important; see for example [LK78].

An alternative drop-policy mechanism that has been considered for router queues is random drop. Under
this policy, if a packet arrives but the destination queue is full, with N packets waiting, then one of the N+1
packets in all – the N waiting plus the new arrival – is chosen at random for dropping. The most recent

arrival has thus a very good chance of gaining an initial place in the queue, but also a reasonable chance of
being dropped later on. See [AM90].
While random drop is seldom if ever put to production use its original form, it does resolve a peculiar
synchronization problem related to TCP’s natural periodicity that can lead to starvation for one connection.
This situation – known as phase effects – will be revisited in 16.3.4 Phase Effects. Mathematically,
random-drop queuing is sometimes more tractable than tail-drop because a packet’s loss probability has
little dependence on arrival-time race conditions with other packets.

14.1.1 Priority Queuing

A quite different alternative to FIFO is priority queuing. We will consider this in more detail in 19.3 Pri-
ority Queuing, but the basic idea is straightforward: whenever the router is ready to send the next packet, it
looks first to see if it has any higher-priority packets to send; lower-priority packets are sent only when there
is no waiting higher-priority traffic. This can, of course, lead to complete starvation for the lower-priority
traffic, but often there are bandwidth constraints on the higher-priority traffic (eg that it amounts to less than
10% of the total available bandwidth) such that starvation does not occur.
In an environment of mixed real-time and bulk traffic, it is natural to use priority queuing to give the real-
time traffic priority service, by assignment of such traffic to the higher-priority queue. This works quite well
as long as, say, the real-time traffic is less than some fixed fraction of the total; we will return to this in
20 Quality of Service.

14.2 Bottleneck Links with Competition

So far we have been ignoring the fact that there are other TCP connections out there. A single connection
in isolation needs not to overrun its bottleneck router and drop packets, at least not too often. However,
once there are other connections present, then each individual TCP connection also needs to consider how
to maximize its share of the aggregate bandwidth.
Consider a simple network path, with bandwidths shown in packets/ms. The minimum bandwidth, or path
bandwidth, is 3 packets/ms.

14.2.1 Example 1: linear bottleneck

Below is the example we considered in 6.3 Linear Bottlenecks; bandwidths are shown in packets/ms.

            10 pkts/ms        6 pkts/ms        3 pkts/ms        3 pkts/ms        8 pkts/ms
        A                R1               R2               R3               R4               B

The bottleneck link for AÑB traffic is at R2, and the queue will form at R2’s outbound interface.
We claimed earlier that if the sender uses sliding windows with a fixed window size, then the network will
converge to a steady state in relatively short order. This is also true if multiple senders are involved; however,
a mathematical proof of convergence may be more difficult.

14.2.2 Example 2: router competition

The bottleneck-link concept is a useful one for understanding congestion due to a single connection. How-
ever, if there are multiple senders in competition for a link, the situation is more complicated. Consider the
following diagram, in which links are labeled with bandwidths in packets/ms:

           10 pkts/ms         2 pkts/ms
      A                 R1

                                                   4 pkts/ms
                                            R3                 C

           10 pkts/ms        10 pkts/ms
      B                 R2

For a moment, assume R3 uses priority queuing, with the BÝÑC path given priority over AÝÑC. If B’s
flow to C is fixed at 3 packets/ms, then A’s share of the R3–C link will be 1 packet/ms, and A’s bottleneck
will be at R3. However, if B’s total flow rate drops to 1 packet/ms, then the R3–C link will have 3 packets/ms
available, and the bottleneck for the A–C path will become the 2 packet/ms R1–R3 link.
Now let us switch to the more-realistic FIFO queuing at R3. If B’s flow is 3 packets/ms and A’s is 1
packet/ms, then the R3–C link will be saturated, but just barely: if each connection sticks to these rates, no
queue will develop at R3. However, it is no longer accurate to describe the 1 packet/ms as A’s share: if A
wishes to send more, it will begin to compete with B. At first, the queue at R3 will grow; eventually, it is
quite possible that B’s total flow rate might drop because B is losing to A in the competition for R3’s queue.
This latter effect is very real.
In general, if two connections share a bottleneck link, they are competing for the bandwidth of that link.
That bandwidth share, however, is precisely dictated by the queue share as of a short while before. R3’s
fixed rate of 4 packets/ms means one packet every 250 µs. If R3 has a queue of 100 packets, and in that
queue there are 37 packets from A and 63 packets from B, then over the next 25 ms (= 100 ˆ 250 µs) R3’s
traffic to C will consist of those 37 packets from A and the 63 from B. Thus the competition between A and
B for R3–C bandwidth is first fought as a competition for R3’s queue space. This is important enough to
state as as rule:
      Queue-Competition Rule: in the steady state, if a connection utilizes fraction 𝛼ď1 of a FIFO
      router’s queue, then that connection has a share of 𝛼 of the router’s total outbound bandwidth.
Below is a picture of R3’s queue and outbound link; the queue contains four packets from A and eight from
B. The link, too, contains packets in this same ratio; presumably packets from B are consistently arriving
twice as fast as packets from A.

      A
                  R3                                                           C
      B

In the steady state here, A and B will use four and eight packets, respectively, of R3’s queue capacity. As
acknowledgments return, each sender will replenish the queue accordingly. However, it is not in A’s long-
term interest to settle for a queue utilization at R3 of four packets; A may want to take steps that will lead in
this setting to a gradual increase of its queue share.
Although we started the discussion above with fixed packet-sending rates for A and B, in general this leads
to instability. If A and B’s combined rates add up to more than 4 packets/ms, R3’s queue will grow without
bound. It is much better to have A and B use sliding windows, and give them each fixed window sizes; in
this case, as we shall see, a stable equilibrium is soon reached. Any combination of window sizes is legal
regardless of the available bandwidth; the queue utilization (and, if necessary, the loss rate) will vary as
necessary to adapt to the actual bandwidth.
If there are several competing flows, then a given connection may have multiple bottlenecks, in the sense
that there are several routers on the path experiencing queue buildups. In the steady state, however, we can
still identify the link (or first link) with minimum bandwidth; we can call this link the bottleneck. Note that
the bottleneck link in this sense can change with the sender’s winsize and with competing traffic.

14.2.3 Example 3: competition and queue utilization

In the next diagram, the bottleneck R–C link has a normalized bandwidth of 1 packet per ms (or, more
abstractly, one packet per unit time). The bandwidths of the A–R and B–R links do not matter, except they
are greater than 1 packet per ms. Each link is labeled with the propagation delay, measured in the same
time unit as the bandwidth; the delay thus represents the number of packets the link can be transporting at
the same time, if sent at the bottleneck rate.

                     delay dA
     A

                                          delay d
                                   R                 C

     B               delay dB

The network layout here, with the shared R–C link as the bottleneck, is sometimes known as the singlebell
topology. A perhaps-more-common alternative is the dumbbell topology of 14.3 TCP Fairness with
Synchronized Losses, though the two are equivalent for our purposes.
Suppose A and B each send to C using sliding windows, each with fixed values of winsize wA and wB .
Suppose further that these winsize values are large enough to saturate the R–C link. How big will the queue
be at R? And how will the bandwidth divide between the AÝÑC and BÝÑC flows?
For the two-competing-connections example above, assume we have reached the steady state. Let 𝛼 denote
the fraction of the bandwidth that the AÝÑC connection receives, and let 𝛽 = 1-𝛼 denote the fraction that
the BÝÑC connection gets; because of our normalization choice for the R–C bandwidth, 𝛼 and 𝛽 also
represent respective throughputs. From the Queue-Competition Rule above, these bandwidth proportions
must agree with the queue proportions; if Q denotes the combined queue utilization of both connections,
then that queue will have about 𝛼Q packets from the AÝÑC flow and about 𝛽Q packets from the BÝÑC
flow.
We worked out the queue usage precisely in 6.3.2 RTT Calculations for a single flow; we derived there the
following:
      queue_usage = winsize – throughput ˆ RTTnoLoad
where we have here used “throughput” instead of “bandwidth” to emphasize that this is the dynamic share
rather than the physical transmission capacity.
This equation remains true for each separate flow in the present case, where the RTTnoLoad for the AÝÑC
connection is 2(dA +d) (the factor of 2 is to account for the round-trip) and the RTTnoLoad for the BÝÑC
connection is 2(dB +d). We thus have
      𝛼Q = wA – 2𝛼(dA +d)
      𝛽Q = wB – 2𝛽(dB +d)
or, alternatively,
      𝛼[Q + 2d + 2dA ] = wA
      𝛽[Q + 2d + 2dB ] = wB
If we add the first pair of equations above, we can obtain the combined queue utilization:
      Q = wA + wB – 2d – 2(𝛼dA +𝛽dB )
The last term here, 2(𝛼dA +𝛽dB ), represents the number of A’s packets in flight on the A–R link plus the
number of B’s packets in flight on the B–R link.

We can solve these equations exactly for 𝛼, 𝛽 and Q in terms of the known quantities, but the algebraic
solution is not particularly illuminating. Instead, we examine a few more-tractable special cases.

14.2.3.1 The equal-delays case

We consider first the special case of equal delays: dA = dB = d’. In this case the term (𝛼dA +𝛽dB ) simplifies
to d’, and thus we have Q = wA + wB – 2d – 2d’. Furthermore, if we divide corresponding sides of the
second pair of equations above, we get 𝛼/𝛽 = wA /wB ; that is, the bandwidth (and thus the queue utilization)
divides in exact accordance to the window-size proportions.
If, however, dA is larger than dB , then a greater fraction of the AÝÑC packets will be in transit, and so fewer
will be in the queue at R, and so 𝛼 will be somewhat smaller and 𝛽 somewhat larger.

14.2.3.2 The equal-windows case

If we assume equal winsize values instead, wA = wB = w, then we get
      𝛼/𝛽 = [Q + 2d + 2dB ] / [Q + 2d + 2dA ]
The bandwidth ratio here is biased against the larger of dA or dB . That is, if dA > dB , then more of A’s
packets will be in transit, and thus fewer will be in R’s queue, and so A will have a smaller fraction of the
the bandwidth. This bias is, however, not quite proportional: if we assume dA is double dB and dB = d =
Q/2, then 𝛼/𝛽 = 3/4, and A gets 3/7 of the bandwidth to B’s 4/7.
Still assuming wA = wB = w, let us decrease w to the point where the link is just saturated, but Q=0. At this
point 𝛼/𝛽 = [d+dB ]/[d +dA ]; that is, bandwidth divides according to the respective RTTnoLoad values. As w
rises, additional queue capacity is used and 𝛼/𝛽 will move closer to 1.

14.2.3.3 The fixed-wB case

Finally, let us consider what happens if wB is fixed at a large-enough value to create a queue at R from the
B–C traffic alone, while wA then increases from zero to a point much larger than wB . Denote the number
of B’s packets in R’s queue by QB ; with wA = 0 we have 𝛽=1 and Q = QB = wB – 2(dB +d) = throughput ˆ
(RTT – RTTnoLoad ).
As wA begins to increase from zero, the competition will decrease B’s throughput. We have 𝛼 =
wA /[Q+2d+2dA ]; small changes in wA will not lead to much change in Q, and even less in Q+2d+2dA ,
and so 𝛼 will initially be approximately proportional to wA .
For B’s part, increased competition from A (increased wA ) will always decrease B’s share of the bottleneck
R–C link; this link is saturated and every packet of A’s in transit there must take away one slot on that link
for a packet of B’s. This in turn means that B’s bandwidth 𝛽 must decrease as wA rises. As B’s bandwidth
decreases, QB = 𝛽Q = wB – 2𝛽(dB +d) must increase; another way to put this is as the transit capacity falls,
the queue utilization rises. For QB = 𝛽Q to increase while 𝛽 decreases, Q must be increasing faster than 𝛽
is decreasing.
Finally, we can conclude that as wA gets large and 𝛽Ñ0, the limiting value for B’s queue utilization QB at R
will be the entire windowful wB , up from its starting value (when wA =0) of wB – 2(dB +d). If dB +d had been

small relative to wB , then QB ’s increase will be modest, and it may be appropriate to consider QB relatively
constant.
We remark again that the formulas here are based on the assumption that the bottleneck bandwidth is one
packet per unit time; see exercise 0.5 for the necessary adjustments for conventional bandwidth measure-
ments.

14.2.3.4 The iterative solution

Given d, dA , dB , wA and wB , one way to solve for 𝛼, 𝛽 and Q is to proceed iteratively. Suppose an initial
x𝛼,𝛽y is given, as the respective fractions of packets in the queue at R. Over the next period of time, 𝛼
and 𝛽 must (by the Queue Rule) become the bandwidth ratios. If the A–C connection has bandwidth 𝛼
(recall that the R–C connection has bandwidth 1.0, in packets per unit time, so a bandwidth fraction of
𝛼 means an actual bandwidth of 𝛼), then the number of packets in bidirectional transit will be 2𝛼(dA +d),
and so the number of A–C packets in R’s queue will be QA = wA – 2𝛼(dA +d); similarly for QB . At that
point we will have 𝛼new = QA /(QA +QB ). Starting with an appropriate guess for 𝛼 and iterating 𝛼 Ñ 𝛼new a
few times, if the sequence converges then it will converge to the steady-state solution. Convergence is not
guaranteed, however, and is dependent on the initial guess for 𝛼. One guess that often leads to convergence
is wA /(wA +wB ).

14.2.4 Example 4: cross traffic and RTT variation

In the following diagram, let us consider what happens to the A–B traffic when the CÝÑD link ramps
up. Bandwidths shown are expressed as packets/ms and all queues are FIFO. (Because the bandwidth is not
equal to 1.0, we cannot apply the formulas of the previous section directly.) We will assume that propagation
delays are small enough that only an inconsequential number of packets from C to D can be simultaneously
in transit at the bottleneck rate of 5 packets/ms. All senders will use sliding windows.

                       C

                        100 pkts/ms

         100 pkts/ms        5 pkts/ms        2 pkts/ms        100 pkts/ms
     A                 R1               R2               R3                 B

                                         100 pkts/ms

                                        D

Let us suppose the A–B link is idle, and the CÝÑD connection begins sending with a window size chosen
so as to create a queue of 30 of C’s packets at R1 (if propagation delays are such that two packets can be in
transit each direction, we would achieve this with winsize=34).
Now imagine A begins sending. If A sends a single packet, is not shut out even though the R1–R2 link is
100% busy. A’s packet will simply have to wait at R1 behind the 30 packets from C; the waiting time in the

queue will be 30 packets ˜ (5 packets/ms) = 6 ms. If we change the winsize of the CÝÑD connection, the
delay for A’s packets will be directly proportional to the number of C’s packets in R1’s queue.
To most intents and purposes, the CÝÑD flow here has increased the RTT of the AÝÑB flow by 6 ms. As
long as A’s contribution to R1’s queue is small relative to C’s, the delay at R1 for A’s packets looks more
like propagation delay than bandwidth delay, because if A sends two back-to-back packets they will likely
be enqueued consecutively at R1 and thus be subject to a single 6 ms queuing delay. By varying the CÝÑD
window size, we can, within limits, increase or decrease the RTT for the AÝÑB flow.
Let us return to the fixed CÝÑD window size – denoted wC – chosen to yield a queue of 30 of C’s packets
at R1. As A increases its own window size from, say, 1 to 5, the CÝÑD throughput will decrease slightly,
but C’s contribution to R1’s queue will remain dominant.
As in the argument at the end of 14.2.3.3 The fixed-wB case, small propagation delays mean that wC will
not be much larger than 30. As wA climbs from zero to infinity, C’s contribution to R1’s queue rises from 30
to at most wC , and so the 6ms delay for AÝÑB packets remains relatively constant even as A’s winsize rises
to the point that A’s contribution to R1’s queue far outweighed C’s. (As we will argue in the next paragraphs,
this can actually happen only if the R2–R3 bandwidth is increased). Each packet from A arriving at R1 will,
on average, face 30 or so of C’s packets ahead of it, along with anywhere from many fewer to many more
of A’s packets.
If A’s window size is 1, its one packet at a time will wait 6 ms in the queue at R1. If A’s window size
is greater than 1 but remains small, so that A contributes only a small proportion of R1’s queue, then A’s
packets will wait only at R1. Initially, as A’s winsize increases, the queue at R1 grows but all other queues
remain empty.
However, if A’s winsize grows large enough that its packets consume 40% of R1’s queue in the steady state,
then this situation changes. At the point when A has 40% of R1’s queue, by the Queue Competition Rule it
will also have a 40% share of the R1–R2 link’s bandwidth, that is, 40% ˆ 5 = 2 packets/ms. Because the
R2–R3 link has a bandwidth of 2 packets/ms, the A–B throughput can never grow beyond this. If the C–D
contribution to R1’s queue is held constant at 30 packets, then this point is reached when A’s contribution to
R1’s queue is 20 packets.
Because A’s proportional contribution to R1’s queue cannot increase further, any additional increase to A’s
winsize must result in those packets now being enqueued at R2.
We have now reached a situation where A’s packets are queuing up at both R1 and at R2, contrary to the
single-sender principle that packets can queue at only one router. Note, however, that for any fixed value of
A’s winsize, a small-enough increase in A’s winsize will result in either that increase going entirely to R1’s
queue or entirely to R2’s queue. Specifically, if wA represents A’s winsize at the point when A has 40%
of R1’s queue (a little above 20 packets if propagation delays are small), then for winsize < wA any queue
growth will be at R1 while for winsize > wA any queue growth will be at R2. In a sense the bottleneck link
“switches” from R1–R2 to R2–R3 at the point winsize = wA .
In the graph below, A’s contribution to R1’s queue is plotted in green and A’s contribution to R2’s queue is
in blue. It may be instructive to compare this graph with the third graph in 6.3.3 Graphs at the Congestion
Knee, which illustrates a single connection with a single bottleneck.

    queue
    utilization
     R1
     R2

                                       WA
                             A's winsize

In Exercise 5.0 we consider some minor changes needed if propagation delay is not inconsequential.

14.2.5 Example 5: dynamic bottlenecks

The next example has two links offering potential competition to the AÝÑB flow: CÝÑD and EÝÑF.
Either of these could send traffic so as to throttle (or at least compete with) the AÝÑB traffic. Either of
these could choose a window size so as to build up a persistent queue at R1 or R3; a persistent queue of 20
packets would mean that AÝÑB traffic would wait 4 ms in the queue.

                        C                                    E

                         100 pkts/ms                          100 pkts/ms

          100 pkts/ms          5 pkts/ms         2 pkts/ms        5 pkts/ms        100 pkts/ms
    A                   R1                  R2               R3               R4                 B

                                             100 pkts/ms                       100 pkts/ms

                                            D                                 F

Despite situations like this, we will usually use the term “bottleneck link” as if it were a precisely defined
concept. In Examples 2, 3 and 4 above, a better term might be “competitive link”; for Example 5 we perhaps
should say “competitive links.

14.2.6 Packet Pairs

One approach for a sender to attempt to measure the physical bandwidth of the bottleneck link is the packet-
pairs technique: the sender repeatedly sends a pair of packets P1 and P2 to the receiver, one right after the
other. The receiver records the time difference between the arrivals.
Sooner or later, we would expect that P1 and P2 would arrive consecutively at the bottleneck router R, and
be put into the queue next to each other. They would then be sent one right after the other on the bottleneck

link; if T is the time difference in arrival at the far end of the link, the physical bandwidth is size(P1)/T. At
least some of the time, the packets will remain spaced by time T for the rest of their journey.
The theory is that the receiver can measure the different arrival-time differences for the different packet
pairs, and look for the minimum time difference. Often, this will be the time difference introduced by the
bandwidth delay on the bottleneck link, as in the previous paragraph, and so the ultimate receiver will be
able to infer that the bottleneck physical bandwidth is size(P1)/T.
Two things can mar this analysis. First, packets may be reordered; P2 might arrive before P1. Second, P1
and P2 can arrive together at the bottleneck router and be sent consecutively, but then, later in the network,
the two packets can arrive at a second router R2 with a (transient) queue large enough that P2 arrives while
P1 is in R2’s queue. If P1 and P2 are consecutive in R2’s queue, then the ultimate arrival-time difference is
likely to reflect R2’s (higher) outbound bandwidth rather than R’s.
Additional analysis of the problems with the packet-pair technique can be found in [VP97], along with a
proposal for an improved technique known as packet bunch mode.

14.3 TCP Fairness with Synchronized Losses

This brings us to the question of just what is a “fair” division of bandwidth. A starting place is to assume
that “fair” means “equal”, though, as we shall see below, the question does not end there.
For the moment, consider again two competing TCP connections: Connection 1 (in blue) from A to C and
Connection 2 (in green) from B to D, through the same bottleneck router R, and with the same RTT. The
router R will use tail-drop queuing.

      A                                C

             R                 R2

      B                                D

The layout illustrated here, with the shared link somewhere in the middle of each path, is sometimes known
as the dumbbell topology.
For the time being, we will also continue to assume the synchronized-loss hypothesis: that in any one
RTT either both connections experience a loss or neither does. (This assumption is suspect; we explore
it further in 14.3.3 TCP RTT bias and in 16.3 Two TCP Senders Competing). This was the model
reviewed previously in 13.1.1.1 A first look at fairness; we argued there that in any RTT without a loss, the
expression (cwnd1 - cwnd2 ) remained the same (both cwnds incremented by 1), while in any RTT with a
loss the expression (cwnd1 - cwnd2 ) decreased by a factor of 2 (both cwnds decreased by factors of 2).
Here is a graphical version of the same argument, as originally introduced in [CJ89]. We plot cwnd1 on
the x-axis and cwnd2 on the y-axis. An additive increase of both (in equal amounts) moves the point (x,y)
= (cwnd1 ,cwnd2 ) along the line parallel to the 45° line y=x; equal multiplicative decreases of both moves
the point (x,y) along a line straight back towards the origin. If the maximum network capacity is Max, then
a loss occurs whenever x+y exceeds Max, that is, the point (x,y) crosses the line x+y=Max.

                                Multiplicative increase/decrease
                                follows this line from/to origin

                                                 Additive-increase
                                                 follows this line

                                                                          cwnd1 = cwnd2

                initial state
  cwnd2

                                                                     cwnd1+cwnd2 = Max

                                                                                    Max
                                               cwnd1

Beginning at the initial state, additive increase moves the state at a 45° angle up to the line x+y=Max, in
small increments denoted by the small arrowheads. At this point a loss would occur, and the state jumps
back halfway towards the origin. The state then moves at 45° incrementally back to the line x+y=Max, and
continues to zigzag slowly towards the equal-shares line y=x.
Any attempt to increase cwnd faster than linear will mean that the increase phase is not parallel to the line
y=x, but in fact veers away from it. This will slow down the process of convergence to equal shares.
Finally, here is a timeline version of the argument. We will assume that the A–C path capacity, the B–D path
capacity and R’s queue size all add up to 24 packets, and that in any RTT in which cwnd1 + cwnd2 > 24,
both connections experience a packet loss. We also assume that, initially, the first connection has cwnd=20,
and the second has cwnd=1.

                                T    A–C       B–D
                                0    20        1
                                1    21        2
                                2    22        3        total cwnd is 25; packet loss
                                3    11        1
                                4    12        2
                                5    13        3
                                                           Continued on next page

14.3 TCP Fairness with Synchronized Losses                                                              451

                                Table 1 – continued from previous page
                            T     A–C B–D
                            6     14     4
                            7     15     5
                            8     16     6
                            9     17     7
                            10 18        8      second packet loss
                            11 9         4
                            12 10        5
                            13 11        6
                            14 12        7
                            15 13        8
                            16 14        9
                            17 15        10     third packet loss
                            18 7         5
                            19 8         6
                            20 9         7
                            21 10        8
                            22 11        9
                            23 12        10
                            24 13        11
                            25 14        12     fourth loss
                            26 7         6      cwnds are quite close
                            ...
                            32 13        12     loss
                            33 6         6      cwnds are equal

So far, fairness seems to be winning.

14.3.1 Example 2: Faster additive increase

Here is the same kind of timeline – again with the synchronized-loss hypothesis – but with the additive-
increase increment changed from 1 to 2 for the B–D connection (but not for A–C); both connections start
with cwnd=1. Again, we assume a loss occurs when cwnd1 + cwnd2 > 24

                          T     A–C     B–D
                          0     1       1
                          1     2       3
                          2     3       5
                          3     4       7
                          4     5       9
                          5     6       11
                          6     7       13
                          7     8       15
                          8     9       17      first packet loss
                          9     4       8
                          10    5       10
                          11    6       12
                          12    7       14
                          13    8       16
                          14    9       18      second loss
                          15    4       9       essentially where we were at T=9

The effect here is that the second connection’s average cwnd, and thus its throughput, is double that of
the first connection. Thus, changes to the additive-increase increment lead to very significant changes in
fairness. In general, an additive-increase value of 𝛼 increases throughput, relative to TCP Reno, by a factor
of 𝛼.

14.3.2 Example 3: Longer RTT

For the next example, we will return to standard TCP Reno, with an increase increment of 1. But here
we assume that the RTT of the A–C connection is double that of the B–D connection, perhaps because of
additional delay in the A–R link. The longer RTT means that the first connection sends packet flights only
when T is even. Here is the timeline, where we allow the first connection a hefty head-start. As before, we
assume a loss occurs when cwnd1 + cwnd2 > 24.

                     T    A–C     B–D
                     0    20      1
                     1            2
                     2    21      3
                     3            4
                     4    22      5       first loss
                     5            2
                     6    11      3
                     7            4
                     8    12      5
                     9            6
                     10   13      7
                     11           8
                                                              Continued on next page

14.3 TCP Fairness with Synchronized Losses                                                              453

                             Table 2 – continued from previous page
                     T    A–C B–D
                     12   14  9
                     13       10
                     14   15  11      second loss
                     15       5
                     16   7   6
                     17       7
                     18   8   8       B–D has caught up
                     20   9   10      from here on only even values for T shown
                     22   10  12
                     24   11  14      third loss
                     26   5   8       B–D is now ahead
                     28   6   10
                     30   7   12
                     32   8   14
                     34   9   16      fourth loss
                     35       8
                     36   4   9
                     38   5   11
                     40   6   13
                     42   7   15
                     44   8   17      fifth loss
                     45       8
                     46   4   9       exactly where we were at T=36

The interval 36ďT<46 represents the steady state here; the first connection’s average cwnd is 6 while the
second connection’s average is (8+9+. . . +16+17)/10 = 12.5. Worse, the first connection sends a windowful
only half as often. In the interval 36ďT<46 the first connection sends 4+5+6+7+8 = 30 packets; the second
connection sends 125. The cost of the first connection’s longer RTT is quadratic; in general, as we argue
more formally below, if the first connection has RTT = 𝜆 > 1 relative to the second’s, then its bandwidth will
be reduced by a factor of 1/𝜆2 .
Is this fair?
Early thinking was that there was something to fix here; see [F91] and [FJ92], §3.3 where the Constant-
Rate window-increase algorithm is discussed. A more recent attempt to address this problem is TCP Hybla,
[CF04]; discussed later in 15.12 TCP Hybla.
Alternatively, we may simply define TCP Reno’s bandwidth allocation as “fair”, at least in some contexts.
This approach is particularly common when the issue at hand is making sure other TCP implementations
– and non-TCP flows – compete for bandwidth in roughly the same way that TCP Reno does. While TCP
Reno’s strategy is now understood to be “greedy” in some respects, “fixing” it in the Internet at large is
generally recognized as a very difficult option.

14.3.3 TCP RTT bias

Let us consider more carefully the way TCP allocates bandwidth between two connections sharing a bottle-
neck link with relative RTTs of 1 and 𝜆>1. We claimed above that the slower connection’s bandwidth will
be reduced by a factor of 1/𝜆2 ; we will now show this under some assumptions. First, uncontroversially,
we will assume FIFO droptail queuing at the bottleneck router, and also that the network ceiling (and hence
cwnd at the point of loss) is “sufficiently” large. We will also assume, for simplicity, that the network
ceiling C is constant.
We need one more assumption: that most loss events are experienced by both connections. This is the
synchronized losses hypothesis, and is the most debatable; we will explore it further in the next section.
But first, here is the general argument with this assumption.
Let connection 1 be the faster connection, and assume a steady state has been reached. Both connections
experience loss when cwnd1 +cwnd2 ě C, because of the synchronized-loss hypothesis. Let c1 and c2
denote the respective window sizes at the point just before the loss. Both cwnd values are then halved.
Let N be the number of RTTs for connection 1 before the network ceiling is reached again. During this
time c1 increases by N; c2 increases by approximately N/𝜆 if N is reasonably large. Each of these increases
represents half the corresponding cwnd; we thus have c1 /2 = N and c2 /2 = N/𝜆. Taking ratios of respective
sides, we get c1 /c2 = N/(N/𝜆) = 𝜆, and from that we can solve to get c1 = C𝜆/(1+𝜆) and c2 = C/(1+𝜆).
To get the relative bandwidths, we have to count packets sent during the interval between losses. Both
connections have cwnd averaging about 3/4 of the maximum value; that is, the average cwnds are 3/4 c1
and 3/4 c2 respectively. Connection 1 has N RTTs and so sends about 3/4 c1 ˆN packets. Connection 2, with
its slower RTT, has only about N/𝜆 RTTs (again we use the assumption that N is reasonably large), and so
sends about 3/4 c2 ˆN/𝜆 packets. The ratio of these is c1 /(c2 /𝜆) = 𝜆2 . Connection 1 sends fraction 𝜆2 /(1+𝜆2 )
of the packets; connection 2 sends fraction 1/(1+𝜆2 ).

14.3.4 Synchronized-Loss Hypothesis

The synchronized-loss hypothesis is based on the idea that, if the queue is full, late-arriving packets from
each connection will find it so, and be dropped. Once the queue becomes full, in other words, it stays full
for long enough for each connection to experience a packet loss.
That said, it is certainly possible to come up with hypothetical situations where losses are not synchronized.
Recall that a TCP Reno connection’s cwnd is incremented by only 1 each RTT; losses generally occur when
this single extra packet generated by the increment to cwnd arrives to find a full queue. Generally speaking,
packets are leaving the queue about as fast as they are arriving; actual overfull-queue instants may be rare.
It is certainly conceivable that, at least some of the time, one connection would overflow the queue by one
packet, and halve its cwnd, in a short enough time interval that the other connection misses the queue-full
moment entirely. Alternatively, if queue overflows lead to effectively random selection of lost packets (as
would certainly be true for random-drop queuing, and might be true for tail-drop if there were sufficient
randomness in packet arrival times), then there is a finite probability that all the lost packets at a given loss
event come from the same connection.
The synchronized-loss hypothesis is still valid if either or both connection experiences more than one packet
loss, within a single RTT; the hypothesis fails only when one connection experiences no losses.
We will return to possible failure of the synchronized-loss hypothesis in 14.5.2 Unsynchronized TCP
Losses. In 16.3 Two TCP Senders Competing we will consider some TCP Reno simulations in which

14.3 TCP Fairness with Synchronized Losses                                                                  455

actual measurement does not entirely agree with the synchronized-loss model. Two problems will emerge.
The first is that when two connections compete in isolation, a form of synchronization known as phase
effects (16.3.4 Phase Effects) can introduce a persistent perhaps-unexpected bias. The second is that the
longer-RTT connection often does manage to miss out on the full-queue moment entirely, as discussed above
in the second paragraph of this section. This results in a larger cwnd than the synchronized-loss hypothesis
would predict.

14.3.5 Loss Synchronization

The synchronized-loss hypothesis assumes all losses are synchronized. There is another side to this phe-
nomenon that is an issue even if only some reasonable fraction of loss events are synchronized: synchronized
losses may represent a collective inefficiency in the use of bandwidth. In the immediate aftermath of a syn-
chronized loss, it is very likely that the bottleneck link will go underutilized, as (at least) two connections
using it have just cut their sending rate in half. Better utilization would be achieved if the loss events could
be staggered, so that at the point when connection 1 experiences a loss, connection 2 is only halfway to its
next loss. For an example, see exercise 18.0.
This loss synchronization is a very real effect on the Internet, even if losses are not necessarily all synchro-
nized. A major contributing factor to synchronization is the relatively slow response of all parties involved
to packet loss. In the diagram above at 14.3 TCP Fairness with Synchronized Losses, if A increments its
cwnd leading to an overflow at R, the A–R link is likely still full of packets, and R’s queue remains full,
and so there is a reasonable likelihood that sender B will also experience a loss, even if its cwnd was not
particularly high, simply because its packets arrived at the wrong instant. Congestion, unfortunately, takes
time to clear.

14.3.6 Extreme RTT Ratios

What happens to TCP fairness if one TCP connection has a 100-fold-larger RTT than another? The short
answer is that the shorter connection may get 10,000 times the throughput. The longer answer is that this
isn’t quite as easy to set up as one might imagine. For the arguments above, it is necessary for the two
connections to have a common bottleneck link:

              100 ms delay
      A

                                                    10 pkts/ms
                                                R                C
                                                    1 ms delay

                             B
                                 0.1 ms delay

In the diagram above, the A–C connection wants its cwnd to be about 200 ms ˆ 10 packets/ms = 2,000
packets; it is competing for the R–C link with the B–D connection which is happy with a cwnd of 22. If R’s
queue capacity is also about 20, then with most of the bandwidth the B–C connection will experience a loss
about every 20 RTTs, which is to say every 22 ms. If the A–C link shares even a modest fraction of those
losses, it is indeed in trouble.

However, the A–C cwnd cannot fall below 1.0; to test the 10,000-fold hypothesis taking this constraint into
account we would have to scale up the numbers on the B–C link so the transit capacity there was at least
10,000. This would mean a 400 Gbps R–C bandwidth, or else an unrealistically large A–R delay.
As a second issue, realistically the A–C link is much more likely to have its bottleneck somewhere in the
middle of its long path. In a typical real scenario along the lines of that diagrammed above, B, C and R are
all local to a site, and bandwidth of long-haul paths is almost always less than the local LAN bandwidth
within a site. If the A–R path has a 1 packet/ms bottleneck somewhere, then it may be less likely to be as
dramatically affected by B–C traffic.
A few actual simulations using the methods of 16.3 Two TCP Senders Competing resulted in an average
cwnd for the A–C connection of between 1 and 2, versus a B–C cwnd of 20-25, regardless of whether the
two links shared a bottleneck or if the A–C link had its bottleneck somewhere along the A–R path. This may
suggest that the A–C connection was indeed saved by the 1.0 cwnd minimum.

14.4 Notions of Fairness

There are several definitions for fair allocation of bandwidth among flows sharing a bottleneck link. One
is equal-shares fairness; another is what we might call TCP-Reno fairness: to divide the bandwidth the
way TCP Reno would. There are additional approaches to deciding what constitutes a fair allocation of
bandwidth.

14.4.1 Max-Min Fairness

A natural generalization of equal-shares fairness to the case where some flows may be capped is max-
min fairness, in which no flow bandwidth can be increased without decreasing some smaller flow rate.
Alternatively, we maximize the bandwidth of the smallest-capacity flow, and then, with that flow fixed,
maximize the flow with the next-smallest bandwidth, etc. A more intuitive explanation is that we distribute
bandwidth in tiny increments equally among the flows, until the bandwidth is exhausted (meaning we have
divided it equally), or one flow reaches its externally imposed bandwidth cap. At this point we continue
incrementing among the remaining flows; any time we encounter a flow’s external cap we are done with it.
As an example, consider the following, where we have connections A–D, B–D and C–D, and where the
A–R link has a bandwidth of 200 kbps and all other links are 1000 kbps. Starting from zero, we increment
the allocations of each of the three connections until we get to 200 kbps per connection, at which point the
A–D connection has maxed out the capacity of the A–R link. We then continue allocating the remaining
400 kbps equally between B–D and C–D, so they each end up with 400 kbps.

                 200 kbps
         A

                 1000 kbps           1000 kbps
         B                    R                  D

         C
                 1000 kbps

14.4 Notions of Fairness                                                                               457

As another example, known as the parking-lot topology, suppose we have the following network:

          A              B               C               D

There are four connections: one from A to D covering all three links, and three single-link connections A–B,
B–C and C–D. Each link has the same bandwidth. If bandwidth allocations are incrementally distributed
among the four connections, then the first point at which any link bandwidth is maxed out occurs when all
four connections each have 50% of the link bandwidth; max-min fairness here means that each connection
has an equal share.

14.4.2 Proportional Fairness

A bandwidth allocation of rates xr1 ,r2 ,. . . ,rN y for N connections satisfies proportional fairness if it is a
legal allocation of bandwidth, and for any other allocation xs1 ,s2 ,. . . ,sN y, the aggregate proportional change
satisfies
      (r1 –s1 )/s1 + (r2 –s2 )/s2 + . . . + (rN –sN )/sN < 0
Alternatively, proportional fairness means that the sum log(r1 )+log(r2 )+. . . +log(rN ) is minimized. If the
connections share only the bottleneck link, proportional fairness is achieved with equal shares. However,
consider the following two-stage parking-lot network:

         A               B               C

Suppose the A–B and B–C links have bandwidth 1 unit, and we have three connections A–B, B–C and A–C.
Then a proportionally fair solution is to give the A–C link a bandwidth of 1/3 and each of the A–B and B–C
links a bandwidth of 2/3 (so each link has a total bandwidth of 1). For any change ∆b in the bandwidth for
the A–C link, the A–B and B–C links each change by -∆b. Equilibrium is achieved at the point where a 1%
reduction in the A–C link results in two 0.5% increases, that is, the bandwidths are divided in proportion
1:2. Mathematically, if x is the throughput of the A–C connection, we are minimizing log(x) + 2log(1-x).
Proportional fairness partially addresses the problem of TCP Reno’s bias against long-RTT connections;
specifically, TCP’s bias here is still not proportionally fair, but TCP’s response is closer to proportional
fairness than it is to max-min fairness. See [HBT99].

14.5 TCP Reno loss rate versus cwnd

It turns out that we can express a connection’s average cwnd in terms of the packet loss rate, p, eg p =
10-4 = one packet lost in 10,000. The relationship comes by assuming that all packet losses are because
the network ceiling was reached. We will also assume that, when the network ceiling is reached, only one

packet is lost, although we can dispense with this by counting a “cluster” of related losses (within, say, one
RTT) as a single loss event.
Let C represent the network ceiling – so that when cwnd reaches C a packet loss occurs. While C is constant
only for a very stable network, C usually does not vary by much; we will assume here that it is constant.
Then cwnd varies between C/2 and C, with packet drops occurring whenever cwnd = C is reached. Let N
= C/2. Then between two consecutive packet loss events, that is, over one “tooth” of the TCP connection, a
total of N+(N+1)+ . . . +2N packets are sent in N+1 flights; this sum can be expressed algebraically as 3/2
N(N+1) » 1.5 N2 . The loss rate is thus one packet out of every 1.5 N2 , and the loss rate p is 1/(1.5 N2 ).
The average cwnd in this scenario is 3/2 N (that is, the average of N=cwndmin and 2N=cwndmax ). If we
let M = 3/2 N represent the average cwnd, cwndmean , we can express the above loss rate in terms of M: the
number of packets between losses is 2/3 M2 , and so p=3/2 M-2 .
Now let us solve this for M=cwndmean in terms of p; we get M2 = 3/2 p-1 and thus
      M = cwndmean = 1.225 p-1/2
where 1.225 is the square root of 3/2. Seen in this form, a given network loss rate sets the window size; this
loss rate is ultimately be tied to the network capacity. If we are interested in the maximum cwnd instead of
the mean, we multiply the above by 4/3.
From the above, the bandwidth available to a connection is now as follows (though RTT may not be con-
stant):
                                              ?
        bandwidth = cwnd/RTT = 1.225/(RTT ˆ p)
In [PFTK98] the authors consider a TCP Reno model that takes into account the measured frequency of
coarse timeouts (in addition to fast-recovery responses leading to cwnd halving), and develop a related
formula with additional terms.
As the bottleneck queue capacity increases, both cwnd and the number of packets between losses (1/p)
increase, connected as above. Once the queue is large enough that the bottleneck link is 100% utilized,
however, the bandwidth no longer increases.
Another way to view this formula is to recall that 1/p is the number of packets per tooth; that is, 1/p is
the tooth “area”. Squaring both sides, the formula says that the TCP Reno tooth area is proportional to
the square of the average tooth height (that is, to cwndmean ) as the network capacity increases (that is, as
cwndmean increases).

14.5.1 Irregular teeth

In the preceding, we assumed that all teeth were the same size. What if they are not? In [OKM96], this
problem was considered under the assumption that every packet faces the same (small) loss probability (and
so the intervals between packet losses are exponentially distributed). In this model, it turns out that the
above formula still holds except the constant changes from 1.225 to 1.309833.
To understand how irregular teeth lead to a bigger constant, imagine sending a large number K of packets
which encounter n losses. If the losses are regularly spaced, then the TCP graph will have n equally sized
teeth, each with K/n packets. But if the n losses are randomly distributed, some teeth will be larger and some
will be smaller. The average tooth height will be the same as in the regularly-spaced case (see exercise 13.0).
However, the number of packets in any one tooth is generally related to the square of the height of that tooth,

14.5 TCP Reno loss rate versus cwnd                                                                       459

and so larger teeth will count disproportionately more. Thus, the random distribution will have a higher total
number of packets delivered and thus a higher mean cwnd.
See also exercise 17.0, for a simple simulation that generates a numeric estimate for the constant 1.309833.
Note that losses at uniformly distributed random intervals may not be an ideal model for TCP either; in
the presence of congestion, loss events are far from statistical independence. In particular, immediately
following one loss another loss is unlikely to occur until the queue has time to fill up.

14.5.2 Unsynchronized TCP Losses

In 14.3.3 TCP RTT bias we considered a model in which all loss events are fully synchronized; that is,
whenever the queue becomes full, both TCP Reno connections always experience packet loss. In that model,
if RTT2 /RTT1 = 𝜆 then cwnd1 /cwnd2 = 𝜆 and bandwidth1 /bandwidth2 = 𝜆2 , where cwnd1 and cwnd2 are
the respective average values for cwnd.
What happens if loss events for two connections do not have such a neat one-to-one correspondence? We will
derive the ratio of loss events (or, more precisely, TCP loss responses) for connection 1 versus connection 2
in terms of the bandwidth and RTT ratios, without using the synchronized-loss hypothesis.
Note that we are comparing the total number of loss events (or loss responses) here – the total number of TCP
Reno teeth – over a large time interval, and not the relative per-packet loss probabilities. One connection
might have numerically more losses than a second connection but, by dint of a smaller RTT, send more
packets between its losses than the other connection and thus have fewer losses per packet.
Let losscount1 and losscount2 be the number of loss responses for each connection over a long time interval
T. For i=1 and i=2, the ith connection’s per-packet loss probability is pi = losscounti /(bandwidthi ˆ T) =
(losscounti ˆ RTTi )/(cwndi ˆ T). But by the result of 14.5 TCP Reno loss rate versus cwnd, we also have
            ?
cwndi = k/ pi , or pi = k2 /cwndi 2 . Equating, we get

      pi = k2 /cwndi 2 = (losscounti ˆ RTTi ) / (cwndi ˆ T)
and so
      losscounti = k2 T / (cwndi ˆ RTTi )
Dividing and canceling, we get
      losscount1 /losscount2 = (cwnd2 /cwnd1 ) ˆ (RTT2 /RTT1 )
We will make use of this in 16.4.2.2 Relative loss rates.
We can go just a little further with this: let 𝛾 denote the losscount ratio above:
      𝛾 = (cwnd2 /cwnd1 ) ˆ (RTT2 /RTT1 )
Therefore, as RTT2 /RTT1 = 𝜆, we must have cwnd2 /cwnd1 = 𝛾/𝜆 and thus
      bandwidth1 /bandwidth2 = (cwnd1 /cwnd2 ) ˆ (RTT2 /RTT1 ) = 𝜆2 /𝛾.
Note that if 𝛾=𝜆, that is, if the longer-RTT connection has fewer loss events in exact inverse proportion to
the RTT, then bandwidth1 /bandwidth2 = 𝜆 = RTT2 /RTT1 , and also cwnd1 /cwnd2 = 1.

14.6 TCP Friendliness

Suppose we are sending packets using a non-TCP real-time protocol. How are we to manage congestion? In
particular, how are we to manage congestion in a way that treats other connections – particularly TCP Reno
connections – fairly?
For example, suppose we are sending interactive audio data in a congested environment. Because of the
real-time nature of the data, we cannot wait for lost-packet recovery, and so must use UDP rather than TCP.
We might further suppose that we can modify the encoding so as to reduce the sending rate as necessary –
that is, that we are using adaptive encoding – but that we would prefer in the absence of congestion to keep
the sending rate at the high end. We might also want a relatively uniform rate of sending; the TCP sawtooth
leads to periodic variations in throughput that we may wish to avoid.
Our application may not be windows-based, but we can still monitor the number of packets it has in flight
on the network at any one time; if the packets are small, we can count bytes instead. We can use this count
instead of the TCP cwnd.
We will say that a given communications strategy is TCP Friendly if the number of packets on the network
at any one time is approximately equal to the TCP Reno cwndmean for the prevailing packet loss rate p. Note
that – assuming losses are independent events, which is definitely not quite right but which is often Close
Enough – in a long-enough time interval, all connections sharing a common bottleneck can be expected to
experience approximately the same packet loss rate.
The point of TCP Friendliness is to regulate the number of the non-Reno connection’s outstanding packets
in the presence of competition with TCP Reno, so as to achieve a degree of fairness. In the absence of
competition, the number of any connection’s outstanding packets will be bounded by the transit capacity
plus capacity of the bottleneck queue. Some non-Reno protocols (eg TCP Vegas, 15.6 TCP Vegas, or
constant-rate traffic, 14.6.2 RTP) may in the absence of competition have a loss rate of zero, simply
because they never overflow the queue.
Another way to approach TCP Friendliness is to start by defining “Reno Fairness” to be the bandwidth
allocations that TCP Reno assigns in the face of competition. TCP Friendliness then simply means that the
given non-Reno connection will get its Reno-Fair share – not more, not less.
We will return to TCP Friendliness in the context of general AIMD in 14.7 AIMD Revisited.

14.6.1 TFRC

TFRC, or TCP-Friendly Rate Control, RFC 3448, uses the loss rate experienced, p, and the formulas above
to calculate a sending rate. It then allows sending at that rate; that is, TFRC is rate-based rather than window-
based. As the loss rate increases, the sending rate is adjusted downwards, and so on. However, adjustments
are done more smoothly than with TCP, giving the application a more gradually changing transmission rate.
From RFC 5348:
      TFRC is designed to be reasonably fair when competing for bandwidth with TCP flows, where
      we call a flow “reasonably fair” if its sending rate is generally within a factor of two of the
      sending rate of a TCP flow under the same conditions. [emphasis added; a factor of two might
      not be considered “close enough” in some cases.]

14.6 TCP Friendliness                                                                                       461

The penalty of having smoother throughput than TCP while competing fairly for bandwidth is that TFRC
responds more slowly than TCP to changes in available bandwidth.
TFRC senders include in each packet a sequence number, a timestamp, and an estimated RTT.
The TFRC receiver is charged with sending back feedback packets, which serve as (partial) acknowledg-
ments, and also include a receiver-calculated value for the loss rate over the previous RTT. The response
packets also include information on the current actual RTT, which the sender can use to update its estimated
RTT. The TFRC receiver might send back only one such packet per RTT.
The actual response protocol has several parts, but if the loss rate increases, then the primary feedback
                                                                                               ?
mechanism is to calculate a new (lower) sending rate, using some variant of the cwnd = k/ p formula, and
then shift to that new rate. The rate would be cut in half only if the loss rate p quadrupled.
Newer versions of TFRC have a various features for responding more promptly to an unusually sudden
problem, but in normal use the calculated sending rate is used most of the time.

14.6.2 RTP

The Real-Time Protocol, or RTP, is sometimes (though not always) coupled with TFRC. RTP is a UDP-
based protocol for streaming time-sensitive data.
Some RTP features include:
    • The sender establishes a rate (rather than a window size) for sending packets
    • The receiver returns periodic summaries of loss rates
    • ACKs are relatively infrequent
    • RTP is suitable for multicast use; a very limited ACK rate is important when every packet sent might
      have hundreds of recipients
    • The sender adjusts its cwnd-equivalent up or down based on the loss rate and the TCP-friendly
              ?
      cwnd=k/ p rule
    • Usually some sort of “stability” rule is incorporated to avoid sudden changes in rate
As a common RTP example, a typical VoIP connection using a DS0 (64 kbps) rate might send one packet
every 20 ms, containing 160 bytes of voice data, plus headers.
For a combination of RTP and TFRC to be useful, the underlying application must be rate-adaptive, so that
the application can still function when the available rate is reduced. This is often not the case for simple
VoIP encodings; see 20.11.4 RTP and VoIP.
We will return to RTP in 20.11 Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP).
The UDP-based QUIC transport protocol (11.1.1 QUIC) uses a congestion-control mechanism compatible
with Cubic TCP (15.15 TCP CUBIC), which isn’t quite the same as TCP Reno. But QUIC could just as
easily have used TFRC to achieve TCP-Reno-friendliness.

14.6.3 DCCP Congestion Control

We saw DCCP earlier in 11.1.2 DCCP and 12.22.3 DCCP. DCCP also includes a set of congestion-
management “profiles”; a connection can choose the profile that best fits its needs. The two standard ones
are the TCP-Reno-like profile (RFC 4341) and the TFRC profile (RFC 4342).
In the Reno-like profile, every packet is acknowledged (though, as with TCP, ACKs may be sent on the
arrival of every other Data packet). Although DCCP ACKs are not cumulative, use of the TCP-SACK-like
ACK-vector format ensures that acknowledgments are received reliably except in extreme-loss situations.
The sender maintains cwnd much as a TCP Reno sender would. It is incremented by one for each RTT
with no loss, and halved in the event of packet loss. Because sliding windows is not used, cwnd does
not represent a window size. Instead, the sender maintains an Estimated FlightSize (13.4 TCP Reno and
Fast Recovery), which is the sender’s best guess at the number of outstanding packets. In RFC 4341 this
is referred to as the pipe value. The sender is then allowed to send additional packets as long as pipe <
cwnd.
The Reno-like profile also includes a slow start mechanism.
In the TFRC profile, an ACK is sent at least once per RTT. Because ACKs are sent less frequently, it may
occasionally be necessary for the sender to send an ACK of ACK.
As with TFRC generally, a DCCP sender using the TFRC profile has its rate limited, rather than its window
size.
DCCP provides a convenient programming framework for use of TFRC, complete with (at least in the Linux
world), a traditional socket interface. The developer does not have to deal with the TFRC rate calculations
directly.

14.7 AIMD Revisited

TCP Tahoe chose an increase increment of 1 on no losses, and a decrease factor of 1/2 otherwise.
Another approach to TCP Friendliness is to retain TCP’s additive-increase, multiplicative-decrease strategy,
but to change the numbers. Suppose we denote by AIMD(𝛼,𝛽) the strategy of incrementing the window size
by 𝛼 after a window of no losses, and multiplying the window size by (1-𝛽)<1 on loss (so 𝛽=0.1 means the
window is reduced by 10%). TCP Reno is thus AIMD(1,0.5).
Any AIMD(𝛼,𝛽) protocol also follows a sawtooth, where the slanted top to the tooth has slope 𝛼. All
combinations of 𝛼>0 and 0<𝛽<1 are possible. The dimensions of one tooth of the sawtooth are somewhat
constrained by 𝛼 and 𝛽. Let h be the maximum height of the tooth and let w be the width (as measured in
RTTs). Then, if the losses occur at regular intervals, the height of the tooth at the left (low) edge is (1-𝛽)h
and the total vertical difference is 𝛽h. This vertical difference must also be 𝛼w, and so we get 𝛼w = 𝛽h,
or h/w = 𝛼/𝛽; these values are labeled on the rightmost teeth in the diagram below. These equations mean
that the proportions of the tooth (h to w) are determined by 𝛼 and 𝛽. Finally, the mean height of the tooth is
(1-𝛽/2)h.
We are primarily interested in AIMD(𝛼,𝛽) cases which are TCP Friendly (14.6 TCP Friendliness). TCP
friendliness means that an AIMD(𝛼,𝛽) connection with the same loss rate as TCP Reno will have the same
mean cwnd. Each tooth of the sawtooth represents one loss. The number of packets sent per tooth is, using
h and w as in the previous paragraph, (1-𝛽/2)hw.

14.7 AIMD Revisited                                                                                       463

Geometrically, the number of packets sent per tooth is the area of the tooth, so two connections with the
same per-packet loss rate will have teeth with the same area. TCP Friendliness means that two connections
will have the same mean cwnd and thus the same average tooth height. If the teeth of two connections have
the same area and the same average height, they must have the same width (in RTTs), and thus that the rates
of loss per unit time must be equal, not just the rates of loss per number of packets.
The diagram below shows a TCP Reno tooth (blue) together with some unfriendly AIMD(𝛼,𝛽) teeth on the
left (red) and two friendly teeth on the right (green), the second friendly tooth is superimposed on the Reno
tooth.

                                                                                                w/2

                                                                                                  w=?h

                                                                         3
                                                                           w
                                                                         2
                                                                                           h
                                                                                   w
            Unfriendly                      Reno                     Friendly
                     AIMD teeth; Reno tooth has guide-lines showing midpoints

The additional dashed lines within the central Reno tooth demonstrate the Reno 1ˆ1ˆ2 proportions, and
show that the horizontal dashed line, representing cwndmean , is at height 3/2 w, where w is, as before, the
width.
In the rightmost green tooth, superimposed on the Reno tooth, we can see that h = (3/2)ˆw + (𝛼/2)ˆw. We
already know h = (𝛼/𝛽)ˆw; setting these expressions equal, canceling the w and multiplying by 2 we get
(3+𝛼) = 2𝛼/𝛽, or 𝛽 = 2𝛼/(3+𝛼). Solving for 𝛽 we get
      𝛼 = 3𝛽/(2-𝛽)
or 𝛼 » 1.5𝛽 for small 𝛽. As the reduction factor 1-𝛽 gets closer to 1, the protocol can remain TCP-friendly
by appropriately reducing 𝛼; eg AIMD(1/5, 1/8).
Having a small 𝛽 means that a connection does not have sudden bandwidth drops when losses occur; this can
be important for applications that rely on a regular rate of data transfer (such as voice). Such applications
are sometimes said to be slowly responsive, in contrast to TCP’s cwnd = cwnd/2 rapid response.

14.7.1 AIMD and Convergence to Fairness

While TCP-friendly AIMD(𝛼,𝛽) protocols will converge to fairness when competing with TCP Reno (with
equal RTTs), a consequence of decreasing 𝛽 is that fairness may take longer to arrive; here is an example.
We will assume, as above in 14.3.3 TCP RTT bias, that loss events for the two competing connections are
synchronized. Recall that for two same-RTT TCP Reno connections (that is, AIMD(𝛼,𝛽) where 𝛽=1/2),
if the initial difference in the connections’ respective cwnds is D, then D is reduced by half on each loss
event.

Now suppose we have two AIMD(𝛼,𝛽) connections with some other value of 𝛽, and again with a difference
D in their cwnd values. The two connections will each increase cwnd by 𝛼 each RTT, and so when losses
are not occurring D will remain constant. At loss events, D will be reduced by a factor of 1-𝛽. If 𝛽=1/4,
corresponding to 𝛼=3/7, then at each loss event D will be reduced only to 3/4 D, and the “half-life” of D
will be almost twice as large. The two connections will still converge to fairness as DÑ0, but it will take
twice as long.

14.8 Active Queue Management

Active Queue Management (AQM) means that routers take some active steps to manage their queues. The
primary goal of AQM is to reduce excessive queuing delays; cf 14.8.1 Bufferbloat. A secondary goal is
to improve the performance of TCP connections – which constitute the vast majority of Internet traffic –
through the router. By signaling to TCP connections that they should reduce cwnd, overall queuing delays
are also reduced.
Generally routers manage their queues either by marking packets or by dropping them. All routers drop
packets when there is no more space for new arrivals, but this falls into the category of active management
when packets are dropped before the queue has run completely out of space. Queue management can be
done at the congestion “knee”, when queues just start to build (and when marking is more appropriate), or
as the queue starts to become full and approaches the “cliff”.
Broadly speaking, the priority queuing and random drop mechanisms (14.1 A First Look At Queuing, above)
might be considered forms of AQM, at least if the goal was to manage the overall queue size. So might
fair queuing and hierarchical queuing (19 Queuing and Scheduling). The mechanisms most commonly
associated with the AQM category, though, are RED, below, and its successors, especially CoDel. For a
discussion of the potential benefits of fair queuing to queue management, see 19.6.1 Fair Queuing and
Bufferbloat.

14.8.1 Bufferbloat

As we saw in 13.7 TCP and Bottleneck Link Utilization, TCP Reno connections are happiest when the
queue capacity at the bottleneck router exceeds the bandwidth ˆ delay transit capacity. But it is easy to
get carried away here. The calculations of 13.7.1 TCP Queue Sizes suggested that an optimum backbone-
router buffer size for TCP Reno might be hundreds of megabytes. Because RAM is cheap, and because
more space is hard to say no to, queue sizes in the real world often tend to be at the larger end of the
scale. Excessive delay due to excessive queue capacity is known as bufferbloat. Of course, “excessive” is a
matter of perspective; if the only traffic you’re interested in is bulk TCP flows, large queues are good. But if
you’re interested in real-time traffic like voice and interactive video, or even simply in fast web-page loads,
bufferbloat becomes a problem. Large queues can also lead to delay variability, or jitter.
Backbone routers are one class of offender here, but not the only. Many residential routers have a queue
capacity several times the average bandwidth ˆ delay product, meaning that queuing delay potentially
becomes much larger than propagation delay. Even end-systems often have large queues; on Linux systems,
the default queue size can be several hundred packets.
All these delay-related issues do not play well with interactive traffic or real-time traffic (RFC 7567). As
a result, there are proposals for running routers with much smaller queues; see, for example, [WM05] and

14.8 Active Queue Management                                                                               465

[EGMR05]. This may reduce the bottleneck link utilization of a single TCP flow to 75%. However, with
multiple TCP flows having unsynchronized losses, the situation will often be much better.
Still, for router managers, deciding on a queue capacity can be a vexing issue. The CoDel algorithm, below,
offers great promise, but we start with some earlier strategies.

14.8.2 DECbit

In the congestion-avoidance technique proposed in [RJ90], routers encountering early signs of congestion
marked the packets they forwarded; senders used these markings to adjust their window size. The system
became known as DECbit in reference to the authors’ employer and was implemented in DECnet (closely
related to the OSI protocol suite), though apparently there was never a TCP/IP implementation. The idea
behind DECbit eventually made it into TCP/IP in the form of ECN, below, but while ECN – like TCP’s other
congestion responses – applies control near the congestion cliff, DECbit proposed introducing control when
congestion was still minimal, just above the congestion knee. DECbit was never a solution to bufferbloat;
in the DECbit era, memory was expensive and queue capacities were seldom excessive.
The DECbit mechanism allowed routers to set a designated “congestion bit”. This would be set in the data
packet being forwarded, but the status of this bit would be echoed back in the corresponding ACK (otherwise
the sender would never hear about the congestion).
DECbit routers defined “congestion” as an average queue size greater than 1.0; that is, congestion meant that
the connection was just past the “knee”. Routers would set the congestion bit whenever this average-queue
condition was met.
The target for DECbit senders would then be to have 50% of packets marked as “congested”. If fewer than
50% of packets were marked, cwnd would be incremented by 1; if more than 50% were marked, then cwnd
would be decreased by a factor of 0.875. Note this is very different from the TCP approach in that DECbit
begins marking packets at the congestion “knee” while TCP Reno responds only to packet losses which
occur at the “cliff”.
A consequence of this knee-based mechanism is that DECbit shoots for very limited queue utilization,
unlike TCP Reno. At a congested router, a DECbit connection would attempt to keep about 1.0 packets
in the router’s queue, while a TCP Reno connection might fill the remainder of the queue. Thus, DECbit
would in principle compete poorly with any connection where the sender ignored the marked packets and
simply tried to keep cwnd as large as possible. As we will see in 15.6 TCP Vegas, TCP Vegas also strives
for limited queue utilization; in 16.5 TCP Reno versus TCP Vegas we investigate through simulation how
fairly TCP Vegas competes with TCP Reno.

14.8.3 Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN)

ECN is the TCP/IP equivalent of DECbit, though the actual mechanics are quite different. The current
version is specified in RFC 3168, modifying an earlier version in RFC 2481. The IP header contains a
two-bit ECN field, consisting of the ECN-Capable Transport (ECT) bit and the Congestion Experienced
(CE) bit; the ECN field is shown in 7.1 The IPv4 Header. The ECT bit is set by a sender to indicate to
routers that it is able to use the ECN mechanism. (These are actually the older RFC 2481 names for the
bits, but they will serve our purposes here.) The TCP header contains an additional two bits: the ECN-Echo
bit (ECE) and the Congestion Window Reduced (CWR) bit; these are shown in the fourth row in 12.2 TCP
Header.

The original goal of ECN was to improve TCP throughput by eliminating most actual packet losses and the
resultant timeouts. Bufferbloat was, again, not at issue.

 ECN and Middleboxes

 In the early days of ECN, some non-ECN-aware firewalls responded to packets with the CWR or ECE bits
 set by dropping them and returning a spoofed RST packet to the sender. See RFC 3360 for details and a
 discussion of this nonstandard use of RST. This is a good example of how “middleboxes” are sometimes
 obstacles to protocol evolution; see 7.7.2 Middleboxes.

Routers set the CE bit in the IP header when they might otherwise drop the packet (or possibly when the
queue is at least half full, or in lieu of a RED drop, below). As in DECbit, receivers echo the CE status back
to the sender in the ECE bit of the next ACK; the reason for using the ECE bit is that this bit belongs to the
TCP header and thus the TCP layer can be assured of control of it.
TCP senders treat ACKs with the ECE bit set the same as if a loss occurred: cwnd is cut in half. Because
there is no actual loss, the arriving ACKs can still pace continued sliding-windows sending. The Fast
Recovery mechanism is not needed.
When the TCP sender has responded to an ECE bit (by halving cwnd), it sets the CWR bit. Once the receiver
has received a packet with the CE bit set in the IP layer, it sets the ECE bit in all subsequent ACKs until
it receives a data packet with the CWR bit set. This provides for reliable communication of the congestion
information, and helps the sender respond just once to multiple packet losses within a single windowful.
Note that the initial packet marking is done at the IP layer, but the generation of the marked ACK and the
sender response to marked packets is at the TCP layer (the same is true of DECbit though the layers have
different names).
Only a packet that would otherwise have been dropped has its CE bit set; the router does not mark all
waiting packets once its queue reaches a certain threshold. Any marked packet must, as usual, wait in the
queue for its turn to be forwarded. The sender finds out about the congestion after one full RTT, versus
one full RTT plus four packet transmission times for Fast Retransmit. A much earlier, “legacy” strategy
was to require routers, upon dropping a packet, to immediately send back to the sender an ICMP Source
Quench packet. This is a faster way (the fastest possible way) to notify a sender of a loss. It was never
widely implemented, however, and was officially deprecated by RFC 6633.
Because ECN congestion is treated the same way as packet drops, ECN competes fairly with TCP Reno.
RFC 3540 is a proposal (as of 2016 not yet official) to slightly amend the mechanism described above to
support detection of receivers who attempt to conceal evidence of congestion. A receiver would do this by
not setting the ECE bit in the ACK when a data packet arrives marked as having experienced congestion.
Such an unscrupulous (or incorrectly implemented) receiver may then gain a greater share of the bandwidth,
because its sender maintains a larger cwnd than it should. The amendment also detects erasure of the ECE
bit (or other ECN bits) by middleboxes.
The new strategy, known as the ECN nonce, treats the ECN bits ECT and CE as a single unit. The value
00 is used by non-ECN-aware senders, and the value 11 is used by routers as the congestion marker. ECN-
aware senders mark data packets by randomly choosing 10 (known as ECT(0)) or 01 (known as ECT(1)).
This choice encodes the nonce bit, with ECT(0) representing a nonce bit of 0 and ECT(1) representing 1;
the nonce bit can also be viewed as the value of the second ECN bit.

14.8 Active Queue Management                                                                             467

The receiver is now expected, in addition to setting the ECE bit, to also return the one-bit running sum of the
nonce bits in a new TCP-header bit called the nonce-sum (NS) bit, which immediately precedes the CRW
bit. This sum is over all data packets received since the previous packet loss or congestion-experienced
packet. The point of this is that if the receiver attempts to conceal congestion by leaving the ECE bit zero,
the receiver cannot properly set the NS bit, because it does not know which of ECT(0) or ECT(1) was used.
For each packet marked as experiencing congestion, the receiver has a 50% chance of guessing correctly,
but over time successful guessing becomes increasingly unlikely. If ECN-noncompliance is detected, the
sender must now stop using ECN, and may choose a smaller cwnd as a precaution.
Although we have described ECN as a mechanism implemented by routers, it can just as easily be imple-
mented by switches, and is available in many commercial switches.

14.8.4 RED

“Traditional” routers drop packets only when the queue is full; senders have no overt indication before
then that the cliff is looming. ECN improves this by informing TCP connections of the impending cliff so
they can reduce cwnd without actually losing packets. The idea behind Random Early Detection (RED)
routers, introduced in [FJ93], is that the router is allowed to drop an occasional packet much earlier, say
when the queue is less than half full. These early packet drops provide a signal to senders that they should
slow down; we will call them signaling losses. While packets are indeed lost, they are dropped in such
a manner that usually only one packet per windowful (per connection) will be lost. Classic TCP Reno, in
particular, behaves poorly with multiple losses per window and RED is able to avoid such multiple losses.
The primary goal of RED was, as with ECN, to improve TCP performance. Note that RED preceded ECN
by six years.
RED is, strictly speaking, a queuing discipline in the sense of 19.4 Queuing Disciplines; FIFO is another.
It is often more helpful, however, to think of RED as a technique that an otherwise-FIFO router can use to
improve the performance of TCP traffic through it.
Designing an early-drop algorithm is not trivial. A predecessor of RED known as Early Random Drop
(ERD) gateways simply introduced a small uniform drop probability p, eg p=0.01, once the queue had
reached a certain threshold. This addresses the TCP Reno issue reasonably well, except that dropping with
a uniform probability p leads to a surprisingly high rate of multiple drops in a cluster, or of long stretches
with no drops. More uniformity was needed, but drops at regular intervals are too uniform.
The actual RED algorithm does two things. First, the base drop probability – pbase – rises steadily from a
minimum queue threshold qmin to a maximum queue threshold qmax (these might be 40% and 80% respec-
tively of the absolute queue capacity); at the maximum threshold, the drop probability is still quite small.
The base probability pbase increases linearly in this range according to the following formula, where pmax is
the maximum RED-drop probability; the value for pmax proposed in [FJ93] was 0.02.
      pbase = pmax ˆ (avg_queuesize – qmin )/(qmax – qmin )
Second, as time passes after a RED drop, the actual drop probability pactual begins to rise, according to the
next formula:
      pactual = pbase / (1 – countˆpbase )
Here, count is the number of packets sent since the last RED drop. With count=0 we have pactual = pbase ,
but pactual rises from then on with a RED drop guaranteed within the next 1/pbase packets. This provides a
mechanism by which RED drops are uniformly enough spaced that it is unlikely two will occur in the same

window of the same connection, and yet random enough that it is unlikely that the RED drops will remain
synchronized with a single connection, thus targeting it unfairly.
A significant drawback to RED is that the choice of the various parameters is decidedly ad hoc. It is not clear
how to set them so that TCP connections with both small and large bandwidthˆdelay products are handled
appropriately, or even how to set them for a given output bandwidth. The probability pbase should, for
example, be roughly 1/winsize, but winsize for TCP connections can vary by several orders of magnitude.
RFC 2309, from 1998, recommended RED, but its successor RFC 7567 from 2015 has backed away from
this, recommending instead that an appropriate AQM strategy be implemented, but that the details should
be left to the discretion of the router manager.
In 20.8 RED with In and Out we will look at an application of RED to quality-of-service guarantees.

14.8.5 ADT

The paper [SKS06] proposes the Adaptive Drop-Tail algorithm, in which the maximum queue capacity is
adjusted at intervals (of perhaps 5 minutes) in order to maintain a specific desired link-utilization target
(perhaps 95%). At the end of each interval, the available queue capacity is increased or decreased (perhaps
by 5%) depending on whether the link utilization was under or over the target. ADT does not selectively drop
packets otherwise; if there is space for an arriving packet within the current queue capacity, it is accepted.
ADT does a good job adjusting the overall queue capacity to meet circumstances that change slowly; an
example might be the size of the user pool. However, ADT does not respond to short-term fluctuations. In
particular, it does not attempt to respond to fluctuations occurring within a single TCP Reno tooth. ADT
also does not maintain additional queue space for transient packet bursts.

14.8.6 CoDel

The CoDel queue-management algorithm (pronounced “coddle”) attempts, like RED, to use signaling losses
to encourage connections to reduce their queue utilization. This allows CoDel to maintain a large total queue
capacity, available to absorb bursts, while at the same time maintaining on average a much smaller level of
actual queue utilization. To achieve this, CoDel is able to distinguish between transient queue spikes and
“standing-queue” utilization, persisting over multiple RTTs; the canonical example of the latter is TCP
Reno’s queue buildup towards the right-hand edge of each sawtooth. Unlike RED, CoDel has essentially no
tunable parameters, and adapts to a wide range of bandwidths and traffic types. See [NJ12] and the Internet
Draft draft-ietf-aqm-codel-06. Reducing bufferbloat is an explict goal of CoDel.
CoDel measures the minimum value of queue utilization over a designated short time period known as
the Interval. The Interval is intended to be a little larger than most connection RTTnoLoad values; it is
typically 100 ms. Through this minimum-utilization statistic, CoDel will easily be able to detect a TCP Reno
connection’s queue-building phase, which except for short-RTT connections will last for many Intervals.
CoDel measures this queue utilization in terms of the time the packet spends in the queue (its “sojourn time”)
rather than the size of the queue in bytes. While these two measures are proportional at any one router, the
use of time rather than space means that the CoDel algorithm is independent of the outbound bandwidth,
and so does not need to be configured for that bandwidth.
CoDel’s target for the minimum queue utilization is typically 5% of the interval, or 5 ms, although 10%
is also reasonable. If the minimum utilization is smaller, no action is taken. If the minimum utilization

14.8 Active Queue Management                                                                              469

becomes larger, then CoDel enters its “dropping mode”, drops a packet, and begins scheduling additional
packet drops. This lasts until the minimum utilization is again below the target, and CoDel returns to its
“normal mode”.
Once dropping mode begins, the second drop is scheduled for one Interval after the first drop, though the
second drop may not occur if CoDel is able to return to normal mode. While CoDel remains in dropping
                                                                    ?            ?
mode, additional packet drops are scheduled after times of Interval/ 2, Interval/ 3, etc; that is, the dropping
                                 ?
rate accelerates in proportion to n until the minimum time packets spend in the queue is small enough again
that CoDel is able to return to normal mode.
If the traffic consists of a single TCP Reno connection, CoDel will drop one of its packets as soon as the
queue utilization hits 5%. That will cause cwnd to halve, most likely making even a second packet drop
unnecessary. If the connection’s RTT was approximately equal to the Interval, then its link utilization will
be the same as if the queue capacity was fixed at 5% of the transit capacity, or 79% (13.12 Exercises, 12.5).
However, if there are a modest number of unsynchronized TCP connections, the link-utilization rate climbs
to above 90% ([NJ12], figs 5 and 8).
If the traffic consists of several TCP Reno connections, a few drops should be all that are necessary to force
most of the connections to halve their cwnds, and thus greatly reduce their collective queue utilization.
However, even if the traffic consists of a single fixed-rate UDP connection, with too high a rate for the
bottleneck, CoDel still works. In this case it drops as many packets as it needs to in order to drive down the
queue utilization, and this cycle repeats as necessary. An additional feature of CoDel is that if the dropping
mode is re-entered quickly, the dropping rate picks up where it left off.
For an example application of CoDel, see 19.10.2 Limiting Delay.

14.9 The High-Bandwidth TCP Problem

The TCP Reno algorithm has a serious consequence for high-bandwidth connections: the cwnd needed
implies a very small – unrealistically small – packet-loss rate p. “Noise” losses (losses not due to congestion)
are not frequent but no longer negligible; these keep the window significantly smaller than it should be. The
following table, from RFC 3649, is based on an RTT of 0.1 seconds and a packet size of 1500 bytes, for
various throughputs. The cwnd values represent the bandwidthˆRTT products.

          TCP Throughput (Mbps)          RTTs between losses          cwnd     Packet Loss Rate P
          1                              5.5                          8.3      0.02
          10                             55                           83       0.0002
          100                            555                          833      2 ˆ 10-6
          1000                           5555                         8333     2 ˆ 10-8
          10,000                         55555                        83333    2 ˆ 10-10

Note the very small value of the loss probability needed to support 10 Gbps; this works out to a bit error rate
of less than 2 ˆ 10-14 . For fiber optic data links, alas, a physical bit error rate of 10-13 is often considered
acceptable; there is thus no way to support the window size of the final row above. (The use of error-
correcting codes on OTN links, 4.2.3 Optical Transport Network, can reduce the bit error rate to less than
10-15 .) Another source of “noise” losses are queue overflows within Ethernet switches; switches tend to
have much shorter queues than routers. At 10 Gbps, a switch is forwarding one packet every microsecond;
at that rate a burst does not have to last long to overrun the switch’s queue.

Here is a similar table, expressing cwnd in terms of the packet loss rate:

                        Packet Loss Rate P       cwnd        RTTs between losses
                        10-2                     12          8
                        10-3                     38          25
                        10-4                     120         80
                        10-5                     379         252
                        10-6                     1,200       800
                        10-7                     3,795       2,530
                        10-8                     12,000      8,000
                        10-9                     37,948      25,298
                        10-10                    120,000     80,000

The above two tables indicate that large window sizes require extremely small drop rates. This is the high-
bandwidth-TCP problem: how do we maintain a large window when a path has a large bandwidthˆdelay
product? The primary issue is that non-congestive (noise) packet losses bring the window size down, poten-
tially far below where it could be. A secondary issue is that, even if such random drops are not significant,
the increase of cwnd to a reasonable level can be quite slow. If the network ceiling were about 2,000 pack-
ets, then the normal sawtooth return to the ceiling after a loss would take 1,000 RTTs. This is slow, but the
sender would still average 75% throughput, as we saw in 13.7 TCP and Bottleneck Link Utilization. Per-
haps more seriously, if the network ceiling were to double to 4,000 packets due to decreases in competing
traffic, it would take the sender an additional 2,000 RTTs to reach the point where the link was saturated.
In the following diagram, the network ceiling and the ideal TCP sawtooth are shown in green. The ideal
TCP sawtooth should range between 50% and 100% of the ceiling; in the diagram, “noise” or non-congestive
losses occur at the red x’s, bringing down the throughput to a much lower average level.

cwnd

                                                     time
                                 TCP without (green) and with (red) random losses
               In this diagram, red random losses occur 3-4 times as often as green congestion losses

14.9 The High-Bandwidth TCP Problem                                                                     471

14.10 The Lossy-Link TCP Problem

Closely related to the high-bandwidth problem is the lossy-link problem, where one link on the path has a
relatively high non-congestive-loss rate; the classic example of such a link is Wi-Fi. If TCP is used on a
path with a 1.0% loss rate, then 14.5 TCP Reno loss rate versus cwnd indicates that the sender can expect
an average cwnd of only about 12, no matter how high the bandwidthˆdelay product is.
The only difference between the lossy-link problem and the high-bandwidth problem is one of scale; the
lossy-link problem involves unusually large values of p while the high-bandwidth problem involves cir-
cumstances where p is quite low but not low enough. For a given non-congestive loss rate p, if the
                                                   ?
bandwidthˆdelay product is much in excess of 1.22/ p then the sender will be unable to maintain a cwnd
close to the network ceiling.

14.11 The Satellite-Link TCP Problem

A third TCP problem, only partially related to the previous two, is that encountered by TCP users with very
long RTTs. The most dramatic example of this involves satellite Internet links (3.9.2 Satellite Internet).
Communication each way involves routing the signal through a satellite in geosynchronous orbit; a round
trip involves four up-or-down trips of ~36,000 km each and thus has a propagation delay of about 500ms.
If we take the per-user bandwidth to be 1 Mbps (satellite ISPs usually provide quite limited bandwidth,
though peak bandwidths can be higher), then the bandwidthˆdelay product is about 40 packets. This is not
especially high, even when typical queuing delays of another ~500ms are included, but the fact that it takes
many seconds to reach even a moderate cwnd is an annoyance for many applications. Most ISPs provide an
“acceleration” mechanism when they can identify a TCP connection as a file download; this usually involves
transferring the file over the satellite portion of the path using a proprietary protocol. However, this is not
much use to those using TCP connections that involve multiple bidirectional exchanges; eg those using VPN
connections.

14.12 Epilog

TCP Reno’s core congestion algorithm is based on algorithms in Jacobson and Karel’s 1988 paper [JK88],
now twenty-five years old. There are concerns both that TCP Reno uses too much bandwidth (the greediness
issue) and that it does not use enough (the high-bandwidth-TCP problem).
In the next chapter we consider alternative versions of TCP that attempt to solve some of the above problems
associated with TCP Reno.

14.13 Exercises

Exercises are given fractional (floating point) numbers, to allow for interpolation of new exercises. Exercise
2.5 is distinct, for example, from exercises 2.0 and 3.0. Exercises marked with a ♢ have solutions or hints
at 24.12 Solutions for Dynamics of TCP.
0.5. In the section 14.2.3 Example 3: competition and queue utilization, we derived the formula

Q = wA + wB – 2d – 2(𝛼dA +𝛽dB )

under the assumption that the bottleneck bandwidth was 1 packet per unit time. Give the formula when the
bottleneck bandwidth is r packets per unit time. Hint: the formula above will apply if we measure time in
units of 1/r; only the delays d, dA and dB need to be re-scaled to refer to “normal” time. A delay d measured
in “normal” time corresponds to a delay d1 = rˆd measured in 1/r units.
1.0. Consider the following network, where the bandwidths marked are all in packets/ms. C is sending to D
using sliding windows and A and B are idle.

              C

            100

A    100      R1     5       R2          100   B

                             100

                             D

Suppose the one-way propagation delay on the 100 packet/ms links is 1 ms, and the one-way propagation
delay on the R1–R2 link is 2 ms. The RTTnoLoad for the C–D path is thus about 8 ms, for a bandwidthˆdelay
product of 40 packets. If C uses winsize = 50, then the queue at R1 will have size 10.
Now suppose A starts sending to B using sliding windows, also with winsize = 50. What will be the size of
the queue at R1?
Hint: by symmetry, the queue will be equally divided between A’s packets and C’s, and A and C will each
see a throughput of 2.5 packets/ms. RTTnoLoad , however, does not change. The number of packets in transit
for each connection will be 2.5 packets/ms ˆ RTTnoLoad .
2.0. In the previous exercise, give the average number of data packets (not ACKs) in transit on each
individual link:

(a).♢ for the original case in which C is the only sender, with winsize = 50 (the only active links here are
C–R1, R1–R2 and R2–D).
(b). for the new case in which B is also sending, also with winsize = 50. In this case all links are active.

Each link will also have an equal number of ACK packets in transit in the reverse direction. Hint: since
winsize ě bandwidthˆdelay, packets are sent at the bottleneck rate.
2.5.♢ Consider the following network, with links labeled with one-way propagation delays in milliseconds
(so, ignoring bandwidth delay, A’s RTTnoLoad is 40 ms and B’s is 20 ms). The bottleneck link is R–D, with
a bandwidth of 6 packets/ms.

A          15

                         R       5   D

               B   5

Initially B sends to D using a winsize of 120, the bandwidthˆround-trip-delay product for the B–D path. A
then begins sending as well, increasing its winsize until its share of the bandwidth is 2 packets/ms.
What is A’s winsize at this point? How many packets do A and B each have in the queue at R?
It is perhaps easiest to solve this by repeated use of the observation that the number of packets in transit
on a connection is always equal to RTTnoLoad times the actual bandwidth received by that connection. The
algebraic methods of 14.2.3 Example 3: competition and queue utilization can also be used, but bandwidth
there was normalized to 1; all propagation delays given here would therefore need to be multiplied by 6.
3.0. Consider the C–D path from the diagram of 14.2.4 Example 4: cross traffic and RTT variation:

C     100     R1       5   R2     100     D

Link numbers are bandwidths in packets/ms. Assume C is the only sender.

(a).♢ Give propagation delays for the links C–R1 and R2–D so that there will be an average of 5 packets in
transit on the C–R1 and R2–D links, in each direction, if C uses a winsize sufficient to saturate the
bottleneck R1–R2 link.
(b). Give propagation delays for all three links so that, when C uses a winsize equal to the round-trip transit
capacity, there are 5 packets each way on the C–R1 link, 10 on the R1–R2 link, and 20 on the R2–D link.

3.5. Suppose we have the network layout below of 14.2.4 Example 4: cross traffic and RTT variation,
except that the R1–R2 bandwidth is 6 packets/ms and the R2–R3 bandwidth is 3 pkts/ms. The delays are as
shown, making the C–D RTTnoLoad 10 ms and the A–B RTTnoLoad 16 ms. A connects to B and C connects
to D.

(a).♢ Find window sizes wA and wC so that the A–B and C–D connections share the bottleneck R1–R2
bandwidth equally, and there is no queue.

(b). Show that increasing each of wA and wC by 30 packets leaves each connection with 30 packets in R1’s
queue – so the bandwidth is still shared equally – and none in R2’s. Hint: As in (a), the A–B bandwidth
cannot exceed 3 packets/ms, and C’s packets can only accumulate at R1. To show A cannot have less than
50% of the bandwidth, observe that, if this happened, then A can have no queue at R2 (because packets
now leave faster than they arrive), and so all of A’s extra packets must also queue at R1.

                      C                        Links A—R1, B—R1, R2—D, R3—B:
                                             1 ms propagation delay, 100 pkts/ms bandwidth

                           6 pkts/ms           3 pkts/ms
    A                R1                 R2                  R3                 B
                           3 ms delay          3 ms delay

                                        D

4.0. Suppose we have the network layout of 3.5 above. Suppose also that the A–B and C–D connections have
settled upon window sizes as in 3.5(b), so that each contributes 30 packets to R1’s queue. Each connection
thus has 50% of the R1–R2 bandwidth and there is no queue at R2.
. . . R2 will then be sending 3 packets/ms to R3 and so will have no queue.
Now A’s winsize is incremented by 10, initially, at least, leading to A contributing more than 50% of R1’s
queue. When the steady state is reached, how will these extra 10 packets be distributed between R1 and R2?
Hint: As A’s winsize increases, A’s overall throughput cannot rise due to the bandwidth restriction of the
R2–R3 link.
5.0. Suppose we have the network layout of exercise 3.5, but modified so that the round-trip C–D RTTnoLoad
is 5 ms. The round-trip A–B RTTnoLoad may be different.
The R1–R2 bandwidth is 6 packets/ms, so with A idle the C–D throughput is 6 packets/ms.

(a). Suppose that A and C have window sizes such that, with both transmitting, each has 30 packets in the
queue at R1. What is C’s winsize? Hint: C’s throughput is now 3 packets/ms.
(b). Now suppose C’s winsize, with A idle, is 60. In this case the C–D transit capacity would be 5 ms ˆ 6
packets/ms = 30 packets, and so C would have 60–30 = 30 packets in R1’s queue. A then begins sending,
with a winsize chosen so that A and C’s contributions to R1’s queue are equal; C’s winsize remains at 60.
What will be C’s (and thus A’s) queue usage at R1? Hint: find the transit capacity for a throughput of 3
packets/ms.
(c). Suppose the A–B RTTnoLoad is 10 ms. If C’s winsize is 60, find the winsize for A that makes A and C’s
contributions to R1’s queue equal.

6.0. One way to address the reduced bandwidth TCP Reno gives to long-RTT connections is for all connec-
tions to use an increase increment of RTT2 instead of 1; that is, everyone uses AIMD(RTT2 ,1/2) instead of
AIMD(1,1/2) (or AIMD(kˆRTT2 ,1/2), where k is an arbitrary scaling factor that applies to everyone).

(a). Construct a table in the style of of 14.3.2 Example 3: Longer RTT above, showing the result of two
connections using this strategy, where one connection has RTT = 1 and the other has RTT = 2. Start the
connections with cwnd=RTT2 , and assume a loss occurs when cwnd1 + cwnd2 > 24.

(b). Explain why this strategy might not be desirable if one connection is over a direct LAN with an RTT of
1 ms, while the second connection has a very long path and an RTT of 1.0 sec. (Hint: the cwnd-increment
value for the short-RTT connection would have to apply whether or not the long-RTT connection was
present.)

7.0. For each value 𝛼 or 𝛽 below, find the other value so that AIMD(𝛼,𝛽) is TCP-friendly.

(a). 𝛽 = 1/5
(b). 𝛽 = 2/9
(c). 𝛼 = 1/5

Then pick the pair that has the smallest 𝛼, and draw a sawtooth diagram that is approximately proportional:
𝛼 should be the slope of the linear increase, and 𝛽 should be the decrease fraction at the end of each tooth.
8.0. Suppose two TCP flows compete. The flows have the same RTT. The first flow uses AIMD(𝛼1 ,𝛽 1 )
and the second uses AIMD(𝛼2 ,𝛽 2 ); neither flow is necessarily TCP-Reno-friendly. The two connections,
however, compete fairly with one another; that is, they have the same average packet-loss rates. Show that
      𝛼1 /𝛽 1 = (2-𝛽 2 )/(2-𝛽 1 ) ˆ 𝛼2 /𝛽 2 .
Assume regular losses, and use the methods of 14.7 AIMD Revisited. Hint: first, apply the argument there
to show that the two flows’ teeth must have the same width w and same average height. The average height
is no longer 3w/2, but can still be expressed in terms of w, 𝛼 and 𝛽. Use a diagram to show that, for any
tooth, average_height = hˆ(1–𝛽/2), with h the right-edge height of the tooth. Then equate the two average
heights of the h1 /𝛽 1 and h2 /𝛽 2 teeth. Finally, use the 𝛼i w = 𝛽 i hi relationships to eliminate h1 and h2 .
8.5. Using the result of the previous exercise, show that AIMD(𝛼1 ,𝛽) is equivalent to (in the sense of
competing fairly with) AIMD(𝛼2 ,0.5), with 𝛼2 = 𝛼1 ˆ(2–𝛽)/3𝛽.
9.0. Suppose two 1 kB packets are sent as part of a packet-pair probe, and the minimum time measured
between arrivals is 5 ms. What is the estimated bottleneck bandwidth?
10.0. Consider the following three causes of a 1-second network delay between A and B. In all cases, assume
ACKs travel instantly from B back to A.
      (i) An intermediate router with a 1-second-per-packet bandwidth delay; all other bandwidth
      delays negligible
      (ii) An intermediate link with a 1-second propagation delay; all bandwidth delays negligible
      (iii) An intermediate router with a 100-ms-per-packet bandwidth delay, and a steadily
      replenished queue of 10 packets, from another source (as in the diagram in 14.2.4 Example 4:
      cross traffic and RTT variation).
(a). Suppose that, in each of these cases, the packet-pair technique (14.2.6 Packet Pairs) is used to measure
the bandwidth. Assuming no packet reordering, what is the minimum time interval we could expect in each
case?
(b). What would be the corresponding values of the measured bandwidths? (For purposes of bandwidth
measurement, you may assume that the “negligible” bandwidth delay in case (ii) is 0.01 sec.)

11.0. Consider again the three-link parking-lot network from 14.4.1 Max-Min Fairness:

         A             B            C            D

(a). Suppose we have two end-to-end connections, in addition to one single-link connection for each link.
Find the max-min-fair allocation.
(b). Suppose we have a single end-to-end connection, and one B–C and C–D connection, but two A–B
connections. Find the max-min-fair allocation.

12.0. Consider the two-link parking-lot network:

A          B          C

Suppose there are two A–C connections, one A–B connection and one A–C connection. Find the allocation
that is proportionally fair.
13.0. Suppose we use TCP Reno to send K packets over R RTT intervals. The transmission experiences n
not-necessarily-uniform loss events; the TCP cwnd graph thus has n sawtooth peaks of heights N1 through
Nn . At the start of the graph, cwnd = A, and at the end of the graph, cwnd = B. Show that the sum N1 + . . .
+ Nn is 2(R+A-B), and in particular the average tooth height is independent of the distribution of the loss
events.

                                                                                           R+A-B

                                                                       N4

                                               N3
                                                                         N4/2
                 N1                                                                   B
                             N2                     N3/2
                      N1/2
                              N2/2
      A

                                         R

13.5. Suppose the bandwidthˆdelay product for a network path is 1000 packets. The only traffic on the
path is from a single TCP Reno connection. For each of the following cases, find the average cwnd and the
approximate number of packets between losses (the reciprocal of the loss rate). Your answers, collectively,
should reflect the formula in 14.5 TCP Reno loss rate versus cwnd.

(a).♢ The bottleneck queue capacity is close to zero.
(b). The bottleneck queue capacity is 1000 packets.
(c). The bottleneck queue capacity is 3000 packets.

14.0. Suppose TCP Reno has regularly spaced sawtooth peaks of the same height, but the packet losses come
in pairs, with just enough separation that both losses in a pair are counted separately. N is large enough that
the spacing between the two losses is negligible. The net effect is that each large-scale tooth ranges from
                                                                                ?
height N/4 to N. As in 14.5 TCP Reno loss rate versus cwnd, cwndmean = K/ p for some constant K. Find
the constant. Hint: from the given information one can determine both cwndmean and the number of packets
sent in one tooth. The loss rate is p = 2/(number of packets sent in one tooth).

                             N

      N/4         3/4 N

15.0. As in the previous exercise, suppose a TCP transmission has large-scale teeth of height N. Between
each pair of consecutive large teeth, however, there are K-1 additional losses resulting in K-1 additional tiny
teeth; N is large enough that these tiny teeth can be ignored. A non-Reno variant of TCP is used, so that
between these tiny teeth cwnd is assumed not to be cut in half; during the course of these tiny teeth cwnd
does not change much at all. The large-scale tooth has width N/2 and height ranging from N/2 to N, and
                                                                 ?
there are K losses per large-scale tooth. Find the ratio cwnd/(1/ p), in terms of K. When K=1 your answer
should reduce to that derived in 14.5 TCP Reno loss rate versus cwnd.

                                 N

        N/2         N/2

                              K=4 shown

16.0. Suppose a TCP Reno tooth starts with cwnd = c, and contains N packets. Let w be the width of the
tooth, in RTTs as usual. Show that w = (c2 + 2N)1/2 – c. Hint: the maximum height of the tooth will be c+w,
and so the average height will be c + w/2. Find an equation relating c, w and N, and solve for w using the
quadratic formula.
16.5. Suppose we have a non-Reno implementation of TCP, in which the formula relating the cwnd c to the
time t, as measured in RTTs since the most recent loss event, is c = t2 (versus TCP Reno’s c = c0 + t). The
sawtooth then looks like the following:

The number of packets sent in a tooth of width T RTTs, which is the reciprocal of the loss rate p, is now
approximately kˆT3 (this may be accepted on faith, or shown by integrating t2 from 0 to T). The average

cwnd is therefore kˆT3 /T = kˆT2 .
Derive a formula expressing the average cwnd in terms of the loss rate p. Hint: the exponent for p should
be –2/3, versus –1/2 in the formula in 14.5 TCP Reno loss rate versus cwnd.
16.6. Using the TCP assumptions of exercise 16.5 above, cwnd is incremented by about 2t per each RTT.
Show that the cwnd increment rule can be expressed as
      cwnd += 𝛼cwnd1/2
and find the value of 𝛼.
16.7. Using the same TCP assumptions as in exercise 16.5 above, show that cwnd is still proportional to
p-2/3 , where p is the loss rate, assuming the following:
    • the top boundary of each tooth follows the curve cwnd = c(t) = t2 , as before.
    • each tooth has a right boundary at t=T and a left boundary at t=T1 , where c(T1 ) = 0.5ˆc(T).
(In the previous exercise we assumed, in effect, that T1 = 0 and that cwnd dropped to 0 after each loss event;
here we assume multiplicative decrease is in effect with 𝛽=1/2.) The number of packets sent in one tooth is
now kˆ(T3 – T1 3 ), and the mean cwnd is this divided by T–T1 .

                                                   h

                                         h/2
                       c(t) = t 2

                                    T1         T

Note that as the teeth here become higher, they become proportionately narrower. Hint: show T1 =
(0.5)0.5 ˆT, and then eliminate T1 from the above equations.
17.0. Suppose in a TCP Reno run each packet is equally likely to be lost; the number of packets N in each
tooth will therefore be distributed exponentially. That is, N = -k log(X), where X is a uniformly distributed
random number in the range 0<X<1 (k, which does not really matter here, is the mean interval between
losses). Write a simple program that simulates such a TCP Reno run. At the end of the simulation, output
                                                              ?
an estimate of the constant C in the formula cwndmean = C/ p. You should get a value of about 1.31, as in
the formula in 14.5.1 Irregular teeth.
Hint: There is no need to simulate packet transmissions; we simply create a series of teeth of random size,
and maintain running totals of the number of packets sent, the number of RTT intervals needed to send them,
and the number of loss events (that is, teeth). After each loss event (each tooth), we update:
    • total_packets += packets sent in this tooth
    • RTT_intervals += RTT intervals in this tooth
    • loss_events += 1 (one tooth = one loss event)
If a loss event marking the end of one tooth occurs at a specific value of cwnd, the next tooth begins at
height c = cwnd/2. If N is the random value for the number of packets in this tooth, then by the previous

exercise the tooth width in RTTs is w = (c2 + 2N)1/2 – c; the next peak (that is, loss event) therefore occurs
when cwnd = c+w. Update the totals as above and go on to the next tooth. It should be possible to run this
simulation for 1 million teeth in modest time.
18.0. Suppose two TCP connections have the same RTT and share a bottleneck link, for which there is
no other competition. The size of the bottleneck queue is negligible when compared to the bandwidth ˆ
RTTnoLoad product. Loss events occur at regular intervals.
In Exercise 12.0 of the previous chapter, you were to show that if losses are synchronized then the two
connections together will use 75% of the total bottleneck-link capacity
Now assume the two TCP connections have no losses in common, and, in fact, alternate losses at regular
intervals as in the following diagram.

     C

Both connections have a maximum cwnd of C. When Connection 1 experiences a loss, Connection 2 will
have cwnd = 75% of C, and vice-versa.

(a). What is the combined transit capacity of the paths, in terms of C? (Because the queue size is
negligible, the transit capacity is approximately the sum of the cwnds at the point of loss.)
(b). Find the bottleneck-link utilization. Hint: Again because the queue size is negligible, this is
approximately the ratio of the average total cwnd to the transit capacity of part (a). It should be at least
85%.

