BUILDING A DEBUGGER
Write a Native x64 Debugger from Scratch

by Sy Brand

no starch press®

San Francisco
BUILDING A DEBUGGER. Copyright © 2025 by Sy Brand.

All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage or retrieval system, without the prior
written permission of the copyright owner and the publisher.

First printing

29 28 27 26 25      12345

ISBN-13: 978-1-7185-0408-0 (print)

ISBN-13: 978-1-7185-0409-7 (ebook)

                    Published by No Starch Press®, Inc.
                    245 8th Street, San Francisco, CA 94103
                    phone: +1.415.863.9900
                    www.nostarch.com; info@nostarch.com

Publisher: William Pollock

Managing Editor: Jill Franklin

Production Manager: Sabrina Plomitallo-González
Production Editor: Miles Bond

Developmental Editor: Frances Saux

Cover Illustrator: Josh Kemble

Interior Design: Octopod Studios

Technical Reviewer: Peter Cawley

Copyeditor: George Hale

Proofreader: Rachel Head

Library of Congress Control Number: 2024048685

For customer service inquiries, please contact
info@nostarch.com. For information on distribution, bulk sales,
corporate sales, or translations: sales@nostarch.com. For
permission to translate this work: rights@nostarch.com. To
report counterfeit copies or piracy: counterfeit@nostarch.com.
The authorized representative in the EU for product safety and
compliance is EU Compliance Partner, Pärnu mnt. 139b-14,
11317 Tallinn, Estonia, hello@eucompliancepartner.com,
+3375690241.
No Starch Press and the No Starch Press iron logo are registered
trademarks of No Starch Press, Inc. Other product and company
names mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their
respective owners. Rather than use a trademark symbol with
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we are using the
names only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the
trademark.

The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis,
without warranty. While every precaution has been taken in
the preparation of this work, neither the author nor No Starch
Press, Inc. shall have any liability to any person or entity with
respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused
directly or indirectly by the information contained in it.
To everyone who has ever set a breakpoint in their code and
thought to themselves, “I wonder how that works, then?”
About the Author
Sy Brand is Microsoft’s C++ Developer Advocate. With more
than 10 years’ experience in developer tooling, they’ve worked
on profilers, compilers, language runtimes, standard libraries,
and, of course, debuggers. They’ve also contributed to the
standards for C++, DWARF, and HSA.

They graduated from the University of St. Andrews with a first-
class degree in computer science, where they specialized in
compiler implementation. Outside the world of technology, they
are a published poet, maker of experimental films and music,
activist, and parent to three cats and one entire human.
About the Technical Reviewer
Peter Cawley is an expert in x64 assembly, ELF files, linkers,
loaders, and low-level systems programming. He holds a first-
class degree in mathematics and computer science from
Oxford. After many enjoyable years writing C++ in the high-
frequency trading industry, he retired to a quiet corner of
Scotland with his wife and their cat. You can often find him
online as @corsix.
BRIEF CONTENTS
 1. Acknowledgments
 2. Introduction
 3. List of Abbreviations
 4. Chapter 1: Project Setup
 5. Chapter 2: Compilation and Computer Architecture
 6. Chapter 3: Attaching to a Process
 7. Chapter 4: Pipes, procfs, and Automated Testing
 8. Chapter 5: Registers
 9. Chapter 6: Testing Registers with x64 Assembly
10. Chapter 7: Software Breakpoints
11. Chapter 8: Memory and Disassembly
12. Chapter 9: Hardware Breakpoints and Watchpoints
13. Chapter 10: Signals and Syscalls
14. Chapter 11: Object Files
15. Chapter 12: Debug Information
16. Chapter 13: Line Tables
17. Chapter 14: Source-Level Breakpoints and Stepping
18. Chapter 15: Call Frame Information
19. Chapter 16: Stack Unwinding
20. Chapter 17: Shared Libraries
21. Chapter 18: Multithreading
22. Chapter 19: DWARF Expressions
23. Chapter 20: Variables and Types
24. Chapter 21: Expression Evaluation
25. Chapter 22: Advanced Topics
26. Appendix: Check Your Knowledge Answers
27. Glossary
28. Index
CONTENTS IN DETAIL
1. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
2. INTRODUCTION
3. What Is a Debugger?
4. What Will We Build?
  1. The Source Language
  2. Limitations
5. What’s in This Book?
6. The Target Platform
  1. For Windows Users
  2. For macOS Users
7. LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
8. 1
  PROJECT SETUP
  1. The Directory Structure
       1. Writing the Top-Level CMake File
       2. Building the libsdb Library
       3. Building the sdb Executable
  2. Making the Dependencies Accessible
  3. Dependency Management with vcpkg
  4. Testing
  5. Summary
9. 2
   COMPILATION AND COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE
    1. Compilation
        1. Encoding
        2. Debug Information
    2. Operating Systems and Debuggers
        1. Program Loading
        2. User Space vs. Kernel Space
        3. Virtual Memory
        4. Debug APIs
        5. Signals
    3. Computer Architecture
        1. Registers
        2. Program Counter
        3. Assembly and Instruction Encodings
        4. Endianness
        5. Stack Frames
    4. Summary
    5. Check Your Knowledge
10. 3
   ATTACHING TO A PROCESS
    1. Process Interaction
        1. fork and exec
        2. ptrace
    2. Launching and Attaching to Processes
        1. The main Function
        2. The attach Function
    3. Adding a User Interface
    4. Handling User Input
    5. Manual Testing
    6. Refactoring into a Library
        1. Creating a Process Type
        2. Implementing launch and attach
        3. Handling Errors
        4. Destructing Processes
        5. Resuming the Process
        6. Waiting on Signals
    7. Summary
    8. Check Your Knowledge
11. 4
   PIPES, PROCFS, AND AUTOMATED TESTING
    1. Test Cases
    2. Testing Process Launching
    3. Pipes for Inter-Process Communication
    4. The Linux procfs
    5. Testing Process Attaching
    6. Testing Process Resuming
    7. Summary
    8. Check Your Knowledge
    9. 5
        REGISTERS
  10. x64 Registers
        1. General Purpose
        2. Floating Point and Vector
        3. Debug
  11. Interactions with ptrace
  12. Describing Registers
        1. X-Macros
        2. Register Tables
  13. Register Interactions
        1. Reading
        2. Writing
        3. Troubleshooting
  14. Summary
  15. Check Your Knowledge
12. 6
   TESTING REGISTERS WITH X64 ASSEMBLY
    1. Why Test with Assembly?
    2. An x64 Assembly Primer
    3. Test Setup
    4. Issuing Syscalls
    5. printf
    6. General-Purpose Registers
    7. MMX
    8. SSE
    9. x87
  10. Register Reads
  11. Exposing Registers
        1. The Help Command
        2. Register Reading
        3. Register Writing
        4. Register Interactions
  12. Summary
  13. Check Your Knowledge
13. 7
   SOFTWARE BREAKPOINTS
    1. Hardware vs. Software Breakpoints
    2. Implementing Software Breakpoints
        1. Representing Locations
        2. Creating Sites
        3. Managing Sites
        4. Testing Site Management
        5. Enabling Breakpoints
        6. Disabling Breakpoints
    3. Adding Breakpoints to the Debugger
        1. Listing
        2. Setting
        3. Enabling, Disabling, and Deleting
        4. Providing Help
    4. Determining Where to Set Breakpoints
        1. Position-Independent Executables
        2. Breakpoint Tests
    5. Continuing
    6. Automated Testing
    7. Summary
    8. Check Your Knowledge
14. 8
   MEMORY AND DISASSEMBLY
    1. Memory Operations
        1. Reading and Writing
        2. Exposing Memory to the User
        3. Testing Memory Operations
    2. Disassembly
    3. Summary
    4. Check Your Knowledge
15. 9
   HARDWARE BREAKPOINTS AND WATCHPOINTS
    1. Debug Registers
    2. Implementing Hardware Breakpoints
        1. Tracking
        2. Setting
         3. Clearing
   3. Testing Hardware Breakpoints
   4. Watchpoints
         1. Exposing Watchpoints to the User
         2. Testing Watchpoints
   5. Summary
   6. Check Your Knowledge
16. 10
   SIGNALS AND SYSCALLS
   1. Signal Handlers
   2. Printing Stop Information
         1. Tracking Debug Register Assignments
         2. Tracking Watchpoint Values
         3. Displaying Stop Information
   3. Catchpoints
         1. Tracing Syscalls
         2. Exposing Syscall Catchpoints
   4. Testing Syscall Catchpoints
   5. Signal and Interrupt Internals
   6. Summary
   7. Check Your Knowledge
17. 11
   OBJECT FILES
   1. What Is an ELF?
         1. Sections and Segments
         2. File Structure
   2. ELF Header Parsing
   3. Section Header Parsing
   4. String Tables
         1. Getting Section Names
         2. Building a Section Map
         3. Parsing the General String Table
   5. File Addresses, File Offsets, and Virtual Addresses
   6. Parsing the Symbol Table
   7. Creating a Target Type
         1. Auxiliary Vectors
         2. Targets
   8. Testing
   9. Summary
  10. Check Your Knowledge
18. 12
   DEBUG INFORMATION
   1. An Introduction to DWARF
         1. DWARF Sections
         2. DIE Binary Encoding
   2. Fetching a Constants File
   3. Parsing Abbreviation Tables
         1. Integer Encoding
         2. Entry Structure
         3. The DWARF Cursor
         4. Extraction
   4. Parsing Compile Unit Headers
   5. Parsing DIEs
         1. Implementing Form Skipping
         2. Traversing the DIE Tree
   6. Reading Attributes
   7. Augmenting DIEs with Attribute Support
         1. Optimizing Child Iterators
         2. Extracting DIE Address Ranges
         3. Checking Offsets and Supporting Range Lists
   8. Augmenting the dwarf Type
         1. Retrieving DIE Names
         2. Indexing DIEs
   9. Testing the Parser
  10. Summary
  11. Check Your Knowledge
19. 13
   LINE TABLES
   1. Line Table Contents
   2. Interpreting the Line Table Program
         1. The Program Header
         2. The Abstract Machine
         3. The Program Instructions
   3. Retrieving Entries by Line or File Address
   4. DIE Line Attribute Helpers
   5. Testing the Interpreter
   6. Summary
   7. Check Your Knowledge
20. 14
   SOURCE-LEVEL BREAK POINTS AND STEPPING
   1. Function Inlining
   2. Retrieving Inlined Function Stacks
         1. Tracking Inlining
         2. Finding the Current Stack
   3. Source-Level Stepping
         1. Step In
         2. Step Over
         3. Step Out
         4. Exposing Stepping to the User
   4. Source-Level Breakpoints
         1. Expanding Breakpoint Sites
         2. Determining the Breakpoint Site Type
         3. Implementing Breakpoint Functions
         4. Creating Breakpoint Subtypes
         5. Creating Breakpoints
         6. Exposing Breakpoints to the User
   5. Printing Currently Executing Source Code
   6. Testing
         1. Breakpoints
         2. Stepping
   7. Summary
   8. Check Your Knowledge
21. 15
   CALL FRAME INFORMATION
   1. A Backtrace Example
   2. DWARF Call Frame Information
         1. Common Information Entries
         2. Frame Description Entries
   3. Parsing Common Information Entries
   4. Parsing Frame Description Entries
   5. Looking Up Frame Description Entries
         1. Parsing the EH Frame Header
         2. Searching the EH Frame Table
   6. Adding the Parsers to the Debugger
   7. Summary
   8. Check Your Knowledge
22. 16
   STACK UNWINDING
   1. Executing Call Frame Information
         1. Representing Rules
         2. Returning Registers
         3. Writing a Stack Unwinder
         4. Executing Instructions
   2. Executing Register Rules
   3. Unwinding the Stack
         1. Creating a Stack Frame Type
         2. Tracking and Manipulating Frames
         3. Understanding the Unwinding Algorithm
         4. Writing the Unwinding Function
   4. Exposing Stack Unwinding to the User
         1. Adding up and down Commands
         2. Reading Registers from Other Frames
         3. Printing the Backtrace
   5. Testing
   6. Summary
   7. Check Your Knowledge
23. 17
   SHARED LIBRARIES
   1. Program Loading
         1. Static Executables
         2. Dynamic Executables
   2. Loading Dependencies
         1. The .dynamic Section
         2. The Rendezvous Structure
   3. Relocations
         1. Global Offset Table
         2. Relocation Records
         3. Procedure Linkage Table
   4. Tracing Shared Library Loading
         1. Adding Breakpoint Hit Callbacks
         2. Locating the Rendezvous Structure
         3. Handling Multiple ELF Files
         4. Reading the Loaded Library List
   5. Testing
   6. Summary
   7. Check Your Knowledge
24. 18
   MULTITHREADING
   1. Threads on Linux
         1. The pthreads Library
         2. Race Conditions
         3. ptrace and the procfs
   2. Tracing Threads
         1. Trapping New Threads
         2. Identifying Thread Creation
         3. Representing Thread States
   3. Supporting Multithreaded Processes
   4. Multithreaded Signal Handling
         1. Updating the Signal Handling Function
         2. Stopping and Resuming Threads
         3. Cleaning Up Exited Threads
         4. Reporting Lifecycle Events
         5. Handling the Signals
   5. Tracing Threads in the Target
   6. Exposing Threads to the User
   7. Testing
   8. Summary
   9. Check Your Knowledge
25. 19
   DWARF EXPRESSIONS
   1. A Taxonomy of DWARF Expressions
         1. Single Location Descriptions
         2. Simple Location Descriptions
         3. Composite Location Descriptions
   2. Executing Simple Location Descriptions
         1. Defining Result Types
         2. Evaluating Expressions
         3. Performing Stack Operations
         4. Finding the Current Simple Location Description
         5. Handling Opcode Ranges
         6. Handling Individual Opcodes
         7. Performing Stack Operations
         8. Executing Dereferencing Instructions
         9. Pushing Specific Entities to the Stack
     10. Performing Arithmetic, Bitwise, and Relational
           Operations
     11. Executing Control Flow Instructions
     12. Executing Non-Address Location Types
     13. Handling Composite Locations
   3. Executing Location Lists
   4. Exposing Attributes to the User
   5. Augmenting the Stack Unwinder
   6. Reading Global Variables
         1. Reading DWARF Expression Results
         2. Indexing Global Variables
         3. Adding a Variable Lookup Interface
   7. Testing
   8. Summary
   9. Check Your Knowledge
26. 20
   VARIABLES AND TYPES
   1. Type DIEs
         1. Base Types
         2. Array Types
         3. Class and Union Types
         4. Member Pointer Types
   2. Storing Type Information
   3. Visualizing Typed Data
         1. Member Pointers
         2. Pointers
         3. Classes
         4. Arrays
         5. Base Types
   4. Finding Local Variables
   5. Resolving Indirect Names
   6. Exposing Variables to the User
   7. Testing
   8. Summary
   9. Check Your Knowledge
27. 21
   EXPRESSION EVALUATION
   1. Supporting Expression Evaluation
   2. Extending Name Lookup
   3. Parsing Arguments
         1. Representing Built-in Types
         2. Parsing a Single Argument
         3. Collecting All Arguments
   4. Overload Resolution
   5. Calling Conventions
         1. Classifying Parameters
         2. Passing Arguments
         3. Returning Values
   6. Calling Functions in the Debugger
         1. Performing Low-Level Inferior Calls
         2. Allocating Memory for Arguments
         3. Classifying Parameters
         4. Checking Call Triviality
         5. Identifiying Constructors and Destructors
         6. Checking for Unaligned Fields
         7. Implementing Argument Passing
         8. Reading Return Values
         9. Indexing Member Functions
   7. Performing High-Level Inferior Calls
   8. Evaluating Expressions
   9. Exposing Expression Evaluation to the User
  10. Testing the Evaluator
  11. Summary
  12. Check Your Knowledge
28. 22
   ADVANCED TOPICS
   1. Remote Debugging
   2. Development Tool Communication
         1. GDB Machine Interface
         2. Debug Adapter Protocol
     3. What You Should Use
   3. Thread-Local Storage
   4. Time-Travel Debugging
   5. Exception Catchpoints
   6. Non-Stop Mode
   7. Follow-Fork Mode
   8. Summary
29. APPENDIX: CHECK YOUR KNOWLEDGE ANSWERS
30. GLOSSARY
31. INDEX
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book would not exist without the work and support of
many people. Thanks to my editors, Frances Saux and Miles
Bond, for tirelessly editing out my Britishisms and propensity
for using the passive voice. Thanks also to my technical
reviewer, Peter Cawley, for his patience in working through this
mammoth book. Thanks to those in my life who have put up
with me talking about nothing other than book progress for the
past two years, especially Lizzie, Maren, and Quinn. Thanks to
Yoshua Wuyts for many conversations that helped shape parts
of the book. Thanks to Kyle Loveless for several corrections.
INTRODUCTION

Have you ever set a breakpoint on a line of code and wondered
how it worked, or printed the value of a variable and become
curious about how the debugger knew where to look for it in
memory? Or maybe you want to know what happens in the
depths of your computer when you attach to existing processes
and bend them to your will.

If so, this is the book for you. Building a Debugger will demystify
the black boxes that debuggers so often appear to be. It will
reveal how they function and walk you through building one of
your own, beginning from an empty folder on your filesystem
and ending with a functional tool that can step through your
programs, set breakpoints, read variables, and more. Along the
way, you’ll pick up a wealth of knowledge about Linux,
operating systems in general, and the low-level operations of
computer systems.

What Is a Debugger?

It all started with a moth. In 1947, a team at Harvard University
was working on the Harvard Mark II electromechanical
computer. This large machine weighed over 20 metric tons and
occupied more than 370 m2 of floor space.

On September 9, the team was diagnosing an issue with the
Mark II and traced it back to a rather unusual source: a moth
had gotten stuck in one of the electromagnetic relays on which
the machine was based, causing it to malfunction. After they
removed the minibeast, they taped it to a logbook with the
phrase “First actual case of a bug being found.” While computer
scientists had used the term “bug” before this incident, the poor
moth’s demise contributed to its widespread use in the lexicon.

Most of the time, however, we’re not looking for actual bugs in
our systems, so we don’t require a screwdriver and magnifying
glass to identify issues. Instead, we need a program that can
trace, manipulate, and visualize the state of a different program
running on our system. Such a program is called a debugger.

Developers typically use debuggers for tasks such as tracing the
control flow of their code as it runs, inspecting the values of
variables at various points of execution, halting the program at
predetermined locations, and executing functions inside the
running process.

In this book, we’re particularly concerned with debuggers for
compiled code that runs directly on your central processing
unit (CPU), written in a language like C, C++, Rust, or FORTRAN.
Debuggers for these programs need to interface directly with
the operating system and the underlying hardware, which can
lead us to some deep insights into how computers actually
work.
What Will We Build?

Over the course of this book, we’ll build a command line
debugger for native code. I’ll call the debugger sdb, for Sy’s
Debugger, but you can call yours whatever you like. (You might
want to avoid conflicting with the names of existing debuggers,
like GDB and LLDB, however.)

When we begin, the project will consist of a single executable,
sdb, which the user can interact with on the command line. As
we progress, we’ll build the majority of the debugger as a
library, libsdb, and then author a command line driver that uses
its functionality. This design will make it easier to write
automated tests for the code and enable you to develop
applications that interact with the debugger programmatically.

The Source Language

We’ll write the debugger’s source code in C++17. The techniques
I’ll teach you aren’t specific to C++, however, and you can
choose a different language if you’d like. While it’s easier to
handle some of the low-level machinery in a compiled language
like C, C++, or Rust, nothing will stop you from translating the
book’s code into a higher-level language like Python.
The code for sdb is available at
https://github.com/TartanLlama/sdb. Each chapter has its own
branch. For example, the code for Chapter 1 is available at
https://github.com/TartanLlama/sdb/tree/chapter-1.

The book assumes a basic understanding of C++. If you know
other C-like languages, you may be able to follow along without
much difficulty. To brush up on C++, I recommend the online
reference https://cppreference.com and C++ Crash Course (No
Starch Press, 2019) by Josh Lospinoso. I’ll also explain certain
advanced or modern features of C++ in textual asides.

Limitations

The debugger we’ll write in this book won’t be thread-safe.
We’ll assume that only one thread is using it, and I make no
guarantee that it will work if you try to use it in a
multithreaded context. I chose this design because making the
project thread-safe would require significantly more code
unrelated to the core activities of the debugger. Feel free to
make your debugger thread-safe on your own if you’d like.

What’s in This Book?
In each chapter, we’ll tackle a debugger feature, explore the
background necessary to understand how it works, and add
code to implement it:

  Chapter 1: Project Setup Walks you through setting up your
  environment for building the debugger.
  Chapter 2: Compilation and Computer Architecture
  Provides you with the theoretical knowledge you’ll need to
  work through the book, including information about user
  space and kernel space on Linux, the process of compilation,
  how the operating system loads programs, and more.
  Chapter 3: Attaching to a Process Walks you through
  launching and attaching to Linux processes and begins the
  implementation of the debugger library and command line
  driver.
  Chapter 4: Pipes, procfs, and Automated Testing
  Introduces methods for inter-process communication on
  Linux and using the process filesystem (procfs) to get
  information about processes on the system, and helps you
  begin an automated testing suite for the debugger.
  Chapter 5: Registers Details the hardware registers
  available on x64 systems, including general-purpose,
  floating-point, and debug registers, and how the debugger
  can interact with them.
Chapter 6: Testing Registers with x64 Assembly Gives you
an introduction to x64 assembly language and shows you
how to use it to test the hardware register functionality
implemented in the preceding chapter.
Chapter 7: Software Breakpoints Explains how software
breakpoints work on x64 systems and walks you through
adding support for them to the debugger.
Chapter 8: Memory and Disassembly Helps you add
features for reading and manipulating the memory of
running processes and disassembling the machine code that
is currently executing.
Chapter 9: Hardware Breakpoints and Watchpoints Helps
you add support for hardware breakpoints and memory
watchpoints to the debugger.
Chapter 10: Signals and Syscalls Deepens your
understanding of Unix signals and Linux syscalls and helps
you extend the functionality of the debugger to handle them.
Chapter 11: Object Files Introduces ELF, the object file
format for Linux, and walks you through writing a parser for
it.
Chapter 12: Debug Information Introduces the debug
information format for Linux object files and helps you
implement a parser for that format.
Chapter 13: Line Tables Describes how debug information
encodes the mapping between source code and machine code
and details writing a parser for this information.
Chapter 14: Source-Level Breakpoints and Stepping Helps
you use the debug information formats described in the
preceding chapters to implement breakpoints and code
stepping at the level of the source code rather than at the
machine code level.
Chapter 15: Call Frame Information Describes the format
that Linux uses for encoding the layout of the program call
stack and walks you through implementing a parser for it.
Chapter 16: Stack Unwinding Describes how to use the
parser created in the preceding chapter to implement a stack
unwinder that can generate program backtraces and restore
hardware registers to the values that they had before a
function call began.
Chapter 17: Shared Libraries Details how Linux systems
load and track shared libraries and helps you extend the
debugger to support debugging code that is loaded from a
shared library.
Chapter 18: Multithreading Describes how Linux uses
threads to support programs that execute multiple tasks at
the same time and helps you add support for debugging
multithreaded programs to the debugger.
  Chapter 19: DWARF Expressions Explores how DWARF
  expressions encode the locations of variables in a running
  program and walks you through extending the debug
  information parser to support them.
  Chapter 20: Variables and Types Covers the format for
  variable and type descriptions in debug information and
  helps you add basic support for visualizing variable contents
  in the debugger.
  Chapter 21: Expression Evaluation Walks you through
  writing a simple expression evaluation engine that allows
  debugger users to execute function calls inside the running
  process.
  Chapter 22: Advanced Topics Briefly describes some other
  debugger features you can research on your own if you want
  to further extend your debugger.

Most chapters conclude with a set of questions to test your
knowledge. You’ll find sample answers to these questions in the
book’s appendix.

The Target Platform

The debugger described in this book will target 64-bit x86 Linux
systems. I’ll use the term x64 throughout the book to refer to the
64-bit flavor of x86. I don’t make any assumptions about which
distribution you’re using; the provided code should work as
well on Ubuntu as it will on Fedora, Arch, or some Linux-from-
scratch monstrosity you built when you were bored.

I do assume that you have a C++ compiler, binutils, and a C++
build system like make installed. On Debian-based systems, you
can install all of these with apt install build-essential.

For Windows Users

If you’re on Windows, you’re best off installing the Windows
Subsystem for Linux (WSL). With this setup, you’ll be able to
develop your application from Windows and run it on Linux
almost seamlessly. The installation process for WSL is detailed
at https://aka.ms/wsl.

At the time of this writing, opening an elevated command
prompt (using “Run as administrator”) and executing wsl --install
will install all WSL components and Ubuntu.

For macOS Users

If you’re using an x64 macOS system, you can install a Linux
virtual machine or, if you want something more lightweight,
use a Docker container. To run a virtual machine, you could use
UTM, which you can find at https://mac.getutm.app. You can find
instructions on installing and using Docker at
https://www.docker.com.

If you’re using an ARM-based Mac, such as one with an M1 or
M2 chip, you’re in a more difficult position, as current x64
emulation technologies don’t provide sufficient support for the
code in this book. You could install an ARM-based Linux virtual
machine or Docker container and attempt to adapt the x64-
specific code for ARM, but you’d have to do independent
research on the available hardware registers and calling
conventions. If you don’t feel prepared to do this, I’d
recommend finding a secondhand x64 system and using that.
ABBREVIATIONS

ABI     application binary interface

ASLR    address space layout randomization

AVX     Advanced Vector Extensions

CFA     canonical frame address

CIE     common information entry

DAP     Debug Adapter Protocol

DIE     DWARF information entry

ELF     executable and linkable format

FDE     frame description entry

FPR     floating-point register

GDB     GNU debugger
GDB/MI    GDB machine interface

GDB RSP   GDB remote serial protocol

GOT       global offset table

GPR       general-purpose register

LSB       Linux Standard Base

LSM       Linux Security Module

NTFPOC    non-trivial for the purposes of calls

PGID      process group identifier

PID       process identifier

PIE       position-independent executable

PLT       procedure linkage table

RAII      resource acquisition is initialization
RAM        random access memory

SIMD       single instruction multiple data

SSE        Streaming SIMD Extensions

SYSV ABI   System V application binary interface

TGID       thread group identifier

TID        thread identifier

TLS        thread-local storage

vDSO       virtual dynamic shared object
