COMPILATION AND COMPUTER
ARCHITECTURE
    . . . for the buildings in this place are strange and cast with
    rainbows, like those who dwell here.
Debuggers need to interact with components of the system that
are as close to the hardware as you can reasonably get without
working on the implementation of the chips themselves.
Therefore, you’ll require an understanding of how some of
these components operate to be able to imbue your debugger
with the powers you wish it to have.
In particular, a debugger interfaces closely with a program’s
compiler, the operating system hosting the target process, and
aspects of the computer’s architecture. Each of these topics
alone could be the subject of an entire book, so we’ll focus on
the minimum you’ll need to know to get your debugger to work.

If you’re already familiar with the basics of compilers,
computer architecture, and operating systems, take a minute to
appreciate the wealth of knowledge you have accrued and
move on to the next chapter. By contrast, if you’re a beginner,
you may find this chapter to be dense with information and
want to revisit relevant sections as you encounter their uses in
the rest of the book.

Compilation

A compiler is a program that translates source code written in
one programming language into either binary code or another
programming language. In this book, we’ll focus on compilers
that generate binary code that runs directly on your CPU. This
type of binary code is also known as native code or machine
code. When we built the sdb.cpp source file into the sdb
executable, we used a compiler (most likely GCC or Clang). The
programs we debug with sdb will also have been generated by a
compiler.
Compilation is a lossy, or destructive, process. This means that,
generally speaking, it is impossible to reverse the process of
compilation; you can’t take a compiled executable and translate
it back into the source code that produced it. You may be able to
produce source code that does the same thing, but it will likely
be missing key elements of the original, such as comments and
human-readable names. While a human reader might care that
you called your variable database_transaction rather than
all_mimsy_were_the _borogoves, your CPU does not. As such, the

compiler may discard the name during the compilation process,
perhaps along with the fact that the variable existed in the first
place. Figure 2-1 shows an example of this loss.
Figure 2-1: Compilation is a lossy process.

As you can see, if we take some beautiful C++ source code and
compile it to machine code, we can later decompile it to a C++
representation. But notice how different it is from the original.
There are none of the nice variable names, the structure is hard
to understand, and we’ve lost the named function calls. We
can’t get from the machine code to the C++ used to produce it.

Encoding

When you run a compiler, you usually give it the name of a file
that exists on your filesystem. This file consists of bits and bytes,
1s and 0s, like any other file, but by interpreting this binary in a
particular way, the compiler can retrieve the text of some
source code written in your programming language of choice.

The structure that enables this interpretation is called the file’s
encoding, and it’s most likely UTF-8 or ASCII. At the end of the
day, text files are binary data, just like anything on your
computer. But if we understand how they are encoded, we can
read and manipulate them. Figure 2-2 shows an example of a
UTF-8-encoded file.
Hexidecimal representation on the left is labeled binary view; text view says This
file consists of bits and bytes, ones and zeros, like any other file.

Figure 2-2: All text files are represented in binary using a text encoding scheme.

The view on the left is the hexadecimal representation of the
bytes on disk. Given a definition of the UTF-8 encoding scheme,
we can interpret those bytes to retrieve the text they represent.

The output of a compiler is also a binary file, but it has a
different encoding than a text file. We often call these files
object files, and as magical as they may appear, they’re just like
text files; if we understand how they are encoded, we can read
and manipulate them.

On Linux systems, executable programs are encoded as
Executable and Linkable Format (ELF) files, which you’ll learn
about in Chapter 11. macOS uses a format called Mach-O, and
Windows uses one called Portable Executable (PE). While there
are many differences between these formats, they exist for a
common purpose: to hold the instructions generated by the
compiler along with the data that is necessary for the operating
system to load and execute them.

Debug Information
How is all of this information relevant to debuggers? I said
earlier that compilation is destructive, meaning we can’t
retrieve the source code from the machine code. Unfortunately,
this is exactly what we want a debugger to do. We want to know
which line of the source code we are executing, not where we
are in a blob of binary instructions, and we’re interested in the
value of the variable do_i_like_green_eggs_and_ham, not the memory
address 0xBABACACA.

Fortunately, compilers help us out here. When run with the
right set of compiler flags, they’ll add extra metadata to the
object file called debug information. Armed with this
information, we can take a binary instruction of machine code
back in time to when it was a beautiful line of text that could be
read by humans.

The debug information format used on Linux systems is DWARF
(a reference to the ELF file format; we’re all very funny) and
you’ll learn more about it in Chapter 12. DWARF and other
debug information formats provide a veritable gold mine of
details about the source code that was used to produce a given
object file, including:

  What compiler was used to produce the object file
  The paths to the source files used to compile the program
  The names of functions in the source file and where in
  memory the executable machine code for them will reside
  The names of variables and how to locate them while the
  program is running at any given point (variables may move
  around in memory, so it’s important to be able to track this)
  How the data types in the program are structured
  Which line of source code a given machine instruction
  corresponds to

If you’ve ever tried to debug a program and not been able to see
the source code that corresponds to it, or seen strange behavior
while stepping through it, this is likely because the debug
information wasn’t sufficient for the debugger to be able to
locate the source code or fully re-create how it relates to the
executable. This might be because the object file was compiled
without debug information, or because it was optimized and no
longer corresponds exactly to lines of code in the source.

In the next section, we’ll look at the parts of the operating
system that are relevant to debuggers.

Operating Systems and Debuggers

Debuggers need to be able to alter the execution of a running
process, retrieve information about that process, and be
notified of events that occur to report these to the user. The
operating system provides these facilities. In addition, you need
to understand some of the ways in which operating systems
load programs for execution and prevent processes from
interfering with one another.

Program Loading

I mentioned that an object file is a binary file encoded in some
known format. Somewhere in that object file are the
instructions that make up the program you have compiled;
these, too, are binary data in a special format. We’ll talk about
how these instructions are encoded in “Assembly and
Instruction Encodings” on page 20, but for now, you can
consider them amorphous blobs of data.

Somehow, when a user requests that a program be executed,
this blob of binary data needs to make it from the filesystem
into some place in the computer’s working memory (generally,
its random access memory, or RAM). The CPU then needs to be
told to run the instructions contained within. This process,
which is handled by the operating system, is known as program
loading.
When the operating system is tasked with loading a program, it
examines the metadata contained in the program’s ELF file to
understand what actions it needs to take and then sets up the
environment to allow this program to be loaded into memory
and run by hardware. Generally, this requires the following:

  Calculating how much memory this program requires and
  reserving that amount. This memory must hold the code for
  the program and all of its global variables. The program also
  needs memory for the stack, a structure that holds local
  variables and information about function calls while the
  program is running. You’ll learn more about the stack in
  “Stack Frames” on page 22.
  Setting up relevant protections on these areas of memory. For
  example, we usually don’t want to allow the execution of
  memory that is on the stack, as this can lead to security
  vulnerabilities.
  Copying the code and any preinitialized global variables
  from the object file into the reserved memory.
  Finding any dynamic libraries that the binary requires,
  loading them, and pointing the binary toward the place
  where these dependencies are loaded.
  Setting up registers, command line arguments, and
  environment variables.
  Jumping to the program’s entry point and letting it continue
  on its merry way.

Some of these operations are special, privileged operations; you
couldn’t write a program yourself that did them. For example,
you couldn’t arbitrarily modify the registers of another process,
as these privileged operations must be implemented in a special
part of the operating system known as the kernel.

User Space vs. Kernel Space

Unless you happen to be a kernel engineer (in which case, why
are you reading this chapter?), the programs you write will
execute in user space. Programs in user space are restricted; for
example, they can’t read arbitrary locations in memory or write
wherever they please on disk. These restrictions protect you
from malicious programs and from your own mistakes. (I sleep
much better at night knowing that I can’t irrevocably destroy a
computer by accidentally writing past the end of an array.)

But without access to the filesystem or the ability to allocate
memory, it’s quite difficult to write useful programs.
Fortunately, the operating system supplies a way for user-space
programs to make requests to the kernel. These are called
system calls (syscalls). You may have already encountered some
of these, like open for opening files, and you’ll meet several more
while writing the debugger. Figure 2-3 shows how syscalls
provide user-space programs with a way to communicate with
kernel space.

User space programs connect to system call interface, which connects to kernel,
device drivers, and then hardware. The central three components are labeled kernel
space.

Figure 2-3: The separation of user space and kernel space

User-space programs, like GCC, Visual Studio (VS) Code, and Cat
Petter 3000, cannot access the kernel, device drivers, or
hardware directly. Instead, they make syscalls that provide
controlled access to certain kernel operations.

Another way in which the operating system protects against
badly behaved processes is by lying to you about memory.

Virtual Memory

If you’ve ever printed the value of a pointer in C or C++, you’ve
likely seen some hexadecimal value that looks like 0xBA5EBA11. This
number identifies the location of a byte in memory. The byte
before it in memory lives at 0xBA5EBA10, and the byte after it lives
at 0xBA5EBA12.

However, if you ran two user-space programs and both of them
wrote to 0xBA5EBA11, they would actually be writing to different
physical locations in memory. This is because memory accesses
made from user space don’t go straight to RAM. Instead, the
operating system maintains a mapping of which parts of
memory it has allocated to each process and, with the help of
the hardware, translates memory accesses accordingly. Figure
2-4 shows a visualization of this translation.
Figure 2-4: Virtual memory translation
The operating system might allocate different blocks of virtual
memory for a given process to completely different areas of
physical memory. Their physical address space may even be
interrupted by blocks of memory allocated to a different
process. This not only helps protect processes from each other
but also allows the operating system to pretend the computer
has more memory than it actually does, as the real storage for a
given virtual memory address might live on disk and be read
into RAM only when requested. Sneaky.

If this is the case, how can programs read memory from
another process? The answer, once again, involves syscalls.

Debug APIs

Modern operating systems provide syscalls to carry out
common debugger tasks. These aren’t high-level operations like
“set a breakpoint on line 431 of cat_petter.cpp.” They’re close-to-
the-hardware activities like “read memory location 0xF005BA11.”

The main debug syscall provided by Linux and macOS to carry
out these low-level jobs is ptrace, and we’ll be using it throughout
our debugger to make requests to the operating system.
Windows instead exposes different functions for each job a
debugger might want to carry out. These functions have
descriptive names, like ReadProcessMemory and DebugBreakProcess.

We’ll look at how ptrace works under the hood in Chapter 10. In
the meantime, let’s examine another way for processes to
communicate with one another: signals.

Signals

In Unix-like systems, signals are simple messages that processes
can exchange to trigger specific behaviors, like halting a process
or telling it that a network connection was interrupted.

UNIX VS. LINUX VS. POSIX

Unix, Linux, and POSIX are related technologies, but they’re not
the same. Unix is a family of operating systems. First released in
1971 for the PDP-11 minicomputer, it proved incredibly
influential, inspiring a slew of “Unix-like” operating systems
that follow similar design principles and provide suites of
similar programs for interacting with the system.

Linux is a family of Unix-like operating systems that use the
Linux kernel. POSIX is a family of standards that define
common services and utilities for Unix-like operating systems to
allow them to interoperate. Some examples of these are signals,
process creation facilities, and filesystem operations.

Signals consist of just an integer identifier with an associated
name and meaning. You can run kill -l at a command line to
print out the list of signals available on your machine and their
names. For me, this prints the following:

   1) SIGHUP       2) SIGINT       3) SIGQUIT      4
   6) SIGABRT      7) SIGBUS       8) SIGFPE       9
   11) SIGSEGV     12) SIGUSR2     13) SIGPIPE
   16) SIGSTKFLT   17) SIGCHLD     18) SIGCONT
   21) SIGTTIN     22) SIGTTOU     23) SIGURG      2
   26) SIGVTALRM   27) SIGPROF     28) SIGWINCH    2
   31) SIGSYS      34) SIGRTMIN    35) SIGRTMIN+1 3
   38) SIGRTMIN+4 39) SIGRTMIN+5 40) SIGRTMIN+6 4
   43) SIGRTMIN+9 44) SIGRTMIN+10 45) SIGRTMIN+11 4
   48) SIGRTMIN+14 49) SIGRTMIN+15 50) SIGRTMAX-14 5
   53) SIGRTMAX-11 54) SIGRTMAX-10 55) SIGRTMAX-9 5
   58) SIGRTMAX-6 59) SIGRTMAX-5 60) SIGRTMAX-4 6
   63) SIGRTMAX-1 64) SIGRTMAX

You may be familiar with some of these signals already. For
example, a process receives SIGSEGV when it attempts to read a
virtual memory address that it’s not allowed to and SIGINT when
a user presses CTRL-C at a command line to terminate it. We’ll
use a handful of these signals over the course of the book, and
I’ll explain what they do as we come to them.

Signals may originate from another user-space process or from
the kernel. A program can install a signal handler that calls
some function when a specific signal is received. For example,
SIGTERM terminates a process while allowing it to clean up any

resources (such as file handles and database transactions). A
process could install a SIGTERM handler that does the cleaning up
before exiting.

Signals sent by the kernel will often result from hardware
interrupts. When a process reads memory it’s not supposed to,
tries to execute an invalid instruction, or performs some other
operation that isn’t allowed, the hardware notifies the
operating system by calling interrupt handlers, which in turn
may send signals to the offending process. Interrupt handlers
are kind of like signal handlers, but they’re set up in special
regions of memory and interact directly with the hardware.
You’ll learn more about these in Chapter 10.

To build a debugger, you also need a basic understanding of
computer architecture. We’ll take a look at that next.
Computer Architecture

Because debuggers interact with the raw memory of processes
and must map hardware concepts to source code, you should
understand how a program executes at the CPU level, starting
with memory.

Registers

As debugger engineers, we’re interested in two types of
memory: virtual memory, which we’ve already discussed, and
registers. Registers are very small regions of memory that are
very fast to access. If the hard disk is like a huge, hulking
behemoth and RAM is like a human with an average running
speed, then registers are like Speedy Gonzales: small and very
fast. Registers are around 100 times faster to access than RAM,
and x64 has more than 100 registers, each with its own
purpose. You’ll learn about these in Chapter 5. Some of the
common purposes of registers are:

  To hold function arguments and return values
  To hold local variables
  To give information about the status of the CPU
  To keep track of the instruction currently being executed
The register used to keep track of the current instruction is
called the program counter or instruction pointer.

Program Counter

Machine code is nothing more than bytes that live in memory,
and the program counter is just a pointer to the place in
memory where the current instruction is located. When this
instruction is executed, the program counter usually moves to
the next instruction in memory. If the instruction is a function
call or some instance of control flow (such as instructions
resulting from an if statement), then the program counter
might jump to a different part of memory so it can access the
new code to be executed.

Assembly and Instruction Encodings

You might be wondering, if machine code is nothing more than
bytes in memory, how does the CPU understand what they
mean? For this purpose, the CPU has an instruction encoding
that specifies how these bytes should be interpreted. Instruction
encoding schemes can get very complicated (especially on x64),
but in essence, the encoding for a given instruction specifies the
following:
  What operation should be carried out, known as the opcode
  What data the operation should be executed on, known as
  the operands

Let’s look at an example instruction from a computer
architecture with a far simpler encoding scheme than x64: the
6502 processor used in BBC Micro computers. Here are a couple
of instructions written in 6502 assembly language:

   LDA        #1
   ADC        #2

Assembly language is a human-readable textual format that a
tool called an assembler can convert to a binary representation.
Humans use assembly because we generally don’t like to write
binary machine code by hand, as it’s very difficult and error
prone. It would be like writing a book by entering the UTF-8
encoding of the text in binary, a process I can assure you I
didn’t follow for this book.

The 6502 has a register called A, or the accumulator, for
arithmetic instructions. The first instruction in the previous
listing, LDA, loads a value into the accumulator. In this example,
we load the value 1. The # prefix clarifies that this value is a
number rather than a memory address. Such numbers
expressed in assembly are called immediate operands.

The second instruction, ADC, adds a value to the accumulator. In
this case, we add 2, leaving the accumulator with the value 3.
When run through an assembler, these text instructions will be
converted to their binary encoding. For the 6502, instructions
are encoded using 1 byte for the opcode and between 0 and 2
bytes for operands.

Let’s take LDA #1, for example. The opcode for LDA with an
immediate operand is 10101001, according to the 6502 processor’s
programming manual. The value 1 in binary is 00000001, so the
binary encoding for LDA #1 is 10101001 00000001, or a9 01 in
hexadecimal.

Endianness

The binary representation of assembly isn’t always stored as
you might expect. Consider the following 6502 assembly, which
uses the STA instruction to store the accumulator in a given
memory address:

   LDA #1
   STA $a003
   LDA #9
   STA $a001

Compare these instructions to their encodings in hexadecimal.
Can you pick out the different opcodes and operands?

   a9 01
   8d 03 a0
   a9 09
   8d 01 a0

You might notice that the binary representation of the memory
addresses flips the bytes of the original; it shows 01 a0 instead of
a0 01. This is due to the endianness of the processor.

Endianness is a term taken from the book Gulliver’s Travels by
Jonathan Swift. In the book, the people of the fictional island of
Lilliput disagree as to whether a hard-boiled egg should be
broken from the big end or the little end. Proponents of the
former are called “big-endian” and proponents of the latter
“little-endian.”

In computer architecture, big-endian systems store the biggest,
or initial, bytes first, in the order we write them. So, the
hexadecimal number cafeba11 would be stored in byte order ca fe
ba 11. In contrast, little-endian systems store the biggest bytes

last, so cafeba11 would be stored as 11 ba fe ca.

The details of why little-endian systems exist are a bit
complicated. You’ll learn more about them in Chapter 5; for
now, it suffices to say that 6502 is little-endian, and so is x64.

Stack Frames

The final architecture topic we’ll touch on in this chapter is the
stack frame. When you create local variables inside of a
function, where do they go? Often, they’ll be placed into
registers, but sometimes they don’t fit, or you might call some
other function that needs to use those registers. In this case,
they go into a special area of memory called the stack.

It’s called a “stack” because every function in the current chain
of calls gets its own little area called a stack frame, and
operations on these frames occur in a first in, first out manner:
when a function is called, a new frame is added to the stack,
and when a function returns, the top frame on the stack is
removed. Figure 2-5 shows a simplified view of the program
stack.
The stack consists of two frames: one for give_cat_attention and one for pet_cat.
Each stack frame consists of three components: parameters, return address, and
local variables.

Figure 2-5: A simplified stack

A C++ program begins in the main function. When main begins, it
allocates itself some memory to form its stack frame. It does this
by changing the value in a special register called the stack
pointer. If you then call some other function (for example,
give_cat_attention) from main, this new function will allocate space

for its stack frame on top of the frame for main. If give_cat_attention
calls pet_cat, then the stack frame for pet_cat goes on top of the one
for give_cat_attention, and so on. This builds a big stack of local
variables. On x64 systems, the stack grows downward, so the
“top” of the stack is at the lowest address that’s part of the stack.

When a function returns, it deallocates the memory for its stack
frame by putting the stack pointer back where it was when the
function began. This way, the stack for the process grows and
shrinks as functions are called and return. You’ll learn more
about the stack in Chapters 15 and 16.

This concludes your thousand-miles-per-hour tour of compilers,
operating systems, and computer architecture. Don’t worry if it
seems like a lot of information to absorb; you can always refer
back to this chapter when you encounter an unfamiliar concept
down the line.

Summary

In this chapter, you got an overview of the compilation process,
how compilers output object files, and how debug information
can help reverse the lossy process of compilation. You also
learned how the operating system kernel can carry out
privileged actions, how it uses virtual memory to protect
processes from one another, and how it loads programs from
disk to be executed. You were introduced to ptrace and Unix
signals, which we’ll use throughout this book, and gained a
deeper understanding of how CPU instructions are represented
in memory and how registers function as very small, very fast
pieces of memory, sometimes with special jobs. Finally, you
learned how functions are allocated stack frames to give them
working memory while they execute.

Check Your Knowledge

See the appendix for sample answers to the questions in this
and the following chapters.

1.
1. What is the name of the object file format used on Linux?
2.
2. What is the name of the debug information format used on
  Linux?
3.
3. The operating system kernel operates in kernel space. In
  what space do regular processes run?
4.
4. What is the name for the special functions that the kernel
  provides so that non-privileged processes can interact with
  memory and the filesystem?
5.
5. What is the name of the signal that is sent when you press
  CTRL-C in the console?

6.
6. What is the name of the special register that tracks the
  current instruction being executed?
7.
7. In instruction encoding, what are the names given to the
  operation to be carried out and the data this operation
  should be executed on?
8.
8. What is the name of the tool used to translate assembly code
  into binary machine code?
9.
9. How is the value 0xba5eba11 stored on little-endian machines?
