INTRODUCTION

Have you ever set a breakpoint on a line of code and wondered
how it worked, or printed the value of a variable and become
curious about how the debugger knew where to look for it in
memory? Or maybe you want to know what happens in the
depths of your computer when you attach to existing processes
and bend them to your will.

If so, this is the book for you. Building a Debugger will demystify
the black boxes that debuggers so often appear to be. It will
reveal how they function and walk you through building one of
your own, beginning from an empty folder on your filesystem
and ending with a functional tool that can step through your
programs, set breakpoints, read variables, and more. Along the
way, you’ll pick up a wealth of knowledge about Linux,
operating systems in general, and the low-level operations of
computer systems.

What Is a Debugger?

It all started with a moth. In 1947, a team at Harvard University
was working on the Harvard Mark II electromechanical
computer. This large machine weighed over 20 metric tons and
occupied more than 370 m2 of floor space.

On September 9, the team was diagnosing an issue with the
Mark II and traced it back to a rather unusual source: a moth
had gotten stuck in one of the electromagnetic relays on which
the machine was based, causing it to malfunction. After they
removed the minibeast, they taped it to a logbook with the
phrase “First actual case of a bug being found.” While computer
scientists had used the term “bug” before this incident, the poor
moth’s demise contributed to its widespread use in the lexicon.

Most of the time, however, we’re not looking for actual bugs in
our systems, so we don’t require a screwdriver and magnifying
glass to identify issues. Instead, we need a program that can
trace, manipulate, and visualize the state of a different program
running on our system. Such a program is called a debugger.

Developers typically use debuggers for tasks such as tracing the
control flow of their code as it runs, inspecting the values of
variables at various points of execution, halting the program at
predetermined locations, and executing functions inside the
running process.

In this book, we’re particularly concerned with debuggers for
compiled code that runs directly on your central processing
unit (CPU), written in a language like C, C++, Rust, or FORTRAN.
Debuggers for these programs need to interface directly with
the operating system and the underlying hardware, which can
lead us to some deep insights into how computers actually
work.
What Will We Build?

Over the course of this book, we’ll build a command line
debugger for native code. I’ll call the debugger sdb, for Sy’s
Debugger, but you can call yours whatever you like. (You might
want to avoid conflicting with the names of existing debuggers,
like GDB and LLDB, however.)

When we begin, the project will consist of a single executable,
sdb, which the user can interact with on the command line. As
we progress, we’ll build the majority of the debugger as a
library, libsdb, and then author a command line driver that uses
its functionality. This design will make it easier to write
automated tests for the code and enable you to develop
applications that interact with the debugger programmatically.

The Source Language

We’ll write the debugger’s source code in C++17. The techniques
I’ll teach you aren’t specific to C++, however, and you can
choose a different language if you’d like. While it’s easier to
handle some of the low-level machinery in a compiled language
like C, C++, or Rust, nothing will stop you from translating the
book’s code into a higher-level language like Python.
The code for sdb is available at
https://github.com/TartanLlama/sdb. Each chapter has its own
branch. For example, the code for Chapter 1 is available at
https://github.com/TartanLlama/sdb/tree/chapter-1.

The book assumes a basic understanding of C++. If you know
other C-like languages, you may be able to follow along without
much difficulty. To brush up on C++, I recommend the online
reference https://cppreference.com and C++ Crash Course (No
Starch Press, 2019) by Josh Lospinoso. I’ll also explain certain
advanced or modern features of C++ in textual asides.

Limitations

The debugger we’ll write in this book won’t be thread-safe.
We’ll assume that only one thread is using it, and I make no
guarantee that it will work if you try to use it in a
multithreaded context. I chose this design because making the
project thread-safe would require significantly more code
unrelated to the core activities of the debugger. Feel free to
make your debugger thread-safe on your own if you’d like.

What’s in This Book?
In each chapter, we’ll tackle a debugger feature, explore the
background necessary to understand how it works, and add
code to implement it:

  Chapter 1: Project Setup Walks you through setting up your
  environment for building the debugger.
  Chapter 2: Compilation and Computer Architecture
  Provides you with the theoretical knowledge you’ll need to
  work through the book, including information about user
  space and kernel space on Linux, the process of compilation,
  how the operating system loads programs, and more.
  Chapter 3: Attaching to a Process Walks you through
  launching and attaching to Linux processes and begins the
  implementation of the debugger library and command line
  driver.
  Chapter 4: Pipes, procfs, and Automated Testing
  Introduces methods for inter-process communication on
  Linux and using the process filesystem (procfs) to get
  information about processes on the system, and helps you
  begin an automated testing suite for the debugger.
  Chapter 5: Registers Details the hardware registers
  available on x64 systems, including general-purpose,
  floating-point, and debug registers, and how the debugger
  can interact with them.
Chapter 6: Testing Registers with x64 Assembly Gives you
an introduction to x64 assembly language and shows you
how to use it to test the hardware register functionality
implemented in the preceding chapter.
Chapter 7: Software Breakpoints Explains how software
breakpoints work on x64 systems and walks you through
adding support for them to the debugger.
Chapter 8: Memory and Disassembly Helps you add
features for reading and manipulating the memory of
running processes and disassembling the machine code that
is currently executing.
Chapter 9: Hardware Breakpoints and Watchpoints Helps
you add support for hardware breakpoints and memory
watchpoints to the debugger.
Chapter 10: Signals and Syscalls Deepens your
understanding of Unix signals and Linux syscalls and helps
you extend the functionality of the debugger to handle them.
Chapter 11: Object Files Introduces ELF, the object file
format for Linux, and walks you through writing a parser for
it.
Chapter 12: Debug Information Introduces the debug
information format for Linux object files and helps you
implement a parser for that format.
Chapter 13: Line Tables Describes how debug information
encodes the mapping between source code and machine code
and details writing a parser for this information.
Chapter 14: Source-Level Breakpoints and Stepping Helps
you use the debug information formats described in the
preceding chapters to implement breakpoints and code
stepping at the level of the source code rather than at the
machine code level.
Chapter 15: Call Frame Information Describes the format
that Linux uses for encoding the layout of the program call
stack and walks you through implementing a parser for it.
Chapter 16: Stack Unwinding Describes how to use the
parser created in the preceding chapter to implement a stack
unwinder that can generate program backtraces and restore
hardware registers to the values that they had before a
function call began.
Chapter 17: Shared Libraries Details how Linux systems
load and track shared libraries and helps you extend the
debugger to support debugging code that is loaded from a
shared library.
Chapter 18: Multithreading Describes how Linux uses
threads to support programs that execute multiple tasks at
the same time and helps you add support for debugging
multithreaded programs to the debugger.
  Chapter 19: DWARF Expressions Explores how DWARF
  expressions encode the locations of variables in a running
  program and walks you through extending the debug
  information parser to support them.
  Chapter 20: Variables and Types Covers the format for
  variable and type descriptions in debug information and
  helps you add basic support for visualizing variable contents
  in the debugger.
  Chapter 21: Expression Evaluation Walks you through
  writing a simple expression evaluation engine that allows
  debugger users to execute function calls inside the running
  process.
  Chapter 22: Advanced Topics Briefly describes some other
  debugger features you can research on your own if you want
  to further extend your debugger.

Most chapters conclude with a set of questions to test your
knowledge. You’ll find sample answers to these questions in the
book’s appendix.

The Target Platform

The debugger described in this book will target 64-bit x86 Linux
systems. I’ll use the term x64 throughout the book to refer to the
64-bit flavor of x86. I don’t make any assumptions about which
distribution you’re using; the provided code should work as
well on Ubuntu as it will on Fedora, Arch, or some Linux-from-
scratch monstrosity you built when you were bored.

I do assume that you have a C++ compiler, binutils, and a C++
build system like make installed. On Debian-based systems, you
can install all of these with apt install build-essential.

For Windows Users

If you’re on Windows, you’re best off installing the Windows
Subsystem for Linux (WSL). With this setup, you’ll be able to
develop your application from Windows and run it on Linux
almost seamlessly. The installation process for WSL is detailed
at https://aka.ms/wsl.

At the time of this writing, opening an elevated command
prompt (using “Run as administrator”) and executing wsl --install
will install all WSL components and Ubuntu.

For macOS Users

If you’re using an x64 macOS system, you can install a Linux
virtual machine or, if you want something more lightweight,
use a Docker container. To run a virtual machine, you could use
UTM, which you can find at https://mac.getutm.app. You can find
instructions on installing and using Docker at
https://www.docker.com.

If you’re using an ARM-based Mac, such as one with an M1 or
M2 chip, you’re in a more difficult position, as current x64
emulation technologies don’t provide sufficient support for the
code in this book. You could install an ARM-based Linux virtual
machine or Docker container and attempt to adapt the x64-
specific code for ARM, but you’d have to do independent
research on the available hardware registers and calling
conventions. If you don’t feel prepared to do this, I’d
recommend finding a secondhand x64 system and using that.
ABBREVIATIONS

ABI     application binary interface

ASLR    address space layout randomization

AVX     Advanced Vector Extensions

CFA     canonical frame address

CIE     common information entry

DAP     Debug Adapter Protocol

DIE     DWARF information entry

ELF     executable and linkable format

FDE     frame description entry

FPR     floating-point register

GDB     GNU debugger
GDB/MI    GDB machine interface

GDB RSP   GDB remote serial protocol

GOT       global offset table

GPR       general-purpose register

LSB       Linux Standard Base

LSM       Linux Security Module

NTFPOC    non-trivial for the purposes of calls

PGID      process group identifier

PID       process identifier

PIE       position-independent executable

PLT       procedure linkage table

RAII      resource acquisition is initialization
RAM        random access memory

SIMD       single instruction multiple data

SSE        Streaming SIMD Extensions

SYSV ABI   System V application binary interface

TGID       thread group identifier

TID        thread identifier

TLS        thread-local storage

vDSO       virtual dynamic shared object
