APPENDIX: CHECK YOUR
KNOWLEDGE ANSWERS
Chapter 2: Compilation and Computer
Architecture

1. ELF
2. DWARF
3. User space
4. System calls (syscalls)
5. SIGINT
6. Program counter or instruction pointer
7. Opcode and operand
8. Assembler
9. 0x11, 0xba, 0x5e, 0xba
Chapter 3: Attaching to a Process

1. fork and exec syscalls
2. ptrace
3. waitpid
Chapter 4: Pipes, procfs, and Automated
Testing

1. Inter-process
2. 64KiB
3. Set additional flags
4. The procfs
5. The stat file
Chapter 5: Registers

1. GPR, x87, MMX, SSE, SSE2, AVX, AVX-512, and debug
2. rip
3. With the e prefix
4. MMX and x87
5. The SYSV ABI
6. Marshmallow, Milkshake, and Lexa
7. long double
8. Any registers other than GPR and debug registers
9. IEEE 754
Chapter 6: Testing Registers with x64
Assembly

1. Quadword
2. . and :
3. .text
4. rax
5. x87
6. .asciz
Chapter 7: Software Breakpoints

1. We set hardware breakpoints with debug registers, whereas
   we set software breakpoints by modifying the code that the
   inferior process is running. Software breakpoints are not
   limited, but hardware breakpoints can be used in certain
   security contexts where software breakpoints cannot.
2. PTRACE_PEEKDATA and PTRACE_POKEDATA
3. int3
4. By looking for “pie executable” or “shared object” in the
   output of the file utility
5. By calling the personality function with ADDR_NO_RANDOMIZE
6. The maps file
Chapter 8: Memory and Disassembly

1. They operate one word at a time.
2. To turn machine code into human-readable assembly
3. 15
Chapter 9: Hardware Breakpoints and
Watchpoints

1. 4
2. DR7
3. Keep track of the value at the address, set a read/write stop
   point, and swallow any traps at which the value at the
   address has changed.
4. When the inferior process modifies its own code or attempts
   to detect software breakpoints
Chapter 10: Signals and Syscalls

1. signal
2. SIGINT
3. Functions able to be safely interrupted and resumed without
   issue
4. setpgid
5. DR6
6. PTRACE_SYSCALL
Chapter 11: Object Files

1. Executable, shared library, static library, core dump
2. ELF sections represent information relevant for linking;
   segments represent information relevant for loading and
   execution.
3. mmap
4. A list of null-terminated strings, where a string is represented
   by a byte offset into the string table
5. An array of identifier/value pairs that the operating system
   kernel uses to provide information about a process to user
   space
Chapter 12: Debug Information

1. DWARF information entry
2. No
3. .debug_info
4. To factor out common structure between DIEs
5. To encode variable-length integers in a space-efficient
   manner
6. Regular, base address selectors, and end-of-list indicators
Chapter 13: Line Tables

1. For space efficiency
2. Standard, extended, and special
3. To advance the current line and address and emit a matrix
  row, all in a single opcode
4. The program counter value to which the entry applies; the
  source file, line, and column that correspond to that program
  counter value; whether the entry represents a new
  statement, starts a basic block, ends a sequence, ends a
  function prologue, or begins a function epilogue; and a
  discriminator value
Chapter 14: Source-Level Breakpoints and
Stepping

1. A compiler optimization where the body of the function is
   pasted into the call site
2. DW_TAG_inlined_subroutine
3. rbp, which the compiler may have chosen to use for other
   purposes
Chapter 15: Call Frame Information

1. Frame description entries (FDEs) and common information
  entries (CIEs)
2. So that the common parts can be reused
3. A specific point of the stack frame that we use as the base
  address for other computations
4. 16
5. It provides platform- and language-specific information and
  alternate data encoding schemes.
6. The SYSV ABI and LSB
Chapter 16: Stack Unwinding

1. undefined, register(R), same_value, offset(N), val_offset(N), expression(E), and
   val_expression(E)

2. Because a register value may not be restorable
3. register_and_offset(R,N) and expression(E)
4. Multiple logical frames may exist where there’s only one
   physical frame.
Chapter 17: Shared Libraries

1. The segments of the ELF file
2. INTERP
3. To speed up certain syscalls by executing them in user space
4. Inside the dynamic linker
5. NEEDED
6. For the dynamic linker to communicate with tools that need
   to track the loading and unloading of shared libraries
7. By reading the DEBUG field of the .dynamic section
8. _dl_debug_state
9. To adjust references that are sensitive to where parts of the
   program are loaded, such that they point to the real virtual
   address of the relevant symbol
10. To enable updating references that reside in read-only
   sections and facilitate relocating symbols by updating only
   one location
11. Because there would be too many relocations to execute and
   instruction encodings may need to be changed
12. The act of delaying the resolution of a function’s address
   until the function is called for the first time
Chapter 18: Multithreading

1. Threads can share a single virtual address space, set of file
   descriptors, and signal handlers, whereas processes cannot.
2. clone
3. PTRACE_O_TRACECLONE
4. pthreads
5. When the behavior of a program relies on the timing of two
   or more threads carrying out an action
6. The task directory
Chapter 19: DWARF Expressions

1. Address, register, implicit, empty, composite, and location lists
2. Range lists
3. DW_OP_pick
4. DW_OP_call_ref
Chapter 20: Variables and Types

1. The DW_AT_bit_offset attribute stores the distance in bits between
  the most significant bit of the aligned storage for the member
  and the most significant bit of the real data, whereas the
  DW_AT_data _bit_offset attribute stores the distance in bits from

  the start of the enclosing type to the start of the data.
2. With DW_TAG_subrange_type DIEs
3. To support multiple inheritance
Chapter 21: Expression Evaluation

1. The SYSV and Itanium ABIs
2. rdi
3. The number of vector registers used must be passed in the al
   register.
4. Only on returning from a function
5. Types that must be passed on the stack by invisible reference
6. In reverse lexical order
7. The address at the end of the stack arguments must be
   aligned to a 16-byte boundary.
