GLOSSARY
address space layout randomization (ASLR)        The
randomization of the load position of a binary, carried out by
the operating system as a security measure.

alignment    An address is aligned to a particular boundary if
the address is exactly divisible by the boundary size.

all-stop mode   A debugger model for multithreaded programs
where all threads are stopped if one thread is stopped.

application binary interface (ABI)     A document that defines
how pieces of machine code on a platform should communicate
with one another. Includes calling conventions for functions
and the layout of data.

assembler    A tool for converting code written in assembly
language into binary machine code.

assembly language     A textual representation of machine code
designed to be read and written by humans.

async-signal-safe   A function that can be called within a signal
handler. These functions either are reentrant or cannot be
interrupted by another signal handler.
backtrace     A visual representation of the current call stack.

big-endian     A data representation for integers that stores the
most significant byte at the smallest memory address and the
least significant byte at the largest.

breakpoint     Halts program execution when a particular piece
of code is executed.

callee-saved registers     Registers that a function must save
before modifying and restore before returning. Defined by the
ABI.

caller-saved registers     Registers that a function can safely
modify without having to save and restore. Defined by the ABI.

calling conventions      The rules specified in an ABI for how
arguments and return values are communicated between
functions on a specific platform.

canonical frame address        An address within a stack frame
that is used as the base address for other frame address
computations.

cat    A lovable ball of fluff that lives in your house and makes a
mess.
compiler    A program that translates source code written in
one programming language into machine code or another
programming language.

compile unit     A source file along with all of the header files it
includes.

debug information       Data that enables a debugger to relate
machine code back to the source code that was used to produce
it.

debug register     A special-purpose hardware register used to
create hardware breakpoints and watchpoints.

disassembler      A tool that decodes binary machine
instructions and converts them to human-readable assembly
code.

DWARF information        The debug information format used on
Linux systems.

dyadic rational    A floating-point number whose denominator
is a power of two, thus making it directly expressible in binary.

dynamic linker     A user-space program that is responsible for
loading dynamic dependencies of programs.
dynamic linker rendezvous structure        An area of memory
that the dynamic linker uses to communicate with the kernel
and debugger.

eightbyte    A group of 8 bytes that is considered for the System
V ABI type classification algorithms for calling conventions.

ELF file    The object file format used on Linux systems.

endianness      The order in which the bytes of an integer are
stored on a platform.

exponent     The location of the point in a floating-point number.

expression evaluation      Running a source code expression
inside the inferior process.

frame pointer     A pointer to the beginning of the stack frame
for the function that is currently executing.

function epilogue     An area of code run at the end of a
function’s execution that tears down the call stack.

function inlining    A compiler optimization where the body of
a function is copied and pasted into the body of another
function, eliminating the function call entirely.
function prologue     An area of code at the beginning of a
function that sets up the call stack.

global offset table (GOT)      A table that stores the real offsets of
symbols that are dynamically loaded.

hardware breakpoint         A breakpoint set using architecture-
specific debug registers.

hardware interrupt      A signal that is sent to the operating
system from the CPU on a variety of conditions, such as floating-
point exceptions or memory access violations.

hardware registers      Very small and fast areas of memory that
are given specific names, such as the rip register that holds the
current program counter value.

immediate operand       An assembly language operand that
encodes a constant value, such as the integer 42.

inferior   A process that is being managed by a debugger.

instruction encoding        The scheme by which machine code
instructions are expressed in binary.

interrupt handler     A function that is called when a specific
hardware interrupt triggers.
interrupt vector table      A data structure that allocates
interrupt handlers for different types of hardware interrupts.

kernel   The core part of an operating system that handles the
most privileged operations.

kernel space     Code that runs here is allowed to execute
privileged operations not available to code that operates in user
space.

lambda      An anonymous function.

lazy binding    The act of deferring the resolution of a function’s
address until the function is called for the first time.

little-endian   A data representation for integers where the
least significant byte is stored at the smallest address and the
most significant byte at the largest.

load bias    The difference between the address at which an
object file is loaded in memory and the address assumed as the
load address in the object file itself.

machine code/native code        Binary-encoded instructions that
run directly on a CPU.
mantissa       The part of a floating-point number that represents
its digits.

memory paging        The splitting of memory into pages (usually
4KiB in size), which have their own memory protections and
can be stored in external devices, being read into RAM when
required.

mnemonic        A human-readable name for a machine
instruction.

move-only types       C++ types that can’t be copied but can be
moved with move semantics.

move semantics        A C++ feature that allows transferring
resources between objects without making copies.

name mangling        The process of turning the name of a
program entity into a form that can be linked against.
Commonly used for supporting function overloading and
namespaces.

nondeterministic behavior        Behavior that can’t be predicted,
potentially caused by a race condition.
non-stop mode       A debugger model for multithreaded
programs where some threads can continue executing while
other threads are stopped for inspection.

object file    A file that contains machine code and metadata
that the operating system requires to execute that machine
code.

opcode     The part of a machine code instruction that indicates
what kind of action to perform.

operand       The part of a machine code instruction that indicates
the data on which to perform the instruction.

position-independent executable (PIE)        An executable that
can be loaded at any virtual memory address.

POSIX      A set of standards for compatibility between Unix-like
operating systems.

preemption       The process of an operating system halting the
execution of a process so it can schedule the execution of
another.

procedure linkage table (PLT)       A table of function stubs that
are relocated to jump to dynamically loaded functions.
process identifier (PID)   A unique identifier for a running
process, supplied by the operating system.

program counter/instruction pointer      A hardware register
that stores the memory address of the machine instruction that
is currently being executed.

program loading     The process by which a program is loaded
from the filesystem into memory in order to be executed.

program stack    A data structure that stores variables and
information about the functions that a process is executing.

pure virtual function    A C++ virtual function that must be
overridden by a child class.

race condition   A situation where the behavior of a program
relies on the timing of two or more threads carrying out an
action.

random access memory (RAM)        An area of memory that is
faster and smaller than external storage, but slower and larger
than hardware registers.

reentrant   Describes a function that can be safely executed
concurrently without issue.
relocation         The process of the static or dynamic linker fixing
up memory references inside programs to point to their real
virtual addresses.

resource acquisition is initialization (RAII)         A C++ idiom in
which the constructor for a class acquires the resources that an
object needs and the destructor releases them.

section hashing         Computing the hash of a binary section in
order to detect changes to it at runtime.

section load bias        The difference between the file offset and
file address of an object file section.

signal    A form of inter-process communication for notifying
processes of events that occur in the system.

signal handler         A function that is called when a process
receives a particular signal.

sign extension         The process of widening an integer to a larger
byte size without changing its sign.

smart pointer         A C++ type that acts like a pointer but manages
the memory to which it points automatically, such as
std::unique_ptr.
software breakpoint      A breakpoint set by modifying the
instructions of the running code to send a signal when a given
machine instruction is executed.

stack frame     An area of memory dedicated to a particular
function invocation, in which it can store local variables, callee-
saved register contents, and other information it needs to track.

stack pointer    A hardware register that stores the address of
the top of the program stack.

stack unwinding     The process of re-creating the current
program stack from a program counter value and set of
registers.

stop point    A breakpoint or watchpoint.

system call (syscall)   A way for user-space programs to
request privileged operations from the operating system kernel.

Unix   Refers to a family of operating systems that are
descended from the original Unix operating system. Includes
operating systems based on the Linux kernel.

user area    An area of memory that Linux systems dedicate to
registers and metadata for running processes.
user space   Code that runs here is not allowed to perform
privileged operations that are reserved for the kernel, except
through authorized channels such as system calls.

virtual dynamic shared object (vDSO)         A shared library
loaded into every user-space process’s address space on Linux
systems in order to make certain syscalls faster.

virtual memory        A scheme for preserving memory safety
across processes, abstracting the available storage of a machine,
and presenting a linear view of memory that can be allocated to
noncontiguous areas of physical memory, potentially on
different devices.

watchpoint    Similar to a breakpoint, but can be triggered
when an address is read from or written to in addition to
executed.

weak symbol      A symbol in an object file that may be
overridden by a stronger symbol.

zero extension       The process of extending the byte width of an
integer by filling the newly allocated space with zeros.
