                                 Preface

Surreptitious software is the term we have chosen to describe a new branch
of computer security research that has emerged over the last decade. It’s a
field that borrows techniques not only from computer security, but also
from many other areas of computer science, such as cryptography,
steganography, media watermarking, software metrics, reverse engineering,
and compiler optimization. Surreptitious software applies these techniques
in order to solve very different problems: It is concerned with protecting the
secrets contained within computer programs. We use the word secrets
loosely, but the techniques we present in this book (code obfuscation,
software watermarking and fingerprinting, tamperproofing, and
birthmarking) are typically used to prevent others from exploiting the
intellectual effort invested in producing a piece of software. For example,
software fingerprinting can be used to trace software pirates, code
obfuscation can be used to make it more difficult to reverse engineer a
program, and tamperproofing can make it harder for a hacker to remove a
license check.

So let’s look at why someone should read this book, who they might be, and
what material the book will cover.

Why Should You Read This Book?

Unlike traditional security research, surreptitious software is not concerned
with how to protect your computer from viruses, but rather how virus
writers protect their code from you! Similarly, we’re not interested in how
to make your code free from security bugs, but rather how to riddle your
program with buggy code that gets run only when someone tries to tamper
with the program. And unlike cryptography research that protects the
confidentiality of data, assuming that a secret key remains hidden, we’re
interested in how to hide that key. While software engineering research has
devised a multitude of software metrics in order to be able to make
programs well structured, we will use the same techniques to make your
programs more convoluted! Many of the techniques that we will describe in
this book are based on algorithms developed by compiler optimization
researchers, but unlike them, we’re not interested in making your program
faster or smaller. Rather, after you apply the algorithms in this book to your
own code, your programs will be larger and slower! Finally, unlike
traditional media watermarking and steganography that hides secrets in
images, audio, video, or English text, surreptitious software hides secrets
inside computer code.

So why, then, should you be interested in this book? Why learn about a
branch of computer security research that doesn’t teach how to protect
yourself against viruses and worms? Why study optimizing compiler
transformations that make your code slower and larger? Why bother with a
branch of cryptography that breaks the most basic assumption of that field,
namely, that the secret key must be kept hidden?

The answer is that there are real-world problems that don’t fit neatly into
traditional computer security and cryptography research but that are
interesting nonetheless. For example, in this book we will show you how to
use software watermarking to fight piracy. A software watermark is a
unique identifier (such as someone’s credit card number or your copyright
notice) that you embed into your program to uniquely bind it to you (the
author) or your customer. If you find illegal copies of your program being
sold at a market in Singapore, you can extract the watermark and trace the
illegal copy back to the original purchaser. You can use the same technique
when you distribute beta copies of your new computer game to your partner
companies—should any of them leak the code, you can trace the culprit and
sue for damages.

Or if the new version of your program contains a novel algorithm that you
don’t want your competitors to get their hands on and incorporate into their
competing product, you can obfuscate your program and make it as
convoluted and hard to understand as possible in order to slow down your
competitors’ reverse engineering efforts. If you do suspect someone has
stolen your code, we’ll show you how to use software birthmarking
techniques to identify the offending sections.

Or, say that you have included a secret in your program and you want to
make sure that without this secret remaining intact, no one can execute the
program. For example, you don’t want a hacker to be able to modify your
license checking code or the cryptographic key that unlocks an mp3 file in
your digital rights management system. Our chapter on tamperproofing will
discuss various techniques for ensuring that programs that have been
tampered with will cease to function properly.

Now, we hear you object that including a crypto key in an executable is a
Really Bad Idea! Surely experience has shown us that security by obscurity
never works, and whatever secret we try to hide in our program will
eventually be discovered by a sufficiently determined hacker. And yes—we
have to concede—you’re right. None of the techniques we’re advocating in
this book are foolproof. They won’t hide a secret forever. They won’t make
your program safe from tampering forever. They won’t identify software
theft all of the time. All we can hope for, barring major advances in the
field, is that we can slow down our adversaries. Our goal is to slow them
down enough so that either they give up on cracking our code because they
figure it’s too painful and not worth the trouble, or so that by the time
they’ve come up with a successful attack we’ve already made enough of a
profit or have moved on to the next version of the code.

For example, say that you’re running a pay-TV channel that your customers
access through a set-top box. Each box is personalized—hidden somewhere
in the code is their unique identifier—so that you can grant and revoke
viewing privileges depending on whether they’ve paid their bill or not.
Now, an enterprising hacker extracts and disassembles the code, finds their
unique identifier, and starts selling it over the Web at a fraction of the price
you charge, along with instructions on how to implant it in the box. How do
you counter this attack? Well, you may use tamperproof smartcards, which
are not that hard to tamper with, as you will see in our chapter on hardware
protection techniques. Or maybe you’ll obfuscate your code to make it
harder to analyze. Or maybe you’ll use software tamperproofing to stop the
code from executing once it is mucked with. More likely, you’ll use a
combination of all these techniques in order to protect your code. Even
when employing all these techniques, you must know, and accept, that your
code will eventually be broken and your secret will be out of the bag (or
box, in this case). So why should you bother? If security through obscurity
is a fundamentally flawed idea, and if none of the techniques you will read
about in this book will give you “perfect and long-term security,” why go
through the trouble? Why should you buy this book? You will bother for the
very simple reason that the longer you can keep your code safe, the more
subscriptions you’ll sell and the longer between set-top box upgrades, and
hence, the more money you’ll make.

It’s as simple as that.

Who Uses Surreptitious Software?

Many well-known companies have shown an interest in surreptitious
software. It’s difficult to get a grip on the extent to which these techniques
are actually being used in practice (most companies are notoriously tight-
lipped about how they protect their code), but we can gauge their level of
interest from their patents and current patent applications. Microsoft owns
several       software        watermarking         [104,354],      obfuscation
[62,62,69,69,70,70,180,378], and birthmarking [364] patents. Intertrust
holds a huge patent portfolio related to digital rights management, including
patents on obfuscation [91,169] and tamperproofing [168]. In 2004, to the
tune of $440 million [176], Microsoft settled a long-running lawsuit with
Intertrust by licensing their entire patent portfolio. That same year
Microsoft also partnered [250] with PreEmptive Solutions in order to
include PreEmptive’s identifier obfuscator (which is based on their patent
[351]) in Visual Studio. Arxan, a spin-off from Purdue University
researchers, has made a successful business from their tamperproofing
algorithm [24,305]. Apple holds a patent on code obfuscation [197],
perhaps intended to protect their iTunes software. Intel spun off a company,
Convera, to explore their tamperproofing algorithm [27,268–270] for digital
rights management. The Canadian telecom Northern Telecom spun off what
to date has been the most successful company in this area, Cloakware,
which holds patents [67,68,182] on what they call whitebox cryptography,
how to hide cryptographic algorithms and keys in computer code. In
December 2007 Cloakware was sold for $72.5 million to Irdeto, a Dutch
company in the pay-TV business [162]. A relative latecomer, Sun
Microsystems, has also recently filed several patent applications on code
obfuscation [105–110].

Skype’s VoIP client is highly obfuscated and tamperproofed by techniques
similar to those of Arxan [24], Intel [27], and ourselves [89]. Protecting the
integrity of their client is undoubtedly of the highest importance for Skype,
since, if cracked, their protocol could be easily hijacked by cheaper
competitors. Keeping their protocol secret allowed them to build an
impressive user base, and this might have been one of the reasons eBay
decided to acquire them for $2.6 billion in 2005. In essence, the protection
afforded Skype by surreptitious software techniques bought them enough
time to become VoIP market leaders. Even if, at this point, their protocol
has been cracked (which it has; see Section 7.2.4), it will be difficult for a
competitor to threaten this position.

Academic researchers have approached surreptitious software from a
variety of angles. Some, like us, come from a compiler and programming
languages background. This is natural since most algorithms involve code
transformations that require static analysis, with which compiler
optimization researchers are intimately familiar. In spite of the disdain
cryptography researchers have in the past had for security through
obscurity, some have recently applied their techniques to software
watermarking and to discovering the limits of obfuscation. Researchers
from media watermarking, computer security, and software engineering
have also published in surreptitious software. Unfortunately, progress in the
area has been hampered by the lack of natural publication venues. Instead,
researchers have struggled, and continue to struggle, to get their works
accepted in traditional conferences and journals. Papers have appeared in
venues such as the ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming
Languages (POPL), the Information Hiding Workshop, IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, Advances in Cryptology (CRYPTO), and
Information Security Conference (ISC), as well as in various digital rights
management conferences. As the field becomes more mainstream, we can
expect journals, workshops, and conferences dedicated exclusively to
surreptitious software, but this has yet to happen.

The military has also spent much effort (and taxpayer money) on
surreptitious software research. For example, the patent [96] held on
Cousot’s software watermarking algorithm [95] is assigned to the French
Thales group, the ninth-largest defense contractor in the world. Here’s a
quote from a recent (2006) U.S. Army solicitation [303] for what they term
AT, anti-tamper research:

    All U.S. Army Project Executive Offices (PEOs) and Project Managers
    (PMs) are now charged with executing Army and Department of
    Defense (DoD) AT policies in the design and implementation of their
    systems. Embedded software is at the core of modern weapon systems
    and is one of the most critical technologies to be protected. AT
    provides protection of U.S. technologies against exploitation via
    reverse engineering. Standard compiled code with no AT is easy to
    reverse engineer, so the goal of employed AT techniques will be to
    make that effort more difficult. In attacking software, reverse engineers
    have a wide array of tools available to them, including debuggers,
    decompilers, disassemblers, as well as static and dynamic analysis
    techniques. AT techniques are being developed to combat the loss of
    the U.S. technological advantage, but further advances are necessary to
    provide useful, effective and varied toolsets to U.S. Army PEOs and
    PMs. ... The goal of software AT technologies/techniques developed is
    to provide a substantial layer of protection against reverse engineering,
    allowing for maximum delay in an adversary compromising the
    protected code. This capability will allow the U.S. time to advance its
    own technology or otherwise mitigate any losses of weapons
    technologies. As a result, the U.S. Army can continue to maintain a
    technological edge in support of its warfighters.

This particular solicitation comes from the Army’s Missile and Space
program and focuses on providing protection in real-time embedded
systems. So it’s reasonable to assume that the Army is worried about one of
their missiles not exploding on impact, allowing the enemy access to the
embedded targeting flight software.
The DoD’s current interest in protecting their software goes back to the
infamous incident in 2001 when a—what CNN [359] calls a US “Navy
reconnaissance plane” but the rest of us know as a “spy plane”—had a run-
in with a Chinese fighter jet and had to make an emergency landing on the
Chinese island of Hainan. In spite of George W. Bush’s plea [116] for the
“prompt return ‘without further damage or tampering’ of the crew and
plane,” the Chinese stalled, presumably so that they could gather as much
information as possible from the plane’s hardware and software. There is a
claim [116] that all the software was erased:

    A former Pentagon intelligence official told United Press International
    the crew would have “zeroed” out the crypto analytic equipment and
    other software on landing, essentially wiping their memories clean.
    Although the Chinese might have access to the hardware, the software
    that runs it would be almost impossible to penetrate.

Regardless of whether this is accurate1 or a carefully orchestrated leak to
reassure the U.S. public (why was the software just almost impossible to
penetrate if it was in fact successfully wiped?), the DoD got significantly
spooked and initiated a program to investigate technologies such as
obfuscation and tamperproofing in order to protect sensitive weapons
systems software. As one DoD official put it, “[T]he next time a plane goes
down, we don’t want to end up on the cover of the New York Times again
[291].”

Here’s another quote from the DoD [115]:

    The Software Protection Initiative (SPI) is an undertaking of the
    Department of Defense (DoD) to develop and deploy technologies to
    secure special-purpose computer programs containing information
    critical to DoD weapon programs. SPI offers a novel approach to
    protecting high value computer programs. It doesn’t secure the
    computer or the network. Instead it empowers a single computer
    program to secure itself. This approach promises to significantly
    improve DoD’s Information Assurance posture. SPI protection
    technology is effective on systems ranging from desktop computers to
    supercomputers. It is an integral layer of the defense-in-depth security
     paradigm. SPI technologies complement, but do no[t] rely upon,
     network firewalls, or physical security. These SPI products are
     currently being deployed to selected HPC centers and are in use at
     over 150 DoD government and contractor sites. Broader deployment
     will play a significant role in protecting the DoD’s and the nation’s
     critical application software.

What does this mean? The DoD is worried not only about dud missiles
falling into the wrong hands, but also about software in use at hardened
high-performance computer centers. In fact, theft of any software developed
for the defense and intelligence communities may have negative
consequences. Anecdotally, when the software on a fighter jet is to be
updated, a service technician simply walks out to the plane with a laptop,
hooks it up, and uploads the new code. What would happen if that laptop
got lost or liberated by a technician in the service of a foreign government,
as seems to happen [375] every so often? The code could be reverse
engineered to be used in an adversary’s planes, or even modified with a
Trojan horse that would make the avionics fail at a particular time. While
there is no substitute for good security practices, surreptitious software
techniques can be used as a last line of defense. For example, the avionics
software could be fingerprinted with the identifiers of those who have had it
in their possession. If one day we find copies of the code in the onboard
computers of a North Korean plane we’ve shot down and are now reverse
engineering, we could trace it back to the person who last had authorized
access to it.

But, we hear you say, why should I be interested in how evil government
agencies or companies with monopolistic tendencies are protecting their
secrets? If crackers rip them off, maybe they’re just getting what they
deserve. Well, maybe so, but technical means of protecting against software
theft may ultimately benefit the little guy more than big government or big
industry. The reason is that legal forms of protection (such as patents,
trademarks, and copyrights) are available to you only if you have the
financial means to defend them in a court of law. In other words, even if
you think you have a pretty good case against Microsoft for ripping off your
code, you will still not prevail in court unless you have the financial
backing to outlast them through the appeals process.2 The technical means
of protection that we will discuss in this book such as obfuscation and
tamperproofing, on the other hand, can be cheap and easy to apply for the
little guy as well as the big guy. And, if you find yourself up against
Microsoft in a court of law, techniques such as watermarking and
birthmarking can bolster your case by allowing you to present evidence of
theft.

There is one final category of people that we have yet to touch upon that
makes extensive use of surreptitious software: bad guys. Virus writers have
been spectacularly successful in obfuscating their code to prevent it from
being intercepted by virus scanners. It is interesting to note that while the
techniques the good guys use (for example, to protect DVDs, games, or
cable TV) seem to be regularly broken by the bad guys, the techniques the
bad guys use (to build malware) seem much harder for the good guys to
protect against.

What’s the Goal of This Book?

The goal of surreptitious software research is to invent algorithms that slow
down our adversaries as much as possible while adding as little
computational overhead as possible. We also need to devise evaluation
techniques that allow us to say, “After applying algorithm A to your
program, it will take an average hacker T extra time to crack it compared to
the original code, while adding O amount of overhead,” or, failing that, at
least be able to say that “compared to algorithm B, algorithm A produces
code that is harder to crack.” It’s important to emphasize that research into
surreptitious software is still in its infancy, and that the algorithms and
evaluation techniques that we’ll present in this book, while representing the
state of the art, are nowhere near perfect.

In this book we attempt to organize and systematize all that is currently
known about surreptitious software research. Each chapter covers a
particular technique and describes application areas and available
algorithms. In Chapter 1 (What Is Surreptitious Software?), we give an
overview of the area, and in Chapter 2 (Methods of Attack and Defense),
we discuss our adversarial model, i.e., what hacker tools and techniques we
should try to protect ourselves against and what ideas are available to us as
defenders. In Chapter 3 (Program Analysis), we detail the techniques that
both attackers and defenders can use to analyze programs. Chapter 4 (Code
Obfuscation), Chapter 5 (Obfuscation Theory), and Chapter 6 (Dynamic
Obfuscation) give algorithms for code obfuscation. Chapter 7 (Software
Tamperproofing) gives tamperproofing algorithms, Chapter 8 (Software
Watermarking) and Chapter 9 (Dynamic Watermarking) give watermarking
algorithms, and Chapter 10 (Software Similarity Analysis) gives
birthmarking algorithms. Chapter 11 (Hardware for Protecting Software)
presents hardware-based protection techniques.

If you’re a manager interested in learning about the state of the art in
surreptitious software research and how it can be applied in your
organization, you’ll want to read Chapter 1 and Chapter 2. If you’re a
researcher with a background in compiler design, you can skip Chapter 3.
It’s advantageous to read the algorithm chapters in order, since, for
example, the watermarking chapter relies on ideas you’ve learned in the
obfuscation chapter. Still, we’ve tried to make each chapter as self-
contained as possible, so skipping around should be possible. If you’re an
engineer charged with adding protection to your company’s product line,
you should read Chapter 3 carefully and maybe complement that by reading
up on static analysis in a good compiler text. You can then move on to the
algorithm chapter relevant to you. If you’re a graduate student reading this
book for a class, read the entire thing from cover to cover, and don’t forget
to review for the final!

We hope this book will do two things. First, we want to convince you, dear
reader, that code obfuscation, software watermarking, birthmarking, and
tamperproofing are interesting ideas well worth studying, and that they are
viable alternatives to protecting the intellectual property you have invested
in your software. Second, we want this book to bring together all available
information on the subject so that it can serve as a starting point for further
research in the field.
                                                           Christian and Jasvir

                                                  Tucson and Mountain View
                                                       Groundhog Day, 2009

P.S. There is a third reason for writing this book. If, while reading this book,
you are struck by the cleverness of an idea and, as a result, you become
inspired to make your own contributions to the field, well, then, dear reader,
our goal with this book has really been met. And when you’ve come up
with your new clever algorithm, please remember to let us know so we can
include it in the next edition!
                       About the Authors

Christian Collberg received a B.Sc. in computer science and numerical
analysis and a Ph.D. in computer science from Lund University, Sweden.
He is currently an associate professor in the department of computer science
at the University of Arizona and has also worked at the University of
Auckland, New Zealand, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing.
Professor Collberg is a leading researcher in the intellectual property
protection of software, and also maintains an interest in compiler and
programming language research. In his spare time he writes songs, sings,
and plays guitar for The Zax and hopes one day to finish his Great Swedish
Novel.

Jasvir Nagra received his B.Sc. in mathematics and computer science and a
Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Auckland, New Zealand.
He’s been a postdoctoral scholar on the RE-TRUST project at the
University of Trento, where his focus is on applying obfuscation,
tamperproofing, and watermarking techniques to protect the integrity of
software executing on a remote untrusted platform. His research interests
also include the design of programming languages and its impact on the
security of applications. He’s currently with Google Inc., where he is
building Caja, an open source, secure subset of JavaScript. In his spare time
Jasvir dabbles with Lego and one day hopes to finish building his Turing
machine made entirely out of Lego blocks.
                        Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the following people without whose assistance this
book could not have been written: Amena Ali, Bertrand Anckaert, Gregory
Andrews, Mike Atallah, Jan Cappaert, Edward Carter, Igor Crk, Mike
Dager, Mila Dalla Preda, Saumya Debray, Fabrice Desclaux, Roberto
Giacobazzi, Jon Giffin, Gael Hachez, Wulf Harder, William Horne, Mariusz
Jakubowski, Yuichiro Kanzaki, Phil Kaslo, David P. Maher, Scott
Moskowitz, Yoram Ofek, Reiner Sailer, Christine Scheer, Arvind Seshadri,
Richard Snodgrass, the students of CSc 620, Clark Thomborson, Gregg
Townsend, Tom Van Vleck, and Glenn Wurster.

Special thanks to the Institute of Automation and Professor Fei-Yue Wang
of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, for their generous support during
Christian Collberg’s sabbatical visit, August 2006 through July 2007, and to
Yoram Ofek and the RE-TRUST project for their support during the
summer of 2008.

To everyone at Addison-Wesley who made this project possible, our sincere
thanks: Jessica Goldstein, Gary McGraw, Romny French, Elizabeth Ryan
and Chuck Toporek.

Finally, we would like to thank all our friends and family who have
encouraged and supported us throughout this project: Charlotte Bergh,
Andrew Collberg, Melissa Fitch, Michael Hammer, John Hartman, Louise
Holbrook, Ma and Dad, Mamma, Ginger Myles, Qu “Jojo” Cheng, Shwetha
Shankar, Haya Shulman, Mr. Snickers, and Tudou.
