            1. What Is Surreptitious Software?

In this first chapter we will talk about the basic techniques used to protect
secrets stored in software, namely obfuscation, watermarking,
tamperproofing, and birthmarking. These techniques have many interesting
applications, such as the use of obfuscation and tamperproofing to protect
media in digital rights management systems. What we think you will find
particularly interesting is that obfuscation and the three other techniques
“solve” problems that traditional computer security and cryptography can’t
touch. We put “solve” in quotation marks because there are no known
algorithms that provide complete security for an indefinite amount of time.
At the present time, the best we can hope for is to be able to extend the time
it takes a hacker to crack our schemes. You might think that this seems
highly unsatisfactory—and you’d be right—but the bottom line is that there
are interesting applications for which no better techniques are known.

1.1 Setting the Scene

When you hear the term computer security, you probably imagine a
scenario where a computer (owned by a benign user we’ll call Alice) is
under attack from an evil hacker (we’ll call him Bob), or from the viruses,
worms, Trojan horses, rootkits, and keyloggers that he’s created. The goal
of computer security research is to devise techniques for building systems
that prevent Bob from taking over Alice’s computer or that alert her when
he does. The basic idea behind such techniques is to restrict what Bob can
do on Alice’s computer without unduly restricting what she can do herself.
For example, a network firewall allows Alice to access other computers on
the network but restricts the ways in which Bob can access hers. An
intrusion detection system analyzes the network access patterns on Alice’s
computer and alerts her if Bob appears to be doing something unusual or
suspicious. A virus scanner refuses to run Bob’s program unless it can
convince itself that the program contains no harmful code. In other words,
Alice adds protective layers around her computer to prevent someone from
entering, to detect that someone has entered, or to stop someone from doing
harm once they’ve entered:

Now what happens if we invert the situation? What if, instead of Bob
sending an evil program to penetrate the defenses around Alice’s computer,
we have a software developer, Doris, who sends or sells Axel1 a benign
program to run? To make this interesting, let’s assume that Doris’s program
contains some secret and that Axel can gain some economic advantage
over Doris by extracting or altering :

The secret could be anything: a new super-duper algorithm that makes
Doris program much faster than Axel’s that he would love to get his hands
on; the overall architecture of her program, which would be useful to Axel
as he starts building his own; a cryptographic key that is used to unlock
some media in a digital rights management system; or a license check that
prevents Axel from running the program after a certain period of time. What
can Doris do to protect this secret?

At first blush, you might think that cryptography would solve the problem,
since, after all, cryptography is concerned with protecting the
confidentiality of data. Specifically, a cryptographic system scrambles a
cleartext into a cryptotext E ( ) so that it can’t be read without access to
a secret key :

So why doesn’t Doris just protect the secret she has stored in her program
by encrypting the program before selling it to Axel? Unfortunately, this
won’t work, since Axel needs to be able to execute the program and hence,
at some point, it—and Doris’ secret—must exist in cleartext!

What makes software protection so different from cryptography and
standard computer security is that once Axel has access to Doris’ program,
there is no limit to what he can do to it: He can study its code (maybe first
disassembling or decompiling it); he can execute the program to study its
behavior (perhaps using a debugger); or he can alter the code to make it do
something different than what the original author intended (such as
bypassing a license check).

There are three components to a typical attack in a software protection
scenario against Doris’ program , namely, analysis, tampering, and
distribution:
Axel starts by analyzing , extracting algorithms, design, and other secrets
such as cryptographic keys or the location of license-checking code. Next,
he modifies Doris’ code (he may, for example, remove the license check) or
incorporates pieces of it into his own program. Finally, Axel distributes the
resulting program, thereby violating Doris’ intellectual property rights.

There are many variants of this scenario, of course. Axel could remove a
license check without redistributing the hacked program and just enjoy it
for his own pleasure. He could resell the program along with a known
license password, without ever having to tamper with the code. Finally, he
could decompile and analyze the program to verify its safety (for example,
that it doesn’t contain damaging viruses or spyware, or, in the case of voting
software, that it correctly counts every vote), without using this information
to improve on his own programs. While these attacks occur in a variety of
guises, they’re all based on the following observation: Once a program
leaves the hands of its author, any secrets it contains become open to attack.

In the scenarios we study, there is usually some financial motive for Axel to
extract or alter information in the program. There is also typically a certain
period of time during which Doris wants to protect this information. It is the
goal of software protection to provide technical means for keeping the
valuable information safe from attack for this period of time. A computer
game developer, for example, may be happy if software protection prevents
his program from being pirated for a few extra weeks, since most of the
revenue is generated during a short time period after the release.
In a typical defense scenario, Doris adds confusion to her code to make it
more difficult for Axel to analyze, tamper-protection to prevent him from
modifying it, and finally marks the code (for example, with her copyright
notice or Axel’s unique identifier) to assert her intellectual property rights:

In this book we will consider five methods for Doris to protect her program:
Code obfuscation for preventing analysis; software watermarking,
fingerprinting, and birthmarking for detecting and tracing illegal
distribution; and software- and hardware-based protection against
tampering.

Although the primary motivation for the techniques developed in software
protection has been protecting the secrets contained within computer
programs, they also have applications to protecting the distribution chain of
digital media (digital rights management), protecting against computer
viruses, steganographic transfer of secret messages, and protecting against
cheating in online computer games. We will also show how these
techniques can be used maliciously to create stealthy computer viruses and
to cheat in computer-based voting.

Software protection is related both to computer security and cryptography,
but it has most in common with steganography, the branch of cryptography
that studies how to transfer a secret stealthily. This is often illustrated by the
so-called prisoners’ problem. Here, Alice and Bob are planning a prison
break by passing notes through their warden, Wendy:

Of course, if Wendy finds that a purported love note mentions a prison
break, she will immediately stop any further messages and put Alice and
Bob in solitary confinement. So what can the two conspirators do? They
can’t use cryptography, since as soon as Wendy sees a garbled message she
will become suspicious and put an end to further communication. Instead,
they must communicate surreptitiously, by sending their secrets hidden
inside innocuous-looking messages. For example, Alice and Bob could
agree on a scheme where the hidden message (the payload) is hidden in the
first letter of each sentence in the cover message:

This is called a null cipher. There are many other possible types of cover
messages. For example, Alice could send Bob a picture of the prison cat in
which she has manipulated the low-order bits to encode the payload. Or she
could send him an mp3-file of their favorite love song in which she has
added inaudible echoes—a short one for every 0-bit of the payload, a longer
one for every 1-bit. Or she could subtly manipulate the line spacing in a
pdf-file, 12.0 points representing a 0, 12.1 points representing a 1. Or she
could be even sneakier and ask Wendy to pass along a Tetris program she’s
written to help Bob while away the long hours in solitary. However,
unbeknownst to Wendy, the program not only plays Tetris, but inside its
control or data structures Alice has hidden the secret payload detailing their
escape plan. In this book we will consider exactly this scenario and many
like it. We call a program that contains both a secret and any technique for
preventing an attack against this secret surreptitious software.

1.2 Attack and Defense

You cannot do computer security research, or computer security practice,
without carefully examining your attack model, your assumptions about the
adversary’s abilities, and the strategies that he’ll use to attack your system.
In cryptography research, for example, you might assume that “the
adversary cannot find the secret key” or “the adversary isn’t better at
factoring than I am” or “the adversary won’t successfully tamper with the
tamperproof smartcard.” Once you have an adversarial model, you can go
ahead and design a system that is secure against these attack scenarios. In
the real world, adversaries will then immediately try to find scenarios you
didn’t think about in order to get past the defenses you’ve put up! The
cheapest way to break a cryptosystem isn’t to spend $100,000 on
specialized hardware to factor a key—it’s to spend $50,000 to bribe
someone to give you the key. The easiest way to get secrets out of a
smartcard isn’t to pry the card open (having to bypass the security features
that the designers put in place to defend against exactly this attack), but to
induce faults in the card by subjecting it to radiation, modifying its power
supply voltage, and so on, attacks the designers didn’t have in mind.

In surreptitious software research, the situation is no different. Researchers
have often made assumptions about the behavior of the adversary that have
no basis in reality. In our own research, we (the authors of this book) have
often made the assumption that “the adversary will employ static analysis
techniques to attack the system,” because coming from a compiler
background, that’s exactly what we would do! Or, others have speculated
that “the adversary will build up a complete graph of the system and then
look for subgraphs that are weakly connected, under the assumption that
these represent surreptitious code that does not belong to the original
program.” One might assume that those researchers came from a graph-
theoretic background. Some work has endowed the adversary with not
enough power (“the adversary will not run the program”—of course he
will!) and some has endowed him with too much power: “The adversary has
access to, or can construct, a comprehensive test input set for the program
he’s attacking, giving him the confidence to make wholesale alterations to a
program he did not write and for which he does not have documentation or
source code.”

Unfortunately, much of the research published on surreptitious software has
not clarified the attack model that was used. One of our stated goals with
this book is to change that. Thus, for each algorithm, we present attacks that
are possible now and that may be possible in the future.

In Chapter 2 we will also look at a defense model, ideas of how we good
guys can protect ourselves against attacks from the bad guys. We will
propose a model that tries to apply ideas taken from the way plants,
animals, and human societies have used surreptition to protect themselves
against attackers to the way we can protect software from attack. We will be
using this model in the rest of the book to classify software protection
schemes that have been proposed in the literature.

1.3 Program Analysis

An attack against a program typically will go through two stages: an
analysis stage that gathers information about the program, and a
transformation stage that makes modifications to the program based on the
information that was collected. There are two basic ways of analyzing the
program: You can just look at the code itself (this is called static analysis),
or you can collect information by looking at the execution of the code
(dynamic analysis).

Static analyses takes only one input, the program P itself:
There are a huge number of different kinds of static analysis that have been
developed over the years. The chief designers have been software
engineering researchers who want to analyze programs for defects and
compiler researchers who want to analyze programs to optimize them, but
there are also crackers who want to analyze programs to remove protection
codes. Static analysis gathers information that we call conservative, that is,
it may be imprecise but it will always err on the conservative side. So for
example, if a static analysis tells you that “on line 45, variable x is always
42,” you can be sure that this is the case. Sometimes conservative analyses
will fail to gather a piece of information about the code that is in fact true,
but at the very least, it will never lie and say that something is true when it
isn’t.

Dynamic analyses collect information about a program by executing it on a
sample input data set:

The accuracy of the generated information depends on the completeness of
the input data. Because of this, dynamic analysis can only make predictions
such as, “On line 45, variable x is always 42, well, OK, at least for the set of
inputs I’ve tried.” Code transformations that make use of information only
from static analyses are safe in that they won’t turn a working program into
a buggy one (assuming, of course, that the transformation itself is
semantics-preserving, i.e., it doesn’t change the meaning of the program).
Transformations that use dynamic analysis results, on the other hand, will
typically not be safe: They can fail if they are based on information
gathered from an insufficient input data set.

Depending on what an attacker is trying to accomplish, he will choose
different types of analyses and transformations. If all he wants to do is to
disable a license check, the simplest of static and dynamic analyses may be
all he needs: He can just run the program under a debugger until the
“license expired” alert comes up, find the approximate location in the code,
disassemble the code at that location, read until he finds something that
looks like if today's date > license date then..., fire up a binary editor on the
code, and edit out the offending lines. If, on the other hand, he wants to
extract a complex algorithm from a huge program, being able to decompile
it all the way to source code would be very helpful.

1.3.1 A Simple Reverse Engineering Example

To make this a little more concrete, let’s look at an example. Assume that
your boss has given you the following string of bytes and asked you to
reverse engineer it:

     06 3b 03 3c 1b 07 a2 00 15 1a 06 a3 00 0b
     06 3b 84 01 01 a7 ff f1 06 3b a7 ff ec b1

He tells you that these bytes correspond to the bytecode for a competitor’s
Java program that contains a very secret and important algorithm. The code
actually corresponds to the following program, but of course as a reverse
engineer you don’t know this yet:
Since your goal is to find and understand the super-duper-secret algorithm,
it would be great if you could turn this bytecode mess into some really
clean and easy-to-read Java source code. If the owner of the code inserted
some obfuscations or other trickery to confuse us, then it would be great if
we were able to remove that too, of course.

As your first step, you’ll want to disassemble the bytes. This means to
convert the raw bytes into a symbolic, assembly code form. For Java
bytecode this is essentially trivial, and there are many tools (such as jasmin
or javap) that will do the job:
We’ve shaded the source code and instructions to make it easy for you to
identify which part of the source code corresponds to which bytecode
instructions. We’ve put the codebytes themselves in brackets.

Java bytecode was designed to make disassembly easy. The bytecode
contains enough information to allow for the recovery of types and control
flow. This is not true of other machine codes, such as those for x86 and
other processors. For these binary codes, it is easy to insert code that will
confuse disassembly. We will talk more about this in Chapter 3.
Now that you have the Java bytecode in an assembly code format, your next
step is to perform control flow analysis, which will recover the order in
which the code can be executed. The result of this analysis is a control flow
graph (CFG). A node of this graph consists of straight-line code, except that
the last statement can be a jump. There is an edge from one node to another
if it is possible for us take this path through the code during execution:

The nodes in the CFG are called basic blocks. CFGs are the central data
structure around which many compilers and reverse engineering tools are
built. We’ve again used shading to make it easy to see which basic blocks
correspond to which bytecode instruction sequences.

Next, you will want to perform a variety of analysis tasks to gather as much
information as you can about the code. This information may allow you to
perform transformations that will make the code simpler and easier to
understand, or even to remove some of the obfuscations that may have been
added. One family of analyses common in optimizing compilers and reverse
engineering tools is called data flow analysis. You’ll learn more about this
in Section 3.1.2 127. In our example, an analysis called Constant
Propagation can be used to track the value of variable x in order to see at
which points in the code it will always have the same (constant) value:
In the leftmost flow graph, we’ve indicated that at first we know nothing
about the value of x at the entry and exit of each basic block. In the second
step, we’ve considered each basic block once, and have gathered some
information. After a basic block has executed the statement x = 3, for
example, it is clear that x must have the value 3. Also, if a basic block
doesn’t change the value of x, then x must have the same value after the
block executes as it did before. When control can flow into a basic block
from two different directions and we’ve computed that x has the same value
on both paths, then we can safely assume that it will always have that value
at the entry to the block. After considering all the basic blocks one more
time, you’re left with the annotated control flow graph to the left:
Given this CFG, you can now start to perform transformations. First,
wherever x is used and you’ve determined that its value is constant, you can
go ahead and replace x with the computed value. So, for example, x<=3 can
be replaced by true, since x=3 at the entrance to this basic block. Given this
transformation, you can now perform a Dead Code Elimination, getting rid
of any basic block that can never be executed, and you can also get rid of
any redundant statements. The result is the last CFG discussed earlier.

Now, eyeballing this code, it’s clear that further transformations are
possible. In fact, the loop reduces to a single statement, i=4, and since the
procedure returns nothing and has no side effects, it can be removed
altogether! In this particular case, this is easy to see, but in general, the
result will depend on the power of the analyses and the complexity of the
programs.

You can’t be sure whether the “extra” code that you’ve been able to
eliminate was inserted by a code obfuscator with the purpose of sowing
confusion or was just the result of a really broken compiler. All you know is
that you’ve been able to turn the raw sequence of bytes your boss gave you
into a much simpler structured form and to get rid of some irrelevant code
in the process.

The final step of your reverse engineering effort should be to take the
transformed control flow graph and turn it into source code. The graph is so
simple that this decompilation step is trivial. You get:

     public static void P() {
     int i = 0;
     while (i<4)
     i++;
     }

Obviously, other source forms are possible, for example, using a for loop.
Now, turning raw bytes into readable source code is very helpful for a
reverse engineer, but the process typically won’t stop when source code is
generated. The final stage, extracting a deep understanding of the
algorithms employed or modifying the code to bypass license checks, and
so on, will often have to be done by hand.

In Chapter 2 (Methods of Attack and Defense), we’ll show you the general
strategies that reverse engineers go through when they attack code in order
to reveal its secrets or to make it perform tasks it wasn’t designed to do. In
Chapter 3 (Program Analysis), we’ll delve into even more detail and discuss
the many kinds of tools and analysis techniques available to your adversary.
We will not simply present the off-the-shelf tools that happen to be
available now, but will discuss those that could be built given currently
known techniques. It’s much too easy to say, “Our software protection
algorithm is secure because we’ve implemented it for dynamically linked
x86 executables, and current decompilers only handle statically linked
code.” A much more interesting statement would be, “This algorithm
employs protection techniques that can cause code explosion in any
decompiler, current and future.”

1.4 Code Obfuscation

The first protection technique we’re going to look at is code obfuscation.
What’s particularly interesting about obfuscation is that it’s a double-edged
sword: Bad guys use it to protect their malware from discovery (you will
see this in the next section), good guys use it to protect their programs from
reverse engineering, and bad guys can also use it to destroy secrets (such as
watermarks) stored in the good guys’ programs.

In the most general sense, to obfuscate a program means to transform it into
a form that is more difficult for an adversary to understand or change than
the original code. We are deliberately vague about defining “difficult,” but
we typically take it to mean that the obfuscated program requires more
human time, more money, or more computing power to analyze than the
original program. Under this definition, to distribute a program in a
compiled form rather than as source code is a form of obfuscation, since
analyzing binary machine code is more demanding than reading source.
Similarly, we would consider a program that has been optimized to be more
obfuscated than one that has not, since many code optimizations make
analysis (both by humans and tools such as disassemblers and decompilers)
more onerous.

However, the tools and techniques we present in this book go further than
compilation and optimization in order to make a program hard to
understand. In contrast to an optimizer that rearranges code for the purposes
of efficiency, a code obfuscator transforms code for the sole purpose of
making it difficult to analyze. A negative by-product of obfuscating
transformations is that the resulting code often becomes larger, slower, or
both. The author of the code has to decide whether the protection that the
transformations afford is worth this overhead.

Obfuscation is often confused with security through obscurity, a term (used
contemptuously) for the “branch” of cryptography or security where the
algorithms used are expected to remain secret. This is in contrast to
mainstream research that teaches that you must assume that all algorithms
are public, and the only secrets you may keep are the cryptographic keys,
and so on, that are the inputs to the algorithms. The idea is that many eyes
examining the same algorithm or piece of code will likely be able to find
flaws, and the more eyes that have failed to find a flaw, the more confident
you can be that the algorithm is, in fact, secure. This principle is frequently
violated, and you’ll often see unscrupulous web-sites advertise “military-
strength, proprietary” cryptographic algorithms, arguing that “since no one
knows what our algorithm does, this will make it that much harder to
break.” The same argument is sometimes made in reverse by software
vendors like Microsoft: “Open-source software is inherently more
vulnerable to attacks than our closed-source code since you can easily read
the source and find bugs to exploit.” We know from experience that both
claims are false. Hackers have no problem finding holes in closed-source
software, and once a proprietary algorithm is leaked (which, inevitably,
happens) it is often found to have serious and exploitable flaws.
As we define it in this book, obfuscation isn’t security through obscurity. As
with research in cryptography, we generally expect that the obfuscating
code transformation algorithms are known to the attacker and that the only
thing the defender can assume is kept secret are the seeds that determine
how and where these algorithms are applied.

Listing 1.1. Obfuscation example. The original unobfuscated
version of the code can be found on the book’s Web site.

     public class C {
     static Object get0(Object[] I) {
     Integer I7, I6, I4, I3; int t9, t8;
     I7=new Integer(9);
     for (;;) {
     if                  (((Integer)I[0]).intValue()%
     ((Integer)I[1]).intValue()==0)
     {t9=1; t8=0;} else {t9=0; t8=0;}
     I4=new Integer(t8);
     I6=new Integer(t9);
     if ((I4.intValue()^I6.intValue())!=0)
     return new Integer(((Integer)I[1]).intValue());
     else {
     if                            ((((I7.intValue()+
     I7.intValue()*I7.intValue())%2!=0)?0:1)!=1)
     return new Integer(0);
     I3=new       Integer(((Integer)I[0]).intValue()%
     ((Integer)I[1]).intValue());
     I[0]=new Integer(((Integer)I[1]).intValue());
     I[1]=new Integer(I3.intValue());
     }
     }
     }
Before we look at some applications of code obfuscation, let’s have a look
at what obfuscated code might actually look like. Check out Listing 1.1 for
a very simple example generated by the SandMark Java code obfuscator.
Without peeking (the answer is in footnote 2), time yourself to see how long
it takes you to analyze this 20-line program and figure out what it does.
Now imagine that rather than being 20 lines long, it’s of a “normal” size for
a program today: hundreds of thousands of lines to a few million lines.
Then how long would it take you? What does your intuition tell you? Does
the time to understanding grow linearly with the size of the code and the
number of obfuscations applied? Do you think some obfuscations would
add more confusion than others? Might some obfuscations be harder to
undo than others? If so, how much harder? Are some impossible to undo?
Unfortunately, the answers to these questions are largely unknown. As of
now, we don’t have any models that can tell us how much longer it would
take to reverse engineer a program that’s been obfuscated by a particular
transformation or sequence of transformations, nor do we know what
overhead these transformations will entail (although this is certainly easier
to measure). Much current obfuscation research tries to devise such models
[289], but we don’t yet have any that are developed enough to be used by
practitioners.

1.4.1 Applications of Code Obfuscation

Now let’s look at a few scenarios where you can use code obfuscation to
protect your code.

1.4.1.1 Malicious Reverse Engineering

In the first scenario, malicious reverse engineering, Doris builds a program
that contains a valuable trade secret (a clever algorithm or design), which
Axel, a rival developer, extracts and incorporates into his own program and
sells to his customer, Carol:
This scenario is what most people have in mind when they think of code
obfuscation. As we’ll soon see, it’s far from the only one. The assumption
(although there’s no formal proof of this proposition) is that given enough
time and resources, Axel will be able to reverse engineer any program. In
other words, no secret hidden in a program will remain a secret forever.
Doris’ goal, instead, has to be to use obfuscation to slow Axel down as
much as possible, while at the same time adding as little overhead as
possible. Ideally, the code is convoluted enough that Axel gives up trying to
understand it and says “OK, fine, then! I’ll just reinvent this darned
algorithm myself from scratch.” Ideally, Doris is able to choose just the
right set of obfuscating transformations and apply them in just the right
places to not make her program so slow and bloated that her customers will
no longer buy it.

1.4.1.2 Digital Rights Management

In a digital rights management scenario, Doris is in the business of building
a software media player. The player will only play music, images, or video
that is distributed encrypted in a special file format known as a cryptolope.
The player contains cryptographic keys that are necessary to unlock and
play the media:
Since you want to be able to enjoy the encrypted media that you’ve bought
in an “untethered environment,” say, watching a movie on your laptop on a
plane where there’s no network connectivity, Doris is forced to store the
decryption keys somewhere on your computer, probably inside your
player’s code. Along with the keys, of course, the code will also contain the
decryption algorithm and a decoder that turns the decrypted media into
analog signals that you can hear or watch. In a typical player, the decoding
chain looks like this:

You should notice that there are three targets for Axel to attack here. He
could steal the keys (and if they’re universal keys he can now decode any
media designed for this player, and, if they’re not tied specifically to him,
he can sell them on the Web), he could steal the digital media, or he could
steal the less desirable analog output. The possible weak points of such a
system are many. First of all, it’s probably unreasonable to believe that the
cryptographic algorithm used by the system will not be well known to an
attacker. So unless the decryptor is obfuscated, a simple pattern-matching
attack may be all that is necessary in order to locate the decryptor and the
keys it uses. Dynamic attacks are also possible. For example, cryptographic
algorithms have very specific execution patterns (think tight loops with lots
of xors) and if they’re not heavily obfuscated, they’d be easy to find using a
dynamic trace of the program. The keys themselves are a weak point.
They’re long strings of bits with a high degree of randomness, and as such,
unusual beasts in most programs. So Axel could simply scan through the
player code looking for, say, a 512-bit long string that’s more random than
expected. Any code that uses this string is likely to be the decryptor. Once
Axel has found the location of the decryptor, he should have little problem
finding where the decrypted media is generated and sent to the decoder. He
can then simply add some code that writes the decrypted content to a file,
and he’s done. What we learn from this is that Doris needs to obfuscate her
code so that a simple pattern-match against it won’t reveal the location of
the decryptor or decoder, or the interfaces between them. She needs to
tamperproof the code so that Axel can’t insert new code, she needs to
obfuscate not only the static code but also the dynamic behavior of the
player, and she needs to obfuscate static data (the keys) in the code as well.
And, still, she has to assume that these defense measures are only
temporary. Given enough time, Axel will bypass them all, and so she needs
to have a plan for what to do when the system is broken.

1.4.1.3 Mobile Agent Computing

In our next scenario, Doris sends out a mobile shopping agent, which visits
online stores in order to find the best deal on a particular CD. The agent
traverses the Web and asks every store it encounters if they have the CD
and how much it costs, records the best price so far, and eventually, returns
to Doris with the site where she can get the best deal. Of course, if evil Axel
runs a store there’s no reason why he wouldn’t cheat. First of all, he can just
erase the information that the agent has collected so far and substitute his
own price:
This strategy will only help him if the agent returns directly to Doris when
it’s done with Axel’s site. Much better (for Axel) would be to manipulate
the code so that regardless of which stores it visits after his, it will still
record his (higher) price as the best one.

One defense that has been proposed (there are many others) is for Doris to
obfuscate the agent [165], thereby slowing down an attack. Ideally, this way
Axel won’t have enough resources (he’s servicing many simultaneous
requests, after all) to reverse engineer and modify the agent. Also, Doris
might be able to detect that the agent spends a suspicious amount of time at
Axel’s site. She can further complicate Axel’s attack by differently
obfuscating every agent she sends out. This way, he won’t be able to speed
up his analyses over time as he gathers more information about the agents
and their defenses.

1.4.1.4 Grid Computing

In the grid computing scenario, Doris wants to run her program P but lacks
the computational resources to do so. So she buys cycles from Axel to run P
on his supercomputer, sends Axel P and the input data, and receives the
output data in return. The problem arises when one or more of P, the inputs,
or the outputs are confidential:

Doris must worry not only about Axel snooping on her algorithms or her
inputs and outputs but also about his tampering with her program. If she
can’t trust that P maintains its integrity on Axel’s site, she can’t trust the
validity of the output data that Axel returns to her.
One way to defend the confidentiality of the inputs and outputs is to encrypt
them and transform P into a program that operates directly on encrypted
inputs and produces encrypted results. There is considerable research on
such homomorphic encryption schemes, but the ones invented so far are
inefficient and not applicable to real programs.

Alternatively, Doris can obfuscate P to help maintain confidentiality of its
algorithms or tamperproof it to help maintain its integrity by using the
techniques in this book. To preserve the confidentiality of the data,
something similar to a DRM scheme can be used, where obfuscation and
tamperproofing are used to hide and protect the encryption code.

Grid computing is a harder scenario to protect than many others. The reason
is that you care about the confidentiality of algorithms and data, integrity of
code, and on top of that, performance. The reason that Doris sent her code
to Axel, after all, was so that it would execute faster on his superior
hardware! She would be very unhappy, indeed, if the protection techniques
she applied negated the performance boost she was paying for.

1.4.1.5 Artificial Diversity

Code obfuscation techniques have also been applied to operating systems to
protect them against attacks by malware such as viruses and worms [74,75].
The idea is for Doris to randomize her code so that a malicious agent will
not be able to locate or take advantage of a known vulnerability. Just like in
the mobile agent scenario, we can take advantage of multi-versioning: If
every distributed version of Doris’ code is obfuscated differently, Axel’s
virus will need to be very clever to infect all of them:
This is known as artificial diversity. Of course, viruses themselves make
use of obfuscation techniques to avoid detection by virus scanners, and with
spectacular success. We will talk about this in the next section.

1.4.2 Obfuscating Transformations

It’s of course possible to take your program with its precious cargo and
manually transform it into a mess that’s hard for your adversary to
understand and manipulate. In practice, though, that’s too tedious and error-
prone. A better idea is to build an obfuscation tool that translates your well-
designed, easy-to-comprehend, easy-to-modify program into an
incomprehensible mess of spaghetti code that’s near-impossible to alter.
Such an obfuscator is similar to a compiler, except that instead of
generating efficient and compact code, it generates code that’s hard for your
adversary to comprehend.

Conceptually, an obfuscation tool takes four inputs: the program        you
want to transform, the amount of obfuscation you would like to add, the
amount of overhead you can accept, and a list of the code locations that are
particularly precious to you that you would like to protect the most:

Internally, the obfuscator has a set of obfuscating code transformations, a
set of program analyses needed to implement those transformations, and a
loop that iteratively applies the transformations to . The analyses will be
similar to those used by compilers and reverse engineering tools. The
process continues until the amount of obfuscation you desire has been
reached or the maximum amount of overhead you can accept has been
exceeded. The output is a program ′ that behaves the same as but whose
internal structure is very different. Practical code obfuscators may have a
simpler structure than this. It’s common, for example, to have just a small
number of transformations and to apply them in a fixed order.

There are four broad classes of obfuscating code transformations.
Abstraction transformations break down the overall structure of the
program, i.e., they obfuscate the way the programmer has organized the
program into classes, modules, and functions. Data transformations replace
the data structures the programmer has selected with others that reveal less
information. Control transformations modify the control structures (if- and
while-statements) in the program to hide the paths it may take at runtime.
Dynamic transformations, finally, insert a transformer into the program
so that, at runtime, causes the program to continuously transform itself.
At runtime, the program therefore looks like this:

We’ve spread our discussion of code obfuscation over three chapters. In
Chapter 4 (Code Obfuscation), you will see many control, data, and
abstraction transformations. We’ll discuss the amount of confusion they
add, how hard they are to defeat, and the amount of overhead they incur. In
Chapter 6 (Dynamic Obfuscation), we’ll do the same for dynamic
obfuscation. In Chapter 5 (Obfuscation Theory), we will look at the
theoretical underpinnings of obfuscation. In particular, we’ll be interested in
finding out what can be obfuscated, and what can’t.

To give you some idea of what obfuscating code transformations do, let’s
go through a really trivial example. We’ll start with a little C program in its
original form and show how it changes as you apply, first, an abstraction
transformation, then a data transformation, next a control transformation,
and finally, a dynamic transformation. Here’s the original program:

The first thing we’re going to do is to hide the fact that the program consists
of two functions. The programmer had something in mind when he decided
to break the program into three parts, main, foo, and bar; presumably, this
matched the mental model he had of his program. So let’s break this
abstraction by merging foo and bar into one function, foobar. This new
function takes three parameters. Two of them, x and z, are necessary to
accommodate bar’s arguments, and the third, s, we’ll use to distinguish calls
that should execute foo’s and bar’s bodies. Here’s foobar and the transformed
version of main:

Notice how it appears as if main calls the same function twice when, in fact,
it’s really calling two different functions.

Now, in many programs the precious thing that you want to protect is data
rather than code or design. This is, for example, the case in a digital rights
management system where you want to prevent the adversary from getting
their hands on the cleartext media. Ideally, in a system like that, the data is
never in cleartext. Rather, it is always encoded in some incomprehensible
(to the attacker) format and always operated on in this format. Let’s assume
that, in our little example program, we want to protect all the integer values
from the prying eyes of an attacker, who, for example, might be examining
the program by running it under a debugger.

As it turns out, we’re lucky. The program only performs three operations on
the data, namely, assignment, multiplication, and comparison for equality.
Why is this lucky? Well, there’s a very simple encoding on integers that
supports exactly these operations, namely, RSA encryption! We’ll leave the
details of this encoding to later in the book. For right now, you’ll just have
to take our word that setting

leads to a program where no integer values are ever in cleartext:

In particular, you can see how 6 is encoded as 12, 42 as 36, and 7 as 37! Not
until the program absolutely has to have a value in cleartext (when it needs
to pass it to printf to print it out) is it finally decoded. Note also that the
multiplication x*7 takes place in the encoded domain; again, no values are in
cleartext until necessary.

Structured programming dictates that you organize your functions by
properly nesting conditional and loop statements. This makes the code easy
to understand and modify. One popular kind of obfuscating control
transformation, control flow flattening, rewrites functions to turn structured
statements into spaghetti code. Here’s what the last version of the foobar
function looks like after control structures have been replaced by plain old
goto statements:

     int foobar(int x, int z, int s) {
     char* next = &&cell0;
     int retVal = 0;

     cell0: next = (s==1)?&&cell1:&&cell2; goto
     *next;
     cell1: retVal=(x*37)%51; goto end;
     cell2: next = (s==2)?&&cell3:&&end; goto *next;
     cell3: next = (x==z)?&&cell4:&&end; goto *next;
     cell4: {
     int x2=x*x % 51, x3=x2*x % 51;
     int x4=x2*x2 % 51, x8=x4*x4 % 51;
     int x11=x8*x3 % 51;
     printf("%i\n",x11); goto end;
     }
     end: return retVal;
     }

Have a look at Listing 1.2 25. Here, we’ve broken the body of foobar into
two functions, A and B. This, by itself, isn’t a very effective transformation,
but what’s interesting here is what happens to A and B at runtime. Every time
foobar is called, it makes A and B trade places:
From an attacker’s point of view this code is hard to understand in two
different ways. If he looks at our program statically, i.e., without running it,
the abstraction transformation will have removed the way we chose to
organize the program, the data transformation the way we chose our data
structures, and the control transformations the way we structured our flow
of control. If, instead, he decides to learn about the program by executing it,
he will find that the dynamic obfuscation has violated a very basic
assumption about programs, namely, that every time control reaches a
particular point, the same code is executed.

Listing 1.2. The result of a dynamic obfuscating
transformation. The functions A and B will continuously trade
places at runtime. The swap function is in Listing 6.3 377.

     int start = 0;

     typedef int (*printfT) (char const *str,...);
     typedef              int              (*FuncPtr)
     (int,int,int,uint32,int,printfT,void * funcs);
     typedef FuncPtr FuncPtrArr[];
     static FuncPtrArr funcs ={&A,&B};

     int A(int x, int z, int s, uint32 begin,
     int start, printfT printf,void * funcs) {
     int next = 0;
     int retVal = 0;
     char*       cells[]={&&cell0-(uint32)&A,&&cell1-
     (uint32)&A,
     &&cell2-(uint32)&A,&&cell3-(uint32)&A,
     &&cell4-(uint32)&A,&&end-(uint32)&A};
    goto *(cells[next]+begin);
    cell0:    next    =    (s==1)?1:2;     goto    *
    (cells[next]+begin);
    cell1:   retVal=(x*37)%51;   next=5;    goto   *
    (cells[next]+begin);
    cell2:    next    =    (s==2)?3:5;     goto    *
    (cells[next]+begin);
    cell3:    next    =    (x==z)?4:5;     goto    *
    (cells[next]+begin);
    cell4:   FuncPtr    f  =   ((FuncPtr*)    funcs)
    [(1+start)%2];
    f(x,z,s,(uint32)f,start,printf,funcs);
    next=5; goto *(cells[next]+begin);
    end: return retVal;
    }

    int B(int x, int z, int s, uint32 begin,
    int start,printfT printf,void * funcs) {
    int x2=x*x % 51; int x3=x2*x % 51; int x4=x2*x2
    % 51;
    int x8=x4*x4 % 51; int x11=x8*x3 % 51;
    printf("%i\n",x11);
    }

    int foobar(int x, int z, int s) {
    int      retVal      =     funcs[0+start](x,z,s,
    (uint32)funcs[0+start],
    start,printf,funcs);
    swap((caddr_t)funcs[0],(caddr_t)funcs[1],1024);
    start = (start+1) % 2;
    return retVal;
    }

1.4.3 Black Hat Code Obfuscation
For many years obfuscation was considered nothing more than a curiosity,
something that no serious researcher would touch. The International
Obfuscated C Code Contest (IOCCC) [177,227], for example, is an annual
event that (humorously) tries to write the worst programs possible, C being
a particularly suitable language for this task. It was generally assumed that
there could be no real value to any code obfuscation technique and that
anyone using one was just foolish for not using “real” security algorithms.
Only fairly recently has it been acknowledged that there are legitimate
applications where obfuscation and related techniques are the only available
methods of protection.

Unfortunately, however, it’s turned out that the applications where
obfuscation has had its most spectacular success are in what we like to call
black hat scenarios. This should probably not come as much of a surprise.
It’s not uncommon for the bad guys to adopt techniques first designed by
the good guys. Cryptography, for example, can be used to protect the
communication between criminals as well as between law enforcement
agents. Steganography can be used by freedom fighters to avoid detection
by an oppressive regime as well as by terrorists to avoid detection by
national security forces. TV set-top box hackers have been known to first
break through the smartcard-based defenses of the box and then turn around
and use smartcards themselves to protect these hacks from counterattacks
by the set-top box manufacturers!

One black hat scenario is when Axel uses obfuscation to protect his virus V
from detection by Doris:

The virus comes in two parts, the payload, which is the code that’s designed
to cause harm, and the obfuscator, which the virus uses to protect itself from
discovery. In the first step, Axel infects a program with and sends it out
into the wild. If Doris installs the infected ′ on her site, the virus may be
able to infect another program, Q. Before infection, however, the virus uses
the obfuscator to generate a different version of itself. The idea is that if
every version of the virus is different, it will be difficult for Doris’ virus
scanner to detect it. This is similar to the artificial diversity scenario you
saw earlier, only this time the good guy and the bad guy have traded places!

1.4.3.1 Misdirection—Stealthy Obfuscation

If you look at a few of the programs submitted to the IOCCC, it should be
clear that the code looks far from natural. While machine-generated code,
obfuscated code, or optimized code can often look this bad, code written by
humans typically doesn’t. For example, you can tell by looking at the
obfuscator-generated code in Listing 1.1 15 that it wasn’t written by a
typical human programmer. So if Axel was looking for a secret in Doris’
program, a section that looked like this would likely raise his suspicion—
could the secret be hidden behind this obviously obfuscated mess? You’ll
see many cases in this book where the stealthiness of a protection technique
is important; the attacker mustn’t be given a clue as to where in the code the
technique was applied or the order in which a sequence of techniques were
applied.

Misdirection is a particularly nasty black hat obfuscation technique that is
based on the extreme stealthiness of an inserted bug. Look at Listing 1.3
28, which shows a program to collect and tally the votes for American Idol.
The program reads votes from standard input, and after the contest displays
a summary of the votes cast. Here is a sample run of the program:

     > cat votes-cast.txt
     alice
     alice
     bob
     alice
     dmitri
    bob
    zebra
    > java Voting < votes-cast.txt
    Total: 7
    Invalid: 1
    alice: 3
    bob: 2
    charles: 0
    dmitri: 1

Listing 1.3. Obfuscated voting code.

    public class Voting {
    final int INVALID_VOTE = -1;
    int invalidVotes, totalVotes = 0;
    String[]    candidates   =   {"alice",    "bob",
    "charles", "dmitri"};
    int[] tally = new int [candidates.length];
    BufferedReader in = null; BufferedWriter log =
    null;
    public Voting () {
    in = new BufferedReader (new InputStreamReader
    (System.in));
    }
    public String readVote () {
    try {return in.readLine();}
    catch (Exception e) {return null;}
    }
    public boolean isValidTime (Date today) {
    SimpleDateFormat time = new SimpleDateFormat
    ("HH");
    int        hour24        =        Integer.decode
    (time.format(today)).intValue();
    return !(hour24 < 9 || hour24 > 21);
}
public int decodeVote (String input) {
for (int i=0; i < candidates.length; i++)
if (candidates[i].equals (input)) return i;
return INVALID_VOTE;
}
public void logVote (Date date, int vote)
throws Exception {
if (log == null)
log   =  new   BufferedWriter  (new   FileWriter
("log.txt"));
log.write ("TIME: " + date + " VOTE: " + vote);
}
public void printSummary () {
System.out.println ("Total:"+totalVotes +
"\nInvalid:"+invalidVotes);
for (int i=0; i < candidates.length; i++)
System.out.println     ("Votes    for     "    +
candidates[i] +": "+tally[i]);
}
public void go () {
while (true) {
String input = readVote();
int vote = 0;
if (input == null)break;
try {
Date today = new Date();
if (isValidTime (today)) vote = decodeVote
(input);
else vote = INVALID_VOTE;

logVote (today, vote);
} catch (Exception e) {}
totalVotes++;
if (vote == INVALID_VOTE) invalidVotes++;
else tally[vote]++;
      }
      printSummary();
      }
      public static void main (String args[]) {
      Voting voting = new Voting (); voting.go();
      }
      }

Can you tell whether the program produces a fair count or not, or has it, in
fact, been deliberately manipulated to favor a particular candidate? Before
reading the answer in footnote 3, time yourself to see how long it took to
analyze this 58-line program. Now, how long would it take for you to find a
potential problem in a real-world voting system comprising hundreds of
thousands of lines of code? What if the techniques used in Listing 1.3 were
combined with those in Listing 1.1 15? Might it be possible to provide
enough confusion so that by the time the obfuscation has been penetrated
and any irregularities identified, the next American Idol has already been
selected (or, in the case of the United States’ presidential election, the
Electoral College has convened and cast their votes)?

1.4.3.2 Obfuscating Viruses

As you will see in this book, there are important real-world problems that,
to date, only obfuscation is able to tackle. Unfortunately, however, it’s in
black hat code scenarios where obfuscation has had its most spectacular
successes: Obfuscation is used by malware writers to protect their viruses,
worms, trojans, and rootkits from detection. It is entertaining to examine
techniques that hackers have invented and successfully used to foil security
researchers, and to see whether the good guys can make use of the same
techniques. Virus writers and virus scanner writers are engaged in a cat-and-
mouse game: When a new virus detection technique is invented, the virus
writers counter with a more sophisticated code obfuscation technique,
which is then countered by a more powerful detection technique, and so on.
So far, the hackers seem to be winning. Recent reports claim that 25% of
the world’s computers have been penetrated and taken over by botnets
[368]. Obviously, this can be attributed not only to the success of
obfuscated malware but also to the fact that many people run unpatched
operating systems, outdated virus scanners, and so on.

Virus writers typically beat virus scanners by making their virus code
“invisible” to the scanners. Scanners have only a limited amount of
resources and cannot fully analyze a file to decide whether or not it’s
malicious. Even if they could, there are theoretical results [74] that state
that it may still fail. The scanner therefore identifies a virus by its signature,
some aspect of it that is easy enough to extract and that does not change
from one infection to the next. This is similar to birthmarks, which you will
see in Chapter 10 (Software Similarity Analysis).

What sort of tricks does a virus writer use to make the viruses stay
“invisible” to virus scanners? Look at the self-reproducing viral Java
program in Listing 1.4 31. Real viruses are rarely, if ever, written in Java,
but this simplified example will help you understand how a virus can use
obfuscation to protect itself.

There are several things that are noteworthy in this Java virus. The first
thing to note is that the program seems to have its entire source code
encoded as a string within itself. In order to manage this in a finite space, a
program takes advantage of the duplicate structure of the program. This
trick is used in a common geek amusement to devise quines—programs that
when run produce their own source code as their only output [1].

The source code is built in the variable self. It’s eventually written to a file
and compiled using Sun’s internal Java compiler. The recent Slapper worm
[320] and its variants also used a compiler to make the virus less platform-
dependent. Using a compiler in this way has another side effect that is
advantageous for a virus writer. Different compilers can produce slightly
different (though semantically equivalent) programs from the same source
code. This makes it a bit harder to find good signatures that scanners can
use to reliably detect a virus.
In Listing 1.4 31, the example goes one step further. Before the new copy
of the virus is written to a file, it is passed to the function morph. The morph
function adds a i++ statement between every line of the main program. This
instruction has no effect on the output or behavior of the program.
However, this trivial obfuscation ensures that every new version of the
program will be different from its predecessor! This means that a virus
scanner that uses a trivial checksum-based signature detector will not be
powerful enough to identify the virus.

Listing 1.4. A metamorphic virus in Java.

     import java.io.*;

     public class m {
     private static int i = 0;
     private static com.sun.tools.javac.Main javac=
     new com.sun.tools.javac.Main();
     public static String morph (String text) {
     return text.substring(0,360) +
     text.substring(360).replaceAll (
     new String (new char[] { ';' }),
     new String (new char[] { ';','i','+','+',';'
     }));
     }
     public static void main (String[] a) throws
     IOException {
     String self="import java.io.*; public class m {
     private
     static    int    i   =    0;   private    static
     com.sun.tools.javac.Main
     javac=new      com.sun.tools.javac.Main();public
     static String
     morph      (String      text)      {      return
     text.substring(0,360) +
     text.substring(360).replaceAll (new String (new
char[]
{   ';'    }),new     String  (new    char[]   {
';','i','+','+',';' })
);} public static void main (String[] a) throws
IOException
{ String self=@;char q=34;char t=64;String
text=
self.replaceAll(String.valueOf(t),q+morph(self)
+q);String
filename    =   new    String  (new   char[]   {
'm','.','j','a','v',
'a'     });File      file=new    File(filename);
file.deleteOnExit();
PrintWriter         out=new      PrintWriter(new
FileOutputStream(file
));               out.println(text);out.close();
javac.compile(new
String[]{filename});}}";
char q=34; char t=64;
String
text=self.replaceAll(String.valueOf((char)64),
q+morph(self)+q);
text=text.replaceAll(String.valueOf((char)35),
String.valueOf((char)34));
String filename =
new       String         (new     char[]       {
'm','.','j','a','v','a' });
File file = new File(new String (filename));
file.deleteOnExit();
PrintWriter out =
new PrintWriter(new FileOutputStream(file));
out.println(text);
out.close();
javac.compile(new String[] { filename });
}
}
Imagine if, instead of our very trivial morph function, a virus writer included
and used one of the more sophisticated obfuscations we discussed in the last
section. What sort of analysis would a scanner need to perform to detect
such a virus?

Real viruses use obfuscation to counter detection by ensuring that as many
properties as possible change between infections. Metamorphic viruses use
obfuscating transformations to change the entire body of the program from
one generation to the next. Polymorphic viruses are a simpler variation of
metamorphic viruses. Instead of morphing the entire program, each
generation of the virus encrypts itself with a different key. Of course, for the
virus to still be functional it must also contain a decryption and execution
routine. Polymorphic viruses only morph this decryption and execution
routine. In this way, morphing protects the decryption and execution routine
from the scanner, while encryption protects the rest of the program.

1.5 Tamperproofing

One of the uses of obfuscation is to add so much confusion to a program
that an adversary will give up trying to understand or modify it. But what if
Axel is able to break through Doris’ obfuscation defenses, then what? Well,
in addition to obfuscating her code, Doris can also tamperproof it. This
means that if Axel tries to make modifications to Doris’ program, he will be
left with a program with unintended side effects: The cracked program may
simply refuse to run, it could crash randomly, it could destroy files on
Axel’s computer, or it could phone home and tell Doris about Axel’s attack,
and so on.

In general, a tamperproofing algorithm performs two duties. First, it has to
detect that the program has been modified. A common strategy is to
compute a checksum over the code and compare it to an expected value. An
alternative strategy is check that the program is in an acceptable execution
state by examining the values of variables.

Once tampering has been detected, the second duty of a tamperproofing
algorithm is to execute the tamper response mechanism, for example
causing the program to fail. This is actually fairly tricky: You don’t want to
alert the attacker to the location of the tamperproofing code since that will
make it easier for him to disable it. For example, tamperproofing code like

     if (tampering-detected()) abort()

is much too weak because it’s easy for the attacker to trace back from the
location where the program failed (the call to abort()) to the location where
tampering was detected. Once he has that information, the tamperproofing
is easy to disable. A good tamperproofing system separates the tamper
detection from the tamper response in both space and time.

1.5.1 Applications of Tamperproofing

Tamperproofing is important in digital rights management systems where
any change to the code could allow Axel to enjoy media for free. Here’s a
top-level view of a DRM system:

     static final long key = 0xb0b5b0b5;
     void play(byte[] media) {
     // if (!hasPaidMoney("Bob")) return;
     System.out.print(key);
     byte[] clear = decrypt(key,media);
     System.out.print(clear);
     float[] analog = decode(clear);
     System.out.print(analog);
     device.write(analog);
     }
Notice how Axel has been able to delete a check (light gray) that prevented
him from playing the media if he had no money, and to insert extra code
(dark gray) to dump the secret cryptographic key and the decrypted (digital
and analog) media. In general, tampering with a program can involve
deleting code, inserting new code, or modifying original code. All can be
equally devastating.

Another common use of tamperproofing is to protect a license check. Doris
inserts a check in the code that stops Axel from running the program after a
specific date or after a certain number of executions, or to let no more than
a given number of Axel’s employees run the program at any one time. Axel,
being an unscrupulous user, locates and disables the license check to give
him unlimited use of the program. Doris can obfuscate her program (to
make it hard for Axel to find the license code), but she can also tamperproof
the license check so that if Axel finds and alters it, the program will no
longer function properly:

There are situations where simply failing when tampering is detected isn’t
enough; you also need to alert someone that an attack has been attempted.
For example, consider a multi-player online computer game where, for
performance reasons, the client program caches information (such as local
maps) that it won’t let the player see. A player who can hack around such
limitations will get an unfair advantage over his competitors. This is a
serious problem for the game manufacturer, since players who become
disillusioned with the game because of rampant cheating may turn to
another one. It’s therefore essential for the game administrators to detect
any attempt at tampering so that anyone who tries to cheat can immediately
be ejected from the game. The term we use for this problem is remote
tamperproofing. The goal is to make sure that a program running on a
remote untrusted host is the correct, unadulterated version, and that it is
running in a safe environment. “Safe” here can mean that the program is
running on the correct hardware (and not under a hacked emulator), that the
operating system is at the correct patch-level, that all environment variables
have reasonable values, that the process has no debugger attached, and so
on. As long as the client code determines that it is running safely and hasn’t
been tampered with, it sends back a stream of surreptitious “I’m-OK”
signals to the server:

In this figure, the program is using steganographic techniques to embed this
secret bitstream in TCP/IP headers.

Even if you don’t intend to cause harm to a cheating game player,
monitoring your protected programs for evidence of an ongoing attack can
still be useful. We know of at least one major software protection company
that includes a phone home facility in their code that allows them to watch,
in real time, an attack in progress. Being able to see which strategies the
attacker is using, see which strategies are successful, measure how long an
attack takes to complete and thus, ultimately, get a feel for which protection
algorithms are effective and which are not is definitely useful. However, we
know that other software protection companies eschew such eavesdropping
because of its problematic privacy issues.

1.5.2 An Example
If you have ever run a signed Java applet or installed a program signed by
Microsoft, you’ve already had experience with programs designed to detect
tampering. A signed program carries a certificate issued by a known
authority that can be used to detect if some part of the program has been
changed. Usually such detection is extrinsic to the program itself. For
example, if you try to install a signed Microsoft program that has been
tampered with, the OS will check that the signature is one that Microsoft
trusts and that the program has not been altered since it was signed.
Unfortunately, the obvious way of extending such a scheme to allow a
program to check itself for tampering is not effective. To see this, have a
look at the program in Listing 1.5 36, which converts temperatures
expressed in Fahrenheit into Celsius. The function bad_check_for_tampering
protects the program from tampering by comparing a checksum of the
program file to a checksum computed when the program was compiled. If
they’re not the same, the program simply quits.

Can you think of any difficulties in writing such a program? One problem is
that checksum is embedded in the program and as a result affects the
checksum itself! To successfully construct such a program requires
searching for a value that, when inserted into the program as a checksum,
results in the program having that value as a checksum.

A further problem is that in spite of its clever construction, once a function
has been identified by the attacker as a tamper-detection function, it’s easy
to remove any calls to it.

The function better_check_for_tampering is slightly better. Instead of merely
checking for tampering, it incorporates the output of the checksum into the
code itself. If the program is altered, the value returned by this function
changes, which in turn makes the program subtly incorrect.

In spite of the improvements, better_check_for_tampering remains vulnerable to
the same attack as bad_check_for_tampering. Both tamper-checking functions
are easy to identify, because programs rarely attempt to read themselves.
Once a function is identified as a tamper-checking function, it can be
replaced by a simple function that returns the original checksum as a
constant. Thereafter, an attacker can go ahead and modify the program
arbitrarily.

These weaknesses notwithstanding, checksumming code forms the basis of
many tamperproof detection techniques used in practice. You’ll see some of
them in Chapter 7 (Software Tamperproofing).

Listing 1.5. A self-checking program in Java.

    import java.io.*;
    import java.security.*;

    public class tamper {

    public static int checksum_self () {
    File file = new File("tamper.class");
    FileInputStream   fr   =   new   FileInputStream
    (file);
    DigestInputStream sha = new DigestInputStream
    (fr,
    MessageDigest.getInstance ("SHA"));
    while (fr.read () != -1) {}
    byte[] digest = sha.getMessageDigest().digest
    ();
    int result = 12;
    for (int i=0; i < digest.length; i++) {
    result =(result + digest[i]) % 16;
    }
    }
    public static boolean bad_check_for_tampering
    () throws Exception {
    return checksum_self() != 9;
    }
    public static int better_check_for_tampering ()
    throws Exception {
     return checksum_self();
     }
     public static void main (String args[]) throws
     Exception {
     if    (bad_check_for_tampering())    System.exit
     (-1);
     float celsius=Integer.parseInt (rgs[0]);
     float fahrenheit=better_check_for_tampering() *
     celsius / 5 + 32;
     System.out.println   (celsius  +   "C   =  "   +
     fahrenheit + "F");
     }
     }

1.6 Software Watermarking

There are various scenarios where you would like to mark an object to
indicate that you claim certain rights to it. Most famously, the government
marks all their paper currency with a watermark that is deeply embedded in
the paper and is therefore difficult to destroy or reproduce. For example, if
you found a torn or damaged part of a note, you could hold it up to the light
and use the watermark to identify the original value of the note. Also, if a
forger attempts to pay you using photocopied currency, the missing
watermark will alert you to the fact that the currency is not genuine.

There has been much work in the area of media watermarking, where the
goal is to embed unique identifiers in digital media such as images, text,
video, and audio. In a typical scenario, Doris has an online store that sells
digital music. When Axel buys a copy of a song, she embeds two marks in
it: a copyright notice (the same for every object she sells) that asserts her
rights to the music, and a customer identification number (unique to Axel)
that she can use to track any illegal copies he might make and sell to Carol:
If Doris gets ahold of an illegal copy of a song, she can extract the customer
mark ( is often referred to as a fingerprint), trace the copy back to Axel
as the original purchaser, and then take legal action against him. If Axel
were to claim “Well, I wrote and recorded this song in the first place,” Doris
can extract her copyright notice to prove him wrong.

Media watermarking algorithms typically take advantage of limitations in
the human sensory systems. For example, to embed a watermark in a piece
of music, you can add short—and to the human ear, imperceptible—echos.
For every 0-bit of the mark, you’d add a really short echo and for a 1-bit,
you would add a slightly longer echo. To mark a PDF file, you’d slightly
alter the line spacing: 12 points for a 0-bit, and 12.1 points for a 1-bit. To
mark an image, you’d slightly increase or decrease the brightness of (a
group of) pixels. In all these cases you also need to decide where in the
digital file you will make the changes. This is often done by means of a
random number generator that traces out a sequence of locations in the file.
The seed to the generator is the key without which you cannot extract the
watermark. So a typical watermarking system consists of two functions,
embed and extract:
Both functions take the secret key as input. The embed function also takes
the original object (known as the cover object) and the watermark (the
payload) as input, and produces a watermarked copy (the stego object) as
output. The extract function, as the name implies, extracts the watermark
from the stego object, given the correct key. This is just one basic
watermarking system, and we’ll discuss others in Chapter 8 (Software
Watermarking).

As you see from the figures above, we also have to take the adversary into
account. Axel will want to make sure that before he resells Doris’ object
he’s destroyed every watermark she’s embedded. More precisely, he needs
to somehow disturb the watermark extraction process so that Doris can no
longer extract the mark, even given the right key. In a typical attack, Axel
inserts small disturbances into the watermarked object, small enough that
they don’t diminish its value (so he can still resell it), but large enough that
Doris can no longer extract the mark. For example, he might randomly
adjust the line spacing in a PDF file, spread a large number of imperceptible
echoes all over an audio file, or reset all low-order bits in an image file to 0.
Media watermarking research is a game between the good guys who build
marking algorithms that produce robust marks and the bad guys who build
algorithms that attempt to destroy these marks. In both cases, they want the
algorithms to have as little impact on a viewer’s/listener’s perception as
possible.

Of course, our interest in this book is watermarking software, not media.
But many of the principles are the same. Given a program , a watermark
w, and a key k, a software watermark embedder produces a new program w.
We want      to be semantically equivalent to (have the same input/output
behavior), be only marginally larger and slower than , and of course,
contain the watermark w. The extractor takes    and the key k as input and
returns w.

1.6.1 An Example
Take a look at the example in Listing 1.6 39. How many fingerprints with
the value "Bob" can you find? Actually, that’s not a fair question! As we’ve
noted, we must assume that the algorithms Doris is using are public, and
that the only thing she’s able to keep secret are the inputs to these
algorithms. But nevertheless, have a look and see what you can find. One
fingerprint stands out, of course, the string variable "fingerprint"! Not a very
clever embedding, one might think, but easy to insert and extract, and if
nothing else it could serve as a decoy, drawing Axel’s attention away from
more subtle marks.

Listing 1.6. Watermarking example.

     import java.awt.*;
     public class WMExample extends Frame {
     static String code (int e) {
     switch (e) {
     case 0 : return "voided";
     case 6 : return "check";
     case 5 : return "balance";
     case 4 : return "overdraft";
     case 2 : return "transfer";
     case 1 : return "countersign";
     case 3 : return "billing";
     default: return "Bogus!";
     }
     }

     public void init(String name) {
     Panel panel = new Panel();
     setLayout(new FlowLayout(FlowLayout.CENTER, 10,
     10));
     add(new Label(name));
     add ("Center", panel);
     pack();
     show();
     }

     public static void main(String args[]) {
     String fingerprint = "Bob";

     if (args[0].equals("42"))
     new WMExample().init(code(7).substring(0,2)                            +
     code(5).charAt(0));

     int x = 100;
     x = 1 - (3 % (1 - x));

     }
     }

What else? Take a look at the code method. What Doris did here was to
encode the string "Bob" in base 26 as bob26 = 1 · 262 + 14 · 161 + 1 = 104110,
using a = 0, b = 1, ..., o = 14, ..., z = 25. She then turned 1041 into a
permutation of the integers 〈0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6〉, getting

〈0 → 0, 1 → 6, 2 → 5, 3 → 4, 4 → 2, 5 → 1, 6 → 3〉

This permutation, in turn, she used to reorder the cases of the switch
statement in the code method. To extract the mark, she would have to do the
process in reverse. First, she would need to find the method into which the
mark is embedded (the secret key would point out the code method), extract
the permutation from the switch statement, turn the permutation into 1041,
and finally, decode that as the string "bob". There are many algorithms that,
like this one, are based on permuting aspects of a program to embed a mark.
The very first published watermarking algorithm [104,263] (a Microsoft
patent), for example, permutes the basic blocks of a function’s control flow
graph. In Section 8.4 486, we will discuss this further.
Now what about the statement x=1-(3%(1-x))? Here, Doris created a
translation table from letters to binary operators:

Thus, the three letters of the string "bob" turn into the operand/operator-pairs
1-, 3%, 1-, which when stitched together become x=1-(3%(1-x)). This is similar
in flavor to an algorithm by Monden [252,263] et al., which we will talk
about in Section 8.7.1 505.

The three marks we’ve seen so far are all static, i.e., they’re embedded
directly into the code of the program. In our example we’ve embedded into
source code, but we could have used any convenient program
representation, including binary code, Java bytecode, or any of the many
intermediate code forms used in compilers. We will discuss static
algorithms further in Chapter 8.

There is one final mark in the program, however, and this is a dynamic
fingerprint. What this means is that the fingerprint only appears at runtime,
and only for a particular input to the program. When Doris starts the
example program with the secret input key 42, the statement

new    WMExample().init(code(7).substring(0,2)                                +
code(5).charAt(0));

executes and displays the embedded fingerprint:
In Chapter 9 (Dynamic Watermarking), we will discuss these types of
watermarks. In practice, of course, they are never as obvious as this: It’s too
easy for Axel to find the code that would pop up a window with a string in
it. Rather, the watermark is hidden somewhere in the dynamic state of the
program, and this state gets built only for the special, secret input. A
debugger or a special-purpose recognizer can then examine the state
(registers, the stack, the heap, and so on) to find the fingerprint.

1.6.2 Attacks on Watermarking Systems

As in every security scenario, you need to consider possible attacks against
the watermark. Doris has to assume, of course, that Axel will try to destroy
her marks before trying to resell the program. And, unfortunately, there’s
one attack that will always succeed, that will always manage to destroy the
watermark. Can you think of what it is? To be absolutely sure that the
program he’s distributing doesn’t contain a watermark, well, Axel can just
rewrite the program from scratch, sans the mark!4 We call this a rewrite
attack:

Axel can also add his own watermarks to the program. We call this an
additive attack:
An additive attack might confuse Doris’ recognizer, but more important, it
may help Axel to cast doubt in court as to whose watermark is the original
one. A distortive attack applies semantics-preserving transformations (such
as code optimizations, code obfuscations, and so on) to try to disturb Doris’
recognizer:

Finally, Axel can launch a collusive attack against a fingerprinted program
by buying two differently marked copies and comparing them to discover
the location of the fingerprint:

To prevent such an attack, Doris should apply a different set of obfuscations
to each distributed copy, ensuring that comparing two copies of the same
program will yield little information.

One clever attack that Axel may try to use is not an attack on the watermark
itself. Rather, Axel could try to bring into question the validity of Doris’
watermark by pretending that the software contains his own watermark.
Axel simply writes his own recognizer that “recognizes” this program as
containing his mark. If he is successful, we could not tell which was the
true recognizer and Doris would not be able to present a legally convincing
claim on her own program.

In Chapter 8 and Chapter 9 we will describe many software watermarking
algorithms. Some will be useful for watermarking entire applications, others
are good for parts of applications. Some will work for binary code, others
are for typed bytecode. Some will embed stealthy marks, some will embed
large marks, some will embed marks that are hard to remove, and some will
have low overhead. However, we know of no algorithm that satisfies all
these requirements. This is exactly the challenge facing the software
watermarking researcher.

1.7 Software Similarity

There’s a class of software protection problems that are not amenable to
algorithms based on code transformations, and we lump them together
under the term software similarity analysis. They have in common that,
conceptually, they rely on your being able to determine if two programs are
very similar or if one program is (partially) contained in another. We
capture this in the two functions similarity and containment:

1.7.1 Plagiarism
We think of plagiarism as chiefly occurring in academic settings where
students copy each other’s assignments or researchers copy each other’s
work, but it’s really found anywhere that some humans create and others try
making a shortcut to profit by “borrowing” these creations. Ideas from
works of art are copied, as are pieces of music, furniture, or fashion designs
and so on. Over the years, many famous authors, artists, and musicians have
found themselves in court for incorporating too much of a colleague’s work
into their own. Exactly what “too much” means is ultimately left up to the
courts to define. Famous cases include John Fogerty, who was sued for
plagiarizing himself (known as self-plagiarism) when his new songs
sounded too much like his old ones that were under copyright to a previous
publisher.

In this book, we’re interested in plagiarism of code. This occurs frequently
in computer science classes where students find it easier and faster to
borrow their classmates’ assignments than to write them from scratch
themselves. Here, Axel has copied a piece of Doris’ program Q, inserted it
into his own program P, and submitted it as his own:

With large classes, it becomes impossible for computer science professors
to manually look for code copying in every pair of submitted programming
assignments. Instead (being programmers and used to automating
everything), they build tools that perform the comparisons automatically.
For the example above, the output might look something like this, listing all
the pairs of programs in order, from most likely to least likely to have been
enhanced by copying:
Automatic methods are best used to weed out from consideration programs
highly unlikely to be the result of plagiarism, leaving a few serious suspects
for the professor to examine by hand.

Students who are aware that instructors are using tools to look for copying
will naturally try to fool them. Simple code transformations such as
renaming identifiers and reordering functions are common, and it’s
therefore important that plagiarism detectors are immune to such
transforms.

1.7.2 Software Forensics

Software forensics answers the question, “Who, out of a group of suspected
programmers, wrote program S?” To answer the question, you need to start
out with code samples from all the programmers you think might have
written S:
From these samples, you extract features that you believe are likely to
uniquely identify each programmer and then compare them to the same
features extracted from S. From the example above, the output might look
something like this, indicating that Axel is much more likely to have written
S than either Doris or Carol:

Here, f is the function that extracts a feature set from a program. Exactly
which set of features will best indicate authorship is hotly debated, but the
feature sets often include measures related to line length, function size, or
the placement of curly braces.

Most work on software forensics has been done on source code, but binary
code forensics is just as interesting. For example, once the FBI catches a
suspected malware author, they could compare his programming style to
those of all known viruses. Being able to bring a large collection of
malware to court as evidence against him might strengthen the
government’s case.

1.7.3 Birthmarking

You’ve already encountered the idea of code lifting, a competitor copying a
module M from your program P into his own program Q:
Both obfuscation and watermarking can make this attack harder to mount
successfully. By obfuscating P you make it more difficult to find M, or
more difficult to extract it cleanly from P. For example, you could mix M
with code from other modules so that along with M’s code any automatic
extraction tool would produce a whole lot of irrelevant code.

You could also embed a watermark or fingerprint in M. Say, for example,
that M is a graphics module produced by a third party (you) that Doris
licenses to use in her own game. If Doris’ fingerprint shows up in a program
sold by Axel, you could use that as evidence that he’s lifted it, and even
evidence that he’s lifted it from Doris’ program. You could take legal action
against Axel for code theft or against Doris if she’s not lived up to her
license agreement to properly protect the module from theft.

For a variety of reasons, you may choose not to use obfuscation and
watermarking. For example, both come with a performance penalty, and
obfuscation can make debugging and quality assurance difficult. Also, you
may want to detect theft of legacy code that was never protected against
intellectual property attacks. Instead of using either one, you could simply
search for your module M inside the attacker’s program Q:

This works fine, unless the adversary has anticipated this and applied some
code transformations, such as obfuscation, to M (or possibly all of Q) to
make it hard to find M:
Depending on the severity of the code transformations, this could make a
straightforward search for M difficult:

This is where the concept of birthmark comes in. The idea is to extract
“signals” from Q and from M, and then look for M’s signal within Q’s
signal rather than looking for M directly within Q:

Here, f is a function that extracts the signal, which we call a birthmark, from
a program or module. The idea is to select the birthmark so that it’s
invariant under common code transformations such as obfuscation and
optimization.

We know of at least one case where birthmarking was successfully used to
argue code theft. In a court case in the early 1980s [128], IBM sued a rival
for theft of their PC-AT ROM. They argued that the defendant’s
programmers pushed and popped registers in the same order as in the
original code, which was essentially a birthmark. They also argued that it
would be highly unlikely for two programs to both say push R1; push R2; add
when push R2; push R1; add is semantically equivalent.

1.7.4 A Birthmarking Example
To be effective, a birthmarking algorithm must extract the mark from a
language feature that is hard for an attacker to alter. One idea that has been
reinvented several times and that we’ll explore further in Chapter 10
(Software Similarity Analysis) is to compute the birthmark from the calls
the program makes to standard library functions or system calls. Some of
these functions are difficult for the adversary to replace with his own
functions. For example, the only way to write to a file on Unix is to issue
the write system call. A birthmark extracted from the way the program uses
write system calls should therefore be reasonably robust against semantics-
preserving transformations.

Consider this C function that reads two strings from a file, converts them to
integers, and returns their product:

     int x() {
     char str[100];
     FILE *fp = fopen("myfile", "rb");
     fscanf(fp,"%s",str);
     int v1 = atoi(str);
     fscanf(fp,"%s",str);
     int v2 = atoi(str);
     fclose(fp);
     return v1*v2;
     }

Several birthmark-extracting functions are possible. You could, for
example, make the birthmark be the sequence of calls to standard library
functions:

                bm1(x) = 〈fopen, fscanf, atoi, fscanf, atoi, fclose〉

Or you could ignore the actual sequence, since some calls are independent
and could easily be reordered. The resulting birthmark is now a set of the
calls the function makes:

                       bm2(x) = {atoi, fclose, fopen, fscanf}

Or you could take into account the number of times the function calls each
library function. The birthmark becomes a set of system calls and their
frequency:

             bm3(x) = {atoi → 2, fclose → 1, fopen → 1, fscanf → 2}

An attacker would get a copy of x, include it in his own program, P, and
perform a variety of transformations to confuse our birthmark extractor.
Here, he’s renamed the function, added calls to gettimeofday and getpagesize
(functions he knows have no dangerous side effects), reordered the calls to
fclose and atoi, and added further bogus calls to fopen and fclose:

     void y () {...}

     int f() {
     FILE *fp = fopen("myfile", "rb");
     char str[100];
     struct timeval tv;
     gettimeofday(&tv, NULL);
     fscanf(fp,"%s",str);
     int v1 = atoi(str);
     fscanf(fp,"%s",str);
     fclose(fp);
     int v2 = atoi(str);
     int p = getpagesize() * getpagesize();
     fp = fopen("myfile", "rb");
     fclose(fp);
     return v1*v2;
     }

     void z () {...}

Bogus calls are shaded in dark gray. Assuming that the rest of P (functions y
and z) don’t contain any standard library calls, you get these possible
birthmarks for P:

     bm1(P) =〈fopen, gettimeofday, fscanf, atoi, fscanf, fclose,
     atoi, getpagesize, getpagesize〉

     bm2(P) = {atoi, fclose, fopen, fscanf, getpagesize, gettimeofday}
     bm3(P) = {atoi → 2, fclose → 2, fopen → 2, fscanf → 2,
     getpagesize → 2, gettimeofday → 1}

To determine whether the attacker has included your function x in his
program P, you compute containment(bmi (x), bmi (P)), where containment
returns a value between 0.0 and 1.0 representing the fraction of x that’s
contained in P. In this case, it would seem like the attacker has done a pretty
good job of covering his tracks and altering the sequence of calls, the set of
functions being called, and the frequency of calls to the different functions.

1.8 Hardware-Based Protection Techniques

What makes it so difficult to design unassailable software protection
techniques is that you never have any solid ground to stand on. The
difference between software security and cryptography is that in
cryptography you’re allowed to assume that there is one secret (the key)
that your adversary will never be able to get his hands on. All security rises
and falls with that assumption. In software protection, you can assume no
such safe zone. The code of your obfuscated, watermarked, and
tamperproofed program will always be available to the attacker for analysis
because the attacker (who may also be your customer!) needs the code in
order to run it.
Hardware-based protection techniques try to change that by providing a
safe haven for data, code, and/or execution. The applications are the same
as you’ve already seen: to protect the code from reverse engineering, to
prevent the code from being tampered with, and to prevent illegal copying
of the code. The difference is that now you’ve got one piece of hardware
whose integrity you can trust and on which you can build protection
schemes.

1.8.1 Distribution with Physical Token

The root cause of software piracy is that digital objects are trivial to clone.
Cloning is not unheard of in the physical world, of course: To see that, just
visit one of the many clothing and antique markets in China where near-
identical copies of name-brand clothing lines and replicas of ancient
artifacts are sold at cut-rate prices. Still, physical cloning requires
considerable skill and sophisticated tools, whereas cloning in the virtual
world only requires the attacker to learn how to use his computer’s copy
command.

Several software anti-piracy techniques are based on the idea that a program
will refuse to run unless the user first shows possession of a physical object.
Thus, you ship your program in two parts: the easily clonable binary code
itself and a hard-to-clone physical object that’s required for the binary to
execute. The physical object needs to somehow be connected to the
computer so that the program can occasionally check to see that the user
actually has possession of it:
For the physical object to be effective, you need to manufacture it in such a
way that it’s difficult to clone without specialized and expensive tools. Two
types of objects have been common: dongles and program distribution disks
(floppy disks, CDs, and DVDs). Dongles are connected to a port on the
computer, these days mostly the USB port. The CD containing the
application must be inserted into the computer’s CD drive in order for it to
run. Often, the CD is manufactured so that ordinary copying software and
hardware won’t be able to make an identical copy.

This anti-piracy technique has fallen out of favor for all but the most
expensive programs. There are many reasons. First, the technique has
proven to be highly annoying to legitimate users who can’t make backup
copies of their legally purchased program, who lose the use of a port or a
CD drive, and who can no longer use the program if they misplace the
physical object. Second, it’s also annoying to the manufacturer who loses
revenue from making and distributing the CD or dongle, who needs to deal
with users who misplace it, and who can no longer simply distribute the
program over the Internet.

1.8.2 Tying the Program to the CPU

If every manufactured copy of a CPU has a unique identity, you can solve
the piracy problem by distributing your program so that each copy is only
executable by a CPU with a particular identity. In practice, this is typically
done by including in each CPU the private part of a unique public key
cryptography key-pair along with a decryption unit. Here, Doris encrypts
her program with Axel’s public key and distributes the encrypted program
to him:
As a result, even if Axel were to resell the program to his friends, their
CPUs will have different private keys and won’t be able to run the program.

This scheme isn’t without its own problems. First, manufacturing the CPU
becomes more complicated since every copy will have to contain a different
key. One solution is to squirt the key into the CPU after manufacturing and
then disable any further modifications. Second, selling shrink-wrapped
programs becomes difficult since every distributed copy needs to be
differently encrypted. This may not be much of a problem these days, when
many programs are sold and downloaded over the Internet. Finally, what
happens when the user upgrades to a new computer with a faster CPU?
Since it will have a different private key, he will need new versions of all
the encrypted programs he ever bought. This means there must be some
way for him to convince the program manufacturer that he’s no longer
using the old CPU and that they should issue him a version to run on his
new one.

1.8.3 Ensuring Safe Execution Environment

In the scenarios we consider in this book, Doris assumes that Axel’s
computer, on which her program is running, is an unsafe environment; it
could contain hostile programs (such as debuggers, binary editors,
emulators, and disk copiers) that Axel can use to pirate, tamper with, or
reverse engineer her program.

There has been considerable effort to build protection systems that would
instead assure Doris that Axel’s computer is trustworthy, and that she can
safely allow him to run her program without fear of it being violated. This
is difficult to do using only software: The code on Axel’s computer that
checks to see if he’s running any unsafe programs could itself be hacked!
The idea instead is to have one small trusted hardware unit on Axel’s
computer that helps Doris collect a reliable list of software that he’s
running:
The protocol starts with Axel asking Doris for a copy of her program P to
run, to which Doris responds, “Not so fast, prove to me that I can trust you
first!” Axel’s computer (with the help of the trusted hardware) then collects
a list of all its security-sensitive software and firmware and sends it to
Doris. She compares it to a list of software she trusts, and only when she’s
convinced herself that Axel’s computer constitutes a safe environment for P
does she send it to him.

We’ve omitted many details here that you’ll learn about in Chapter 11. But
it shouldn’t be hard for you to spot right now some fundamental issues with
this scheme. First, any user who wants to run Doris’ program has to have a
computer that’s been fitted with extra hardware, and obviously this will
come at a cost. Second, Doris has to maintain a whitelist of all versions of
all programs that she trusts, or a blacklist of all versions of all programs that
she doesn’t trust. Given the vast number of programs available to run on
many different hardware platforms and operating system configurations,
this is likely to be a huge logistic nightmare. Finally, an actual protocol
needs to take into account any privacy issues. For example, a user may not
want to reveal to every site he’s communicating with which software he’s
running.

An additional issue that makes many people queasy is that this protocol
would be very useful in a digital rights management scenario. P would be
the DRM player and the protocol would assure Doris that Axel won’t be
able crack it to get to the decrypted media. This, in turn, would give Doris
the confidence to allow Axel to download encrypted media to play.
1.8.4 Encrypted Execution

The ultimate solution to the software protection problem is to encrypt the
program. As long as the program remains encrypted, the adversary can’t
easily tamper with it, and can’t learn anything about its internal algorithms,
and pirating it makes no sense since it’s not executable. However,
eventually you’ll want your user (and potential adversary) to run the
program. This means they will need access to the decryption key, which
will give them access to your program in cleartext, which means they can
do with it what they want. Game over.

For cryptography to provide unassailable protection, the program must
remain encrypted throughout its lifetime, until it’s safely within the CPU
itself. The CPU contains the key with which the program is encrypted. The
key must never escape the CPU capsule or the adversary will gain access to
the cleartext program. Schematically, crypto-processors are organized
roughly like this:

The program (and any sensitive data) is stored encrypted in RAM but
decrypted on the CPU itself. An encryption/decryption unit sits between the
RAM and any on-chip caches and decrypts incoming code and data and
encrypts any outgoing data.

As you will see in Chapter 11, to get this to work without revealing any
information, everything must be protected once it leaves the safe haven of
the CPU. The sequence of addresses that appear on the address bus can
reveal information unless they’re properly scrambled, the sequence of
encrypted data values that appear on the data bus can reveal information if
they don’t change on every store, and the adversary might even get away
with tampering with the encrypted program unless you check on every read
that nothing has changed.

All this extra machinery obviously comes at a price, namely, performance.
For example, modern CPUs are designed to take advantage of the locality of
reference that programs typically display. If addresses are scrambled to hide
access patterns, then the advantages of caches and locality-improving code
optimizations are nullified. There’s also the question of how you convince
your ordinary users that they should “upgrade” to a slower crypto-processor
only for the benefit of protecting your program from piracy and tampering
by themselves. Even if it’s unlikely that they’ll make it into commodity PCs
any time soon, crypto-processors have an important role to fill in financial
systems such as ATMs.

1.8.5 Physical Barriers

Any software protection system that makes use of a crypto-processor
assumes that the secret key hidden within the CPU, in fact, remains hidden.
An adversary, of course, will try to violate that assumption! There have
been many attacks devised against smartcards, for example, since they are
used in pay-TV systems, as stored-value cards, and as tickets on mass-
transit systems, and thus breaking their security can provide financial gains
to the attacker.

Attacks against crypto-processors are either invasive or non-invasive.
Invasive attacks, essentially, scrape off the top of the packaging to give
direct physical access to the internal circuitry. This can then be probed to
reveal secret data (such as keys) and algorithms encoded in hardware. A
non-invasive attack doesn’t physically abuse the CPU but rather feeds it
bogus code or data, or forces it to operate under adverse environmental
conditions, all with the intention of coaxing it to give up its secrets. For
example, popular non-invasive attacks include delivering power spikes or
irregular clock signals to the processor, or subjecting it to radiation. This
can make it execute in a way its designers didn’t intend and, possibly, force
it to reveal secret code and data.

Crypto-processors include physical layers of protection to prevent these
kinds of attacks:

For example, sensors will alert the CPU if the temperature, voltage, clock
signal, or radiation level appears abnormal. If the CPU believes it’s under
attack, it will destroy any private data (such as keys), shut down, or even
self-destruct. To prevent invasive attacks, the processor will have layers of
shielding that make it difficult to drill down to the internal circuitry. These
shields can also have sensors that can alert the CPU that it’s being probed.

Unfortunately, adding physical barriers will affect cost as well as
performance. The higher the clock frequency, the more heat the CPU
dissipates, and the thicker the layers of protection, the harder it will be for
the processor to get rid of this excess heat! As a result, processors with thick
physical protection barriers will have to be clocked at a lower frequency
than equivalent unprotected processors.

1.9 Discussion
There are plenty of reasons to use the techniques you will read about in this
book to protect your code, and plenty of reasons not to. In the end, you
must weigh the pros and cons to see if using them makes sense in your
particular case.

1.9.1 Reasons to Use Software Protection...

On the plus side, there are situations where even a short delay in cracking
your code will be beneficial. For example, these days computer games often
escape into the wild within days or a few weeks of release. Sometimes, as
the result of insider attacks, they even escape before they’re released! Since
gamers are interested in playing the latest and greatest, the revenue from a
new game is typically collected within the first few weeks of its release.
Game manufacturers have therefore traditionally been eager to adopt
software protection techniques, even those that are sure to be cracked
within a very short time.

In situations where you’re selling a particularly high-value program,
software protection might also make sense. If every year you sell only a few
tens of copies of a software system that costs $100,000 per seat, the loss of
even one sale due to piracy could be devastating to your bottom line. In
these situations, it’s common to use a combination of hardware techniques
(such as dongles) to prevent illegal copying and software techniques (such
as obfuscation) to protect the interface between the hardware and the
application.

In some situations, you may want to use software protection to prevent
individuals from cracking your program, individuals you are unlikely to
catch (because they’re far off in another country) or who are legally
untouchable (because they have no assets to forfeit). In other cases, you
may want to use software protection as an aid in criminal prosecution. It is
said that more money is lost to piracy performed by corporations than by
individuals. The reason is that corporations often will buy, say, 10 licenses
to use a program but will let 50 of their employees use it. These
corporations have huge assets, and if you can prove license infringement,
you may actually have a chance to use the legal system to force them to
abide by the license agreement. Individuals, on the other hand, often crack a
program or download a pirated program that they would never have bought
legally anyway. The amount of revenue lost to this type of piracy may
therefore not be as high as often reported, and going after these types of
adversaries is less likely to be profitable.

1.9.2 . . . and Reasons Not To

On the downside, adding software protection to your program can cause
problems in terms of cost, performance, a more complex software
development cycle, and last but not least, annoyance to your legitimate
users.

Costs can increase both during development and distribution. During
development, you have the option of purchasing a protection tool,
developing one yourself, or applying the protection techniques by hand.
Regardless, you will be adding a step and complexity to the development
cycle. In several techniques you’ll see in this book (such as fingerprinting
and code encryption), every distributed copy of your program will be
unique. This means additional headaches during distribution, quality
assurance, and when fielding bug reports.

Many of the techniques you’ll see come with significant performance
overhead. And when we say “significant” we mean significant. Whether
higher levels of protection necessarily incur a more severe performance hit
is unknown, but it seems not an unreasonable possibility. In the end, this
may require you to make difficult trade-offs: using techniques with low
overhead and a low level of protection, using powerful techniques with high
overhead but only for the security-sensitive parts of your program, or
accepting the high overhead of a powerful protection technique but only
selling to users with sufficiently powerful computers.

Many software protection techniques have been cracked not because the
attacker necessarily wanted to pirate or reverse engineer the program, but
because he wanted to perform what to him seemed like reasonable
operations on it. Maybe he wanted to run the program on his laptop as well
as his desktop computer, maybe he wanted to make a backup copy of it,
maybe he wanted to transfer it from his old machine to his newly bought
one, maybe he wanted to run the program without the annoyance of having
to enter a password or insert a CD or USB token every time, and so on.
Whether or not you, as the software developer, think these are legitimate
concerns, and whether or not the software license agreement allows it, the
user may well get ticked off enough to feel no qualms about cracking the
program.

And that’s not to mention bugs. Many of the techniques you will see in this
book are based on code transformations. As such, they’re very similar to the
optimizing code transformations you’ll find in sophisticated compilers. And
as such, they’re susceptible to the usual menagerie of bugs. As a result, your
program that was perfectly functional before protection was added may
exhibit erratic behavior afterward, either as a result of a bug in the
protection tool itself, or because its code transformations revealed a latent
bug in your own code.

1.9.3 So Which Algorithms Should I Use?

So you’ve written your fantastic new program and for whatever reasons
you’ve decided that it makes sense to add some sort of software protection
to it. You’ve bought this book5 and read it cover to cover in search of the
One True Algorithm to implement. Unfortunately, if this was your attitude,
you will have been sorely disappointed.

The problems facing software protection research are multitudinous, but it
boils down to one central issue: How do you evaluate the effectiveness of
an algorithm? Unfortunately, the state of the art is sorely lacking. Ideally,
this book would end with a single large table over all the algorithms that
lists for each one effort to implement, effort to defeat, parallelizability of
attacks, and performance overhead.6 As you may have already guessed,
there’s no such table.
Without knowing how many more hours/days/weeks/months your program
will remain uncracked if you protect it with the algorithms in this book,
how can you know if software protection will make sense in your particular
case? And without being able to compare two algorithms to say that one is
better than another, how can you pick the right algorithm to use? And how
does the field progress when a paper purporting to present a new, improved
algorithm can’t substantiate its claims?

Disturbing questions, indeed. In practice, software protection takes a belt-
and-suspenders approach to security. You layer protection algorithms until
you’ve convinced yourself that your program is secure “enough” while at
the same time remaining within performance bounds. If you can afford to,
maybe you employ a professional red-team to try to break through the
defenses and give you some feel for how long the protection will survive in
the wild. But in the end, you have to accept the fact that you’re engaged in a
cat-and-mouse game: If crackers deem your program sufficiently crack-
worthy, eventually they’ll succeed. This situation may seem depressing, but
it is not much different from other areas of life. In the end, all it means is
that you will have to monitor the efforts of your adversaries and be prepared
to continuously update your defenses.

1.10 Notation

In this book we have tried to devise a uniform naming convention for
surreptitious software algorithms. Every algorithm is referred to by a name
that consists of a prefix (WM for watermarking, OBF for obfuscation, TP for
tamperproofing, and SS for software similarity) followed by the authors’
surname initials. For algorithms that attack programs we use the prefix RE
(for reverse engineering). For a single author algorithm, we use the initial of
the surname followed by the initial of the given name. When a list of
authors have multiple algorithms, we add a subscript. If two different lists
of authors share the same initials, we add given name initials and initials
from the article title until names are disambiguated.
To facilitate navigating through the book, we’ve added page numbers to all
cross-references, using the following notation: “In Section 3.2.3 163 you
will see the totally awesome Algorithm 3.1 165 ... .”
