             2. Methods of Attack and Defense

There is a saying: “If you build a better mouse trap, someone will build a
better mouse,” and that could well describe the eternal struggle between
Doris and Axel in our surreptitious software scenarios from the last chapter.
Axel comes up with a new way to analyze and modify Doris’ code, Doris
retaliates with a cleverer watermarking algorithm and additional layers of
obfuscation and tamperproofing, which prompts Axel to develop better
analysis techniques, and so on. At present we see no end to this escalating
war—as of yet there are no theoretical results or practical tools that could
put an end to it once and for all, tipping the scales permanently in Doris’ or
Axel’s favor, so this situation is simply something Doris and Axel need to
learn to live with. In practice, this will mean that Doris can expect to have
to monitor Axel’s improving attack capabilities and continually upgrade her
defenses, and Axel can expect that the attacks he develops today will be
rendered useless tomorrow.

What both Doris and Axel desperately want at this point is a theoretical
model that would allow them to compare their own abilities to their
adversaries’ abilities. Doris would like to know the ways in which Axel can
crack her software protection, how long it will take him to do it, and what
the software will be like after he’s done. Ideally, she would like for it to take
Axel a long time to break through her defenses and for the resulting
program to be much larger, much slower, and much more brittle. She would
also, of course, like to have a good model of her own protection tools so
that she can choose the right combinations of algorithms that will thwart
Axel’s attacks for the required length of time. Axel would like access to the
same model: He wants to know the reverse engineering effort required to
break through Doris’ defenses and what the resulting program will look like
so that he can determine if it’s worth his while or not.

There are two parts to Axel’s reverse engineering efforts: building the
necessary support tools and then running these tools. Ideally, Doris wants to
maximize both the effort Axel has to expend to build his tools, and the time
it will take to run them. But she might still be happy if building the tools
took Axel a year and running them on her software took an hour, or if
building them took an hour and running them took a year. Regardless, both
Doris and Axel want to have an understanding of their own and each other’s
capabilities, as they are now and as they are likely to improve over time.

This chapter is divided into two major sections, Section 2.1, in which we
discuss the adversary’s abilities to attack us, and Section 2.2 86, in which
we discuss our abilities to defend ourselves. The two sections are very
different in nature. Section 2.1 is very hands-on, describing the cracker’s
attack goals and his reverse engineering skills and techniques. In Section
2.2 86, we build a much higher-level model for what we can do, drawing
on experiences from how the natural world (plants and animals) protects
itself from predators and from how, over the course of history, we humans
have learned to protect ourselves from the natural world and from each
other.

2.1 Attack Strategies

What should your assumptions about the attacker be? What should your
attack model be? There are two issues you need to resolve: What are the
adversary’s motivations for attacking your program, and what are his means
for reaching his goals? Broadly speaking, once your program is in the
attacker’s hands, he can do with it what he pleases; there are no restrictions!
There are, however, typical strategies and techniques he’ll employ to coax
secrets out of the program, and ways in which he’ll coax the program to
behave the way he wants. In particular, to build your attack model, you
need answers to these questions:

     • What does a typical program look like and what valuables does it
       contain?

     • What is the adversary’s motivation for attacking your program?

     • What information does he start out with as he attacks your program?
     • What is his overall strategy for reaching his goals?

     • What tools does he have at his disposal?

     • What specific techniques does he use to attack the program?

Without answers to these questions, without an attack model in mind, you
won’t be able to appreciate the protection algorithms in the remainder of the
book! In this section, we’ll seek to build such an attack model, and in the
next chapter we’ll explore various attack techniques and tools in more
detail.

2.1.1 A Prototypical Cracking Target

To make the ideas in this section really concrete, we’re going to focus our
attention on a prototypical cracking target, a Digital Rights Management
(DRM) player.1Listing 2.1 62 gives the code of the very simple DRM
player we’ll use in this section. You’ll see variants of this program
throughout the book. Here’s a graphical sketch of the program, where each
component is shaded the same way as the source code in Listing 2.1 62:

The main line of the program reads digitally encrypted audio, decrypts it to
cleartext, decodes the cleartext to analog audio, and writes the result out to
an audio device. The decryptor needs two keys, one provided by the user
and the other hardwired into the player itself.

Listing 2.1. Prototypical cracking target.
In addition to its main functions (all unshaded), the player contains software
protection code (shaded). The light gray code detects if the code of the
player has been tampered with. It does this by computing a hash over the
binary code and comparing the result to an expected value. The dashed code
checks the user’s execution rights, in particular, that he has entered the right
activation code and hasn’t exceeded the player’s use-by date. The dark gray
code responds if the user has violated the program in some way. In this
case, the die function sets the key variable to NULL, which in turn causes the
program to fail at a later stage, when execution reaches line 25 or 29. The
dotted code, finally, contains the user’s unique fingerprint 0xb0b5b0b5, which
allows us to trace an illegal copy back to him.

Further on in the book, we will show you “real” protection algorithms along
these lines. In Section 7.2 412, for example, you’ll see algorithms that do
tamper-checking by hashing the executable code, and in Section 7.3 440
you’ll see an algorithm that constructs pointer-based tamper-response
mechanisms.

In this trivial program, die responds the same way (crashing the player)
regardless of the manner in which it has been violated. In practice, you’ll
want to respond differently if the user enters the wrong license code, if the
program is executed past its use-by date, or if its code has been modified.

2.1.2 What’s the Adversary’s Motivation?

In the information security community it is customary to identify three
security goals, namely, confidentiality, integrity, and availability (the CIA
triad). In the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 [334],
these terms are defined as follows:

     1. The term “information security” means protecting information and
       information systems from unauthorized access, use, disclosure,
       disruption, modification, or destruction in order to provide
     a. integrity, which means guarding against improper information
       modification or destruction, and includes ensuring information
       nonrepudiation and authenticity;
     b. confidentiality, which means preserving authorized restrictions on
       access and disclosure, including means for protecting personal
       privacy and proprietary information; and
     c. availability, which means ensuring timely and reliable access to and
       use of information.

An adversary’s goal, then, is to prevent you from reaching these security
goals and to achieve some sort of (monetary or intellectual) satisfaction
from an attack.

The scenarios that we discuss in this book are different from what most
security professionals deal with, which is typically to protect the integrity,
confidentiality, and availability of a networked computer system. Our
security goals instead all relate to maintaining the integrity, confidentiality,
and availability of a particular program, or information contained in a
program. Tamperproofing, for example, attempts to protect the integrity of a
program, preventing an adversary from modifying it to his advantage.
Obfuscation can be used to protect the confidentiality of algorithms or other
secrets (such as cryptographic keys) contained in a program. The security
goal of watermarking and fingerprinting is to ensure availability of the
marks to the watermark detector. The adversary’s goal, on the other hand, is
to disrupt the defender’s ability to detect the marks, thereby making it
impossible to trace pirated copies back to him.

One way to look at integrity violations is to note that your program consists
of two pieces of semantics, the core semantics that implements the actual
functionality of the program, and the protection semantics that is the code
you added to protect the core from attack. The adversary’s goal is to remove
the protection semantics, add his own attack semantics (such as the ability
to save game-state, which is often missing from an evaluation copy of a
game), while ensuring that the core semantics remains unchanged:

To make this more concrete, let’s look at what valuables your DRM player
contains and how the attacker could benefit (financially or otherwise) from
acquiring them or from modifying the player code.

First, the decrypted digital audio itself has value. It’s of higher fidelity than
the analog audio that’s the output of the player, and hence more valuable
than it. The adversary could either enjoy the music himself (perhaps by
playing it in his car or on his portable music player, instead of just through
the sanctioned player) or sell it for profit.
Second, if he could coax the player to give up its secret cryptographic key,
player_key, he and his customers might be able to decrypt and enjoy any
music for free. He could even use the key to build and sell his own player,
undercutting the price of the competition.

Third, although this isn’t common for digital rights management players
(these are normally given away for free and the business model is to make a
profit by selling media), our program performs two forms of license
checking: It checks that it’s not used after a particular date and that the user
has the correct activation code. The player would be more valuable to the
user without these checks.

Fourth, if he did pay for the program, he may want to recoup some of that
cost by making copies and reselling them for profit. If he’s involved in this
sort of piracy, he’d like to make sure that he can’t be caught (prison time is
bad for business) and so needs to disable any tracking mechanisms. Thus
the player becomes more valuable to him if he can disrupt your ability to
find the fingerprint (0xb0b5b0b5) that identifies him as the player’s original
owner.

Finally, if the adversary is your rival DRM player developer, he could profit
from identifying and reusing the algorithms you’ve developed for the
player.

To summarize, the player contains valuable static data (the player key),
valuable dynamically generated data (the digital audio stream), and
valuable algorithms. The player becomes more valuable itself if any
restrictions on its use get lifted, i.e., if it can be modified so that it’s
playable after its expiration date and without having to enter the activation
code, and if it can be freely resold without risk of being traced back to the
seller.

The prototypical DRM player we’ve outlined here is not unique in the
valuable goods it contains, the ways it protects itself, or the ways in which
it’s open to attack. For example, the Skype VoIP client (see Section 7.2.4
431) also contains cryptographic keys and secret protocols that, if you could
pry them away from the code, would allow you to build your own client and
steal Skype’s customers away from them. The Skype client, too, is protected
from tampering by hashing the executable.

2.1.3 What Does the Adversary Get to Crack?

When the adversary sets out to crack your program, what does he start out
with? What does he know about your program, and even more important,
what doesn’t he know? To begin with, let’s assume your source language is
C, or any similar language that typically compiles down to binary code.

In this case, what you as the software developer distribute to your users
(and your potential adversaries!) is an executable file known as a stripped
binary and a user guide for running the program. The binary contains
essentially no symbolic names (there are exceptions here that we’ll get to
shortly), no typing information, and no information about where functions
begin or end. It’s (again, essentially) a black box.

We’re going to assume that the attacker has no other information to work
with. Specifically, he has no documentation about the internal design of the
program (as would be available to the original developers), nor does he
have access to the comprehensive suite of input-output pairs that the
developers used when testing the program. During the course of cracking,
the adversary may, of course, build up documentation of his expanding
knowledge of the internals as well as his own test suite. Initially, however,
he has no such information available.

There are, of course, scenarios in which these assumptions about the
attacker don’t hold. Maybe he has an accomplice on the inside who can
provide him with information, maybe he himself is a former employee of
the development company and knows about its software development
process, maybe there are white papers on the company’s website that can
provide useful clues, and so on. Here, we are going to assume that this is
not the case—the adversary starts out with a clean slate.
2.1.3.1 Static vs. Dynamic and Stripped vs. Unstripped

Now to the exception! In practice, no box is completely black and will
always leak some information! At the very least, every executable has an
entry point where execution commences.

The amount of information the executable leaks depends on if it’s been
dynamically or statically linked, and if it’s been stripped or not. To
statically link an executable means to include all libraries it references, and
to strip it means to remove any unnecessary symbols (variable and function
names). To understand these options, have a look at this figure that relates
to the DRM player executable:

The statically linked executable includes all library functions the program
needs, such as printf, scanf, and time. For this reason, it’s much larger than
the dynamically linked executable that loads in the libraries at runtime. The
light gray boxes show the library symbols the executable contains. In the
case of the dynamically linked program, it must have all the library symbols
present in the executable since references to these symbols aren’t resolved
until runtime. The dark gray boxes show the symbols (audio, hash, play, ...)
from the player program that are available in the executable. For the
statically linked and stripped executable, there are no symbols at all left: All
the libraries have been linked in, all references between symbols have been
resolved at link time, and all symbols have been removed.

As you see, the statically linked stripped binary leaks the least amount of
information. But on the flip side, it’s also two orders of magnitude larger
than the dynamically linked stripped binary! Software developers often will
choose to distribute their programs dynamically linked because it minimizes
size, it allows the program to link in system-dependent files on the user’s
platform, and it ensures that any updates to libraries will take immediate
effect. From a software protection perspective, however, this isn’t ideal. As
you’ll see shortly, even if the play symbol has been stripped out of the
executable, the attacker can use the remaining dynamically linked-in library
symbols for his attack. By locating the time library function, he can find play
since play is the only function in the program to call time!

2.1.3.2 Architecture-Neutral Distribution Formats

Many languages, for example, Java and C#, are compiled not to native
binary code, but to an architecture-neutral format. In the case of Java, every
class X.java is compiled into a classfile X.class that contains a symbol table
and, for every method, a list of its bytecode instructions. For all intents and
purposes, the classfile is isomorphic to the original source: Since all the
bytecodes are fully typed and the symbol table contains complete signatures
of all methods, a decompiler has sufficient information available to turn the
classfile back into a source form that closely resembles the original.

Java classfiles are loaded dynamically, by name, so when a program calls
System.out.println() (the Java equivalent of C’s printf()), this is clearly visible
in the bytecode. In essence, then, Java executables are dynamic and
unstripped. Java programs typically rely heavily on classes in the standard
library, more so than your typical C program. As a result, even in the
absence of source code or documentation, it can be easy for an attacker to
determine which part of a Java program does what by analyzing which
library methods it calls.
2.1.4 What’s the Adversary’s Attack Methodology?

An attacker will go through multiple phases when attacking your program.
In the first few phases he will analyze it, building up an understanding of its
behavior and internal structure, and in later phases he will use this
knowledge to modify its behavior to his liking. At a very high level, you
can think of the adversary going through these five attack phases:

  1. The black box phase,

  2. The dynamic analysis phase,

  3. The static analysis phase,

  4. The editing phase,

  5. The automation phase.

In the black box phase, he treats the program as an “oracle,” feeding it
inputs, recording its outputs, and drawing conclusions about its external
behavior. In the dynamic analysis phase, he gets a first glimpse of the
program’s internal behavior. Again, he executes the program, but this time
he records which parts of it get executed for different inputs. Armed with
this high-level understanding, he can proceed to the static analysis phase
where he analyzes the program by examining the executable code directly.

If his goal is a confidentiality violation, the attacker might stop after the
analysis phases. Maybe he’s looking for some cryptographic keys inside the
program, or maybe he’s interested in the algorithms the program uses—in
these cases he’s done. If, instead, he’s set on an integrity violation, he
continues to the editing phase where he uses his understanding of the
internals of the program to modify the executable: He disables license
checks and modifies the program to disrupt your ability to recognize his
fingerprint.
In practice, of course, an attack is never as compartmentalized as this. The
first four phases are manual and will be interleaved with each other. They
require trial-and-error, multiple runs of the program, and they will be
repeated over and over again, each time giving the attacker a deeper level of
understanding of the code, until he feels confident he has reached his attack
goals.

In the final phase, he encapsulates his knowledge of the attack in an
automated script that can be used, with little or no manual intervention, in
future attacks.

2.1.4.1 Dynamic Analysis—Cracking vs. Debugging

It’s been pointed out [11] that the cracking process bears many likenesses to
debugging. In fact, from the cracker’s point of view, a license check is a
bug in the program that needs to be located and removed!

There are some differences between debugging and cracking, though. When
you debug your program you go through an edit-compile-test cycle, where
you edit the source code, compile it to binary code, test it for bugs, and then
repeat until the program has the required functionality:

When a cracker tries to break your protection, he instead goes through a
locate-alter-test cycle:
During the locate phase, he finds the location in the binary executable
where a modification will remove the undesired behavior (e.g., disable the
license check). Next, during the alter phase, he decides on a set of changes
to the code that will have the desired effect. This can involve adding
instructions, removing instructions, or modifying existing instructions.
Finally, during the test phase, he checks that the changes have had the
desired effect (the license check is no longer triggered) and didn’t adversely
affect the core semantics of the program.

Earlier we noted that one of our assumptions about the attacker is that,
unlike you, he doesn’t have access to a comprehensive test suite. This is an
important limitation on his abilities. It means that he has to be extra-careful
that none of the alterations he makes to the program will affect its core
semantics. If the alteration is highly localized (say, replacing a conditional
branch with an unconditional one in a license check), then this may not be
too much of a problem. Modifications with more wide-ranging effects are
harder to check when the attacker has no deep knowledge of the internals of
the program, and no test suite to run to convince him that his changes didn’t
break the program in some subtle way.

Software protection algorithms have been designed to hamper the attacker
in each of the locate-alter-test phases of the attack cycle. For example, to
make the program harder to alter, you can make many portions of it
interdependent, so that local changes are not enough to disable the
protection code. You can slow down the locate phase by making the
program appear to execute non-deterministically, choosing different paths
through the program every time it’s run. Finally, you can add bogus
execution paths to the program so that an attacker has to build many test
cases in order to convince himself that the changes he’s made have no ill
effects.

2.1.4.2 Dynamic Analysis—Exploiting Cracks in the Black Box

Earlier we noted that even a statically linked stripped binary executable will
leak information. At the very least, the main entry point is known, which
makes it possible for the attacker to start to learn about the program by the
(likely laborious) task of single-stepping through it.

A common attack strategy is to try to link the external behavior of the
program to its internal behavior by watching system calls and calls to
library functions. For example, the first trivial attack a cracker who’s trying
to remove a license check will try is to locate the call to the pop-up box that
delivers the “Please enter your program activation code” message. In
Windows he could, for example, set a breakpoint on the GetDlgItemInt()
library function that translates the number entered in the dialog box into an
integer value. When the breakpoint hits, he can look up the call stack to find
the location of the user code that called the function. Most likely, this will
be in the vicinity of the code that checks if the activation code is valid.

If the program is statically linked and stripped, finding library functions by
name is no longer possible. System calls, however, provide a reliable
interface to the operating system, and attackers can use them to find the
location of common library functions. It’s safe to assume, for example, that
printf is going to invoke the write system call at some point. So the attacker
can simply set a breakpoint on write and, when the breakpoint hits, look up
the call stack to find the location of what’s likely to be printf.

2.1.4.3 Static Analysis

Static analysis can be done on several levels. Some crackers are well versed
in reading raw binary machine code and, most, certainly, read x86 assembly
code as if it were their mother tongue. Thus, they require nothing more than
a disassembly listing in order to dive in and start reverse engineering your
program.
Static analysis can be much more efficient, however, when the attacker has
access to good tools. You’ll meet some of these, like control flow analyzers
and slicers, in Chapter 3 (Program Analysis), where you’ll also see how to
implement disassemblers and decompilers. Even if current decompilers are
pretty inaccurate on stripped binary code and on code generated by an
unknown compiler or from a language for which it wasn’t designed, they
can still be useful. Van Emmerik and Waddington [122] describe how they
put the only partially functional decompiler Boomerang to good use when
trying to recover algorithms from a program for which source code wasn’t
available. In spite of having to do a lot of hand-holding, the authors claim
that “using Boomerang was still much safer than hand decompilation,
because of the high probability of errors with a completely manual
approach.”

Simple pattern matching on the binary code can also be effective. In Section
7.2.4 431, you’ll see how the Skype VoIP client was cracked by searching
through the binary for the signature of the tamper-detecting hash functions.
Pattern matching can also be used to find the code of common library
functions such as printf.

2.1.4.4 Editing

Once you know the source of a bug, the edit part in the edit-compile-test
cycle is trivial, because you have the source! It’s not so easy for the attacker
in his locate-alter-test cycle, since he’s working on binary code. Modifying
a single instruction is easy, as long as the new instruction is of the same or
smaller size as the original one. So changing the branch-if-less-than
instruction to a branch-never instruction in a license check shouldn’t pose
any problems. Deleting code is also generally easy—just overwrite it with
NOPs! Any change that involves inserting new code in the middle of the
binary can be problematic, however. In a statically linked executable, all
branch addresses are hardwired and may have to be adjusted if the attacker
starts moving code around or inserting new code. This doesn’t have to be a
problem if the disassembler has been able to correctly recover all the code
in the binary, but as you will see in Section 3.3.1 172, even the best
disassembler will occasionally fail.

2.1.4.5 Automation

The final (and often optional) step in an attack is to automate it. Based on
the understanding he has gained of the binary and the protection
mechanisms, the attacker builds a static tool (known as a script) that
(typically without running the program) strips an executable of its
protection. Depending on his prowess and the complexity of the protection
scheme, this script can be more or less general. It may only work to crack a
particular program, or it may crack any program protected with a particular
technique.

It’s interesting to note that there’s a definite difference in social standing
between the “real” cracker who did the initial analysis and wrote the attack
script and the so-called “script-kiddies” who merely use it. The kiddies have
no programming skills and just download the script and use it to crack their
favorite game.

2.1.5 What Tools Does the Adversary Use?

From what we know of attackers these days, they use fairly unsophisticated
general tools (chiefly debuggers), along with specialized tools they build for
attacking a particular class of protection mechanisms, augmented by a near-
infinite supply of personal time, energy, and motivation for reaching their
goals. In the research community there exist many powerful tools (such as
the slicing and tracing tools we’ll talk about in Chapter 3 (Program
Analysis)) that would be very useful to an attacker. We believe they are not
currently in use, however, because, being research prototypes, they are not
stable enough, fast enough, or precise enough; they don’t run on the right
operating system; or they are simply unknown in the cracker community.
We are still going to assume, however, that our adversaries have access to
such tools, because if they don’t today, they might tomorrow.
2.1.6 What Techniques Does the Adversary Use?

Let’s for a moment invert the color of our hats, from white to black, and
play like we’re crackers! The goal of this section isn’t to turn you into a
full-fledged attacker but for you to get a feel for the types of techniques that
are typically used. Our example cracking target will be the DRM player in
Listing 2.1 62. In most of the attacks, we’ll assume that we’ve been given
an executable that’s been compiled for the x86 running Linux and then
dynamically linked and stripped of local symbols. Our chief cracking tool
will be the gdb debugger.

The details of an attack will vary depending on the operating system, the
tools the attacker has available, and the nature of the protection techniques
he’s wanting to subvert. The basic techniques will be the the same,
however. Other books [56,118] deal more directly with the tools and
techniques that are specific to particular operating systems, such as
Windows.

2.1.6.1 Learning About the Executable

Before you can start cracking, you need to learn a few basic things about
the executable itself. Is it statically linked, are there any symbols present,
what’s the starting address for the various sections, and so on. Every
operating system will have standard tools to discover this information:2

      > file player
      player: ELF 64-bit LSB executable, dynamically
      linked

      > objdump -T player
      DYNAMIC SYMBOL TABLE:
      0xa4 scanf
      0x90 fprintf
      0x12 time
      > objdump -x player | egrep 'rodata|text|Name'
      Name Size VMA LMA File off Algn
      .text 0x4f8 0x4006a0 0x4006a0 0x6a0 2**4
      .rodata 0x84 0x400ba8 0x400ba8 0xba8 2**3

      > objdump -f player | grep start
      start address 0x4006a0

You now know much useful information about the executable! First, it’s
dynamically linked and hence has many useful symbols left. You also know
the beginning and end of the text and data segments—this will come in
handy when you search through the executable for special code sequences
or string values. Last but not least, you know that the program will start
executing at address 0x4006a0!

2.1.6.2 Breaking on Library Functions

The first thing you do is to treat the program as a black box, feeding it
inputs to see how it behaves. You immediately notice that the player says
expired! instead of playing music for you:

      > player 0xca7ca115 1 2 3 4
      Please enter activation code: 42
      expired!
      Segmentation fault

So your first attack is going to have to be to remove that pesky use-by
check!

You already know that the executable is stripped and dynamically linked.
This means that it should be possible to find many library functions by
name. Most likely, the program implements the use-by check by calling the
time() function in the standard library and then comparing the result to a
predefined value. So your goal has to be to find the assembly code
equivalent of if (time(0) > some value)···.

The idea we’re going to use is to set a breakpoint on time(), run the program
until the breakpoint is hit, go up one level in the call stack (to see who
called time()), and look at the code in the vicinity of the call to time() for a
suspicious check. Once we find it, we can replace the branch with if
(time(0) <= some value)···.

As luck would have it, this strategy works out nicely. You find that the
instruction at location 0x4008bc (in light gray) is the offending conditional
branch:

< gdb -write -silent --args player 0xca7ca115 1000
2000 3000 4000
(gdb) break time
Breakpoint 1 at 0x400680
(gdb) run
Please enter activation code: 42
Breakpoint 1, 0x400680 in time()
(gdb) where 2
#0 0x400680 in time
#1 0x4008b6 in ??
(gdb) up
#1 0x4008b6 in ??
(gdb) disassemble $pc-5 $pc+7
0x4008b1 callq 0x400680
0x4008b6 cmp $0x48c72810,%rax
0x4008bc jle 0x4008c8

Now all that’s left to do is to patch the executable by replacing the jle with
a jg (x86 opcode 0x7f). You can use gdb’s set command to patch the
instruction:
      (gdb) set {unsigned char}0x4008bc = 0x7f
      (gdb) disassemble 0x4008bc 0x4008be
      0x4008bc jg 0x4008c8

In this case, you were lucky in that the executable still had dynamic
symbols left. If the program had been statically linked and stripped, it
would not have been so easy to break on the time() function. It’s still not
impossible, of course! Alternative strategies include finding the time()
function by pattern matching on some unique signature of its code, or
breaking on the gettimeofday() system call which, presumably, time() will call
to get the current time from the operating system.

2.1.6.3 Static Pattern Matching

Now the player doesn’t say expired! anymore, so at least you’ve disabled
one of the protections! However, the player still crashes with a "wrong code"
message if you enter anything other than 42:

      > player 0xca7ca115 1000 2000 3000 4000
      tampered!
      Please enter activation code: 99
      wrong code!
      Segmentation fault

This time we’re going to try another common cracker strategy, namely, to
search the executable for character strings. You’d expect that the assembly
code that checks the activation code would look something like this:

      addr1: .ascii "wrong code"
      ...
      cmp read_value,activation_code
      je somewhere
     addr2: move addr1, reg0
     call printf

So the idea is to first search the data segment to find address addr1 where the
string "wrong code" is allocated. Then you search again, this time through the
text segment, for an instruction that contains that address as a literal:

     (gdb) find 0x400ba8,+0x84,"wrong code"
     0x400be2
     (gdb) find 0x4006a0,+0x4f8,0x400be2
     0x400862
     (gdb) disassemble 0x40085d 0x400867
     0x40085d cmp %eax,%edx
     0x40085f je 0x40086b
     0x400861 mov $0x400be2,%edi
     0x400866 callq 0x4007e0

Bingo! The first search finds the addr1 address (in light gray), the second
finds the addr2 address (dark gray). All you have to do now is replace the
jump-on-equal with a jump-always, thereby bypassing the call to printf. On
the x86, the jmp instruction has the opcode 0xeb:

     (gdb) set {unsigned char}0x40085f = 0xeb
     (gdb) disassemble 0x40085f 0x400860
     0x40085f jmp 0x40086b

You were pretty lucky here in that the addr2 address occurred directly as a
literal in an instruction. On many architectures, the address would instead
have been computed by adding an offset to a base register, and that would
have made for a more complicated search.

2.1.6.4 Watching Memory
Now the program doesn’t complain anymore about an exceeded use-by date
or a wrong activation code, but it still crashes with a segmentation
violation:

     > player 0xca7ca115 1000 2000 3000 4000
     tampered!
     Please enter activation code: 55
     Segmentation fault

It’s safe to guess that this is because the edits you did to the executable
caused the tamper-detection mechanism to kick in. On Unix, a segmentation
fault indicates that the program is accessing an illegal memory location, for
example, trying to dereference a NULL pointer.

Your strategy this time will be to first let the program run until it crashes
and then see what address it’s trying to load from or write to. You’ll then
rerun the program while watching the address to find the location that sets it
to an illegal value. Let’s get started:

     (gdb) run
     Program received signal SIGSEGV
     0x40087b in ?? ()
     (gdb) disassemble 0x40086b 0x40087d
     0x40086b mov 0x2009ce(%rip),%rax # 0x601240
     0x400872 mov 0x2009c0(%rip),%edx # 0x601238
     0x400878 xor -0x14(%rbp),%edx
     0x40087b mov %edx,(%rax)

Apparently, at location 0x40087b, the program tries to write to an address it
has loaded from 0x601240, and it fails because of a memory violation. So
now you set a watchpoint on 0x601240, rerun the program from the
beginning, and see what happens:
     (gdb) watch *0x601240
     (gdb) run
     tampered!
     Hardware watchpoint 2: *0x601240

     Old value = 6296176
     New value = 0

     0x400811 in ?? ()

     (gdb) disassemble 0x400806 0x400812
     0x400806 movq $0x0,0x200a2f(%rip) # 0x601240
     0x400811 leaveq

Well, what’s happening is that the instruction at location 0x400806 is
setting the word at address 0x601240 to 0! This corresponds to the key = NULL
statement in the die() function:

     15 void die(char* msg) {
     16 fprintf(stderr,"%s!\n",msg);
     17 key = NULL;
     18 }

To bypass this statement, all you have to do is overwrite it with a sequence
of nop instructions (x86 opcode 0x90):

     (gdb) set {unsigned char}0x400806 = 0x90
     ....
     (gdb) set {unsigned char}0x400810 = 0x90

Now you can disassemble the offending code again, just to make sure that
you’ve removed the entire key = NULL statement:
      (gdb) disassemble 0x400806 0x400812
      0x400806 nop
      ...
      0x400810 nop
      0x400811 leaveq

2.1.6.5 Recovering Internal Data

As we noted earlier, the decrypted data that the player holds internally is
more valuable than the analog data that it produces as output. For this
reason, you, as the attacker, would like to modify the player to dump the
cleartext data. Inserting new code in the middle of an executable is non-
trivial, however, since branch addresses will be affected and have to be
adjusted. A simpler approach can be to ask the debugger to print out the
data for you!

Assume that, after some poking around in the executable, you’ve
determined that at address 0x4008a6, local variable -0x8(%rbp) holds the
cleartext media:

      (gdb) disassemble 0x40086b 0x4008a8
      0x40086b mov 0x2009ce(%rip),%rax
      0x400872 mov 0x2009c0(%rip),%edx
      ...
      0x40089b add -0x20(%rbp),%rax
      0x40089f mov (%rax),%eax
      0x4008a1 xor %edx,%eax
      0x4008a3 mov %eax,-0x8(%rbp)
      0x4008a6 jmp 0x4008ac

This code corresponds to the statement

      29 uint decrypted = *key ^ encrypted_media[i];
in the source. Now all you have to do is set a breakpoint on 0x4008a6 and
tell the debugger to print out the value (light gray) of the local variable
every time the breakpoint is hit:

     (gdb) hbreak *0 x4008a6

     (gdb) commands
     >x/x -0x8+$rbp
     >continue
     >end
     (gdb) cont
     Please enter activation code: 42
     Breakpoint 2, 0x4008a6
     0x7fffffffdc88: 0xbabec99d
     Breakpoint 2, 0x4008a6
     0x7fffffffdc88: 0xbabecda5
     ...

Here, you’re making use of gdb’s ability to execute an arbitrary sequence of
commands (in dark gray) at the time when a breakpoint hits. In this case,
you told gdb to print the value of the local in hex and then to immediately
continue execution.

2.1.6.6 Tampering with the Environment

Even if directly modifying the executable is possible, it isn’t always easy.
To avoid having to disable the tamper detection, it is sometimes possible to
instead modify the environment in which the program is run. For example,
to avoid triggering the time-out, you can simply wind back the system
clock!

There are many variants of this technique. If the program is dynamically
linked, for example, you can provide your own hacked libraries (where the
time function always returns 0, for example), and by a simple change of the
library search path you can force the program to pick up the hacked code.

In Section 7.2.5 435 you’ll see a clever algorithm that makes a small
change to the pagefault handler of the operating system kernel and thereby
disables all hash-based tamperproofing algorithms, without requiring any
modification of the program code!

2.1.6.7 Dynamic Pattern Matching

You won’t need it here, but in other situations a powerful technique is to
pattern match, not on the static code and data but on their dynamic
behavior. Say, for example, that instead of the trivial “decryption routine”
in Listing 2.1 62 (just a single xor instruction!), the DRM player used a
standard algorithm such as Needham and Wheeler’s Tiny Encryption
Algorithm (TEA) [273]:

       #define MX ( (((z>>5)^(y<<2))+((y>>3)^(z<<4)))^
       \
       ((sum^y)+(key[(p&3)^e]^z)) )
       long decode(long* v, long length, long* key) {
       unsigned    long    z,   y=v[0],    sum=0,    e,
       DELTA=0x9e3779b9;
       long p, q ;
       q = 6 + 52/length;
       sum = q*DELTA;
       while (sum != 0) {
       e = (sum >> 2) & 3;
       for (p=length-1; p>0; p--)
       z = v[p-1], y = v[p] -= MX;
       z = v[length-1];
       y = v[0] -= MX;
       sum -= DELTA;
       }
     return 0;
     }

(TEA was one of the cryptographic algorithms used in Microsoft’s XBOX
and a target of one of the attacks [51,172].) If for some reason you can’t
find the code of the decryptor statically (perhaps it’s been obfuscated using
some of the algorithms in Chapter 4), you can instead try to search the
instruction trace for telltale signs of common decryption algorithms. This is
what a trace of the inner for-loop in TEA looks like, with all loads, stores,
and arithmetic operations stripped out:

     0x0804860b cmpl $0x0,0xfffffff0(%ebp)
     0x0804860f jg 0x8048589

     0x08048589 mov 0x8(%ebp),%edx
     0x08048592 shl $0x2,%eax
     0x080485a0 shl $0x2,%eax
     0x080485ab shl $0x2,%eax
     0x080485ba shr $0x5,%edx
     0x080485c0 shl $0x2,%eax
     0x080485c5 xor %eax,%ecx
     0x080485cc shr $0x3,%edx
     0x080485d2 shl $0x4,%eax

     0x080485d5 xor %edx,%eax
     0x080485df xor %eax,%edx
     0x080485e4 and $0x3,%eax
     0x080485e7 xor 0xffffffe8(%ebp),%eax
     0x080485ea shl $0x2,%eax
     0x080485f2 xor 0xffffffdc(%ebp),%eax
     0x080485f8 xor %ecx,%eax

     0x0804860b cmpl $0x0,0xfffffff0(%ebp)
      0x0804860f jg 0x8048589
      0x08048589 mov 0x8(%ebp), %edx

Maybe there’s enough information here to create a dynamic signature for
TEA that distinguishes it from ordinary code, or even from other
cryptographic algorithms? The trace starts with several shifts with small
constant arguments that could be a possible starting point for analysis.

2.1.6.8 Differential Attacks

Now suppose you could get your hands on two versions of the player
executable, each fingerprinted with a different 32-bit number, but otherwise
identical. That is, the only difference in the source code between the two
version is this:

Figure 2.1 82 shows the output of using the VBinDiff [238] program to
compare the resulting executable files. You can easily find the location of
the fingerprints and even destroy them, since VBinDiff also works as a hex
editor.

     Figure 2.1. Using VBinDiff [238] to compare two differently
         fingerprinted versions of the player executable.
Differential attacks like this are not only useful against differently
fingerprinted programs. Anytime you have access to different versions of
the same program—one version where a security hole has been patched and
one where it hasn’t, or one version where a feature is missing and one
where it isn’t, and so on—you can use differential techniques to find the
locations of the interesting code bits.

Tools like VBinDiff compare the static code of two executables. This works
well when the programs are organized about the same and the overall
differences are minor. If you’re faced with a program that has undergone
major changes, you can instead run the two versions in parallel, feeding
them the same input and comparing their execution paths. This is known as
relative debugging, and you’ll see more of that in Section 3.2.1 146.

2.1.6.9 Recovering Algorithms Through Decompilation

Your ultimate task is to recover the algorithms used in the DRM player,
perhaps to be able to build your own. As an accomplished cracker, you’re
certainly adept at reading assembly code, but to simplify your life, you’d
much prefer wading through tons of unfamiliar code in a high-level
language than tons of unfamiliar code in assembly! So you enlist the help of
a decompiler. Here, we’re going to use REC 2.1 [330].

To make the task a little more interesting, let’s assume that the program has
been statically linked and stripped, so there are no symbols available. You
can see the result of the decompilation in Listings 2.2 84 and 2.3 85.
We’ve edited the code just a little to make it more readable and fit on the
page. The complete program consists of 104341 assembly code statements
that decompiles into 90563 lines of non-comment, non-blank C source.
Since the program has been statically linked and stripped, all referenced
library functions have been linked in and will appear in the decompiled
source.

We’re only showing the relevant functions from the player. In this particular
case, finding the user functions in the decompiled source was easy!
Knowing the behavior of the player, you had some idea of what they might
look like, and since both hash and play use C’s xor operator (unusual in most
code), all you had to do was a textual search for “^”!

The control flow is surprisingly readable, although the code is missing type
information that would preclude the program from being recompiled
without hand editing. The decompiler was confused by the inserted
assembly code (dotted in Listing 2.1 62), which is missing from the
decompiled source. Notice that since the DRM player was compiled at the
highest level of optimization, the hash and die functions have been inlined.

2.1.7 Discussion

Ideally, what you would like to come out of the discussion in this section is
a model, a threat model, that describes what the adversary can and cannot
do, how he’s likely to behave and not to behave, what tools he’s likely to
use and not use, what motivates him and what doesn’t, what he finds easy
and what he finds difficult, and so on. You could then use this model to
design your defenses in ways that would counteract that threat.
So what can we say about the prototypical cracker? Well, we’ve seen that
he can:

    • Pattern match on static code (to find the location of strings or well-
      known library functions),

    • Pattern match on execution patterns (to find the location of well-
     known algorithms, such as cryptographic functions),

    • Relate external program behavior to internal code locations (to find
      the location of protection code),

    • Disassemble binary machine code,

    • Decompile binary code even though the result will be partial and at
      times incorrect,

Listing 2.2. Decompilation of the play function from the DRM
player in Listing 2.1 62. The shading corresponds to that of
Listing 2.1 62. Continued in Listing 2.3 85.
Listing 2.3. Decompilation of the player_main function from the
DRM player in Listing 2.1 62. The player was compiled with
gcc-O3, which accounts for the inlining of the call to hash.

Continued from Listing 2.2 84.

    54 L080483AF(A8, Ac) {
    55 ...
    56 ecx = 0x8048260;
    57 edx = 0x8048230;
    58 eax = *L08048230;
    59 if(0x8048260 >= 0x8048230) {
    60 do {
    61 eax = eax ^ * edx;
    62 edx = edx + 4;
    63 } while (ecx >= edx);
    64 }
    65 if(eax != 318563869) {
    66 V8 = "tampered";
     67 V4 = 0x80a082c;
     68 *esp = *L080BE704;
     69 L08049990();
     70 *L080BE2C8 = 0;
     71 }
     72 V8 = A8 - 2;
     73 V4 = ebp + -412;
     74 *esp = *(ebp + -416);
     75 return (L080482A0());
     76 }

     • Debug binary code without access to source code,

     • Compare (statically or dynamically) two closely related versions of
       the same program (to find the location of fingerprints),

     • Modify the program’s execution environment (to force it to use
      deviant dynamic libraries, search paths, operating system
      functionality, and so on),

     • Modify the executable (to remove unwanted behavior or add new
      behavior).

Not all of these techniques are applicable to every situation, of course, and
some may be more or less easy to apply. Generally speaking, the attacker
will, by trial and error, home in on the protection code by first trying simple
techniques and, over time, trying more and more sophisticated ones.

The algorithms in this book have been designed to hamper one or more of
these attack categories. The static obfuscation algorithms in Chapter 4
(Code Obfuscation), for example, are designed to make static pattern-
matching attacks more difficult. They don’t fare so well against a dynamic
pattern-matching attack, however, which is why the algorithms in Chapter 6
(Dynamic Obfuscation) were invented. The algorithms in Chapter 7
(Software Tamperproofing) have been designed to make modifications of
the executable more difficult.
In this section we’ve concentrated on attacking binary executables. It’s
worth noting that many of the problems the attacker faces go away when
the target is instead a typed architecture-neutral format, such as Java
bytecode. In particular, accurate disassembly is trivial, accurate
decompilation is always possible, and references to dynamic libraries are
always exposed.

The tools we showed you in this section are very mainstream and very
simple. Not only are there more powerful tools in common use among the
cracker l33t (the IDA Pro [307] interactive disassembler and debugger and
the SoftICE kernel mode debugger are both mainstays in the cracker
community), it’s also common for crackers to build their own specialized
tools. For example, in Section 3.2.1 146 we’ll show you a germ of a Linux
debugger that could be specialized to perform common cracking tasks such
as tracing system calls (a function gdb doesn’t provide). You could also use it
to build a simple code coverage tool that would be useful for checking that
your test cases have adequately covered the program after your crack.

The type of challenge program you saw in Listing 2.1 62 is known in the
cracking community as a crackme. There are Internet sites devoted to
building and solving such exercises. The site http://crackmes.de, for
example, has (as of September 2008) 14,646 registered users and 2,126
posted crackmes.

2.2 Defense Strategies

So far you’ve learned about various ways in which an attacker can analyze
your program to find (and maybe destroy) a secret you’ve stored in it. The
techniques range from stepping through the program, instruction by
instruction, with a debugger; running it under emulation; and decompiling it
to more easily digested source code. However, assuming that you’re one of
the good guys, the question that you really want this book to answer is how
to protect your program from such attacks.
As you read this book, you will see a few basic ideas reappearing many
times in different guises. For us, it’s been interesting to discover that these
ideas are neither new nor limited to use in software: Since the dawn of time,
plants and animals have developed surreptitious techniques for protecting
themselves from predators, and over thousands of years, humans have
developed surreptitious techniques for protecting ourselves from the
environment and from each other. In this present part of the book we’ll
show you a model [84] that tries to capture these ideas and apply them to
software protection. The goal is to identify a set of primitives that you can
use to protect secrets, and to use these primitives in the rest of the book to
model and classify software protection schemes that have been proposed in
the literature. Hopefully, the model will also provide a uniform language for
researchers and practitioners, making it easier to discuss existing protection
schemes and to invent new ones.

Whenever you see a proposal for a new protection scheme, you will want to
go back to the model to classify it. Ideally, you’ll then be able to say, “This
scheme is a simple variant of this other, previously published scheme,” or
“This is a novel combination of two known schemes, and I predict it will
have the following properties.” Less ideal, but still useful, is if you can say,
“This scheme doesn’t fit into the model—it therefore represents something
entirely new, well worthy of further study—but potentially requiring us to
reconsider the design of the model itself.” We would be happiest, of course,
if the model were also able to predict new ways of protecting software. If
you could say, “Hmm, what I need is a scheme that has the following
properties” and from the model be able to deduce that “I should be able to
create a scheme with the required properties by combining these two
primitives in this particular way,” then the model would be truly useful.

The model we propose in this chapter has yet to reach that level of maturity.
It will, however, serve us well in the remainder of the book as a uniform
means of talking about and classifying the schemes that can be found in the
literature.

We have sought inspiration for our model from defense mechanisms found
in nature, from the way humans have protected themselves from each other
and from the elements, and, of course, from the design of current software
protection schemes. After all, while it would be nice if our model were
complete enough to encompass the defense mechanisms of Puffy the
Pufferfish (we believe it is), this is a book about software protection, not
biology, and our primary goal is to be able to talk consistently about
obfuscation, watermarking, and so on.

2.2.1 Notation

The central concept in our model is the Frame, a knowledge representation
device well known in the AI community. A protection strategy takes a frame
representing a universe with an unprotected secret and transforms it into a
frame representing a universe in which the secret has been protected.
Protection strategies are thus functions mapping frames to frames.

We use a graphical notation to illustrate frames and frame transformations.
Here’s a universe containing two objects, Alice and her purse:

A frame consists of one or more slots, which are name=value pairs. A value
can be a string, an integer, another frame, a reference to another frame, or a
tuple (pair of values). Slots can be atomic (take one value) or multi-valued.
Here, Alice (represented by a frame within the universe) has two slots, one
for her name and one for her age:
A special multi-valued slot is the contains slot, which, when present,
indicates that a particular object contains other objects. In our graphical
notation, the contains slot is represented by boxes within boxes. Here, the
universe itself contains two objects (Alice and her purse), and the purse
contains a wallet that, in turn, contains a coin:

Finally, each slot can also have associated with it a set of demons. These are
actions that fire under certain circumstances. For example, to protect its
young, the Cane toad (Bufo marinus) lays eggs that are poisonous. We
would represent this form of protection with a demon attached to a toad
egg, saying, “When eaten then cause harm to attacker.” This is represented
by a double arrow (⇒):
Consider the Leatherback turtle (Dermochelys coriacea), which buries its
eggs in the sand to protect them from predators and the elements. To model
this protection strategy, we start out with an initial, unprotected scenario, a
frame where the universe contains a turtle, sand, and eggs. We then apply
the cover protection primitive (we’ll get to this in the next section), which
transforms the universe into one where the sand slot now holds the turtle-
eggs frame. The result is a situation where a predator can no longer see the
turtle eggs, since they are covered by sand:

Plants, animals, and humans seldom use a single method of protection, but
rather employ what’s known as defense-in-depth. For example, even if you
diligently lock your car door, you probably don’t rely on it as the sole
means of protecting against car theft. Maybe you put on a steering wheel
lock, maybe you have a car alarm, or maybe you’ve installed a vehicle
tracking device that allows the police to locate the car in case it does get
stolen. Or maybe you’re paranoid enough or own a vehicle expensive
enough to warrant simultaneously employing all these defenses. Layering
protection mechanisms in this way makes sense when you don’t have
complete faith in any one method, or when the object you’re trying to
protect is very valuable. In our model, defense-in-depth is modeled by
function composition of the frame transformations:

     Primitive 2.1 (compose f g).

     Compose primitives f and g.
                                  (f ο g)(x) = f(g(x))

You can download a Haskell implementation of the model from this book’s
Web site. The implementation does rudimentary type checking and also
generates the graphic representations that you find in this section.

In the remainder of this section, we will present our set of protection
operators and give examples of how animals use these strategies to protect
themselves from predators, how humans use them to protect precious
artifacts, and how they can be applied to protect secrets in software.

2.2.2 The cover Primitive

The most fundamental way of hiding an object is to cover it with another
object. This may seem like a trivial observation (and OK, we agree it is),
but covering is an operation that occurs frequently in the natural, human,
and computer domains. To illustrate, say that right now your boss is
entering your office and, in a classic Mad Magazine shtick, you hide that
you’re reading this book by covering it with a copy of Playboy. You can
represent this as a transformation on an environment consisting of the items
in your universe, namely, you, your boss, this book, and a copy of a
magazine:
In this scenario, You are the good guy, protecting a precious object (a book
called Kittens) from being discovered by the adversary (the Boss). The
transformation shows that your protection scheme uses a fourth object in
the universe (the Magazine) inside which you hide the book. This is a
confidentiality scenario—you’re protecting a valuable piece of information
(that you’re in possession of a particular book) from discovery by an
adversary who has the ability to harm you (in this case, fire you).

Covering, like we said, is probably both the simplest and the most common
way of protecting an object. The Leatherback turtle buries its eggs in the
sand to protect them from predators and the elements; you write your
password on a sticky note and put it in a drawer, or you first put the sticky
note in an envelope and then put it in a drawer (for two levels of
protection). In all these cases, you are using one object to cover or hold
another, and this is the essence of the cover transformation:

     Primitive 2.2 (cover x y U).

     Given two frames x and y, make x an element contained in y.

An historical example of covering occurred in 499 B.C., when, to instigate
a revolt against the Persians, Histiaeus tattooed a message on the shaved
head of a slave, waited for the hair to grow back, and sent the slave to his
son-in-law Aristagoras, who simply had to shave the slave’s head again to
read the message [186]:
In this example, the good guy (Histiaeus) is using covering to ensure that
the message could not be read by the bad guys (the Persians).

What can the boss do to see if you’re actually working? Well, he can
uncover the book by removing the magazine. Similarly, a predator who
preys on the eggs of the Leatherback turtle can get to them by removing the
sand that covers them. And, in a scene we’ve seen too many times in cop
movies, the police can enter your office with a warrant and with a “Let’s
tear this place apart, men!” go through every drawer until your secret
password has been uncovered. This scenario makes an important point:
While covering is easy for the defender (she just has to find something big
enough to cover the secret with) it’s harder for the attacker, since he has to
go through every object in the environment to see if it covers the secret:
Your boss has to look under every object in the environment to see if it
covers contraband reading material, birds have to dig everywhere along the
beach to find where the turtle eggs are hidden, the cops have to look inside
every drawer for your password, and so on.

To make our point, the examples in this section are all idealized. In practice,
a defender may leave behind clues (such as scents or tracks, in the case of
the turtle scenario) that make life easier for the attacker. A turtle species that
lays their eggs on the same spot on the same beach, year after year, will face
extinction once predators are clued in to this behavior. Unless, of course,
the turtles realize the threat and modify their defenses (using other defense
primitives you’ll soon see) to counter the attacks.

It’s often easy to apply the cover transformation multiple times for greater
defense-in-depth. For example, after putting the book inside the Playboy
magazine, you could sit on them both, requiring the boss to perform two
uncovering operations to recover the book:

It may initially not be obvious what the analogy of one object covering
another in the software world is. In the real world, you cover an object
when you put it inside another. In the software world, you can cover a file
or some data by putting it inside another file. For example, when mail
systems initially began scanning attachments for viruses, virus writers
responded by zipping (and occasionally encrypting) the virus before
emailing it. The zip-file serves as a cover for the virus itself:

Here, the virus (which in this scenario considers itself the “good guy”!)
covers itself first inside a zip-file and then inside an email message in order
to protect itself from discovery by the virus scanner. To counter this cover,
mail servers today try to “look under” possible covers by unpacking and
scanning archives (including archives containing archives) to find potential
viruses.

A more obvious instance of covering being used is in systems that use
hardware to protect software. For example, the military uses hardened
boxes in which they stick the computers on which the sensitive software is
run. The security goals here are not just to protect the confidentiality of the
program but also to protect its integrity and availability. For example, you
can’t allow the enemy to modify your missile’s targeting software (it may
lead the missile astray), you can’t give him access to the software’s source
code (he could reuse it in his own weapons), and you can’t allow him to
interfere with the operation of the software (or we can’t fire the missile at
him, when needed). In these types of scenarios, covering is typically
combined with tamperproofing in such a way that the precious object will
be made to explode3 if someone tries to muck with it. We’ll be using the
detect-respond primitive to model such tamperproofing.

2.2.3 The duplicate Primitive

The duplicate primitive simply makes a copy of an existing object and adds
it to the universe. This operation can be used in two different ways. First,
you can use the copy as a decoy. The idea is to either make the environment
larger in order to force the attacker to consider more items while searching
for a secret, or to draw attention away from the real secret. The other use of
duplicate, reduplication, is to add a copy of the secret itself to the universe
in order to force an attacker to destroy both copies.

If your goal is to protect the confidentiality of an object, then reduplication
is not a good idea—the more copies there are of an object, the easier it is for
the adversary to find one! Decoying would be useful, however, since it
draws attention away from the object itself. If the goal is instead to protect
the integrity of the object, then reduplication is a good strategy—the more
copies there are of an object, the greater the chance that at least one will
remain intact after an attack.

Here’s the definition of the duplicate primitive:

     Primitive 2.3 (duplicate x_U).

     Given a frame x, create a deep copy of x, renaming as necessary to
     keep names unique:4

In the animal kingdom, reduplication and decoying are both common
protection strategies. An animal low on the food chain will often use
reduplication to protect itself, or rather, its own DNA. For example, the
Pufferfish (of the Tetraodontidae family) spawns 200,000 offspring in the
hope that at least some will survive and carry on its parents’ legacy.

The California newt (Taricha torosa) combines duplication, covering, and
tamperproofing to protect its progeny. The newt lays 7 to 30 eggs, each
covered by a gel-like membrane containing tarichatoxin, for which no
known antidote exists.

Scientists are still unsure exactly why zebras have stripes, but one favorite
theory suggests that they are used as part of a decoying strategy: When a
zebra is running in a herd of similarly striped animals it’s difficult for a lion
to pick out one individual to attack. As we’ll see later, mimicking is another
possible explanation.
Decoys are, of course, common in human warfare: “In World War II, the
U.S. created an entire dummy army unit in southern Britain to convince the
Germans that the Normandy invasion would be directed toward the Pas-de-
Calais” and during Gulf War I, the Iraqis “employed mock tanks, airplanes,
bunkers and artillery” made up of “plywood, aluminum and fiber glass
[sic]” [353].

A well-known legend states that the recipe for Coca-Cola is protected by
reduplicating it over three people, none of whom may ever travel on the
same plane:

Here we’ve applied the duplicate primitive twice and the cover primitive
three times, resulting in a situation where the good guys (the three Coca-
Cola executives Alice, Bob, and Charles) are each holding a copy of the
recipe in their pockets. The bad guys in this case are God, who presumably
can cause random acts of destruction such as the downing of aircraft, and
Pepsi, who would love to get their grubby hands on their competitor’s
crown jewels. Thus, in this scenario, you want to ensure the availability of
the recipe (reduplication increases the odds that least one copy will survive
destruction through acts of God) and confidentiality (Pepsi spies will have a
harder time locating the recipe when it’s hidden in the executives’ pockets).

In the recent TV miniseries Traffic, terrorists attempt to smuggle the
smallpox virus into the United States. The authorities are conned into
believing that the smallpox will enter the country inside a shipping
container with a particular identification number, but they are forced into a
nationwide hunt once they realize that the terrorists have shipped several
containers with the same number! This is a classic use of decoying, but later
in this section you will see how the terrorists combined this ruse with the
advertise primitive to further confuse the DEA.

As you see here, our notion of who is the “good guy” and who is the “bad
guy” can be very fluid! In the terrorist example above, the good guys are
the terrorists, the bad guys the DEA, and the object in need of protection is
the deadly smallpox virus! So in general, the good guy is whoever has a
secret or precious object to protect, and the bad guy is whoever wants to
discover the secret or destroy or acquire the precious object.

In watermarking scenarios, your security goal is to ensure availability—you
want to make sure that at least one of your watermarks survives the
attacker’s deliberate attempts at destruction or disruption. To this end, you
can use both decoying and reduplication. Decoys can be used by software
watermarking algorithms to draw attention away from the actual
watermark, if only for a short while. In the very simplest case, you just add
a variable with a conspicuous name, like this:

     int THE_WATERMARK_IS_HERE = 42;

You could also add a number of fake watermarks, some really obvious,
some less so, with the hope that the attacker will have to spend valuable
time examining them all, having to decide which one is real and which ones
are fakes. Reduplication can also be useful. If you embed multiple copies of
the mark (possibly by using different embedding algorithms), you increase
the workload of the attacker, because he needs to locate and destroy all
copies of the mark.

In code obfuscation, cloning is also a common operation. For example, you
could clone a function f into f′, obfuscate f′ into f″, and modify some of f’s
call sites to call f″. This gives the appearance that calls to f and f″ actually
call different functions, both of which the attacker will need to analyze in
order to gain a full understanding of the program. You can similarly clone a
basic block B into B′, obfuscate into B″, and alternate between executing the
two blocks: if P? then B else B″. P? is an opaque predicate that arbitrarily
chooses between the two blocks at runtime. You will read more about this
idea in Section 4.3.4 235.

2.2.4 The split and merge Primitives

Splitting and merging are two common protection transformations,
particularly in software situations where they are simple to implement.
Splitting can be used to ensure confidentiality by breaking up a secret into
smaller parts, each of which is easier to hide or protect than the whole
secret. Here’s the definition:

     Primitive 2.4 (split z f U).

     Given a predicate f and a frame z, create a new frame z_, so that z_ has
     all the properties of z, and ∀x z; f (x) = true • move x to z-:
The merge primitive blends two unrelated objects together to make it
appear as if they belong together:

     Primitive 2.5 (merge s t U)

     Given two frames s and t, ∀x t • move x to s, merging properties with
     the same name, then remove t:

To create mass confusion, splitting and merging are often used in
conjunction: Take two unrelated objects A and B and split them into parts
A1, A2, B1, and B2, then merge A1 with B1 and A2 with B2.

In the animal kingdom, some species will split themselves and let the
attacker have one part for dinner. This is known as autotomy [101]. This
technique is particularly useful when the species is also able to regenerate
the lost part. In our classification, this is a form of tamperproofing that we
will discuss further in Section 2.2.10 110.
Squirrels use so-called scatter hoarding to split up the food they’ve
gathered and cache it at different locations in their territory. The larger gray
squirrel is known to steal the caches of the European red squirrel, but the
split makes it less likely that all the food will be lost.

Human organizations frequently split themselves up into groups to prevent
an adversary from destroying the entire organization in one attack. This is
true, for example, of terrorist networks that split themselves up into smaller,
autonomous cells. Each cell is less conspicuous than the whole network,
and an attack (be it from an outside force or an inside informant) will affect
only the cell itself, not the network as a whole.

You will see watermarking algorithms that split the mark into several
smaller pieces, so that each piece can be embedded less conspicuously.
Merging is also a natural operation, since the watermark object has to be
attached to some language structure already in the program.

Echo hiding is an audio watermarking technique in which short echoes
(short enough to be undetectable to the human ear) are used to embed
marks. A really short echo encodes a 0, and a longer one encodes a 1. In our
model, embedding a single-bit watermark wm is accomplished by a) settling
on an embedding location p, b) duplicating D0 samples for a 0 and D1
samples for a 1 from p, and c) merging the copy back into the clip. In this
embedding example, where D0 = 2 and D1 = 3, we embed a watermark wm=0
at position p = 2 by first copying two samples 0x20,0x30 from position p and
inserting them to form a short echo:
Obfuscation algorithms make extensive use of splitting and merging to
break up, scatter, and merge pieces of a program, thereby creating
confusion. For example, to confuse someone trying to reverse engineer a
program containing two functions f and g, each can be split into two parts
(yielding fa, fb, ga, gb), and then the parts can be merged together, forming
two new functions fa||gb and fb||ga. Any calls to f or g will have to be
modified, of course, to call the new functions, and to call them in such a
way that only the relevant parts are executed.

Two common protection strategies are shrink and expand. Shrinking oneself
to become as small as possible makes it easier to hide in the environment.
Expanding, on the other hand, is the operation of making oneself as large as
possible, larger objects being harder to destroy than smaller ones. Shrink
and expand are just variants of split and merge, however, so we don’t
include them as primitive operations.

An object shrinks itself by splitting into two parts, one essential and one
superfluous, and deleting the fluff by releasing it into the environment.
Expansion, similarly, is merging yourself with some material you grabbed
from the environment.

The Pufferfish uses a combination of several defense strategies. One is to
expand its size (by inflating itself with water from its surroundings) in order
to appear threatening or a less easy target to an attacker. The blue whale has
grown so big that it only has one natural predator, the Orca.

That size is an important feature of hiding or protecting a secret is evident
from the expression “as hard as finding a needle in a haystack.” Implicit in
this expression is that the needle is small and the haystack big. Hiding the
Seattle Space Needle in a normal-size haystack would be hard, as would
hiding a sewing needle in a stack consisting of three pieces of hay. So a
common strategy for hiding something is to shrink it, much as a spy
compresses a page of text to a microdot. This is often combined with
decoying, increasing the size of the environment, for example, by using a
really big haystack to hide the needle in or by hiding the microdot in the
Bible instead of in the 264 words of the Gettysburg Address. Expansion is,
of course, also a common human strategy. A bigger vault is harder to break
into than a smaller one, a bigger bunker requires a bigger bomb to destroy
it, and in a crash between an SUV and a VW Beetle, we all know which
driver will walk away unscathed.

You can also hide your password by merging it with similar, but less
important, items on a list:

     Groceries *wink*
     ----------------
     * Toblerone
     * m1lk&h0ney
     * cheese
     * vegemite

The principle behind LSB (Least Significant Bit) image watermark
embedding is that the low-order bits of an image are (more or less)
imperceptible to humans and can be replaced with the watermarking bits. In
our model, this is a split (shrinking the image to get rid of the imperceptible
fluff) followed by a merge of the watermarking bits.

It is important to not keep passwords or cryptographic keys in cleartext in
computer memory. An attacker who gets access to your machine can search
through memory for telltale signs of the secret: A 128-bit crypto key, for
example, has much higher entropy than ordinary data and will be easy to
spot [325]. There are two simple ways of fixing this problem: Either
increase the entropy of the data surrounding the key (for example, by
encrypting it) or decrease the entropy of the key itself. The latter can be
accomplished, for example, by splitting the key into several smaller pieces
that are then spread out over the entire program. Thus, this is a composition
of the split primitive and the reorder primitive, which we’ll examine next.

2.2.5 The reorder Primitive
The reorder transformation can be used to place objects in a random order,
thereby sowing confusion. But a reordering can also contain information.
Think of Agent 007 entering a room and finding that the gorgeous blonde
Russian operative Tatiana Romanova, who was just abducted, left him a
message: The Martini glass has been moved to the left of the Baretta, letting
James know that he needs to be on the lookout for Blofeld, who, as usual, is
up to nothing good. Here’s the definition of the reorder primitive:

     Primitive 2.6 (reorder z f U)

     Given a frame z and a permutation function f, reorder the elements of z
     according to f:

In various cons such as the shell game or three-card monty, the secret (the
pea or the queen, respectively) is hidden from the victim by sequences of
deft reorderings by the con man. These games also use the dynamic
primitive to effect the continuous application of the reordering operation.
You’ll see this later on in the section.

Many watermarking algorithms, in media as well as software, make use of
reordering to embed the mark. The idea is that a watermark number can be
represented as a permutation of objects. For example, the WMDM software
watermarking algorithm (Section 8.4.1 488) embeds the watermark by
permuting the basic blocks of a function’s control flow graph. In this
example, the watermark number 5 is embedded by ordering the
permutations of the numbers [1 ... 5]:
     [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], [2, 1, 3, 4, 5], [2, 3, 1, 4, 5], [2, 3, 4, 1, 5], [2, 3, 4, 5, 1],
                                              ...

Picking the fifth permutation to reorder the basic blocks yeilds:

Of course, reorder can also be used as an attack. To destroy a watermark
based on ordering, all the attacker has to do is apply the algorithm again,
destroying the previous ordering at the same time he’s inserting his own
mark.

2.2.6 The map Primitive

The map primitive typically protects an object by adding confusion,
translating every constituent component into something different. If the
mapping function has an inverse, this obviously needs to be kept secret.
Mapping can also be used to insert information. Here’s the definition:

     Primitive 2.7 (map x f U)

     Given a frame x and a function f, replace every element of x with f(x):
Translation is a form of mapping where every word m in a dictionary is
replaced by another word r, usually in a different language, keeping the
mapping secret. The Navajo Code Talkers are famous for their rôle in World
War II, conveying messages in a language unfamiliar to the Japanese.
Humans use this trick to confuse outsiders, or often to build cohesion
among members of a group. Consider, for example, the l33t language used
by youths in online communities. It sets them apart from others who don’t
know the language, but it also protects their communication from outsiders
(such as their parents).

Obfuscated language mappings occur in many professional fields as well,
including computer science, medicine, and law. Steven Stark [333] writes in
the Harvard Law Review that “one need not be a Marxist to understand that
jargon helps professionals to convince the world of their occupational
importance, which leads to payment for service.” In other words,
obfuscating your professional language protects you from competition from
other humans of equal intelligence who have not been initiated into your
field. For example, patent lawyers attempt to strike a balance between
language that is clear enough to capture the essence of an invention but
obfuscated enough that they can later be hired to argue over its meaning in
court.

The most obvious way to protect a secret is to not tell anyone about it! This
is sometimes known as security-through-obscurity. An example is the
layout of many medieval cities in the Middle East. It may seem that there is
no good reason for their confusing alleyways until you realize that the lack
of city planning can actually be a feature in the defense of the city. Without
a map, only those who grew up in the city would know how to get around—
an obvious problem for attackers. But this strategy only works in an
environment with poor communications; as soon as there’s a Lonely Planet
guide to your city, your attempts to use secrecy to protect yourself will have
failed.

To protect the confidentiality of algorithms, the simplest form of code
obfuscation, name obfuscation, translates meaningful identifiers into
meaningless ones:

Here, we’ve transformed a program named prog containing six identifiers
into an equivalent one where the identifiers have been renamed x1,x2, ... .
This leaks less information about the internals of the program.

A common way of watermarking English text is to keep a dictionary of
synonyms, replacing a word with an equivalent one to embed a 0 or a 1:
Here, Alice has used a dictionary Dict that maps words to their synonyms to
embed a 1 at position 2 in the text by replacing "big" by "large". To protect
the confidentiality of the mark she must prevent Bob from gaining access to
the dictionary. In this case she uses the cover primitive to stick the
dictionary in her pocket.
Cryptographers use the terms confusion and diffusion to describe properties
of a secure cipher [326]. Confusion is often implemented by substitution
(replacing one symbol of the plaintext with another symbol), which in our
terminology is a mapping. Diffusion is implemented by transposition
(rearranging the symbols), what we call reordering. A product cipher
creates a secure cipher from compositions of simple substitutions and
transpositions.

2.2.7 The indirect Primitive

In baseball, the coach uses hand signs to indicate to the batter whether to hit
away, bunt, and so on. To prevent the opposing team from stealing the
signs, the coach uses decoying as well as adding a level of indirection. The
actual sign is merged with a sequence of bogus decoy signs and a special
indicator sign. The indicator gives the location of the actual sign, typically
the one following directly after the indicator. Here’s the definition of the
indirect primitive:

     Primitive 2.8 (indirect x r U)

     Given a frame x, add an indirect reference r to x:

Here, you see the final syntactic addition to the model, the squiggly arrow
that represents following a level of indirection.
As far as we’ve been able to find out, neither indirection or reordering
occur as protection strategies in the animal world, maybe because these
forms of surreptition go beyond the animals’ mental capacity.

Indirection is a common adventure movie plot device. In National Treasure,
Nicolas Cage is led by a sequence of increasingly far-fetched clues (a
frozen ship in the Arctic, a meerschaum pipe, the Declaration of
Independence, a $100 bill, and so on), that each point to the next clue and
then to the location of the hidden treasure (a Freemason temple).

Like our other primitives, indirection is often used in combination with
other protection strategies. Our hero will find that the next clue is inside a
box hidden under a rock (covering), that there are many boxes under many
rocks (decoying), that the box will explode unless he unlocks it just the
right way (tamperproofing), and that he needs to find both pieces of the clue
in order to locate the treasure (splitting).

One of our particularly clever friends came up with the following scheme
for protecting her foreign currency while backpacking around Europe. First,
she sewed the different currencies (this was before the European Union
adopted the euro) into different parts of her dress, a form of covering. Next,
in order to remember where the Deutschmark, French francs, and so on,
were hidden, she wrote down their locations on a piece of paper
(indirection). Of course, if someone were to find this note she’d be in
trouble, so she wrote it in French (mapping) using the Cyrillic alphabet
(another mapping), banking on few common thieves being fluent in both
Russian and French. She never lost any money.

Adding a level of indirection is also a common technique in protecting
software, and we will see it used extensively both in obfuscation and
watermarking. The idea is to replace a language construct (such as a
variable or a function) by a reference to it. This adds a confusing level of
indirection. Just like Nicolas Cage running around chasing one clue after
another, an attacker analyzing a protected program would have to chase
pointer-to-pointer-to-pointer until finally reaching the real object. Consider
this example:
Here, we started out with two functions, fun1 and fun2, where fun2 contains
one statement, a call to fun1. We applied the indirect primitive to add an
indirect reference ref1, and then the map primitive to replace all references
to fun1 by an indirect reference through ref1. We then repeated the process to
force an attacker to unravel two levels of indirections. Here’s the scheme:

In Section 4.3.3 229, you’ll see code obfuscation algorithms that make use
of indirection.

2.2.8 The mimic Primitive

Mimicry, of course, is the greatest form of flattery. You can use it in many
different forms of protection. Camouflage, for example, is preventing
discovery by looking like an object in your environment. Mimicry can also
be a deterrent—you can try to look like someone or something you’re not,
to scare off attackers. In our model, the mimic primitive simply copies a
property from one object to another:
     Primitive 2.9 (mimic x y prop U)

     Given two frames x and y, where x has a property prop, copy prop to y:

Cuttlefish have the ability to change color in order to, among other things,
blend in with the environment. Many other animals avoid predators in a
similar way. As we noted earlier, scientists are not sure exactly why the
zebra has stripes. One theory is that lions (being color blind) cannot pick
out a zebra from the background when it stands still in high grass, i.e., the
zebra mimics its background. Another theory contends that the stripes
confuse tsetse flies.

Peter Wayner’s mimic functions [365] create new texts that
steganographically encode a secret message. In order to not arouse
suspicion, the texts are made so that they mimic texts found in our daily
lives, such as transcripts of a baseball announcer, shopping lists, or even
computer programs. If the mimicry is good, i.e., if the statistical properties
of a generated text are close enough to those of real texts, then we will be
able to send secret messages across the Internet without anyone noticing. In
Section 8.8 521, you’ll see algorithms that embed secret messages in x86
binaries.

The same technique has been used by spies. For example, during World War
II, Japanese spy Velvalee Dickinson wrote letters about her doll collection
to addresses in neutral Argentina. When she was writing about dolls, she
actually was talking about ship movements. She was eventually caught and
jailed.
In 2004, during a vehicle search, Hungarian police found what appeared to
be a fake Viagra tablet. Apart from being pink, it was rhombus shaped, had
Pfizer imprinted on one side and VGR50 on the other—clearly a bad Viagra
counterfeit.

However, further analysis revealed that the tablet was just mimicking
Viagra and instead contained amphetamine:

Here we’ve applied the mimic primitive three times, once for each attribute.
Why the drug smugglers did not also mimic the highly recognizable blue
color of Viagra tablets is hard to know, but it’s possible that they thought
that appearing to be a bad counterfeit would make it less likely for the tablet
to be tested for illegal substances. The only secret the bad guys are keeping
here is the fact that the fake pill contains an illegal substance. Everything
else (the shape, color, and so on, of the pill) is out in the open, and we’re
using the advertise primitive to indicate that. You’ll see more of advertise
in the next section.

A central concept in surreptitious software is stealth. Any code that we
introduce as a result of the protection process must fit in with the code that
surrounds it, or it will leave telltale signs for the attacker to search for. In
other words, the new code must mimic aspects of the original code written
by humans. There can be many such aspects, of course: the size of the code,
the instructions used, the nesting of control structures, and so on, and a
stealthy protection algorithm must make sure that the introduced code
mimics every aspect. By embedding a watermark in a modified cloned copy
of an existing function, the WMMIMIT (Section 8.7.1 505) software
watermarking algorithm mimics the style of code already in the program,
thereby increasing stealth. This is actually accomplished using a
combination of the clone and the map primitives:

Here, we first clone an existing function and then map its instructions to
new ones in order to embed the mark.

2.2.9 The advertise Primitive

By default, our model assumes that objects keep all information about
themselves secret. In other words, Doris can see what other objects are
around her, but she only knows their identities; she can’t look inside them.
This is how we normally protect ourselves: You may know that my wallet is
in my pocket, but you can’t see my address and phone number in the wallet,
and so on, unless I tell you what they are. We call the primitive that breaks
this secrecy advertise. In our model, it is represented by a special property
advertise that lists the names of the properties visible to the outside:

     Primitive 2.10 (advertise x prop U)
     Given a frame x with a property prop, add a property advertise (if not
     already present) to x with the value prop:

A common use of this primitive is to advertise the strength of my defenses
in the hope that you will stay away. Toxic species often use bright colors to
advertise their harmfulness. This is known as aposematic coloration [101].

There is nothing, of course, that says I must advertise correct information!
In fact, a common use for this primitive is to lead an attacker astray by
feeding him falsehoods. The non-poisonous scarlet kingsnake
(Lampropeltis triangulum elapsoides), for example, protects itself by a
combination of mimicry (copying the red-yellow-black striped coloration
pattern of the highly poisonous coral snake) and false advertising (letting
everyone know “Look, I’m poisonous!”), in the hope that this will make
predators believe they should stay away:

One way advertising helps defend an object is when the object identifies
itself to its defenders. Flamingoes (Phoenicopterus ruber ruber) bring up
their young in large crèches, but parents feed and take care of only their
own chicks. The chicks advertise their appearance and vocalization. These
characteristics allow parents to recognize and defend their own progeny. In
software, similar birthmarks—unique characteristics of a program—allow
an author to detect piracy by recognizing characteristics of his or her own
programs in other software. You’ll learn more about this in Chapter 10
(Software Similarity Analysis).

In many ways, advertise can be seen as the opposite of security through
obscurity—rather than keeping our defenses secret, we openly display them
to our adversary, taunting him to “go ahead, take your best shot!” In an
ideal scenario, he will take one look at us, walk away disheartened, and
launch an attack against a less well-defended target. In a less ideal scenario,
knowing details of our defenses will allow him to find a chink in our armor
—like a two-meter exhaust vent leading straight into the core of our Death
Star, allowing anyone with a spare proton torpedo to reduce us to so much
space debris.

We already mentioned the recent TV miniseries Traffic, where terrorists
smuggle the smallpox virus into the United States, sending the authorities
on a wild goose chase across the country hunting for the right container
among several decoy containers with the same number. In the end, it turns
out that the terrorists had used advertise (“The virus is in one of these
containers *wink,wink*”) to trick the DEA: All the containers were actually
decoys, and the actual carriers of the virus were the illegal immigrants on
board the cargo ship.

False advertising also works in the software protection domain. A program
can advertise that it is watermarked when in fact it isn’t, or can advertise
that it is tamperproofed using a particular algorithm when in fact it is using
another one.

2.2.10 The detect-respond Primitive

Tamperproofing has two parts, detecting that an attack has occurred and
reacting to the attack. The reaction can be a combination of self-destructing
(in whole or in part), destroying objects in the environment (including the
attacker), or regenerating the tampered parts. In our model, x monitors the
health of y, and if E should happen, executes tamper-response A:

     Primitive 2.11 (detect-respond x E y A U)

     Given two frames x and y, add a demon to x that executes action A if
     event E happens to y.

In the animal world, some species have developed the ability to regenerate
destroyed parts of their bodies (usually limbs and tails, but in some cases
even parts of internal organs) after an attack. Starfish, for example, can
regrow their entire organism given just one arm and the central disk.

Puffy the Pufferfish uses a combination of several defense strategies: He
can expand his body to appear threatening to an attacker, and an attacker
who nevertheless starts munching on him will have to deal with the
neurotoxins of his internal organs, a form of tamperproofing. It may not
save Puffy’s life, but it might save his brothers and sisters, since the attacker
is either dead or has developed a distaste for Pufferfish-sashimi.

Turtles and many other animals use exoskeletons (a form of covering) to
protect themselves. Some combine this with tamperproofing, using poisons
to make themselves unpalatable once the protective layer has been removed
by the predator. The Hawksbill turtle (Eretmochelys imbricata) has both a
shell and poisonous flesh.
Humans using tamperproofing to protect themselves is common in movie
plots: The terrorist straps explosives to his chest and holds a dead-man’s
trigger in his hand so that if our hero takes him out, everyone will die in the
ensuing blast. Another common plot device is leaving an envelope
containing compromising information about your nemesis with your
lawyer, with instructions that “in the case of my untimely demise, mail this
to the Washington Post.”

The terrorist in the above scenario is self-tamper-detecting as well as self-
tamper-responding. This seems to be the most common case: You monitor
some part of yourself (the health of your internal organs, for example), and
if tampering is evident, you execute the tamper response (releasing the
trigger a split second before expiring). This is what it looks like in the
model:

The Washington Post scenario above shows that both detection and
response can be external, however: The lawyer examines the obituaries
every day, and if your name shows up, executes the tamper-response.

Unlike lower-order animals like newts and salamanders, humans have very
little regenerative power—we can only regrow some skin and a part of our
liver.

Tamperproofing is, of course, an extremely important part of surreptitious
software. We will spend all of Chapter 7 (Software Tamperproofing)
discussing both how programs detect they’ve been tampered with and how
they can retaliate in response to an attack. A common form of tamper-
detection is to compare a hash computed over the program to the expected
value. The TPCA (Section 7.2.1 414) tamperproofing algorithm makes use
of regeneration to fix parts of a program after an attack. The idea is to
replace a destroyed part with a fresh copy:
Other types of response are also common: A program can retaliate by
(subtly or spectacularly) self-destructing or destroying files in its
environment. For example, the Display Eater screen motion catcher
program will delete your home directory if you try to use a pirated serial
number [126].

2.2.11 The dynamic Primitive

Our final primitive, dynamic, is used to model protection techniques that
use dynamic behavior to throw off an attacker. Here, continuous change
itself is used to confuse an attacker. The change can take a variety of forms:
fast movement, unpredictable movement, and continuous evolution of
defenses. The dynamic primitive is a higher-order function that takes a
frame x and a function f as argument, and iteratively generates 〈fx, f(fx),
f(f(fx))), ...〉:

     Primitive 2.12 (dynamic f x U)

     Given a frame x, form an infinite sequence of frames by repeatedly
     applying primitive f:
Moving faster than your adversary is, in many ways, the ultimate protection
technique in the animal world. If the cheetah can’t catch you, he can’t eat
you! There is a trade-off between agility and speed, on the one hand, and
physical layers of protection, on the other. A turtle can afford to be slow
because he’s carrying around a thick protective exoskeleton. The Pronghorn
antelope (Antilocapra americana) has made a different trade-off: It can run
60 miles/h to get away from a predator such as the mountain lion, which is
only able to do 40 miles/h. On the other hand, the antelope is soft and
vulnerable on the outside and tasty on the inside, and should he get caught,
it’s game over.

Anyone who has tried to kill a particularly annoying fly knows that while
speed is important, so is agility and unpredictability. In fact, the fruit fly
(Drosophila melanogaster) flies in a sequence of straight-line segments
separated by 90-degree turns that it can execute in less than 50
milliseconds. Since the movements appear completely random, a predator
(you) will have to be very lucky and persistent to get the best of him.

Evolution itself is, of course, an exercise in continuous change. As prey
develop better defenses, predators develop better attacks. HIV is one
example of a particularly successful organism: Because of its fast
replication cycle and high mutation rate, a patient will experience many
virus variants during a single day. This makes it difficult for the immune
system to keep up and for scientists to develop effective vaccines.

Mobility is key in modern warfare. During the Gulf War, Iraqi forces
successfully moved Scud missiles around on transporter-erector-launcher
trucks to avoid detection by coalition forces: “Even in the face of intense
efforts to find and destroy them, the mobile launchers proved remarkably
elusive and survivable.” [194] Just as the Pronghorn antelope and the turtle
have made trade-offs on the scale from slow-but-impenetrable to fast-but-
vulnerable, so have military forces.
Just like in the natural virus world, change is used in the computer virus
world to foil detection. A computer virus that modifies itself for every new
generation will stress the capabilities of the virus detector: It has to find
some signature of the virus that does not change between mutations.

Many of the algorithms that we will see in this book are dynamic, in one
form or another. Aucsmith’s tamperproofing algorithm OBFAGswap (Section
6.2.2 366), for example, first breaks up a program into chunks that are then
encrypted. One chunk is decrypted, executed, re-encrypted, swapped with
another chunk, and the process repeats:

(Here, we’re not modeling the encryption. This could be done with the map
primitive.) This process results in an unpredictable address trace that an
attacker will find difficult to follow, making the code hard to tamper with.

2.2.12 Discussion

The problem with a classification exercise such as the one you’ve just seen
is that it’s impossible to prove that the model is complete. There’s always
the possibility that you’ll happen upon a protection scheme that doesn’t fit
into the model in any natural way. This model is fairly new (we first
presented it in 2007), and so it has yet to be thoroughly vetted.

We therefore invite you to come up with scenarios that can’t be expressed
using the primitives, or to show that a particular primitive can be simulated
by a combination of others, and thus eliminated. However, keep in mind
that while any Turing complete model would do, the goal here isn’t to come
up with a minimalist set of primitives. Rather, the goal is to find a set of
primitives that elegantly expresses how the natural world has evolved
protection strategies, how we as humans think about protecting ourselves,
and most important, of course, how we can protect computer programs.

    Problem 2.1

    Can you extend the model to incorporate attacks as well as defenses?
    Intuitively, attacking a protection scheme based on defense-in-depth
    means “peeling off” successive layers of protection. Thus, for every
    defense primitive of the model you need to add a corresponding attack
    primitive. Can you also add a quantitative component that specifies the
    amount of work required of the defender to apply a primitive and of an
    attacker to undo it?

                                        •••

    Problem 2.2

    A further interesting development would be to give a formal semantics
    to the informal box-notation we’ve used here. A good start would be to
    look at our Haskell implementation of the model, available from the
    book’s Web site.

2.3 Discussion
The fact that we have two disjoint models in this chapter—one describing
the goals and techniques of the attacker, and the other describing the
strategies of the defender—is obviously unsatisfying. Ideally, we would like
to merge the two, adding quantitative components that describe the
attacker’s and the defender’s intellectual and financial motives, technical
strengths, endurance, and so on. Sadly, such a model does not yet exist.

2.3.1 What Do We Need from Attack and Defense Models?

Since at this time we have no software protection algorithms that provide
any security guarantees, the goal of software protection can’t be to
completely prevent a cracker from breaking through your defenses. Rather,
we’re looking for algorithms that will slow him down as much as possible.
Any useful software protection model must be able to express the
time/effort it takes for an attacker to break through a defense vs. the effort
required by the defender to implement that defense vs. the cost in
performance incurred by that defense.

For a software protection algorithm to be considered successful, the effort
required by the attacker should be significantly higher than that incurred by
the defender. In the early parts of the chapter, however, you saw how the
tools and techniques that crackers use to break through software protection
defenses are often surprisingly simple. Armed with nothing but a debugger,
infinite patience, and fueled by a never-ending supply of caffeine and Hot
Pockets, crackers seem able to break through even the most hardened
defenses. And as you will see throughout this book, many protection
algorithms are surprisingly difficult to implement, requiring a thorough
understanding of static analysis techniques.

An important question arises from the preceding observation: “Are there
any software protection techniques that require strictly more effort to break
than to implement?” In Section 4.6.3 281, you’ll see a Java code
obfuscation technique that took significant effort to implement (2,000 man-
hours) but for which the authors concluded it afforded “no to very marginal
security.” On the other hand, you can see in Section 7.2.4 431 that
significant effort was required to break the Skype VoIP client, although we
have, of course, no knowledge of the amount of effort Skype expended
implementing the defense mechanisms. Regardless, any software protection
model must have some way to express the cost of implementation and
contrast that with the cost of an attack, and we must have some way of
measuring these costs.

If we assume that against every defense there’s an effective attack (and we
should!), as defenders we have to accept the fact that our defenses will need
to be continuously updated. Attackers similarly must accept that their
attacks need to be continuously refreshed, too! As a result, any software
protection model must be able to express the ease with which defenses and
attacks can be updated, and how seeing a long sequence of defense updates
may, over time, improve the cracker’s attack capabilities.

2.3.2 How Do We Use the Models to Devise Algorithms?

A good model of the attacker’s behavior can help you figure out what you
need to defend your program against. And a good model of available
defense strategies can help you devise algorithms that effectively slow
down the attack.

In Section 2.1.4 68, for example, you saw how a typical attack goes
through a locate-alter-test cycle: Find the location of the software
protection code that needs to be disabled, alter the behavior of this code,
and test that the modified program behaves as required. Knowing that this is
the attacker’s strategy, you can concoct protection techniques that slow
down each step of the cycle. How do you slow down the locate phase?
Well, one way is to introduce apparent non-determinism: Every time around
the attack cycle the program should appear to execute differently! And how
do you accomplish this? Well, one way is to make copies of pieces of the
code (using the duplicate primitive of our defense model), and randomly
choose between these at runtime. How do you slow down the alter phase?
Well, one way is to make the different parts of the program more
interdependent, for example, by splitting functions into parts and then
merging unrelated parts. Another possibility is to use the detect-respond
primitive to effect a tamper-response whenever you detect that the program
has been modified. You can further use the duplicate primitive to make
multiple copies of the tamper-detection code in order to force the attacker to
disable them all.

Again, a comprehensive model that incorporates both the attack and defense
strategies would make this sort of argument much easier.
