                      4. Code Obfuscation

Code obfuscation is both the most important and the most elusive of the
software protection techniques we discuss in this book. Elusive because it
has proven hard to pin down exactly what obfuscation is, to devise
practically useful algorithms, and to evaluate the quality of these
algorithms, and important because if we could agree on definitions and
devise strong algorithms, we would have a solution to many practical
problems in security and cryptography.

Our discussion of code obfuscation will spread over three chapters. In this
chapter, you will learn about some of the history of code obfuscation and
the algorithms that have been proposed in the literature that are used in
practice. In Chapter 5 (Obfuscation Theory), we will survey recent, more
theoretical, studies that have explored some limits to what can and cannot
be obfuscated. In Chapter 6 (Dynamic Obfuscation), finally, we’ll look at
obfuscation algorithms that dynamically update code at runtime.

Informally, to obfuscate a program P means to transform it into a program
P′ that is still executable but from which it is hard to extract information.
This “definition” leaves you a lot of leeway: What does hard mean and
what information are we talking about? In this chapter, hard simply means
“harder than before”: We want the adversary to have to expend strictly more
resources to extract information from P′ than from P. In the next chapter,
the definition will be stricter: “Hard” means the adversary gains no
advantage from having access to P′ over having blackbox access to P (i.e.,
it is no better for the adversary to be able to look at P′’s obfuscated code
than it is being able to execute P on arbitrary inputs). What information the
adversary wants to extract depends on his intentions: He may want to
discover a secret algorithm to reuse in his own program, secret data (such as
cryptographic keys) to break a DRM scheme, a secret design (data and/or
module structures) to help him clone the program, or the location of a
license check he wants to remove.
In this chapter, you will see only obfuscated programs that remain fixed at
runtime. That is, the obfuscation tool transforms the program either before
or after compilation, but definitely before the program executes. We call
this static obfuscation. In Chapter 6, we will lift this restriction and
introduce dynamic obfuscators that transform programs continuously at
runtime, keeping them in constant flux. Static obfuscations are typically
designed to thwart static analysis, but can be attacked using dynamic
techniques such as debugging, emulation, and tracing. Dynamic obfuscation
techniques are designed to be resistant to these types of attacks.

In Section 4.1, we will start off the chapter by looking at some very simple
obfuscating transformations. In this chapter, the purpose of an obfuscating
transformation is to make it difficult for your adversary to collect
information about the program statically, i.e., without running the program.
For that reason, the transformations you’ll see are designed to make the
program difficult to analyze using the static analysis techniques in Section
3.1 118. You’ll also see how to design an obfuscator, a tool that
automatically picks which transformations to apply to different parts of the
code. In Section 4.2 217, we’ll give definitions, and then we’ll spend the
remainder of the chapter showing you a large collection of transformations
that have been proposed in the literature. Some transformations try to make
control flow as complicated as possible (Section 4.3 225), others transform
data structures into equivalent ones that are harder to understand (Section
4.5 258), and still others remove abstractions that could reveal important
design decisions (Section 4.6 277). Many of these transformations make
use of opaque predicates, boolean expressions that are hard for an
adversary to evaluate. In Section 4.4 246, we’ll show you ways to construct
such predicates.

4.1 Semantics-Preserving Obfuscating Transformations

Fred Cohen did much pioneering work on malware construction and
detection [74, 75]. He’s also credited with the first paper on what we today
would call obfuscation, Operating system protection through program
evolution [76]. The purpose of this paper is diversity of programs, i.e., ways
to generate syntactically different but semantically identical versions of the
same program. Malware typically target very specific vulnerabilities in
software (such as forcing a buffer to overflow to make the function return
address get overwritten, which finally causes control to jump into the
payload). If, so the thinking goes, you can make an installation of a
program different from all other installations, it will be much harder for the
malware writer to write his code generically enough to work on all versions.
There has been much work on diversity through semantics-preserving
transformations since Cohen’s initial paper. See, for example, Anckaert et
al. [11].

It is likely that many of the techniques Fred Cohen presented in Algorithm
OBFCF [76,77] were well known in the folklore before then. Virus writers,
for example, also need to diversify their code so that it isn’t easily identified
by virus scanners! It is, however, hard to document when a technique was
first used in the underground hacking community.

As an introduction to semantics-preserving transformations, we’re now
going to give you an overview of Fred Cohen’s simple diversification
techniques. We’re then going to look at the simplest of all obfuscating
transformations, variable renaming, which was also the one that was first to
make it into the mainstream. We’ll end this introduction to obfuscation by
showing you possible designs of an obfuscation executive, the top-level
loop in an obfuscation tool that chooses which transformations to apply to
which parts of the code.

4.1.1 Algorithm OBFCF: Diversifying Transformations

When you’re reading this section, you should keep in mind that there are
significant differences between the requirements of a transformation used
for diversity and one used to protect an algorithm from reverse engineering.
In both cases, the transformation needs to be cheap, i.e., it should not
introduce much overhead in space and time. It also needs to be potent, i.e.,
it should introduce much confusion. In the case of a diversifying
transformation, this means that the transformation should introduce many
differences between two program versions. In addition to this, a
transformation used for obfuscation must also be resilient to attack, i.e., it
must be hard for an adversary to undo it. Related to the resilience of a
transformation is its stealth. To make obfuscation hard to undo, you don’t
want it to be immediately obvious to an attacker which transformation was
applied where in the code. We’ll make these concepts clearer in Section 4.2
  217.

4.1.1.1 Expression Equivalence

There are an infinite number of ways to turn a given arithmetic expression
into a sequence of elementary instructions. Compilers typically optimize for
the sequence of instructions that is the shortest or will execute the fastest,
but there’s nothing stopping you from optimizing for confusion instead!
Common compiler code generation tricks can generate obfuscated code. For
example, multiplication by a constant is often turned into a sequence of less
obvious adds and shifts:

4.1.1.2 Algorithm OBFCFrecorder: Reordering Code and Data

Programmers tend to put related pieces of code close together, and
compilers tend to lay out code in the order in which it occurs in the source
code. Locality can therefore be an important clue to a reverse engineer as to
what pieces of code belong together. It’s therefore a good idea to randomize
the placement of modules within a program, functions within a module,
statements within a function, and instructions within a statement.

You can almost always trivially reorder modules and functions, but you can
only reorder statements and instructions for as long as you don’t violate any
dependencies. A code obfuscation tool that wants to reorder instructions
needs to start by building a data- and control-dependence graph (Section
3.1.3 132). Two instructions can be reordered if there are no dependencies
between them.

In type-safe languages like Java, variable declarations that appear within the
same scope can trivially be reordered. In C, where programmers can play
tricks with pointer arithmetic, and arrays are indexed without bounds
checks, reordering is much harder. In this example, the programmer might
not have intended to index outside the bounds of a, but he did anyway, and
somehow his program still worked:

     int main() {
     int a[5];
     int b[6];
     a[5] = 42;
     printf("%i\n",b[0]);
     }

If your obfuscation tool now decides to reorder a and b, the code will
mysteriously cease to function.

4.1.1.3 Algorithm OBFCFinoutline: Splitting and Merging Functions

As a programmer, you use abstraction to manage the inherent complexity
of larger programs. You break long pieces of code into smaller functions,
you collect related functions into modules or classes, you collect related
classes into packages, and so on. In Section 4.6 277, we’ll show you
various ways in which you can obfuscate a program by breaking these
abstractions.

Function inlining is a common code optimization technique that replaces a
call to a function with its code. This can also be an effective obfuscation
technique, since it breaks the abstraction boundary that the programmer
created.
The opposite of inlining is function outlining, where a piece of code is
extracted into its own function and replaced with a call to this function.
Outlining is also an effective obfuscation technique, since it inserts a bogus
abstraction where there previously was none. Here’s an example where a
piece of the modular exponentiation routine (in light gray) is extracted into
its own function f and replaced with a call (in dark gray):

Inlining is essentially a merge of a function caller and its callee. Similarly,
outlining is a split of a function into two pieces. You can also merge two
unrelated functions. For pure functions (those without side effects), this is
trivial: Just merge the parameter lists, merge the function bodies, and
replace any call to either of the functions with a call to the merged function.
When a function has side effects, you have to be more careful. Here’s an
example where function f has side effects but function g is pure:
The merged function fg takes an extra argument which, to ensure that the
code that causes side effects is executed only when the function is called as
an f-function, not as a g-function. We also had to add extra bogus arguments
to fg to fill out the parameter list.

4.1.1.4 Algorithm OBFCFcopy: Copying Code

A common obfuscation technique is to make the program larger by cloning
pieces of it. Size itself is an impediment to reverse engineering, and if you
can make the copied code look different from the original code, you may
force the attacker to carefully examine all pairs of code blocks in the
program to figure out which ones share the same functionality.

Here’s an example where we’ve cloned a function f into a bogus function
f1. We’ve further obfuscated f1 by modifying the array index computation
and adding some bogus code that doesn’t affect program semantics:
We replaced one of the two calls to f in main with a call to f1. To gain a full
understanding of the code, the adversary would have to analyze f and f1 to
determine that they actually perform the same function.

4.1.1.5 Algorithm OBFCFinterp: Interpretation

Programs are compiled from source code down to code for a physical
machine architecture (such as the x86) or a virtual machine architecture
(such as Java bytecode). There’s nothing stopping you from compiling to a
custom instruction set architecture, one that you define yourself and one for
which you provide a specialized interpreter. Nothing, that is, except the fact
that your program will now run a factor 10-100 slower than before.

Have a look at Listing 4.1 208, where we’ve translated the modular
exponentiation routine into code for a direct threaded interpreter [125,200].
Notice how the instruction set is specialized to fit the particular routine
we’re executing. Some of the instructions are generic and could be part of
any interpreter (pusha, pushv, add, mul, mod, jump, store), whereas others (inc_k,
x_k_ne_1, k_ge_w) are so-called superoperators [292] that only make sense for
the modular exponentiation routine. The superoperators both speed up the
program by reducing the number of executed instructions, and allow you to
generate many different interpreters with different instruction sets for the
same routine. This makes it harder for the adversary to come up with an
automated attack that removes the layer of interpretation.

Listing 4.1. Algorithm        OBFCFinterp:   Adding a layer of
interpretation.

int modexp(int y, int x[], int w, int n) {
int R, L, k = 0, s = 1;
int Stack[10]; int sp=0;
void* prog[]={
// if (k >= w) return L
&&k_ge_w,
// if (x[k] == 1)
&&x_k_ne_1,&prog[16],
// R = (s*y) % n;
&&pusha,&R,&&pushv,&s,&&pushv,&y,&&mul,&&pushv,&n,
&&mod,&&store,
// Jump after if-statement
&&jump,&prog[21],
// R = s;
&&pusha,&R,&&pushv,&s,&&store,
// s = R*R % n;
&&pusha,&s,&&pushv,&R,&&pushv,&R,&&mul,&&pushv,&n,
&&mod,&&store,
// L = R;
&&pusha,&L,&&pushv,&R,&&store,
// k++
&&inc_k,
// Jump to top of loop
&&jump,&prog[0]
};
void** pc = (void**) &prog;
goto **pc++;
inc_k: k++; goto **pc++;
pusha: Stack[sp++]=(int)*pc; pc++; goto **pc++;
pushv: Stack[sp++]=*(int*)*pc; pc++; goto **pc++;
store:   *((int*)Stack[sp-2])=Stack[sp-1];   sp-=2;
goto **pc++;
x_k_ne_1: if (x[k] != 1) pc=*pc; else pc++; goto
**pc++;
k_ge_w: if (k >= w) return L; goto **pc++;
add:   Stack[sp-2]  +=   Stack[sp-1];  sp--;   goto
**pc++;
mul:   Stack[sp-2]  *=   Stack[sp-1];  sp--;   goto
**pc++;
mod:   Stack[sp-2]  %=   Stack[sp-1];  sp--;   goto
**pc++;
jump: pc=*pc; goto **pc++;
}

   Problem 4.1

   Many authors have suggested that interpretation is a “hard”
   obfuscation to undo. No one, however, seems to have analyzed just
   how hard it is in practice. Can you implement an attack that unfolds a
   specialized interpreter and its hardcoded instruction list back into the
   original program? Which type of interpreter (switch-based, direct call
   threaded, direct threaded, indirect threaded) is most difficult to attack?

Algorithm 4.1. Algorithm OBFTP, for renaming classes, fields,
and methods in an object-oriented language with the minimum
number of names.
OBFUSCATE(P):

  1. Build the inheritance hierarchy for P.

  2. Create an empty undirected graph G and add a node for every class
     and field, and for every method that doesn’t override a method in the
     standard library.

  3. Add an edge between every pair of class nodes.

  4. Add an edge between every pair of field nodes declared within the
     same class.

  5. Merge any pair of method nodes where one overrides the other.

  6. Add an edge between any pair of methods C1.m1 and C2.m2 that have
     the same signature and where C1 = C2 or C2 inherits from C1, directly
     or indirectly.

  7. Color G with a minimum number of colors so that as many nodes as
     possible are given the same color.

4.1.2 Algorithm OBFTP: Identifier Renaming

The first obfuscation method that came into widespread use was identifier
renaming. In the wake of the release of Java, and people’s realization that
decompilation was easy and led to the recovery of source [293], Hans Peter
Van Vliet released Crema [356], a Java obfuscator, and Mocha [357], a Java
decompiler. Building a decompiler for a type-safe bytecode language like
the JVM isn’t hard, but it requires attention to detail in order to cover all
corner cases. For this reason, a cat-and-mouse game ensued where
obfuscators would employ clever techniques to trip up less-than-perfect
decompilers. HoseMocha [218] was the first example of this, adding a
bogus instruction after the return statement of a method, apparently enough
to make Mocha fail. Another common technique to foil Java decompilers
has become to rename identifiers using characters that are legal in the JVM,
but not in Java source [58].

While identifier renaming today is mostly of historical interest, it does have
two interesting characteristics. First, it removes information that truly is
unrecoverable to a decompiler; once the programmer’s identifiers have been
removed, there’s no way to get them back. You can, possibly, analyze the
code to substitute intelligent identifiers for the ones the obfuscator assigned,
but you’ll never recover the actual identifiers the programmer originally
chose! The second interesting characteristic is that identifier renaming,
unlike most other obfuscating transformations, doesn’t incur any
performance overhead.

Depending on your language, you can be more or less clever in replacing
original identifiers with bogus ones. Algorithm 4.1 [58,351] is employed by
PreEmptive Solutions’ Dash0 Java obfuscator and, presumably, by its
Dotfuscator obfuscator for .NET, which is included with Microsoft’s Visual
Studio 2005. The idea is to make use of the language’s overloading features
to give as many declarations as possible the same name. As an example,
consider this set of classes:

     class Felinae {
     int color;
     int speed;
     public void move(int x,int y){}
     }
     class Felis extends Felinae {
     public void move(int x,int y){}
     public void meow(int tone,int length){}
     }
     class Pantherinae extends Felinae {
     public void move(int x,int y){}
     public void growl(int tone,int length){}
     }
    class Panthera extends Pantherinae {
    public void move(int x,int y){}
    }

Ignoring Java’s concept of packages, interfaces, and access modifiers
(private, public, protected), the naming rules for Java essentially require
class names to be globally unique, and field names to be unique within
classes. Also, methods with different signatures are considered unique and
can have the same name.

Given these rules, Algorithm 4.1 209 builds a graph where every node is a
declaration and there’s an edge between two nodes if they cannot have the
same name. Methods that must have the same name (because they override
each other) are merged into super-nodes. Renaming with the smallest
number of names then becomes a problem of coloring the graph with the
smallest number of colors. Here’s the graph corresponding to the program
above:

Here’s the resulting, renamed code:
    class Light {
    int Light;
    int Dark;
    public void Dark(int x,int y){}
    }
    class Dark extends Light {
    public void Dark(int x,int y){}
    public void Light(int tone,int length){}
    }
    class Dashed extends Light {
    public void Dark(int x,int y){}
    public void Light(int tone,int length){}
    }
    class Dotted extends Dashed {
    public void Dark(int x,int y){}
    }

For example, although meow and growl have the same signature, they can be
given the same name since they are declared in classes that have no
inheritance relationship.

    Problem 4.2

    For a strongly typed language like Java, write a tool that de-obfuscates
    obfuscated identifiers making use of available type information,
    references to standard libraries with known semantics, and a library of
    common programming idioms. Evaluate your tool by having subjects
    compare the readability of original (unobfuscated) programs to your
    de-obfuscated programs with generated identifiers. How would your
    tool be different for a weakly typed language like C that relies less
    heavily than Java on a standard library? Could you use statistical
    methods to generate identifiers, for example, by training a neural
    network on a set of well-structured programs? Generating identifiers in
     “Hungarian Notation” is straightforward, but can you do better? Can
     you do better than this paper [73]?

4.1.3 Obfuscation Executives

If you have multiple obfuscating transformations at your disposal, a
question naturally arises: Which transformations should I apply where, and
in which order should I apply them? The problem gets even more complex
if you not only want to obfuscate the program but also want to watermark
and tamperproof it. Should I watermark first, then obfuscate, and then
tamperproof, or is some other ordering better?

A similar problem (known as the “phase-ordering-problem” [373,374])
arises in compilers when there are many optimizing transformations
available. Some compilers apply the optimizations in a fixed order, while
others iteratively apply the transformations until there are no more changes,
or until some time limit has been exceeded.

With some exceptions, choosing a good optimization order is an easier
problem than choosing a good obfuscation order. The reason is that most
optimizations make the program simpler (for example, by removing
redundant computations), or at the very least, don’t make the program much
more complex. Transformations such as loop unrolling are exceptions.
Obfuscating transformations, on the other hand, are designed to make the
program more complex! So for every obfuscating transformation you apply,
the program gets more complex and you make the job of the next
transformation harder.

A related problem is how to decide when to stop obfuscating. With a fixed
transformation order, this isn’t a problem, of course: Just apply each
transformation until you have no more. If you choose transformations
randomly, however (as you’d like to do when generating a diverse set of
programs), you have to define a termination criterion. Ever the pioneer,
Fred Cohen defined the simple routine OBFCFOE [76] in Algorithm 4.2 for
controlling the generation of a diverse set of programs. We call the top-level
routine in an obfuscation tool the obfuscation executive (OE).

Algorithm 4.2. Algorithm OBFCFOE for controlling diversifying
transformations. prob[t] is the probability that you’ll select
transformation t and thresholdSpace is a bound on the size of the
obfuscated program.

OBFUSCATIONEXECUTIVE(P,〈 ,             , ...〉, thresholdSpace):

while (totalSpace ≤ thresholdSpace) {
x ← y ← 0;
a ← pseudo-random number between 0 and 1;
do {
y ← y+1;
x ← x+prob[y];
} while x<a;
apply y;
}

4.1.3.1 Algorithm OBFCTJOE: Maximizing Bang for the Buck

Picking transformations randomly may work for diversification, but when
you’re obfuscating to hide some property, you want more control than that.
OBFCTJOE [87] in Algorithm 4.3 214 refines Cohen’s idea. It breaks up the
program into application objects, i.e., any program structure that could
possibly be obfuscated. Depending on the programming language and the
transformations, this could include the modules, classes, routines, types,
basic blocks, and so on that the program is made up of. For each application
object, the user needs to specify how security-critical it is. The OE keeps a
priority queue of application objects, and during each step it selects the
most security-critical object to obfuscate. It next selects the most
appropriate transformation to apply to the application object. “Most
appropriate” here means a heuristic that maximizes the bang for the buck,
i.e., selects the transformation that sows as much confusion as possible,
minimizes the performance penalty, and generates code that fits in well with
surrounding code.

Algorithm 4.3. Algorithm OBFCTJOE [87]. Obfuscate program P
using transformations 〈 , , ... 〉 . P consists of application
objects (routines, modules, classes, basic blocks, ...) 〈 s1, s2,
... 〉 . prio[si] gives the importance of protecting application
object si. acceptCost is the maximum execution penalty the user is
willing to accept. reqObf is the amount of obfuscation the user
requires.

OBFUSCATIONEXECUTIVE(P = 〈 s1, s2, ... 〉 ,             = 〈      ,   , ... 〉 ,
prio,acceptCost, reqObf):

  1. Build necessary internal data structures such as the inheritance graph,
     the call graph, and control flow graphs for each routine.

  2. Insert each application object si into a priority queue Q, using prio[si]
     as the priority.

  3. Select the most important application object s to protect and an
     appropriate transformation t. Repeat the process until the obfuscation
     level the user requires has been reached or the maximum acceptable
     execution penalty has been exceeded:

         while (!done(acceptCost,reqObf)) {
         s ← application object with max priority in
         Q;
         t ← SELECTTRANSFORMATION(s, );
         apply t to s;
         update s's priority in Q;
           update internal data structures;
           }

     Use software complexity metrics (Section 3.4.2 193) to estimate the
     obfuscation level of the program before and after a transformation is
     applied.

SELECTTRANSFORMATION(s,          =〈 ,       , ...〉):

  1. Return a transformation t appropriate to apply to application object s.
     Select t to maximize stealth, maximize the resulting obfuscation, and
     minimize the execution penalty.

4.1.3.2 Algorithm OBFHC: Modeling Dependencies

When we built the SandMark [2,81] tool, we realized the need for a more
powerful obfuscation executive. In addition to obfuscating transformations,
SandMark includes watermarking transformations. If you’re going to both
obfuscate and watermark, it becomes important to specify which
obfuscations are compatible with which watermarks and the order in which
to apply the different transformations. Some obfuscations, for example, will
destroy the watermarks and thus need to be applied before the mark is
embedded. Also, to be effective, some transformations require others to be
run afterwards. For example, a transformation that splits a method A in two
may, for simplicity and debuggability, name them A_firstHalf and A_secondHalf
and then require an identifier renaming transformation to run afterwards.

     Problem 4.3

     Many obfuscation papers say, “So, uh, unfortunately, our proposed
     transformation has a high performance overhead, but that’s no
     problem! We’ll just (a) apply it only to the security-critical parts of the
     program or (b) use profiling to avoid any performance-critical parts!”
     There are two problems with this argument. First, what’s to say that the
     parts that are security-critical aren’t also performance-critical? Second,
     if the transformation isn’t perfectly stealthy, will the security-critical
     parts be easier for the adversary to locate if the transformation isn’t
     applied uniformly over the program? Study some real programs to
     determine if this is a valid argument or not.

Algorithm OBFHC [157] builds a Finite State Automaton (FSA) that embeds
all the dependencies between transformations. During obfuscation, the OE
does a probabilistic walk over the FSA, selecting a path that respects
dependencies, selecting the most security-sensitive objects to obfuscate, and
selecting transformations that lead to the highest level of obfuscation with
the lowest performance overhead. The FSA, in other words, is a model that
embeds all the information that an OE might use to select sequences of
transformations. The model allows you to construct OEs of various
complexity and precision.

For example, assume you have a program that consists of a single function
m(). You specify to the OE ObfLevel(m), the desired obfuscation level of m(),
and PerfImport(m), how performance critical m() is:

Assume your obfuscator has two obfuscating transformations A and B. For
each transformation, the obfuscator specifies the obfuscation Potency (how
much confusion it adds), the performance Degradation, and any
dependencies on other transformations:
There’s only one dependency here, stating that if transformation A is
applied to some object x, B must at some later point be applied to x. From
this information, the obfuscator builds the following FSA:

The FSA generates a language of strings of (x), i.e., a series of
obfuscations to run on particular application objects. The language
generated by this FSA is (B(m)|A(m)+B(m)))*. For example, acceptable
transformation sequences include

    〈B(m)〉,
    〈B(m), B(m)〉,
    〈A(m), B(m)〉,
    〈A(m), A(m), B(m), B(m)〉,
    ...

Some sequences are better than others, of course, since they result in more
obfuscated programs with lower performance penalty. To let the OE pick
better paths, each FSA edge is of the form

where the tuple to the right of the colon represents the “goodness” of
applying transformation T to application object x. A simple OE will map
this tuple into a single edge weight (a real number in [0, 1]) and use it to
select edges probabilistically.
     Problem 4.4

     In most optimizing compilers, each optimization will compute the
     static analyses it needs, perform the transformation, and when it’s done
     throw away the collected information. This doesn’t work well for
     obfuscation tools, since each transformation makes the program more
     complex than before. The “right way” to build an OE is therefore to
     maintain static information across transformations. The disadvantage is
     that every transformation now becomes more complicated: After the
     transformation has been performed, the tool must update the static
     information so that it correctly reflects any changes it has made to the
     program. Design an interface to a database of static information that
     makes it easy to maintain correct state. Investigate how hard it would
     be to integrate it with an existing tool, such as SandMark. Number
     One, make it so.

4.2 Definitions

In this chapter, the goal of you, the defender, is to transform a program Pσ,
which has a secret property σ, into a program , so that it is harder for an
adversary to discover σ from       than from Pσ. The goal of the adversary is
de-obfuscation, to discover σ given access only to . We’ll call Po the
obfuscated version of P, and we’ll drop the σ superscript when it’s clear
from context what property you want to hide.

There are many different properties σ that you might want to hide. For
example, σ could be

     • the source code of the program,

     • the organization of the program (its module structure, class hierarchy,
       ...),
     • the names of the functions of the program,

     • the algorithm the program uses to compute a particular function,

     • the location in the program at which a particular function (such as a
       license check, decryption function, ...) is computed,

     • the value of a particular literal data structure (such as a cryptographic
       key, license expiration date, ...) contained within the program,

     • whether location l in the program is reachable, or

     • what values variable x can take on during the execution of the
      program.

As you see, in some cases the goal of de-obfuscation is code (the source of
P or some representation of one of P’s algorithms), while in other cases it’s
a particular location in the program, the value of some literal data, or some
other property of the control or data flow. For example, an attacker who
wants to modify license checking code first of all needs to know where in
the program it’s located. But this is not enough. Before he goes ahead and
modifies the program, he has to recover enough other information about it
to know that the modification is safe and doesn’t have any nasty side
effects.

To convert P into Po, you have access to a library of semantics-preserving
code transformations = { , ,...} and a set of program analysis tools =
{ , ,...}.      aids the transformations by providing useful static and/or
dynamic information about P. Static analysis techniques might include
control flow analysis, data flow analyses, slicing, and so on: all the kinds of
code analysis algorithms that are normally used by compilers and program-
understanding tools. Useful dynamic analysis tools include profilers,
tracers, and debuggers. For these, you also will need a set of test cases ,
which consists of input data that thoroughly exercises the program, and
possibly their expected results. Schematically, the obfuscation process looks
like this:
K is a secret (to the adversary) security parameter that we’ll call the key.
The obfuscator can use K to guide which transformations to apply to the
program and where in the program to apply them.           is the set of de-
obfuscating transformations your adversary has at his disposal.

You have to assume that your adversary is at least as accomplished as you,
and has access to at least the same information and tools that you do!
Specifically, he has access to the same set of program analyzers, and he’s
aware of the set of code transformations in the obfuscator’s library, just
like you’re aware of his de-obfuscating transformations. He can use to
extract information about , and ideally σ itself, but possibly he’ll be
happy with an approximation of σ, σd. It may be that his ultimate goal is to
recover the source of P itself, or one of its algorithms. For this, he’ll need a
set of de-obfuscating transformations = { , , ... } that transform Po into
Pd. Typically, he does not require Pd to be identical to P, but it has to be
some representation that is “easy enough” to understand or manipulate or at
least easier to understand and manipulate than Po. Schematically, the de-
obfuscation process looks like this:

In practice, the attacker will iterate back and forth between analysis and de-
obfuscation until he’s reached a point where Pd is clear enough for his
purposes.
Let’s compare the last two figures. What advantage do you as the defender
have over the adversary? First, you know the key K, which determines
where in the code the different obfuscating transformations are applied—
the adversary doesn’t. This means that, even if for every one of your
obfuscating transformations he has a corresponding de-obfuscating
transformation, he still has to analyze the program in enough detail to know
where to apply them. Second, if you’re the developer of the program, most
likely your set of test cases is more comprehensive than the adversary’s
d. This means that he will have to be careful when he makes changes to the
program, since he can’t hope to thoroughly test the correctness of every
change. Third, while both of you have access to the same set of analysis
tools , you are applying them to different programs. If obfuscation has
made Po larger than P, and the complexity of the analyses grow with the
size of the program (which is common), the adversary will have to spend
more time in analysis than you.

What advantages, then, may the adversary have over you? First, if the
program is small enough, and the number of transformations is small
enough, without access to K the adversary may still be able to exhaustively
apply all the de-obfuscating transformations to every point of the program.
Second, even though analyzing a larger program requires more resources
than does a smaller one, there’s nothing that says that the analyses that you
had to perform in order to protect the program are the same analyses that
the attacker needs to perform in order to break it! You may have had to
perform expensive static analysis to correctly obfuscate the program in
order to hide the σ property, but the attacker may decide that a quick run
through a debugger is enough to locate that property!

4.2.1 Potent Obfuscating Transformations

We’re taking a very pragmatic view of obfuscation in this chapter. We
won’t require a transformation to be “unbreakable,” we will just ask that it
make the attacker’s task of analyzing the program to find the hidden
information a bit harder. In Chapter 5 (Obfuscation Theory) you will see
what happens when you try to strengthen this requirement.
Let’s start by defining what we mean by an obfuscating transformation
[87]:

    Definition 4.1 (Obfuscating Transformation)

    Let :            be a transformation from programs to programs. is
    an obfuscating transformation, if P and Po =     (P) have the same
    observable behavior. More precisely,

         • If P fails to terminate or terminates with an error condition, then
           Po may or may not terminate.

         • Otherwise, Po must terminate and produce the same output as P.

By “observable behavior” we mean “behavior as experienced by the user.”
For example, Po may have side effects (creating files, sending messages
over the network, and so on) that P doesn’t have, but those side effects
cannot be experienced by the user. Someone versed in program semantics
may say that while we require an obfuscating transformation to leave the
program’s denotational semantics unchanged, we allow it to change the
program’s trace semantics.

This definition essentially allows any transformation on programs to be an
obfuscating transformation as long as it’s semantics-preserving! This is
intentional. Optimizing transformations found in compilers are semantics-
preserving, and many of them can be used for obfuscation as well. But not
all transformations will be useful to us, and in particular, not every
transformation will be useful to hide every particular property. So let’s
define an effective transformation:
     Definition 4.2 (Effective Obfuscating Transformation)

     Let   be an obfuscating transformation, Pσ, a program with property σ,
                 an obfuscated version of Pσ,      a program analysis that
     reveals σ, (σ = (Pσ)), and σd is the result of applying        to    ,
               . Then with respect to Pσ and ,

        is effective if σd σ or        requires more resources to compute
     than (Pσ);

        is ineffective if σd ≈ σ and          requires the same amount of
     resources to compute as (Pσ);

        is defective if σd ≈ σ and      requires fewer resources to compute
     than (Pσ);

To paraphrase this definition, you could say: “A good obfuscating
transformation makes it harder to perform the necessary analyses that reveal
the secret property on the obfuscated program than it is on the original.” We
don’t define ≈ formally. In many situations, σd = σ is what the attacker
needs, but in others, some approximation of σ will suffice.

Actually, Definition 4.2 isn’t quite right. The adversary has a collection of
analyses at his disposal, and it’s conceivable that an obfuscating
transformation makes one analysis harder to apply but others easier! So we
need to extend the definition to a set of analyses:

     Definition 4.3 (Potent Obfuscating Transformation)

     Let    be an obfuscating transformation, Pσ a program with property σ,
                an obfuscated version of Pσ, and = { 1, 2, ..., n} a set
     of program analyses.

     Then,     is potent with respect to Pσ and    if∃ i    such that    is
     effective with respect to Pσ and i, and ∀ j    , is not defective with
     respect to Pσ and j.

In other words, a potent obfuscating transformation makes at least one
analysis harder to perform, and no analyses easier.

What are the set of analyses that an attacker has access to? Ideally, you
want your obfuscation technique to be potent to all possible analyses—even
ones you have not thought of yet! In practice, proposed obfuscation
techniques are resilient to known sets of analyses. For example, some
obfuscation transformations can be shown to be resilient to static analysis—
you cannot reverse engineer them without running them—but fail trivially
to be resilient against simple dynamic analyses. Knowing the set of
analyses your attacker has access to can dramatically simplify your job as
an obfuscator. All you need to do is figure out the limits of those analyses
and design your obfuscating transformations to require their worst-case
behavior!

In discussing existing obfuscating transformations, we will point out the set
of analyses that are being protected against and how the obfuscation takes
advantage of this.

But first we must finalize our definition of what obfuscation is, because
Definition 4.3 is still not quite right! What you really want is a definition
that allows you to compare two transformations in order to say that one is
more potent than the other.

In her Ph.D. thesis, Mila Dalla Preda gives what’s to date the most rigorous
definition of obfuscation potency [287–289]. In her framework, obfuscating
transformations and attackers are both characterized by abstract domains.
(Look back at Section 3.1.6 143 for an introduction to abstract
interpretation.) These domains form a lattice, where domains lower in the
lattice are more concrete (have more accurate information) than those
higher in the lattice. In Mila’s model, an obfuscating program
transformation is potent when there exists a property that is not preserved
by the transformation. This framework also allows you to compare the
potency of two transformations by comparing the most concrete property
that’s preserved by each.

To illustrate the basic idea, have a look at these two trivial obfuscating
transformations:

                                     1(x) = 2 · x
                                     2(x) = 3 · x

 1 takes an integer variable x in the program and replaces it with 2 · x. This
is an example of a data transformation, which you will see more of in
Section 4.5 258. 2(x) is similar; it replaces an integer variable x with 3 · x.
What you’d like to know is which one ( 1or 2) is the more potent. In
Mila’s system, the transformation that preserves the most concrete property
is the one that’s the worse obfuscation. Think about it—a transformation
that preserves everything (the identity transformation) is a really bad
transformation, and the transformation that preserves no property from the
original program is a really good one!

So which ( 1(x) = 2 · x or 2(x) = 3 · x) preserves the least and is the better
obfuscation? Let’s look at two properties, Sign and Parity:
Both     and     preserve the Sign property, since Sign(x) = Sign(2 · x) and
Sign(x) = Sign(3 · x).  also preserves the Parity property, since Parity(x) =
Parity(3 · x), which   1 does not, since Parity(x) ≠ Parity(2 · x). Thus,
preserves less than and is therefore a better obfuscating transformation
than !

While this is very clever, in practice many transformations cannot be
compared in this way—their domains are not comparable.

4.2.2 Efficient Obfuscating Transformations

So far we haven’t said anything about the cost of obfuscation. Most
obfuscating transformations result in Po being larger than P, slower than P,
using more memory than P, or often a combination of all three! In practice,
you’d measure the cost of a transformation by selecting a suitable
benchmark suite (such as the SPEC benchmarks used by compiler
researchers), obfuscate the programs using a transformation , run the
original and transformed programs on the input data sets provided by the
suite, and measure the difference in execution time and memory usage.

By itself, however, this type of evaluation is meaningless. Saying that , on
average, makes programs x% slower is of no value unless you can also say
that the transformed program is now y% more secure against attacks! Thus,
only when you factor in the potency of the transformation does efficiency
make any sense.

4.2.3 Stealth

A big problem with many software protection algorithms is the stealthiness
of the transformed code. Intuitively, you can think of stealth as the degree to
which transformed code can be distinguished from untransformed code.
Many attacks on protected programs become much easier if the adversary
can find even an approximate location of the protection code. For example,
as you’ll see in Section 7.2.4 431, the Skype VoIP client was compromised
(in part) because the tamper-detection code was really easy to find among
all the other code in the program. Stealthiness becomes especially important
when transformations add new code to a program. Many of the software
watermarking algorithms you’ll see in Chapter 8 (Software Watermarking)
and Chapter 9 (Dynamic Watermarking) fall in this category, and if the new
code looks different from the original code, the watermarks will be easy to
locate. In Section 8.8.1 523, you’ll see an algorithm that steganographically
embeds a message in an x86 binary and is very careful to make the
embedding stealthy—it ensures that statistical properties of the transformed
code match those of real programs.

Many different definitions of stealth are possible. Here, we’ll distinguish
between local stealth and steganographic stealth. A transformation         is
steganographically stealthy if an adversary cannot determine if a program P
has been transformed with or not. A transformation is locally stealthy if
the adversary can’t tell the location in P where       has been applied. The
stealth of a transformation is always expressed with respect to a universe
of programs. For example, a transformation that inserts a large number of
xor instructions will be stealthy with respect to a universe of cryptographic
or bitmapped-graphics programs, but it will be unstealthy with respect to a
universe of programs performing scientific computations.

To formally define local stealth, let’s assume that the adversary has a
locator function L that can determine if a particular instruction has been
affected by an obfuscating transformation or not. is locally 1-stealthy
with respect to L if L is always wrong (the adversary has a maximally
defective locator function), and it’s locally 0-stealthy if L is always right:

     Definition 4.4 (Local stealth)

     Let be a universe of programs, an obfuscating transformation, P a
     program drawn from , and λ a real-valued constant in [0 ... 1], and let
     Po = (P)be P obfuscated with .
    Let :                         be an error-free locator function so that L(P,
      , j) returns 1 if location j in program P has been inserted or modified
    by transformation , and returns 0 otherwise. Similarly, let L :
                          be an adversary’s locator function.
    We say that      is locally λ-stealthy with respect to     and L if the
    probability that L reports that instruction j has been transformed with
        when it has not, or reports that instruction j has not been
    transformed with when it has, is at least λ:

To formally define steganographic stealth, let’s assume that the adversary
has a function S(P, ) that can determine whether a program P has been
obfuscated by transformation or not. is steganographically 1-stealthy if
S is always wrong and steganographically 0-stealthy if it’s always right:

    Definition 4.5 (Steganographic stealth)

    Let , , P, Po be defined as above, and let μ be a real-valued constant
    in [0 ... 1].
    Let       :                 be an error-free detection function, such that
                  if P has been transformed with , and 0 otherwise. Similarly,
    let S :                 be the adversary’s detection function.
    We say is steganographically μ-stealthy for S if the probability that S
    reports that the untransformed P has been transformed with           or
    reports that the obfuscated Po has not been transformed with is at
    least μ:
    max { Prob(S(P,        ) = 1), Prob(S(Po,   = 0)} ≥ μ
Stealth is an important concept, not just for code obfuscation but for
tamperproofing and software watermarking as well. Tamperproofing
algorithms typically insert new code to detect alterations to the program,
and many watermarking algorithms insert code to embed a mark. For more
detailed definitions of local and steganographic stealth with respect to
software watermarking, you should have a look at Collberg et al. [90], from
which the definitions above have been derived.

4.2.4 Other Definitions

There has been—and still is—considerable debate about obfuscation: Is
obfuscation ever useful, what obfuscating transformations may be useful,
how do you measure the usefulness of an obfuscating transformation, and
what is obfuscation, anyway? The definitions you just saw are only some of
many that have been proposed.

In our original paper on obfuscation [87], we proposed that an obfuscating
transformation should be evaluated in terms of its potency, resilience, cost,
and stealth. The intention was for potency to measure the amount of
confusion added to the program that would affect a human attacker. The
confusion was measured in terms of how the transformation would affect a
set of software metrics (Section 3.4.2 193). Such metrics are normally used
to evaluate how well designed and well structured a program is, but we
proposed to use the same metrics to measure how poorly structured the
program was after obfuscation!

While potency was defined to measure the confusion of a human attacker,
resilience, on the other hand, would measure how well the transformation
would stand up against an automatic deobfuscator. Resilience is a
combination of how long it would take to build a deobfuscator that could
untangle a particular transformation, and how long it would take to run it.
You still occasionally see references to these definitions in the literature.
4.3 Complicating Control Flow

In the remainder of this chapter, you’ll see a catalog of obfuscating
transformations. They can be roughly classified as affecting a program’s
control flow, data structures, and abstractions. We’re going to start by
looking at transformations that make it difficult for an adversary to analyze
the flow of control of a program. Some of these transformations insert
bogus control flow, some flatten the program to remove any vestiges of
structured programming, and others hide the targets of branches to make it
difficult for the adversary to build control flow graphs. None of these
transformations are immune to attacks, and we’ll show you how to use a
combination of static and dynamic analysis to recover hidden flow of
control in Section 4.3.6 242.

4.3.1 Opaque Expressions

Many obfuscating transformations rely on a concept known as opaque
expressions. The idea is simply to construct, at obfuscation time, an
expression whose value is known to you, as the defender, but is difficult for
an attacker to figure out. You’ll learn a lot more about opaque expressions
in Section 4.4 246. For right now, let’s just introduce the notation we’ll be
using.

Most common are opaque predicates, boolean valued expressions for which
you know whether they will return true, false, or sometimes true and
sometimes false. We use the notation PT for an opaquely true predicate, PF
for an opaquely false predicate, and P? for an opaquely indeterminate
predicate. Graphically, we use dashed lines to indicate control-flow paths
that will never be taken at runtime:
For example, here’s an opaquely true predicate that always forces execution
to take the true path:

To de-obfuscate this branch, i.e., to figure out that the false exit will never
be taken, the adversary needs to know that x2 + x is always divisible by 2.
And here, finally, is an opaquely indeterminate predicate where control
could flow through either exit:

In general, we use the notation Ee for an expression known to have the
property e. For example, E=1 is an expression that always evaluates to 1,
E<10 is an expression whose value is always less than 10, and (x2 + x) mod
2=0 is an expression opaquely equal to 0.

4.3.2 Algorithm OBFWHKD: Control-Flow Flattening

Algorithm OBFWHKD is a common tool in the obfuscator’s tool chest. It
removes the control flow structure that functions have, the nesting of loop
and conditional statements, by “flattening” the corresponding control flow
graph. Have a look at the example in Figure 4.1 227. It shows a modular
exponentiation routine commonly found in cryptographic algorithms, such
as RSA. To the right in the figure is the corresponding control flow graph.
To flatten, or “chenxify” as it is affectionately known,11 you put each basic
block as a case inside a switch statement and wrap the switch inside an
infinite loop. You can see the resulting code and control flow graph in
Figure 4.2 228.

      Figure 4.1. Algorithm OBFWHKD: Original modular
       exponentiation routine and its control flow graph.

    Figure 4.2. Algorithm OBFWHKD: The flattened modular
                     exponentiation routine.
The algorithm maintains the correct control flow by making each basic
block update a variable next so that control will continue at the appropriate
basic block. The resulting control flow graph has lost all its structure: Since
the basic blocks no longer have any fall-through cases, you can randomly
reorder them for some minor extra confusion.

These transformations are expensive. The for loop incurs one jump, and the
switch statement incurs a bounds check on the next variable and an indirect
jump through a jump table. In practice, to keep the performance penalty
within reason, you don’t want to convert all control flow edges. If you have
a tight inner loop, for example, you can keep it as one case in the switch
rather than spreading it over several cases.

Depending on your implementation language, you might be able to find
cheaper implementation methods than the for-switch compound. Assembly
language gives you the most flexibility, of course, but even in C there are
some possible optimizations. Here, we’ve used gcc’s labels-as-values to
construct a jump table that lets you jump directly to the next basic block:

     int modexp(int y, int x[], int w, int n) {
     int R, L, k, s;
     char* jtab[]={&&case0,&&case1,&&case2,
     &&case3,&&case4,&&case5,&&case6};
     goto *jtab[0];
     case0: k=0; s=1; goto *jtab[1];
     case1: if (k<w) goto *jtab[2]; else goto
     *jtab[6];
     case2: if (x[k]==1) goto *jtab[3]; else goto
     *jtab[4];
     case3: R=(s*y)%n; goto *jtab[5];
     case4: R=s; goto *jtab[5];
     case5: s=R*R%n; L=R; k++; goto *jtab[1];
     case6: return L;
     }

As you will see in the next section, making the jump go through an array
like this can make it much harder for an adversary to de-obfuscate the
flattened function.

In languages like Java that support exception handling, chenxification
becomes more complicated. If you look at a control flow graph generated
from a language with exception handling, you’ll notice that it has lots more
edges than you’re used to. Any statement that can throw an exception (and
this includes any expression that might divide by zero or which
dereferences a pointer that might be null—very common situations in real
code!) will have a control flow edge to the nearest encompassing catch
block, or the end of the function if there is no try-catch. It’s complicated to
map these dense control flow graphs onto a flattened structure. Lászlo and
Kiss [222,223] solve this problem in their C++ source-to-source obfuscator
by nesting flattened structures, i.e., one switch case will hold a try-catch
block which, in turn, holds another for-switch nest.

     Problem 4.5

     Can you devise a flattening algorithm where exception handling
     doesn’t reveal any structure? Can you do it on source? On Java
     bytecode? What’s the overhead of your implementation?

4.3.3 Introducing Aliasing

If you want to confuse static analysis—and you do, because it’s in fact the
purpose of this chapter—then nothing is more effective than introducing
spurious aliases into your program. Aliasing seems to confuse both analysis
when performed by humans and analysis when performed by static analysis
tools. Intuitively, you can think of it like this. Static analyses need to be
conservative; they can only report facts about a variable that are provably
true. This means that in order to be able to say something for certain about a
variable, an analysis needs to consider all possible ways in which that
variable can be modified. When you add an alias to the program, you
suddenly have two ways to modify the same memory location, and this
complicates analysis.

As you saw in Section 3.1.4 134, aliasing can occur in a variety of settings.
Most obviously, two pointers can refer to the same memory location, but
two reference parameters can also alias each other, as can a reference
parameter and a global variable and two array elements indexed by different
variables.
Alias analysis is known to be undecidable in general [302] and NP-hard for
specific cases [170]. We have to stress here, though, that this doesn’t
necessarily mean that adding a few random aliases to a program will make
it provably hard to analyze! Many authors have made the mistake of
claiming this in the past, and it just isn’t true. Just because a problem is
known to be hard (in a complexity sense) doesn’t mean that a random
instance of that problem will be hard [219]!

     Problem 4.6

     Investigate how to generate provably hard instances of the aliasing
     problem. Can you make use of results from the average case
     complexity field? Ramalingam [302] uses the Post Correspondence
     Problem (PCP) to prove the undecidability of aliasing, and it’s known
     that a related problem, Distributional PCP, is hard on average [362].
     Can you make use of this result? Pick up your Ph.D. on the way out.

Nevertheless, we know from experience that debugging programs with
pointer-related bugs is a pain, and that current alias analysis algorithms fail
to analyze programs that build and modify complex pointer structures. In
this section, we will show you ways to take advantage of these observations
in order to obfuscate programs in a way that makes them difficult to de-
obfuscate. At present, we have insufficient knowledge on how to insert
aliases, where to insert them, and how many aliases are necessary and
sufficient to insert in order to protect against attack, but we’re hoping this
will change as the field matures.

     Problem 4.7
     In the absence of deep theoretical results, investigate the power of
     current alias analysis algorithms. What level of aliasing do we need to
     add to a program to defeat these algorithms? What kinds of aliases
     work best? Note that many algorithms have a parameter k that limits
     how deeply pointers are followed. For each algorithm, find the k that
     makes it too slow on current hardware and for current program sizes.
     Develop an alias insertion algorithm that adds k + 1 levels of pointers.
     What’s the overhead of your scheme? Pick up your M.Sc. on the way
     out.

4.3.3.1 Algorithm OBFCTJalias: Adding Spurious Aliases

Collberg et al. [87] were the first to suggest that adding spurious aliases to a
program could prevent attacks by static analysis. Their targets, specifically,
were attacks that used program slicing to find the part of a program that
contributes to the value of a variable. For example, in Section 7.3 440 in
Chapter 7 (Software Tamperproofing), you will see an algorithm that sets a
pointer variable to null so that, much later in the program execution, a
segmentation fault exception gets thrown and the program crashes. You do
this to punish the user after you’ve detected that he’s tampered with your
program. A slicing algorithm could help the attacker by, starting at the point
of the crash and working backwards, allowing him to extract the piece of
the program that contributed to the variable that caused the crash. Ideally
(for the attacker), this slice is much smaller than the whole program, and it
lets him easily find a point where he can disable the punishment. Ideally
(for you), the slice is so huge that the attacker gives up on using slicing
altogether.

Essentially all static analysis algorithms require alias information in order
to compute precise results, and slicing is no exception. A precise inter-
procedural slicer will be slower when there are a higher number of potential
aliases in a program; the number of potential aliases grows exponentially
with the number of formal parameters [171]. So to defend yourself against
an attacker who uses a slicing tool, you can add dummy arguments to
functions. This will either slow down the slicer or force it to produce
imprecise slices.

4.3.3.2 Algorithm OBFWHKDalias: Control-Flow Flattening, Take 2

The chenxification you saw earlier isn’t enough to throw off an attacker.
With use-definition and constant-propagation data flow analyses on the next
variable used in the switch statement, an attacker will be able to figure out
what the next block of every block is, and hence be able to accurately
reconstruct the control flow graph.

What we need here is some way to confuse the data flow analyses so that
they’re unable to work out the value of next, and hence the flow from block
to block. Essentially, what you want is for the next variable to be computed
as an opaque value:

     int modexp(int y, int x[], int w, int n) {
     int R, L, k, s;
     int next=E=0;
     for(;;)
     switch(next) {
     case 0 : k=0; s=1; next=E=1; break;
     case 1 : if (k<w) next=E=2; else next=E=6;
     break;
     case 2 : if (x[k]==1) next=E=3; else next=E=4;
     break;
     case 3 : R=(s*y)%n; next=E=5; break;
     case 4 : R=s; next=E=5; break;
     case 5 : s=R*R%n; L=R; k++; next=E=1; break;
     case 6 : return L;
     }
     }
Any technique for manufacturing opaque values will do, of course.
However, Chenxi suggests basing them on the difficulty of array alias
analysis. Here, we’ve introduced a constant array g and computed the value
of next by constructing expressions over g:

     int modexp(int y, int x[], int w, int n) {
     int R, L, k, s;
     int next=0;
     int g[] = {10,9,2,5,3};
     for(;;)
     switch(next) {
     case 0 : k=0; s=1; next=g[0]%g[1]=1; break;
     case 1 : if (k<w) next=g[g[2]]=2;
     else next=g[0]-2*g[2]=6; break;
     case 2 : if (x[k]==1) next=g[3]-g[2]=3;
     else next=2*g[2]=4; break;
     case 3 : R=(s*y)%n; next=g[4]+g[2]=5; break;
     case 4 : R=s; next=g[0]-g[3]=5; break;
     case 5 : s=R*R%n; L=R; k++; next=g[g[4]]%g[2]=1;
     break;
     case 6 : return L;
     }
     }

To further complicate static analysis, you should make sure that the values
in g are in constant flux. The opaque property still has to remain intact, of
course, but other than that, you’re free to dream up any transformation you
want. As an example, here’s a function that rotates the array one step right:

     void permute(int g[], int n, int* m) {
     int i;
     int tmp=g[n-1];
     for(i=n-2; i>=0; i--) g[i+1] = g[i];
     g[0]=tmp;
     *m = ((*m)+1)%n;
     }

And here’s the corresponding flattened code where we rotate the array one
step for every iteration. Regardless of the state of the array, the m variable
indexes the array element that has the value 10, so you can use it as the base
for your array computations:

     int modexp(int y, int x[], int w, int n) {
     int R, L, k, s;
     int next=0;
     int m=0;
     int g[] = {10,9,2,5,3};
     for(;;) {
     switch(next) {
     case 0 : k=0; s=1; next=g[(0+m)%5]%g[(1+m)%5];
     break;
     case 1 : if (k<w) next=g[(g[(2+m)%5]+m)%5];
     else next=g[(0+m)%5]-2*g[(2+m)%5]; break;
     case   2   :   if   (x[k]==1)   next=g[(3+m)%5]-
     g[(2+m)%5];
     else next=2*g[(2+m)%5]; break;
     case 3 : R=(s*y)%n; next=g[(4+m)%5]+g[(2+m)%5];
     break;
     case   4  :   R=s;   next=g[(0+m)%5]-g[(3+m)%5];
     break;
     case 5 : s=R*R%n; L=R; k++;
     next=g[(g[(4+m)%5]+m)%5]%g[(2+m)%5]; break;
     case 6 : return L;
     }
     permute(g,5,&m);
     }
     }
To further confuse static analysis, Udupa et al. [352] suggest making the
array global:

     int g[20];
     int m;
     int modexp(int y, int x[], int w, int n) {
     int R, L, k, s;
     int next=0;
     for(;;)
     switch(next) {
     case 0 : k=0; s=1; next=g[m+0]%g[m+1]; break;
     case 1 : if (k<w) next=g[m+g[m+2]]; else
     next=g[m+0]-2*g[m+2];
     break;
     case 2 : if (x[k]==1) next=g[m+3]-g[m+2]; else
     next=2*g[m+2];
     break;
     case 3 : R = (s*y)%n; next=g[m+4]+g[m+2];
     break;
     case 4 : R=s; next=g[m+0]-g[m+3]; break;
     case    5   :    s    =   R*R%n;    L=R;    k++;
     next=g[m+g[m+4]]%g[m+2]; break;
     case 6 : return L;
     }
     }

This allows you to initialize the array differently at different call sites:

     g[0]=10; g[1]=9; g[2]=2; g[3]=5; g[4]=3; m=0;
     modexp(y, x, w, n);
     ...
     g[5]=10; g[6]=9; g[7]=2; g[8]=5; g[9]=3; m=5;
     modexp(y, x, w, n);
Finally, to further confuse the attacker’s alias analysis, you can sprinkle
pointer variables (in light gray) and pointer manipulations (dark gray)
evenly over the program. In case 2 below, element g[2] is accessed directly
as g[2] as well as through a pointer dereference *g2. Most of the
manipulations will actually be executed, but we’ve also added a dead case
(dashed) that never will be:

The goal of these pointer manipulations is that, taken together, they will
force the attacker’s static analysis routine to conclude that nothing can be
deduced about the next variable. And if he cannot know anything statically
about next, he won’t be able to reconstitute the original control flow graph.

While pure static analysis may be terminally confused by chenxification,
there could be other attacks. For example, next is initialized to 0, which
means the attacker knows which block gets executed first. From there,
symbolic execution of the program could possibly reveal all the control
flow paths.

     Problem 4.8
     In practice, just how hard would it be to attack a chenxified program
     using symbolic execution? After you’ve devised a successful attack,
     can you think of a way to foil it? Chenxi suggests “unrolling loops and
     introducing semantically equivalent blocks that will be chosen
     randomly during execution” [360, p. 76]. Is this effective or not?

Chenxification carries with it a fairly substantial performance penalty.
Udupa et al. [352] report that the number of control flow edges in the SPEC
benchmarks increases by a factor of 55 to a factor of 60. Wang et al. [361]
report that replacing 50% of the branches in three SPEC programs slows
them down by a factor of 4 and increases their size by a factor of 2.

4.3.4 Algorithm OBFCTJbogus: Inserting Bogus Control Flow

Algorithm OBFWHKD reorganizes the control flow of a function to make it
difficult for a static analyzer to reconstitute the corresponding control flow
graph. Algorithm OBFCTJbogus [87,89,91], on the other hand, inserts bogus
control flow into a function. The result is a control flow graph with dead
branches that will never be taken, superfluous branches that will always be
taken, or branches that will sometimes be taken and sometimes not, but
where this doesn’t matter. Regardless, to make it difficult for an adversary
to figure out the bogosity of the branches, they are protected by opaque
predicates. Thus, the resilience of these transformations reduces to the
resilience of the opaque predicates they use.

Once you have access to opaque predicates, there are several possible
transformations. Three of them are known as block splitting transformations
because they appear to split a basic block in two pieces. For example, you
can insert an opaquely true predicate in the middle of a block so that it
seems that the second half (in dark gray) is only sometimes executed while,
in fact, it always is:
Or you can insert a bogus block (dashed), which appears as if it might be
executed while, in fact, it never will be:

The dashed block could be arbitrary code, or it could be a copy of the dark
gray block in which we’ve made some minor random changes. The latter is
particularly clever, since stealth is almost certainly guaranteed.

A third alternative transformation is to insert a P? predicate, which
sometimes executes the dark gray block and sometimes the dashed block:
The dashed block should be semantically equivalent to the dark gray block.
This way, it doesn’t matter which execution path the predicate chooses! The
easiest way to accomplish this is to first make the dashed block a copy of
the dark gray block and then to apply different obfuscations to the dark gray
and dashed blocks to ensure that they’re syntactically different. This
transformation is particularly easy to insert, since creating a P? opaque
predicate is close to trivial: Just pick a random variable in the current
environment and test it! For example, if there’s an integer variable i hanging
around, very stealthy tests are i < 0, i ≠ 1, i mod 2 = 0, and so on. To de-
obfuscate a transformation like this, the adversary must determine that the
dark gray and dashed blocks are semantically equivalent.

You can also extend a loop condition P by conjoining it with an opaquely
true predicate PT, forming P ∧ PT, where PT of course is completely
redundant:

You can similarly use disjunction, turning a loop condition P into P ∨ PF.
4.3.4.1 Irreducible Graphs

If you follow the rules of structured programming and build your code out
of nested if-, for-, while-, repeat-, case-statements, and so on, you wind up
with control flow graphs that are known as reducible. Data flow analysis
over such graphs is straightforward and efficient. If, however, you were to
jump into the middle of a loop so that the loop has multiple entry points, the
corresponding control flow graph becomes irreducible [5]. Data flow
analysis over such graphs is significantly complicated, and so it usually
starts by a pass where the graph is converted to a reducible one. An
interesting obfuscation is therefore to add bogus jumps that appear to
transfer control into the middle of loops, thereby creating harder-to-analyze
irreducible graphs. Here’s an example of an obfuscated loop and its
corresponding control flow graph:

There are two ways for an attacker to de-obfuscate, i.e., to convert the
irreducible graph to a reducible one. The first technique is known as node
splitting and works by duplicating parts of the graph. Here’s the same
example as above, where the attacker has duplicated the statement y=20 and
thereby made the graph reducible:
The nice thing about this construction is that if your obfuscated control flow
graph is known to be really complex (it’s the complete graph of n nodes),
then the equivalent reducible graph will have an exponential number (2n–1)
of nodes [55]! This is potentially exciting news, since it means that you
could force an attacker to build a huge data structure in memory if he wants
to do static analysis on your program. Unfortunately, there’s another
technique for making an irreducible graph reducible, which, rather than
duplicating nodes, inserts extra guards in the loop:

int firsttime=1;
while (1) {
if ((!firsttime) || (!PF)) {
x = y+10; return x;
}
y = 20;
firsttime=0;
}

It’s not known whether this construction also causes exponential blowup.
4.3.4.2 Mutually Dependent Opaque Predicates

One argument against using opaque predicates to complicate control flow is
that “it’s easy to detect an always-true predicate—just run the program a
few times with different inputs while monitoring the outcome of all
predicates—and replace the ones that are always true!” Whether this will be
a successful strategy or not depends on the quality of your test data and how
often, in real code, for reasonable test data sets, predicates will naturally
look opaque. Dalla Preda et al. [290] report that when running the
SPECint2000 benchmarks with the reference inputs, on average 39% of the
predicates look like PT and 22% look like PF. Keep in mind that a typical
attacker won’t have such comprehensive test data available to him, so in an
actual attack scenario, it’s safe to assume that even more branches will look
opaque.

One way to make dynamic analysis a little bit harder is to make opaque
predicates interdependent. That way, an attacker cannot simply remove one
predicate at a time, rerun the program to see if it still works, remove another
predicate, and so on. Instead, he has to remove all interdependent opaque
predicates at the same time. Here’s an example where, should the attacker
remove any one of the two opaque predicates, the other one will raise a
divide-by-zero exception:

int x=0, y=2,t;
while (1) {
if (t=x*(x-1)%y==0,y-=2,x+=2,t)T ...
if (t=y*(y-1)%x==0,y+=2,x-=2,t)T ...
}

     Problem 4.9
     The above construction is admittedly lame, but it’s late, and that’s all
     we could come up with. Can you think of a way to generate less
     conspicuous mutually dependent opaque predicates?

4.3.5 Algorithm OBFLDK: Jumps Through Branch Functions

Algorithm OBFLDK [78,102,212,231,234,259] replaces unconditional
jumps with a call to a function called a branch function. Calls, of course,
are expected to return to the statement immediately following them, but in
the case of the branch function, they instead return to the target of the
original jump. As you will see, this doesn’t just complicate the control flow;
it also leaves convenient “holes” in the program that will never be executed
and where you can stick bogus instructions that will confuse the heck out of
a disassembler.

This figure should illustrate the basic idea:

In the original program, there is an unconditional jump to label b. In the
obfuscated program, this jump has been replaced with a call to the branch
function bf. The call carries with it the return address (the address
immediately following the call), a. Depending on the calling convention,
this address will be passed in a register or on the stack. The branch function
uses this return address to index into a table T to find an offset b – a, add a
top that, yielding b, the target of the original jump. The branch function
replaces the old return address with b, executes the return instruction, and
voilà, you’ve executed a jump to b! In this simple example, there’s only one
unconditional jump in the program, but a real situation will involve many
jumps that will all be converted into calls to the branch function. Thus, to an
observer it seems like there are calls all over the program to one very
popular function, but none of these calls return to the place from whence
they came! As you will see, this is the strength of the algorithm (it provides
a lot of confusion), but also its weakness (it makes it highly dynamically
unstealthy).

The table T is indexed by a hash function h() that hashes every address to an
index of T. Since you’ll want to waste as little space as possible for the
table, you should implement h() as a perfect minimal hashfunction [131].

Let’s have a look at a real example. Below left, again, is the modular
exponentiation routine we’ve been working with. This time, to the right,
we’ve replaced the high-level control constructs with labels and gotos. Of
particular interest is the code in light gray, unconditional jumps that we’re
going to replace with calls to the branch function:

For every pair of addresses (ai, bi) where ai is the return address of the call
instruction you’re inserting and bi is the address that you really want to
jump to, a table T stores
                                T[h(ai)] = bi – ai.

h() is a hash function that maps sparse addresses to a compact range 1 ... n.
Given this table, here’s what the branch function looks like:

     char* T[2];
     void bf() {
     char* old;
     asm volatile("movl 4(%%ebp),%0\n\t" : "=r"
     (old));
     char* new = (char*)((int)T[h(old)]+ (int)old);
     asm volatile("movl %0,4(%%ebp)\n\t" : : "r"
     (new));
     }

The two lines of code in light gray are responsible for loading the old return
address and then storing a new value into it, respectively. The remaining
code computes the address that you really want to jump to. When that
address has been written back into bf’s return address, once you execute the
return instruction, control will continue where you really wanted to go in
the first place.

Now that you have the branch function, converting unconditional branches
to calls is trivial:
The code in dashes would normally be computed at obfuscation time, not
runtime. It’s responsible for filling in the T table with the appropriate
offsets. The code in light gray are calls that have been converted from
unconditional jumps. Notice the “code” in dark gray: Since the branch
function will return to the endif label rather than to the return address as
you’d expect, this code will never be executed! This means you can stick
anything you want here to add further confusion to the code. In this case,
we’ve put a string into this black hole. A disassembler will attempt to
interpret this string as instructions, since it expects a call instruction to
return to the address following it.

Algorithm OBFLDK was originally designed to confuse disassembly. As
such, it works really well. The authors report that 39% of instructions are
incorrectly assembled using a linear sweep disassembly and 25% for
recursive disassembly. For their test cases, they measured an execution
penalty of 13% and an increase in text segment size of 15%.
You will see branch functions again in Section 9.4 592, where the branch
function is extended with bogus branches that encode a watermark.

4.3.6 Attacks

The algorithms we’ve shown you in this section are all designed to confuse
static analysis. By and large, they seem to do a good job with that. This
doesn’t mean, however, that there are no other possible attacks! In
particular, there’s nothing stopping the adversary from executing the
program to see which paths are actually executed and which are not. We’re
next going to show you two de-obfuscation algorithms that attack
Algorithms OBFWHKD and OBFLDK. Both algorithms are hybrid static-
dynamic, meaning they collect information about the obfuscated program
by executing it on a set of test inputs, and then enhance that information by
further static analyses.

Any de-obfuscation algorithm that is based, in full or in part, on dynamic
analysis is not going to be conservative. That is, there may be paths that are
never executed for the test inputs but are realizable nevertheless. If you
don’t take this into account, the de-obfuscated program may contain errors.
Whether this is a problem or not depends on how the attacker intends to use
the de-obfuscated program. If, for example, his intent is to analyze the code
to learn about a particularly valuable algorithm, it’s probably sufficient if
the de-obfuscator recovers the main line control flow. If some exception-
handling code was never executed and isn’t included in the de-obfuscated
program, he probably won’t mind. The situation is different if, instead, his
intent is to analyze the program in order to remove some tamperproofing or
watermarking code and then reassemble the program for distribution. In this
case, any missing code that might make the program inexplicably crash at
some point in the future is going to be unacceptable.

One problem with dynamic attacks is how you get access to input data that
will properly exercise all (or most) possible execution paths in the program.
The two algorithms that you’ll see in this section, REMASB and REUDM,
were both evaluated using the SPEC benchmarks for which the authors had
available comprehensive test data. In a real attack scenario, the adversary
won’t be so lucky! It would be interesting to rerun their experiments on a
program that’s essentially a black box and for which the adversary must
construct input data sets from scratch.

An interesting development are interactive de-obfuscation environments
such as LOCO [236,237] (for x86 binaries) and SandMark [81] (for Java
bytecode). These environments provide user interfaces that allow a reverse
engineer to explore representations (such as control flow, call graphs, and
inheritance graphs) of a program, and, in the case of LOCO, manually
modify these representations.

4.3.6.1 Algorithm REUDM: Dynamic Attacks Against Control-Flow Flattening

Algorithm REUDM [352] uses a hybrid static-dynamic approach to recover
the original control flow from a program flattened by Algorithm
OBFWHKD. Have a look at this control flow graph of the modular
exponentiation routine:
It’s essentially the same graph as the one you saw in Figure 4.2 228, except
that we’ve modeled the switch statement as a series of branches. We’ve also
numbered each statement. In order to turn this graph into the original one in
Figure 4.1 227, you need to figure out what are feasible and infeasible
paths. In Section 4.3.3 229, you saw how one trick to confuse a de-
obfuscator was to add a block to the switch statement that would never be
executed. To properly de-obfuscate the routine, you need to do (the
equivalent of) a constant-propagation data flow analysis to determine that
the next variable can never take on a value that would make this block
execute.

Algorithm REUDM does a constraint-based static path feasibility analysis to
discover realizable paths. Say, for example, that the attacker wants to
discover if block B2 is reachable from block B1 (which it should be,
according to the original control flow graph in Figure 4.1 227). We’ve
marked this path π1 in light shading in the figure above. To solve this
problem, he needs to track the values that next will take on, and so he builds
up a set of constraints like this:

Each variable is subscripted by the location where it was last defined. It’s
not hard to see that this path is, indeed, realizable. This means the de-
obfuscated control flow graph should have an edge from B1 to B2.

Now consider the dark gray path π2. Should there be a corresponding edge
in the de-obfuscated control flow graph? To see that, the attacker builds up
the following set of constraints, where k0, w0 are free variables:

Again, it’s not hard to see that this path is not realizable.
To recover the original control flow graph the attacker needs to consider, for
every pair of blocks, whether there might be a path between them. He can
use a constraint solver such as the Omega calculator [295] to do the
satisfiability testing.

Algorithm REUDM starts out by doing a dynamic analysis, recording any
paths that are actually taken for the set of test inputs. This gives the attacker
a set of control flow paths that must be realizable. Have a look at this graph
where the light gray path is not executed for the test inputs:

However, if you look carefully at this graph you can see that it’s in fact
possible for the light gray node to be executed! To reduce the risk of leaving
out realizable paths, Algorithm REUDM folds in possible paths using static
analysis. If you deploy a constant-propagation data flow analysis along the
paths that were actually executed, you discover that next can take on the
value 1, and hence, that the light gray block is, in fact, reachable.

It is still possible for the de-obfuscator to miss possible edges. The authors
report that between 0.01% and 1.7% of real edges are left out of the de-
obfuscated control flow graph. It is also unable to remove all of the fake
edges. On average, in their test cases 21.4% of the fake edges remained in
the de-obfuscated graphs.

4.3.6.2 Algorithm REMASB: Dynamic Attacks Against Branch Functions
The problem with branch functions is that they’re dynamically unstealthy.
Madou et al. [234] report that for one benchmark program (gcc), the branch
function is called 15,336 times, and, furthermore, none of these calls return
to the place from whence they came! Algorithm REMASB [234] makes use
of this fact in a very simple attack.

The first step is to instrument the program and execute it on representative
inputs. Unless the attacker has input data that will exercise every path in the
program, the dynamic traces he collects won’t be complete enough to build
a control flow graph. Instead, the dynamic trace is used as input to a
recursive traversal disassembler. Normally, such a disassembler would build
a control flow graph given access only to the binary executable, but in this
hybrid static-dynamic approach, it can start from a set of instructions that
must be correctly disassembled, since they were actually executed on a real
run. The result is a control flow graph that, while possibly not 100%
correct, is more accurate than what could have been built from a static or
dynamic approach alone.

The second step is to locate a function with the signature of a branch
function: It should have many call sites and it shouldn’t return to the
location from which it was called.

The third step is to statically locate all the calls to the branch function and
to monitor them while executing the program. This can easily be done
under a debugger. All that is necessary is to set a breakpoint at the end of
the branch function and then record the address to which it will branch.

The final step is to replace the calls to the branch function with
unconditional jumps to the actual target. This is trivial, unless the branch
function has been designed to have side effects to prevent exactly such a
replacement attack! If that’s the case, the attacker will have to do a more
thorough analysis of the semantics of the branch function to ensure that the
attack is semantics-preserving.
    Problem 4.10

    It seems like it will be difficult to build stealthy branch functions; their
    dynamic behavior is just too distinct from ordinary functions. Instead,
    to enhance stealth, would it be possible to make every ordinary
    function behave like a branch function? Failing that, could you
    introduce enough complicated side effects in the branch function to
    prevent automatic removal? How about having multiple branch
    functions, the correct behavior of each one depending on the correct
    behavior of the others?

In Section 9.4 592 in Chapter 9 (Dynamic Watermarking), you will see a
dynamic watermarking algorithm WMCCDKHLSbf, where the watermark is
embedded by adding bogus entries into the branch function. Algorithm
WMCCDKHLSbf attempts to overcome the REMASB attack by making the
program’s control flow depend on the branch function being left in place.
Specifically, the branch function is extended to compute an address that is
later used as the target of a jump. This means that any attack that blindly
removes the branch function will cause the program to break.

    Problem 4.11

    Can you think of an antidote against REMASB-style dynamic attacks
    that makes use of the fact that the attack is nonconservative?
    Specifically, can you protect your program in such a way that there are
    regions that are very rarely executed (and hence unlikely to show up
    on a dynamic trace by an adversary who has an incomplete input data
    set) but that are highly likely to show up eventually? If so, can you
    insert tamperproofing code (such as the code we’ll show you in
    Chapter 7, Software Tamperproofing) into these regions that will
    trigger if the branch function is tampered with?
4.4 Opaque Predicates

When we first started looking for opaque predicates, we went to the library,
found a few books on number theory, and looked in the problems sections
for statements such as “Show that ∀x,       : p(x, y),” where p is a predicate
over the integers. Assuming that the author wasn’t playing a trick on his
readers, trying to make them prove a false statement, we’d found another
opaque predicate! And we’d found a predicate, one would hope, that would
be moderately hard to break, at least for number-theory graduate students.
During this search we found some cute inequalities (such as ∀x,         : x2 –
34y2 ≠ 1) and many statements on divisibility (       : 2|x2 + x).

There are, however, serious problems with these number-theoretic
predicates. First, you have to assume that if your obfuscator keeps a table of
such predicates, your adversary’s de-obfuscator will contain the same table.
Of course, you could choose predicate families that are parameterized, and
then every instance will look slightly different. For example, this predicate
is parameterized by an integer D (a perfect square):

                     ∀x, y,      , D > 0, D = z2 : x2 – Dy2 ≠ 1

The adversary would know about this parameterization, which would force
him to be a bit more clever (but only very slightly so) when searching the
code for potentially opaque expressions.

It seems that the only hope for predicates of this nature is to be able to hide
them well enough that the attacker can’t easily find them, and hence, is not
able to look them up in their table. You could, for example, spread the
computation out over several functions, forcing the attacker to perform an
inter-procedural analysis. This leads us to the second problem, which is that
complicated integer expressions are unusual in real code. Certain operators,
such as division and remainder used in predicates based on divisibility, are
particularly rare. Thus, as is always the case when you insert new protection
code into a program, stealth is an issue.

In this section, we’re going to show you three kinds of opaque predicates
based on the hardness of alias analysis and concurrency analysis. In Section
4.4.4 253, we’re then going to look at ways to break opaque predicates and
possible ways of defending against these attacks.

4.4.1 Algorithm OBFCTJpointer: Opaque Predicates from Pointer Aliasing

Algorithm OBFCTJpointer [87,89,91] was the first to create an obfuscating
transformation from a known computationally hard static analysis problem.
The idea is compelling: If we assume that

  1. the attacker will analyze the program statically, and

  2. we can force him to solve a particular static analysis problem to
     discover the secret he’s after, and

  3. we can generate an actual hard instance of this problem for him to
     solve,

then we will have an obfuscation that is truly useful. Of course, these
assumptions may be false! The attacker may find that it’s enough for his
purposes to analyze the program dynamically, and just because a problem is
known to be computationally hard (NP-complete, for example) doesn’t
mean that the instances we create are!

Algorithm 4.4. Overview of Algorithm OBFCTJpointer for creating
alias-based opaque predicates in a program P.

CREATEOPAQUEPREDICATE(P):
  1. Add to P code to build a set of dynamically allocated global pointer-
     structures G = {G1, G2, ...}.

  2. Add to P a set of pointers Q = {q1, q2, ...} that point into the structures
     in G.

  3. Construct a set of invariants I = {I1, I2, ...} over G and Q, such as

          • qi always points to nodes in Gj;

          • Gi is always strongly connected.

  4. Add code to P that occasionally modifies the graphs in G and the
     pointers in Q, while maintaining the invariants I.

  5. Using the invariants I, construct opaque predicates over Q, such as

          • (qi ≠ qj)T if qi and qj are known to point into different graphs Gm
            and Gn;

          • (qi ≠ null)T if qi moves around inside graph Gk and Gk has no
            leaf nodes;

          • (qi = qj)? if qi and qj are known to both point into graph Gk.

In fact, it’s an open problem to create an algorithm that generates provably
hard instances of a static analysis problem.

Nevertheless, we know from experience that certain aspects of programs
defy reason, and it makes sense to use this observation in our designs of
obfuscating transformations. Several algorithms have made use of the
aliasing problem (Section 3.1.4 134) to create obfuscating transformations
that are resilient to attack. Implementing a precise alias analyzer is difficult,
and the more precise the algorithm needs to be, the longer it will take to
run.

Algorithm OBFCTJpointer creates opaque predicates from pointer analysis
problems. Since it’s not known how to create a provably hard instance of
this problem, the algorithm instead focuses on going beyond the capabilities
of known analysis algorithms. Many such algorithms have problems with
destructive updates. This means that while they may be able to properly
analyze a program that builds a linked list, they may fail on one that
modifies the list [60]. Some algorithms can’t handle cyclic structures [158],
and some fail for recursive structures more than a constant k levels deep.
Hardekopf and Lin [153] write:

               The most precise analyses are flow-sensitive—respecting
               control-flow       dependencies—and      context-sensitive—
               respecting the semantics of function calls. Despite a great
               deal of work on both flow-sensitive and context-sensitive
               algorithms [ ... ], none has been shown to scale to programs
               with millions of lines of code, and most have difficulty
               scaling to 100,000 lines of code.

It’s important to note here that this quote refers to programs written by
humans. Alias analysis algorithms are designed to perform well on “normal
code” because this is what compilers and program understanding tools are
likely to see. You, on the other hand, are free to generate arbitrarily complex
data structures, and to perform arbitrarily complex operations on them, just
to fool an attacker’s analysis!

Have a look at Algorithm 4.4 248, which gives a sketch of how to construct
alias-based opaque predicates. The idea is to construct one or more heap-
based graphs, to keep a set of pointers into those graphs, and then to create
opaque predicates by checking properties you know to be true. To confound
analysis, you also add operations to the program that move the pointers
around and that perform destructive update operations on the graphs while
maintaining the set of invariants your opaque predicates will test for.
Consider this example, where we construct two pointers q1 and q2 pointing
into two graphs G1 (light gray) and G2 (dark gray):

All nodes and pointers are of the same type, perhaps declared as class Node
{Node next;} in Java. The nodes start out on one circular linked list that is
split in two, constructing the two graphs G1 and G2. We’ve then added
arbitrary operations that move q1 and q2 around, and add and delete nodes
randomly to the graphs subject to the two invariants “G1 and G2 are circular
linked lists” and “q1 points to a node in G1 and q2 points to a node in G2.”
After the code has performed enough operations to confuse even the most
precise alias analysis algorithm, you can start inserting opaque queries such
as (q1 ≠ q2)T into the code.

4.4.2 OBFWHKDopaque: Opaque Values from Array Aliasing

In Section 4.3.2 226, you saw how the control flow flattening Algorithm
OBFWHKD used array aliasing as the basis for constructing opaque values.
These were then used to encode the control flow in a surreptitious way.
There’s of course nothing stopping you from using array aliasing to
construct opaque values and predicates for other purposes.

Have a look at this array of integers:

We’ve constructed the array so that the following invariants hold:

  1. Every third cell (in light gray), starting with cell 0, is ≡ 1 mod 5;

  2. Cells 2 and 5 (striped) hold the values 1 and 5, respectively;

  3. Every third cell (in dark gray), starting with cell 1, is ≡ 2 mod 7;

  4. Cells 8 and 11 (black) hold the values 2 and 7, respectively.

The remaining cells (in white) contain garbage values. The constant values
(striped and black) are stored in the array so that you don’t have to refer to
them as literals, which would be unstealthy. Using modular arithmetic
makes it easy to keep the array elements in flux. You can update a light gray
element as often as you want, with any value you want, as long as you
ensure that the value is always ≡ 1 mod 5!

Here’s the array g, given as an initialized array:
The code in light gray constructs an opaquely true predicate. The code in
dark gray ensures that g is constantly changing at runtime, making it harder
to analyze statically. Even though the data is changing, the invariants
remain the same. The code in dashed, finally, constructs an opaque value
42.

Using an initialized array for g is, of course, not a great idea. It’s just as easy
(and harder for the adversary to analyze) to initialize g by filling it with
random values as long as they have the right properties.

4.4.3 Algorithm OBFCTJthread: Opaque Predicates from Concurrency

Concurrent programs are difficult to analyze statically because of their
interleaving semantics. If you have n statements in a parallel region, then
there are n! different orders in which they could execute. On top of that,
badly designed concurrent programs are susceptible to race conditions,
where several processes manipulate the same global data structure without
the prerequisite locking statements. Such situations too are difficult to
analyze.

These observations make it possible to construct opaque predicates whose
resilience against attack is based on the difficulty of analyzing the threading
behavior of programs. The idea is to keep a global data structure G with a
certain set of invariants I, to concurrently update G while maintaining I, and
use I to construct opaque predicates over G (Algorithm 4.5 252).

Algorithm 4.5. Overview of Algorithm OBFCTJthread for creating
threading-based opaque predicates in a program P.

CREATEOPAQUEPREDICATE(P):

  1. Add to P code to create a global data structure G with a set of
     invariants I = {I1, I2, ...}.

  2. Add to P code to create threads T1, T2, ..., which make concurrent
     updates to G while maintaining the invariants I.

  3. Using the invariants I, construct opaque predicates over G.

Here’s an example where two threads T1 and T2 concurrently bang on two
integer variables X and Y, with complete disregard for data races:

Assuming that the assignments are atomic (Java guarantees this for integer
variables), this code maintains the invariants that both X and Y will always
be the square of some value. This allows you to construct an opaque
predicate (X-34*Y==-1)F since ∀x,y : x2 – 34y2 ≠ – 1.
In Chapter 9 you’ll see an algorithm (WMNT), which embeds a watermark
in a program by manipulating its threading behavior. That algorithm needs
opaquely true predicates that are statically indistinguishable from opaquely
false predicates. You can accomplish this by combining the alias-based
opaque predicates from Section 4.4.1 247 with multi-threading. Here’s the
idea [264]:

  1. Generate G, a rooted, singly linked cycle of k nodes.

  2. Construct two pointers a and b that initially refer to the same node in
     G.

  3. Construct two pointers c and d that initially refer to different nodes in
     G.

  4. Create a new thread T1, which asynchronously and atomically updates
     a and b so that each time a is updated to point to its next node in the
     cycle, b is also updated to point to its next node in the cycle.

  5. As in point 4, create a new thread T2, which updates c and d.

Here’s an example where a and b always refer to the same node in G, while
c and d always refer to nodes that are one node apart:

The threads advance the pointers asynchronously around the cycle while
maintaining the invariants. Now you can construct an opaquely true
predicate (a = b)T, which is statically indistinguishable from an opaquely
false predicate (c = d)F, unless you know the invariant that is being
maintained. Listing 4.2 254 shows code to build such predicates.

4.4.4 Breaking Opaque Predicates

Conceptually, an opaque predicate consists of a list of instructions that
reads available variables

x1, x2, ... computes a boolean function f (x1, x2, ...) over these values, and
branches if the function returns true:

     ...
     x1  ← ···;
     x2 ← ···;

     ...
     b ← f (x1, x2, ...);

     if b goto ...

The goal of an attacker is to determine whether the outcome of f is always
the same. In that case, he can replace the conditional jump with an
unconditional one. Breaking an opaque predicate proceeds in these five
steps:

  1. Locate the instructions that make up f (x1, x2, ...);

  2. Determine the inputs to f, i.e., x1, x2...;

  3. Determine the range of values R1 of x1, R2 of x2, ...;
  Listing 4.2. Code to build multi-threading-based opaque
  predicates such that opaquely true and opaquely false
  predicates are statically indistinguishable. Two threads race1
  and race2 asynchronously move two pairs of pointers (a,b and
  c,d, respectively) around a circular singly linked list,

  maintaining the invariant that a==b and c!=d. The function
  getRandomBetween(a,b) returns a random integer between a and b,

  inclusive. The function getNth(p,n) returns the nth node
  starting at node p.

4. Determine the outcome of f for all possible argument values; and
  5. If f is true for all possible input values, replace the conditional jump
     with an unconditional one; if it is false for all possible input values,
     remove the branch altogether.

In step 4, the attacker may not be able to test f for all input values, in which
case he will have to resort to statistical arguments. For certain kinds of
attacks, it may be enough to say with a high degree of confidence that an
expression is opaque; in others, absolute certainty is required.

Consider how an attacker might break this simple opaque predicate:

First, he computes a backwards slice (see Section 3.1.5 141) from b, to
collect all the computations that could affect its value. This includes the
assignments to x and y, but excludes the assignment to z. Next, he finds that
the inputs to the predicate are x and y, and that the range of x is unknown (he
has to assume it will take on all integer values), but that y can only take on
the value 42. Using either a number-theoretic argument or a brute-force
search (both trivial in this case!), he determines that for all input values to
the predicate, b is false. He can now go ahead and remove the instructions
that make up the predicate, including the final branch.

In practice, the actual ranges of variables will be often be unknown to the
attacker, which means that he will have to consider all possible input values
to f, e.g., all 232 values of a 32-bit integer.

There are several ways in which the obfuscator can make the attacker’s task
more difficult:
     • Make it harder to locate the instructions that make up f (x1, x2, ...);

     • Make it harder to determine what are the inputs x1, x2, ... to f;

     • Make it harder to determine the actual ranges R1, R2, ... of x1, x2, ...;
       or

     • Make it harder to determine the outcome of f for all possible
      argument values.

You have to assume the attacker will have a library of known opaque
predicates available; in fact, you have to assume he has the same library
you do, since you can’t expect your obfuscator to be kept secret! This
means that simple number-theoretic predicates such as         : 2|x(x + 1) are
not very interesting by themselves, since they’re easily tabulated by the
attacker, and once broken, they’re broken forever. If you do want to use
predicates like that, you have to instead hamper the attacker’s ability to
break the predicate in some other way. For example, if he can’t easily
determine which instructions make up the predicate or what its inputs are,
then it will be harder for him to look it up in his table of known number-
theoretic results. For example, you can make the slicing stage more difficult
by adding bogus computations that make it appear as if a large part of the
program contributes to the value of f.

4.4.4.1 Algorithm REPMBG: Breaking     : n| p(x)

Algorithm REPMBG [290] attacks opaque predicates confined to a single
basic block. The algorithm assumes that the instructions that make up the
predicate are contiguous, i.e., there are no irrelevant instructions
interspersed with the relevant ones. This makes it simple to identify the
instructions that make up the predicate. In a first step, the algorithm starts at
a conditional jump instruction j (the last instruction of a basic block) and
incrementally extends it with the 1, 2,... preceding instructions until either
an opaque predicate is found or the beginning of the basic block is
encountered. To determine whether the instructions form an opaque
predicate or not, the algorithm can run in brute-force mode (considering all
possible values of input variables) or in static analysis mode, where it uses
abstract interpretation to determine opaqueness.

Have a look at the example basic block to the left, which implements the
opaquely true predicate    : 2|(x2 + x):

In brute-force attack mode, Algorithm REPMBG would start at step (1), by
running the light gray code for all possible values of y. It would quickly
realize that the instructions do not form an opaque predicate. Next, at step
(2), it would again consider all possible values of y, and again come to the
conclusion that for some values of y, b will be true and for some, false. Not
until step (4) can the algorithm conclude that for all values of x, b evaluates
to true.

Obviously, this brute-force attack won’t scale to larger opaque predicates.
At this point, you should have a look back at Section 3.1.6 143, where we
introduced abstract interpretation. In particular, look at the domain Parity
and how it allows you to determine whether an expression is even or odd
without actually having to execute it. Now this is exactly what you need to
efficiently break an opaque predicate of the form        : 2| f (x)!

Let’s first consider the case when x is an even number:
To the left is the code in the concrete domain, and to the right we’ve shown
the interpretation of the code in the abstract domain Parity. The input value
to the predicate, x, starts out with the abstract value even. Since multiplying
and adding two even numbers yields an even number, y becomes even, and b
evaluates to true. Here’s the same computation, but for the case when x
starts out being odd:

So regardless of whether x’s initial value is even or odd, the outcome is the
same: b is true, and the final branch is taken. In other words, you’ve broken
the opaque predicate, and very efficiently at that!

By constructing different abstract domains, Algorithm REPMBG is able to
break all opaque predicates of the form          : n| p(x), where p(x) is a
polynomial, i.e., a combination of additions and multiplications.

4.4.4.2 Algorithm OBFCTJslice: Preventing Slicing Attacks

As you saw from the previous sections, the first step to breaking an opaque
predicate is to extract its code from the program. This means you need to
compute a backwards slice consisting of all the computations that
contribute to the branch condition. A backwards slice slice(P, s, V), as you
learned in Section 3.1.5 141, consists of all the statements in program P
that contribute to the value of variable V, starting with statement s.

The basic idea of Algorithm OBFCTJslice [87,88,91,240–242] is to add
spurious variable dependencies to the program to trick a slicer into
returning artificially large slices. Ideally, the slicer will be so confused that
it will tell the attacker that every variable in the program depends on every
other variable, essentially returning no useful information! Confusing
analysis by slicing can be a good general way to prevent an attacker from
understanding your program, but it’s particularly important in trying to hide
opaque predicates. Unfortunately, it’s not easy to do in practice. To see that,
have a look at this transformation, an extension of the example from the
previous section:

Here, we’ve added a call to a function G(r), which uses r to compute a
value 0, which we then add to x, making it appear as if x depends on r.
Notice that G is really an opaque function itself! Unless we can hide that G
always returns 0, regardless of the current value of r, little has been
accomplished.

In a series of papers, Majumdar et al. [240–242] study the effect of various
obfuscating transformations on the precision of slicing and aliasing. In one
study, they consider a small set of test programs into which they insert
carefully handcrafted opaque predicates designed to create bogus
dependencies between variables. They show that even with a small-to-
moderate increase in total program size (5.8–24%), they get a significant
increase in the size of slices (20–1400%). It’s an open question whether the
same results could be achieved with an automatic obfuscation tool.
4.5 Data Encodings

To obfuscate a variable V in a program, you convert it from the
representation the programmer initially chose for it to a representation that
is harder for the attacker to analyze. Any value that V can take at runtime
must be representable in the new, obfuscated representation. Also, any
operations that the program performs on V must now be performed on the
new representation. Finally, you’re going to need two functions, encode and
decode, which we will abbreviate E() and D(), respectively. E converts from
the original representation into the new one, and D converts from the new
into the old. The analogy with the encryption and decryption functions
Ekey() Dkey() is intentional—in fact, you could imagine using encryption to
obfuscate data. You will see examples of this in the next section.

To make this a bit more formal, imagine that you have an abstract data type
T with operations ⊕T T,...:

To obfuscate T, you construct a new abstract data type T′ with operations for
converting between T and T′, and one new operation operating on T′ for
every operation operating on T:
The simplest way to obfuscate is for every operation on values of type T′ to
first convert back to T, perform the operation, and then again convert to T′:

This really isn’t a good idea, since every time you perform an operation on
an obfuscated type it reveals the de-obfuscated values of the arguments and
the result! You much prefer for every operation to be performed on the
obfuscated representation directly. In practice, however, you will often have
to compromise. You may find that, for a particular obfuscated
representation, some operations can be performed directly on the new
representation, but for others you will have to perform the operation on the
de-obfuscated values.

Ideally, to prevent pattern-matching attacks, you want the obfuscated
representation to be parameterized. In other words, you want a family of
representations so that you can create a large number of different-looking
obfuscated variables even if their underlying representation is based on the
same obfuscation algorithm.

Here, we’ve added a parameter p to the obfuscated data type:

In some obfuscations, p will be an obfuscation-time quantity, in others, a
runtime quantity. When p is determined at runtime, it’s essentially an
opaque value. When a representation is not parameterized, we omit p.
In practice, for many obfuscated representations, the range that can be
accommodated is smaller than the range of the original. For example, if you
encode an integer variable v that has a range [–231... 231 – 1] as v * 210 (i.e.,
1 is represented as 1024, 2 as 2048, and so on.), all of a sudden you’ve
restricted the obfuscated v to the range [–221... 221 – 1]. This poses
problems for an automatic obfuscation tool, which has to maintain
semantics when transforming the program. There are three possible
solutions. The easiest is to simply move to a larger variable size, in the
example above, from a 32-bit integer to a 64-bit integer. This can seriously
affect the memory footprint of the program. Alternatively, you can perform
a static value range propagation analysis [281] to determine the actual
upper and lower bounds ofv, and then decide whether it’s necessary to move
to a larger variable size. These analyses are costly and not always accurate.
Finally, you can rely on programmer annotations to define allowable ranges
of variables. Some languages, such as Pascal and Ada, already support
range specifications of variables, although programmers typically find it
easier to write VAR x: INTEGER than VAR x:[1..99].

A further problem occurs when you have multiple different representations
of the same type in a program. Say, for example, your original program has
three variables a, x, and y, all declared to be integers. You obfuscate a and x
to be of type T1 and y to be of type T2:

Since x and y now have different representations, before any operation can
be performed on it, the second statement has to first de-obfuscate x and then
obfuscate it in order to bring it into the same representation as y. This
reveals x’s true value. For some pairs of representations, you will be able to
convert directly from one to the other without going through cleartext, but
this means you may have to provide such conversion operations for every
pair of obfuscated types! To avoid this problem, an automatic obfuscator
has to very carefully choose which obfuscated representations to assign to
which variables. You can start the obfuscation by computing a backwards
slice from each variable, which will reveal which other variables contribute
to its value. To minimize the number of conversions, variables that occur in
the same slice should be assigned the same obfuscated representation.

There’s of course no reason why a variable should have the same
representation throughout the execution of the program. On the contrary, an
attacker will find that dynamic analysis of the program is much harder if the
representation of a particular variable continuously changes over time or as
the program chooses different execution paths [62].

In this section, we will show you techniques for obfuscating integers,
booleans, strings, and arrays. Booleans are easier than integers to transform,
since their range is known and small ([0... 1]!).

4.5.1 Encoding Integers

Integers are the most common data type in most programs and therefore
important to obfuscate. Unfortunately, programmers are used to the idea
that operations on integers are cheap, so you have to be careful not to
transform them into an exotic representation that may be highly obfuscated
but carries a huge performance penalty.

In this section, we will illustrate the obfuscated transformations in a very
hands-on fashion, by writing C functions that replace the built-in operators.
Every representation will look like the set of definitions below. T1 is the data
type of the obfuscated representation, E1 is a function that transforms from
cleartext integers into the obfuscated representation, D1 transforms
obfuscated integers into cleartext, and ADD1, MUL1, and LT1 define how to add,
multiply, and compare two obfuscated integers:
    typedef int T1;
    T1 E1(int e) {return e;}
    int D1(T1 e) {return e;}
    T1 ADD1(T1 a, T1 b) {return E1(D1(a)+D1(b));}
    T1 MUL1(T1 a, T1 b) {return E1(D1(a)*D1(b));}
    BOOL LT1(T1 a, T1 b) {return D1(a)<D1(b);}

Now these definitions don’t make for a very interesting obfuscated
transformation, of course; we’ve just defined the identity transformation!
But you can imagine adding these definitions to your program and
transforming the code on the left into the code on the right:

We will make this code snippet the running example in this section. By
simply replacing the definitions, you can obfuscate your program with
different representations of the integers.

A very slightly more interesting transformation than the identity is to let
every value v be represented by v + 1:

    typedef int T2;
    T2 E2(int e) {return e+1;}
    int D2(T2 e) {return e-1;}
    T2 ADD2(T2 a, T2 b) {return E2(D2(a)+D2(b));}
    T2 MUL2(T2 a, T2 b) {return E2(D2(a)*D2(b));}
    BOOL LT2(T2 a, T2 b) {return D2(a)<D2(b);}
Encoding and decoding are trivial: Just add and subtract 1, respectively. The
maximum value that is representable is one less than the original range of
int, so you have to be careful not to cause an overflow. Notice that this isn’t
a very good implementation of addition and multiplication: Before applying
the operations, you first convert to de-obfuscated space.

A better implementation is to perform arithmetic operations directly on the
obfuscated values. For an addition x + y, this means you have to adjust the
computed value by subtracting 1, since x + y in obfuscated space is (x +1)+
(y +1) = x + y +2:

     typedef int T3;
     T3 E3(int e) {return e+1;}
     int D3(T3 e) {return e-1;}
     T3 ADD3(T3 a, T3 b) {return a+b-1;}
     T3 MUL3(T3 a, T3 b) {return a*b-a-b+2;}
     BOOL LT3(T3 a, T3 b) {return a<b;}

4.5.1.1 Algorithm OBFBDKMRVnum: Number-Theoretic Tricks

Many integer obfuscations are based on number-theoretic tricks. In this
transformation, an integer y is represented as N * p + y, where N is the
product of two close primes, and p is a random value:

     typedef int T4;
     #define N4 (53*59)
     T4 E4(int e,int p) {return p*N4+e;}
     int D4(T4 e) {return e%N4;}
     T4 ADD4(T4 a, T4 b) {return a+b;}
     T4 MUL4(T4 a, T4 b) {return a*b;}
     BOOL LT4(T4 a, T4 b) {return D4(a)<D4(b);}
N4 must be larger than any integer that you need to represent. De-
obfuscation is simply removing N * p by reducing modulo N4. What’s nice
about this representation is that addition and multiplication can both be
performed in obfuscated space. Before comparisons can be performed,
however, the argument values need to first be de-obfuscated.

Notice that this is a parameterized obfuscation; you can create a whole
family of representation by choosing different values for p. It’s a good idea
to hide p by computing it as an opaque value at runtime.

If two differently obfuscated integers need to be operated on, then one
needs to be first de-obfuscated and then re-obfuscated to the correct
representation. Here, x is obfuscated using type T3 and v using T4, and as
they’re multiplied and added together, their values have to be converted
from one representation to the other and back:

Ideally, you have a transformation that directly takes you from one
representation to the other without having to go through cleartext.

4.5.1.2 Algorithm OBFBDKMRVcrypto: Encrypting Integers

It is natural to think of obfuscating variables by encrypting them using one
of the many standard cryptographic algorithms. Here we’ve used DES:

     #include <openssl/des.h>

     DES_key_schedule ks;
     DES_cblock                 key                                        =
     {0x12,0x34,0x56,0x78,0x9a,0xbc,0xde,0xf0};

     typedef struct {int x; int y;} T7;
     T7 E7(int e) {
     T7 block = (T7){e,0};
     DES_ecb_encrypt((DES_cblock*)&block,
     (DES_cblock*)&block,&ks,DES_ENCRYPT);
     return block;}
     int D7(T7 e) {
     DES_ecb_encrypt((DES_cblock*)&e,
     (DES_cblock*)&e,&ks,DES_DECRYPT);
     return e.x;}
     T7 ADD7(T7 a,T7 b) {return E7(D7(a)+D7(b));}
     T7 MUL7(T7 a,T7 b) {return E7(D7(a)*D7(b));}
     BOOL LT7(T7 a,T7 b) {return D7(a)<D7(b);}

The disadvantage here is that you can’t perform arithmetic operations on
values encrypted by DES directly. This means that before each arithmetic
operation you need to decrypt the operands, and afterwards you must re-
encrypt the result. The overhead will be quite formidable. Also, you’ll need
to store the key somewhere in the program. For this particular
implementation of DES, you also need to call DES_set_key_unchecked(&key,&ks)
to create the internal key from the key material before you can perform any
cryptographic operations. Obviously, this is going to affect the stealthiness
of the representation.

You may not be able to compute with DES-encrypted values, but in some
very specific cases you don’t need to go outside the encrypted domain.
Here, for example, we’ve defined a representation that only supports the
not-equal comparison of encrypted values:

     typedef struct {int x; int y;}T8;
     T8 E8(T8 e) {
     DES_ecb_encrypt((DES_cblock*)&e,
    (DES_cblock*)&e,&ks,DES_ENCRYPT);
    return e;}

    T8 D8(T8 e) {
    DES_ecb_encrypt((DES_cblock*)&e,
    (DES_cblock*)&e,&ks,DES_DECRYPT);
    return e;}
    BOOL       NE8(T8     a,T8       b)                       {return
    memcmp(&a,&b,sizeof(T8))!=0;}

This is enough to allow you to construct simple counted loops without
having to step outside the encrypted domain:

The code in light gray can be computed at obfuscation time.

The RSA cryptosystem is homomorphic in multiplication. This means that
to multiply two values that have been encrypted with RSA, you just
multiply the encrypted values; there’s no need to decrypt them first. Or,
more formally, E(x · y) = E(x) · E(y). RSA is defined by these equations,
where M is the cleartext message and C the cryptotext:
e is known as the public modulus, d is the private modulus, and p and q are
primes. It’s easy to see that RSA is homomorphic in multiplication:

Here’s an example where the modulus M is 33, the public exponent is 3, and
the private exponent is 7:

    typedef int T9;
    #define M 33
    T9 E9(int e) {return (((e*e)%M)*e)%M;}
    int D9(T9 e) {int t=(((e*e)%M)*e)%M;                           return
    (((t*t)%M)*e)%M;}

    T9 ADD9(T9 a,T9 b) {return E9((D9(a)+D9(b)));}
    T9 MUL9(T9 a,T9 b) {return (a*b)%M;}
    BOOL LT9(T9 a,T9 b) {return D9(a)<D9(b);}

You can only represent numbers smaller than the modulus.

Notice that you still have to do addition by first de-obfuscating the
operands. But in certain situations, addition can be converted to
multiplication! For example, it’s easy to transform simple counted for-loops
to use multiplication rather than addition:

Using RSA, this has the advantage that you never have to de-obfuscate the
loop variable, unless, of course, its value is used inside the loop.
     Problem 4.12

     Can you think of a way to obfuscate floating-point variables without
     sacrificing accuracy and without causing too severe a performance
     degradation?

4.5.2 Encoding Booleans

Boolean variables are particularly easy targets for obfuscation since their
value range is known, and is small. Unfortunately, while boolean values
occur frequently in programs as conditions in loops and if-statements, long-
lived boolean variables are much less common. As in the previous section,
here are C functions that define an encoder EA() that converts from
traditional C boolean values (0 and 1) to an encoded type TA, a decoder DA()
that converts from TA back to 0 and 1, and functions corresponding to C’s AND
(&&) and OR(||) operations:

     typedef int TA;
     TA EA(BOOL e) {return e;}
     BOOL DA(TA e) {return e;}
     BOOL ORA(TA a, TA b) {return DA(a)||DA(b);}
     TA ORVA(TA a, TA b) {return EA(DA(a)||DA(b));}
     BOOL ANDA(TA a, TA b) {return DA(a)&&DA(b);}
     TA ANDVA(TA a, TA b) {return EA(DA(a)&&DA(b));}

Boolean expressions are used in two ways: to control the flow in control
flow statements and to compute values that are stored in boolean variables.
We’ll use OR and AND in control flow statements, and ORV and ANDV when an
expression is used in an assignment statement. Here’s an example:
You can use the same techniques we’re showing you in this section for
encoding boolean values to encode any enumerable type with a small range.

4.5.2.1 Algorithm OBFBDKMRVbool [28]: Multiple Values

Since there are so few boolean values, you can use multiple values to
encode true and multiple values to encode false. In this example, any
integers divisible by 2 represent true, and any integers divisible by 3
represent false:

     typedef int TC;
     TC     EC(BOOL     e)     {return      (e)?2*(3*
     (rand()%10000)+rand()%2+1):
     3*(2*(rand()%10000)+1);}
     BOOL DC(TC e) {return ((e%2)==0)?TRUE:FALSE;}
     BOOL ORC(TC a, TC b) {return (a*b)%2==0;}
     TC ORVC(TC a, TC b) {return EC(((a*b)%2==0));}
     BOOL ANDC(TC a, TC b) {return gcd(a,b)%2==0;}
     TC     ANDVC(TC     a,     TC     b)     {return
     EC((gcd(a,b)%2==0));}
The call EC(TRUE) generates an integer without any factors of 3 and exactly
one factor of 2, while EC(FALSE) generates an integer without any factors of 2
and exactly one factor of 3.

4.5.2.2 Algorithm OBFCTJbool: Splitting Booleans

Algorithm OBFCTJbool [87,88,91] splits a boolean variable v into two parts,
p and q. Here, we’ve also made p and q booleans, but other representations
are of course possible:

Notice that there are two representations of true (p = F, q = F and p = T, q =
T) and two of false (p = F, q = T and p = T, q = F)! This means that in
different parts of the program you can have different definitions for true and
false.

For maximum confusion, you should put p and q in different parts of the
program, but for simplicity, let’s put them together into one structure here:

     typedef struct {int p; int q;} TD;

     TD trues[] = {(TD){0,0},(TD){1,1}};
     TD falses[] = {(TD){0,1},(TD){1,0}};

     TD     ED(BOOL     e)     {return     (e==TRUE)?
     trues[(rand()%2)]:falses[(rand()%2)];}
     BOOL DD(TD e) {return (e.p==e.q)?TRUE:FALSE;}
ED(TRUE) randomly picks one of the true values. There are many possible
ways for DD to convert back from the obfuscated to the original
representation. Here, we’ve simply chosen to check if p = q. Other
possibilities would be a table lookup, or to check that 2 p + q {0, 3}, or p
  q = 1, and so on. The fact that there are so many ways to perform the
different boolean operations is what makes this representation so attractive:
You can use different checks on the same variables in different parts of the
code. The && and || operations are no different. Here, we’ve used a table
lookup for && and an arithmetic expression for ||:

     TD and[] = {(TD){0,0}, // {0,0} && {0,0} = T &&
     T = T
     (TD){1,0}, // {0,0} && {0,1} = T && F = F
     (TD){0,1}, // {0,0} && {1,0} = T && F = F
     (TD){1,1}, // {0,0} && {1,1} = T && T = T
     (TD){1,0}, // {0,1} && {0,0} = F && T = F
     (TD){1,0}, // {0,1} && {0,1} = F && F = F
     (TD){0,1}, // {0,1} && {1,0} = F && F = F
     (TD){0,1}, // {0,1} && {1,1} = F && T = F
     (TD){0,1}, // {1,0} && {0,0} = F && T = F
     (TD){1,0}, // {1,0} && {0,1} = F && F = F
     (TD){1,0}, // {1,0} && {1,0} = F && F = F
     (TD){0,1}, // {1,0} && {1,1} = F && T = F
     (TD){0,0}, // {1,1} && {0,0} = T && T = T
     (TD){1,0}, // {1,1} && {0,1} = T && F = F
     (TD){0,1}, // {1,1} && {1,0} = T && F = F
     (TD){1,1} // {1,1} && {1,1} = T && T = T
     };
     BOOL ORD(TD a, TD b) {return ((a.p==a.q)+
     (b.p==b.q))!=0;}
     TD ORVD(TD a, TD b) {return ED(ORD(a,b));}
     TD     ANDVD(TD     a,     TD     b)     {return
     and[8*a.p+4*a.q+2*b.p+b.q];}
     BOOL ANDD(TD a, TD b) {return DD(ANDVD(a,b));}
In this example, we’ve generated the lookup tables at obfuscation time, but
generating them at runtime would make the construction more resilient
against static analysis attacks.

     Problem 4.13

     Can you think of a way to obfuscate booleans by representing them as
     floating point numbers and without getting into accuracy problems?

4.5.3 Encoding Literal Data

Literal data plays an important role in many programs. Most common are
literal integers and strings, but initialized arrays are also not unusual. Literal
data often carries much semantic information: An attacker who can identify
a string such as, "Please enter your password:" or a highly random 1024-bit
bitstring (probably a cryptographic key!) has already learned a lot about the
program. There are many simple tricks for hiding such data: You can break
up a key into many small pieces and spread the pieces over the program
[325], you can xor a string with a known constant value, and so on. As
much as possible, you’ll want to avoid ever reconstituting the literal in
cleartext during the execution. Sometimes it’s unavoidable, such as when
passing the data to a library routine. For example, you probably have to
decode an encoded string before passing it to printf. In this particular case,
depending on the encoding, it may be possible to print the encoded string
character by character rather than first decoding all of it.

An alternative to encoding a literal as a literal in a different form is to
convert it to code that generates the decoded value at runtime. As an
example, let’s encode the strings "MIMI" and "MILA" in a finite state transducer
known as a Mealy machine [247]. This machine takes a bitstring and a state
transition table as input and generates a string as output. In our case, we let
Mealy(01002) produce "MIMI" and Mealy(01102) produce "MILA".

Below are the state transition graph and the corresponding next and out
tables:

The notation              means that if you’re in state s0 and see input i, you
transfer to state s1 and produce an o as output. The transfer is encoded by
the next array (next[state][input]=next state) and the output is encoded by the
out array (out[state][input]=output).

Notice the dark gray edge in the state transition graph above. It doesn’t
actually contribute to the two strings we want to encode, but it makes the
machine produce a bogus string, Mealy(011102)="MILBA".

There are numerous ways to implement the Mealy machine. The most
straightforward is to directly interpret the next and out tables:

     char* mealy(int v) {
     char* str=(char*)malloc(10);
     int state=0,len=0;
     while (state!=3) {
     int input = 1&v; v >>= 1;
     str[len++]=out[state][input];
     state = next[state][input];
     }
     str[len]='\0';
     return str;
     }

You can also hardcode the next and out tables as a switch-based interpreter:

     char* mealy(int v) {
     char* str=(char*)malloc(10);
     int state=0,len=0;
     while (1) {
     int input = 1&v; v >>= 1;
     switch (state) {
     case 0: state=(input==0)?1:2;
     str[len++]=(input==0)?'m':'l'; break;
     case 1: state=(input==0)?3:0;
     str[len++]='i'; break;
     case 2: state=(input==0)?3:2;
     str[len++]=(input==0)?'a':'b'; break;
     case 3: str[len]='\0'; return str;
     }
     }
     }

     Problem 4.14

     In the example above, the finite state transducer only supports
     producing the string. For other operations, you have to generate and
     operate on the cleartext representation. Can you extend the Mealy
     machine framework to also support string concatenation, indexing, and
     other common string operations? Can your design handle destructive
     updates by modifying the machine on the fly?
     Problem 4.15

     The Mealy machine is very simple and probably easy to pattern match
     on. Can you come up with a method that automatically generates a
     large number of different implementations?

4.5.4 Encoding Arrays

Array obfuscations fall into two categories. First, you can reorder the
elements of the array, which breaks the linear ordering that an adversary
will expect. Second, you can restructure the array (breaking it up into
pieces, merging it with other unrelated arrays, or changing its
dimensionality) to hide from the adversary the structure that the
programmer originally intended.

4.5.4.1 Algorithm OBFZCW: Array Permutation

The easiest way to reorder the elements of an array A into a new array B is to
provide a second permutation array P so that A[i] = B[P[i]]:
This may look suspiciously unstealthy, but this construction is, in fact, quite
common in high-performance code.

The array obfuscation transformations are all defined by a function E(a,i)
that takes the transformed array a and an index i as input and returns the
address of the i:th element as output. The code of these transformations
would typically be inlined, but we give them as separate functions here for
clarity. Here’s the code for permutation through an array:

Any function that uniquely maps the index range onto itself (i.e., an
isomorphism) will do as a permutation function. Algorithm OBFZCW [384]
uses homomorphic function f (i) = (i · m) mod n, where n is the length of
the array and m is an integer so that m and n are relatively prime. Here’s an
example where we’ve set n = 10 and m = 3:
And here’s the corresponding code:

4.5.4.2 Algorithm OBFCTJarray: Array Restructuring

Like other data types, arrays can be split up into pieces and the pieces can
be scattered throughout the program. Also, the elements from several arrays
of the same element type can be interleaved and merged into one array.
Additionally, since arrays come in multiple dimensions, an n-dimensional
array can be flattened into an array of n – 1 dimensions or folded into one
with n+1 dimensions. Algorithm OBFCTJarray [87,88,91,117] provides such
transformations.

The array splitting transformation splits an array Aof length n into two
arrays, B0 and B1 of lengths m0 and m1, respectively. Formally [117], you
need a function select that determines the array into which each element
should go, and two functions, p0 and p1, which give the location of each
element in the new arrays:

Then you get the following mapping between elements of A and elements
of B0 and B1:

                            A[i] = Bselect(i)[pselect(i)(i)]

Here’s an example where we split array A into two arrays B and C so that the
even-indexed elements go in B and the odd-indexed go in C:

Any other appropriate split function is, of course, possible. Here’s what this
transformation would look like in code:
The array merging operation is the inverse of splitting; it takes two arrays
of compatible type and merges the elements into one array:

In this simple example, the merging function puts the elements from the A
array at even indices and the elements from B at odd indices:

If the arrays are of unknown length at compile time, or not of the same
length, more complicated merging functions will be necessary.

A multi-dimensional array can be flattened, i.e., turned into a lower-
dimensional array:

This is, of course, what compilers do when they translate multi-dimensional
array operations to primitives that operate on a flat memory structure.
Here’s an example that turns a two-dimensional array into a one-
dimensional array:
The array folding transformation is the inverse of flattening; it turns a k-
dimensional array into a k+ one-dimensional array:

In this example, we turn a one-dimensional array into a two-dimensional
one:
4.6 Breaking Abstractions

Abstractions play an important role in programming. Some abstractions are
given to you (the instruction set architecture of the machine you’re working
on, the system call interface of the operating system, the classes in the Java
library you link in with your program), and others you create yourself in the
programs you write. The way you break your program into packages,
modules, classes, and methods provides plenty of clues to an attacker. For
example, two methods that are declared in the same class are probably
related, and a class is presumably a specialization of its superclass. In this
section, you’ll see ways to break or hide these assumptions. First,
Algorithm OBFWCsig modifies functions to make sure that their signatures
don’t give away any information. Next, you’ll see how Algorithm
OBFCTJclass splits and merges classes to hide the inheritance relationships.
Algorithm OBFDMRVSL takes this one step further by destroying the entire
class hierarchy in a Java program and encoding it as ordinary data.
Algorithm OBFAJV, finally, adds a layer of interpretation in order to destroy
the most basic of assumptions of a computing system, the immutability of
the instruction set architecture.

4.6.1 Algorithm OBFWCsig: Merging Function Signatures
The signature of a function gives away much of its semantics. At the very
least, you can probably assume that two functions foo and bar with these
signatures

     int foo(int, int){...}
     void bar(Window,String){...}

will have very different semantics. There are various ways of reducing the
amount of information present in the signature. In Algorithm OBFWCsig
[360], Chenxi Wang suggests making functions look as similar as possible
by modifying them so that they all have the same signature. In practice, this
is too expensive (if one function in the program has twenty arguments, you
have to make every function in the program have at least twenty
arguments!), and so it makes sense to merge them into a few equivalence
classes.

We won’t give an exact algorithm here, because the details will vary
considerably from one language to another. The calling conventions can be
very subtle [29], and you have to be careful to not introduce bugs in your
transformation. The C standard, for example, allows function arguments to
be evaluated in an arbitrary order, whereas the Java standard requires strict
left-to-right evaluation. Regardless, if you decide to merge two function
signatures by reordering their argument lists, you have to ensure that the
evaluation of actual arguments is done in exactly the same order as in the
original code, at least when argument evaluation can have side effects.
Otherwise, in the case of Java, you would violate the standard, or in the
case of C, you might tickle a platform-dependent bug in the code! For
example, a C compiler is free to evaluate the arguments to foo(i,++i) in
either order, but for the compiler the programmer is using, if this potential
bug has never been triggered, your obfuscator probably shouldn’t either.

In Java, a simple way to merge signatures is to make every method have the
signature Object foo(Object[]). This is expensive, though, since it requires
every argument of a primitive type to be boxed prior to the call and
unboxed on entry to the method. In addition, an array has to be allocated for
the parameters. An alternative is to make two or more methods have the
same signature by a) converting every reference type to type Object, and b)
inserting bogus arguments. Chenxi suggests a similar strategy for C,
converting all large arguments (arrays and structs) to void* and inserting
appropriate casts inside the method. Note, however, that if you apply this
idea to typed distribution formats like Java bytecode, the type casts will be
visible in the code and can hence be used to derive informative method
signatures.

To see how this works in practice, have a look at this simple example:

     typedef struct{int waldo;} thud_t;
     void foo(int i, int j){}
     void bar(int i, float f, int j, int k){}
     void baz(char* s, thud_t t){
     int x = t.waldo;}
     void fred(char* s, char* t){}
     void quux(int i){}
     void qux(char* s, int i, int j){}

     int main() {
     int i;
     thud_t corge;
     foo(1,2);
     bar(3,4.2,8,9);
     baz("dude",corge);
     fred("yo","da");
     for(i=0;i<10000000;i++) qux("luke",1,2);
     quux(5);
     }

The foo, bar, and quux functions are pretty similar, so it makes sense to
modify them so that they all have the same signature, void (int, float, int,
int). Similarly, baz and fred are also much alike, so let’s modify them to both
have the signature void (char*, void*). After merging, you get the following
program:
    typedef struct{int waldo;} thud_t;

    void foo(int i, float bogus1, int j, int
    bogus2){}
    void bar(int i, float f, int j, int k){}
    void quux(int i, float bogus1, int bogus2, int
    bogus3){}
    void baz(char* s, void* t){
    int x = ((thud_t*)t)->waldo;}
    void fred(char* s, void* t){}
    void qux(char* s, int i, int j){}

    int main() {
    int i,bogus1,bogus2;
    float bogus3;
    thud_t corge,corge_cp;
    foo(1,bogus3,2,bogus1);
    bar(3,4.2,8,9);
    memcpy(&corge_cp,&corge,sizeof(corge));
    baz("dude",&corge_cp);
    fred("yo","da");
    for(i=0;i<10000000;i++) qux("luke",1,2);
    quux(5,bogus3,bogus1,bogus2);
    }

Notice that we never touched qux. It’s executed within a tight loop, and
adding extra parameters would have been too costly. Note also that since C
passes structs by value, we had to make a local copy of corge, which we then
passed by reference to baz. Here, we’ve added bogus variables to pass as
extra arguments, but in practice you would prefer random variables already
available in the environment.

4.6.2 Algorithm OBFCTJclass: Splitting and Merging Classes
In typical class-based object-oriented languages like Java, C#, or Eiffel, a
class consists of instance variables (data fields), virtual methods (functions
invoked indirectly through an object), and constructors (methods called on
object creation to initialize instance variables). Classes can inherit from
each other, meaning they include the features from the class (or classes)
they extend. Thus, the classes in a program form an inheritance tree, or if
the language supports multiple inheritance, a DAG. Algorithm OBFCTJclass
[87,88,91,271,331] provides three ways to obfuscate this hierarchy, namely,
by splitting a class into two classes, merging two classes into one class, and
inserting bogus classes into the hierarchy.

To obfuscate a class, you need three primitive operations, MOVEUP, INSERT-
EMPTY, and DELETEEMPTY. With these primitives, you can synthesize the
class merge and the class split operations. The MOVEUP primitive takes a
declared name in one class (such as a field, a method, or a constructor) and
moves it up into the parent class. The INSERT-EMPTY primitive inserts a new
empty class into the class hierarchy. The DELETE-EMPTY primitive, finally,
removes an empty class. The details of these operations will depend on the
language (does it have multiple inheritance like C++, does it support
renaming of fields like Eiffel, does it have interfaces like Java?), so we will
only discuss a simple language here: Java without interfaces.

Have a look at the four classes in the class hierarchy on the left:

Suppose you want to merge class A into C. Given our primitives, you want to
first execute MOVEUP(F), MOVEUP(M), MOVEUP(A), and then DELETE-
EMPTY(A). You cannot simply move the declarations up to C, however,
because their names (and signatures, in the case of the method and
constructor) clash with declarations already in C. We’ll get to the details in a
minute, but you can see a few things in the right-hand side of the figure
above: A’s field f is simply renamed A_f, A’s constructor is renamed C and is
given an extra argument to distinguish it from the one already in C, and A’s
method m is renamed A_m. Because of method overriding, however, this is not
enough. A method that did a=new A(); a.m() before the merge would do a=new
C(); a.m() afterwards, and would wind up invoking the wrong method!
Similarly, what should happen to a method that wants to distinguish an
instance of A from an instance of C by using a runtime type test such as
instanceof?

Class splitting is, unsurprisingly, the inverse of merging. In the example
below, class A is split by first giving it an empty superclass D and then
moving field f and constructor A (which gets renamed D) into it:

Unfortunately, you can’t just move any old declaration up. Moving f is not a
problem, since it will be available to any method or constructor in the
subclass that uses it. Moving up any method or constructor, however,
requires you to also move the declaration of any name that it uses, directly
or indirectly. The MOVEUP() primitive takes care of this.

In Algorithm 4.6 282, you can see the definitions of the MOVEUP primitive
for fields, methods, and constructors. Listing 4.3 283 gives an example
where a class A (dark gray) is merged into its parent class C (light gray). To
handle virtual method calls and runtime type checks, objects of type C and A
are given an instance variable kind that is initialized to the name of the class
by each constructor. Other less obvious representations are, of course, more
desirable. Maintaining complete semantic equivalence between the original
and obfuscated code is tricky; notice how the type cast turns into a
complicated if-statement that checks the kind field, and if the variable is not
of the right type, is forced to explicitly throw an exception.

4.6.3 Algorithm OBFDMRVSL: Destroying High-Level Structures

The Self-Protecting Mobile Agents (SMPA) project from Network
Associates Laboratories was funded by DARPA to build an automated
obfuscator that would protect mobile agents from attacks by untrusted
hosts. It may be the most thorough study of obfuscation to date, at least of
those that are known in the public literature, in that they built both an
obfuscator and an automatic de-obfuscator. It’s also the most depressing
study to date, in that they found that it was easier to build the de-obfuscator
than the obfuscator and, on top of that, the de-obfuscator ran faster than the
obfuscator! Unfortunately, to prevent malicious use, neither tool was ever
released in the public domain.

Algorithm 4.6. Definition of the MOVEUP primitives used in
Algorithm OBFCTJclass to split and merge classes.
The basic idea of the OBFDMRVSL [28,103] obfuscation algorithm is to
remove as much of the high-level structures from Java’s typed bytecode as
possible. In the JVM, classes, fields, methods, and exceptions are all typed,
and the types give the attacker useful clues as to what part of the program
does what. Similarly, the strongly typed nature of the bytecode, and the fact
that code and data can’t be mixed, means that an adversary can easily
reconstitute control structures.

If you were to write a compiler from Java to machine code, you would have
to translate all the high-level features (classes, method dispatch, exception
handling, dynamic memory allocation and deallocation, and so on) into the
low-level operations supported by the hardware and operating system. This
is, essentially, what the SPMA tool does while staying within the Java
bytecode domain. In other words, both the original and obfuscated
programs consist of Java class files, but in the obfuscated program there are
no classes in the constant pool (every class is represented by a unique
integer), virtual method dispatch is done through explicit virtual tables
rather than the Java bytecode invokevirtual instruction, all memory is in
the form of a flat array (which includes the method call stacks), exception
handling does not use Java’s built-in mechanism, and so on. In addition to
these transformations, SPMA also performs traditional data obfuscations.

Figure 4.3. Example of merging a class A with its parent class C.
  The top of the figure shows the transformations on the class
hierarchy. The bottom part of the figure shows transformations
     on instantiations and type checks using these classes.
Have a look at Figure 4.4 285, where we’ve sketched how SPMA
transforms a program. The original program contains two methods, P and Q.
Their control flow graphs are merged and flattened using chenxification.
Whenever possible, methods from the standard library are merged the same
way. Since the JVM limits the size of a method, the obfuscated program
will have several methods containing the basic blocks from the original
program. In Figure 4.4 285, the basic blocks from P, Q, main, and Hashtable.put
are all merged into two methods, m1 and m2.
 Figure 4.4. Example of a program obfuscated with the SPMA
tool. On top is the original program. It consists of two classes, M
and N, where M contains a method P and a static integer variable
   f, and N contains a method Q. Below that is the obfuscated

    program, where all methods have been merged into two
 chenxified methods, m1 and m2, and all data (method call stacks,
     heap, static data) has been merged into an array memory.
Java expects some methods to never change name or signature. For
example, the program has to have a method named main (where execution
starts), and it has to have exactly one argument, an array of strings.
Therefore, in the obfuscated program, main becomes a stub that jumps to the
appropriate flattened method. Similarly, to handle GUI events, you have to
implement methods with a particular name and signature (such as
mousePressed(MouseEvent e)), and these, too, have to be converted to stubs. In
other words, even though the entire program has been flattened into just a
few huge static methods, the obfuscated code will still contain remnants of
the original one, with hints to the adversary as to where particular parts of
the execution originate.

4.6.3.1 An Example

To remove the high-level structures from the Java bytecode, SPMA flattens
control flow (to make it difficult to reconstitute source-level control
structures), turns typed data into (almost) untyped data, merges methods (to
remove procedural abstraction), replaces classes with unique integers,
implements method dispatch through its own virtual method tables, makes
use of its own method call stack, and implements its own version of
common classes from the Java library (to avoid leaving hints from
unobfuscatable library calls). In addition to synthesizing high-level
structures from low-level primitives, SPMA does some simple
transformations on data, such as you saw in Section 4.5 258. Since the
SPMA tools were never released in the public domain, we can’t know the
exact design decisions, so the example here is based on what can be gleaned
from the published reports and from conjecture.

Have a look at the simple Java program below. It consists of two classes, A
and B, B inheriting from A, and a main method that creates an instance of B
and makes a virtual method call through this object to B’s method n:

     class A {
     int i;
     int m() {return i;}
     void n(int i) {}
     }
     class B extends A {
     String s;
     public B(int i, String s) {
     this.i=i; this.s=s;
     }
     void n(int v) {
     int x = v*m();
     System.out.println(s+x);
     }
     public static void main(String[] args) {
     B b = new B(6,"42");
     b.n(7);
     }
     }

Every data object in the original program is represented by a Memory object in
the obfuscated program. Memory has one array for each primitive type and an
array M of type Memory that allows objects to refer to each other in order to
facilitate building arbitrary object graphs:

     class Memory {
     public int[] I;
     public Object[] L;
     public long[] J;
     public float[] F;
     public double[] D;
     public Memory[] M;
     }

Every piece of data in the obfuscated program is fashioned out of Memory
objects. This includes virtual method tables, method call stacks, and class
instances. You could get rid of even more type information by representing
memory as an array of raw bytes, but the performance hit would be
considerable, and it’s not clear how much more would be gained since the
JVM’s instructions are typed anyway and hence reveal information about
the types of memory regions.

Before execution can begin, you need to create virtual method tables for
every class. Class A’s table consists of two numbers, 2 and 3. These refer to
the case labels of the initial blocks of A’s method m and method n,
respectively, in the switch statement that implements the flattened methods.
Since B inherits m from A, its virtual table entry for m also refers to case label
2:

     public class DAnna {
     static Memory[] mem = new Memory[10];
     static int mc = -1;
     static Memory SP;

     static { // create memory and virtual tables
     for(int i=0;i<mem.length;i++)
     mem[i]=new Memory();
     mem[++mc].I=new int[]{2,3}; // {A.m,A.n}
     mem[++mc].I=new int[]{2,5}; // {B.m,A.n}
     }

A virtual table’s index into the memory array (0 for A and 1 for B) also
serves as the unique identifier for that class. A statement such as if (x
instanceof A)... can then translate into if ((x.vtab==0)||(x.vtab==1)) .... Any of
the standard compiler tricks for O(1) time type tests [114,376] could of
course also be used.

Our program is small, so we can get away with only one chenxified method,
m1, which is invoked directly from the stub main:
     static void m1() {
     mem[++mc].M=new Memory[2];
     SP=mem[mc]; // allocate main's AR

     int PC=0;
     while(true) {
     switch (PC) {

     ... // other blocks here
     case 1: { // main ends here
     SP=SP.M[0]; // Deallocate n's AR
     return; // return from main
     }
     }
     }
     }
     public static void main(String args[]) {
     m1(); // stub call to m1()
     }
     }

SP  is the method call stack pointer. Activations records (ARs) are just
instances of Memory linked together on the M field.

The first thing main does is to create a new instance of B. This involves first
allocating it (in our case, getting a new Memory object, creating storage for the
block’s fields i and s, and filling in the new object’s virtual table pointer),
and then invoking B’s constructor to initialize the fields:

     case 0 : { // main's 1st basic block
     Memory b=mem[++mc]; // Allocate new object
     b.I=new int[1]; // space for "i"
     b.L=new Object[1]; // space for "s"
     b.M=new Memory[]{mem[1]}; // b's virtual table
     pointer
     SP.M[1]=b; // b=new B(6,"42")
     mem[++mc].M=new Memory[]{SP,b};// AR for B's
     constructor
     SP=mem[mc];
     SP.I=new int[]{6,6}; // RA=6
     SP.L=new    ObfStr[]{new    ObfStr(new  char[]
     {'4','2'})};
     PC=4; break; // Call B's constructor
     }

In this example, we haven’t used any of the techniques you saw in Section
4.3.3 229 for hiding the flow between blocks. Therefore, it’s easy to see
here that the constructor starts at case label 4. We set the return address (RA)
to 6, meaning that after the constructor returns, we should continue
execution at case block 6, main’s second basic block.

The constructor gets the pointer to the new object (passed to it as this) and
stores the argument values into the object fields:

     case 4: { // body of B's constructor
     PC=SP.I[0]; // get return address
     Memory   this-=(Memory)SP.M[1];   //  get                           this
     pointer
     this_.I[0]=SP.I[1]; // this.i=i
     this_.L[0]=(ObfStr)SP.L[0]; // this.s=s
     break; // return to main
     }

After the constructor has finished executing, it returns to main’s second basic
block. To synthesize the call to b.n(7), you must first look up which method
to call (depending on b’s type this could be either A’s n or B’s n), and you do
this by following the pointer to the virtual table from b:
     case 6: { // main's call to b.n(7);
     SP=SP.M[0]; // Dealloc constructor's AR
     Memory b=SP.M[1]; // main's local b
     mem[++mc].M=new Memory[]{SP,b};// Alloc AR for
     n
     SP=mem[mc];
     SP.I=new int[]{1,7,0}; // {RA,7,space for n's
     x}
     SP.L=new Object[2]; // n's Evaluation stack
     PC=b.M[0].I[1]; // virtual address of b.n;
     break; // call b.n
     }

In our example, b points to a B object, so it’s B’s n that you need to call, and
looking at B’s virtual method table, you see that n starts at case label 5.
There, we perform another virtual method call to m, again linking together
activation records:

     case 5: { // body of B.n
     Memory this_=SP.M[1]; // get this pointer
     mem[++mc].M=new Memory[]{SP,this_};
     SP=mem[mc]; // AR for m
     SP.I=new int[]{7}; // RA=7
     PC=this_.M[0].I[0]; // this.m's virtual address
     break; // call B's m()
     }

Method m just returns the value of the instance variable v, which you access
by following the this pointer:

     case 2: { // body of A's m
     PC=SP.I[0]; // return address
     Memory this_=SP.M[1]; // get this pointer
     // <<< memory dump here >>>
     SP.I=new int[]{this_.I[0]}; // return this.i
     break; // return to n
     }

Now we’re as deep as we will go in the call chain of this simple example,
so it’s illustrative to examine what memory looks like. Here’s the memory
data structure right before the call to A.m() returns:

Blocks in light gray are virtual tables, in dark gray are activation records
(AR), in dashed are class instances, and the block in white is garbage, left
over from the call to B’s constructor. There is clearly more information
available in this structure than there would be in a raw array of bytes, but
clearly less than in the original program.

Finally, here’s n’s second basic block, to which you return after the call to m:

     case 7: { // n's 2nd basic block
     int rm=SP.I[0]; // rm is m's return value
     SP=SP.M[0]; // deallocate AR
      Memory this_=SP.M[1]; // get this pointer
      PC=SP.I[0]; // get return address
      int v=SP.I[1];
      SP.I[2]=rm*v; // x=rm*v
      ObfStr s=((ObfStr)this_.L[0]); //
      ObfStr   vs=new   ObfStr(SP.I[2]);   //   vs=new
      String(x)
      System.out.println((new
      ObfStr(s)).append(vs).toJavaString());
      break; // return to main
      }

There are a couple of things to notice here. First, we have left the evaluation
of rm*v as is. We could have translated it into operations on our own
evaluation stack rather than using Java’s built-in stack, at considerable loss
of performance. In fact, if you look at the memory dump above, you can see
that we linked in such a stack of objects, although we never used it. The
second thing to notice is that the string field s is actually not represented as
a Java String but as an instance of our own ObfStr class. This is a complete
reimplementation of java.lang.String. Normally, ObfStr would be treated the
same as the user classes and its methods would be flattened and mixed in
with the user methods; here we’ve cheated, though, and just call ObfStr’s
methods directly. While replacing common Java library classes with your
own implementations removes a lot of information from the program, it’s
hard to remove all information. Whenever you call a remaining library
method that needs a java.lang.String object, for example, you need to convert
your obfuscated representation back to a String. This is what happens above
when the program calls System.out.println.

4.6.3.2 Evaluation

As you’ve seen, it’s possible to remove much of the high-level information
from a Java program, but it’s hard to remove all the information. Algorithm
OBFDMRVSL replaces a throw new Exception() with an ordinary jump to the
basic block that handles it. However, exceptions that the Java environment
throws implicitly, such as a divide by zero or a null pointer dereference, still
must be handled the Java way. Similarly, you’ve seen how stubs are
necessary for any methods that the Java virtual machine expects to have a
particular name and signature. Furthermore, any obfuscated object (such as
a string or an integer that has been encoded using any of the techniques in
Section 4.5 258) needs to be converted to the original Java type before
being passed to a library method. Any such remnants of the original
program can provide valuable clues to an attacker.

The authors report that the code generated by their obfuscator was about 10
times larger and 4 to 20 times slower than the original. What’s even more
depressing is that reversing the transformations was easy; in fact, de-
obfuscation was easier than obfuscation! We let the authors describe the
design of their de-obfuscator themselves [103, pp. 23–24]:

               We developed a “de-obfuscator” (actually more of an
               analysis assistant) for our obfuscation tool. It worked by
               searching for patterns in the input program and running
               selected parts of the program. It was largely successful, in
               that it was able to determine method entry points, the
               structure of the class hierarchy, which methods were
               constructors, etc. ...
               The de-obfuscator runs the <clinit> (static initialization, run
               when a Java class is loaded) of the program to retrieve the
               virtual tables and jump tables, ...
               The control flow leaving each block was determined by
               pattern matching on the DAG representation of the basic
               block. Since our obfuscator produces basic blocks that use
               data-driven jumps, there is a calculation in each obfuscated
               basic block that returns the block to jump to. Our obfuscator
               output [sic] only a fixed number of formats for this
               calculation, so the de-obfuscator can match against those
               formats.
               After simplifying the control flow leaving each basic block,
               the deobfuscator used the virtual tables (read from running
               the initializer) to determine which basic blocks were method
               entry points. Since no Java method (in the original program)
               can jump to code in other methods, this allowed complete
               determination of method composition. The virtual tables also
               associated methods with classes. Certain facts about the class
               hierarchy could also be determined from the virtual tables,
               such as superclass and interfaces.

In conclusion, the authors note that removing high-level information from a
Java program and obfuscating data provides no extra security, and it comes
at a high cost of implementation:

               Obfuscators are hard to implement ... . the security gained is
               likely to be nonexistent to marginal ... . Our obfuscation tool
               took over 2,000 hours to develop, for no to very marginal
               security.

4.6.4 Algorithm OBFAJV: Modifying Instruction Encodings

The lowest-level abstraction on a machine that an attacker is likely to care
about is the instruction set architecture. An attacker who learns about your
program by disassembling it, or single-stepping through it under a
debugger, relies on his understanding of this abstraction. In particular, he
will have to know the instructions the machine architecture supports, its
addressing modes, and its register sets. He, or the tools he’s using, will also
have to know how these are encoded, i.e., which bit patterns correspond to
which opcodes, addressing modes, and registers. It’s hard to break this
abstraction if you want your program to run directly on the hardware. But if
you’re willing to add a level of interpretation, you can construct whatever
instruction set architecture you want!

This is the basic idea of Algorithm OBFAJV [10]. The goal of this algorithm
is to produce diverse (and therefore more tamper-resistant) programs by
generating a unique interpreter and a unique instruction set for every
distributed copy. Algorithm OBFAJV does this by breaking the instruction
encoding abstraction. The goal is for every program to encode instructions
differently, and for this encoding to change at runtime. Thus, as the attacker
is stepping through the program, learning about which bit patterns
correspond to which instruction semantics, he will find that the encoding
changes as he chooses different execution paths.

Have a look at this tiny example program, where the instruction PUSHC c
pushes the 3-bit constant c, ADD adds the two top elements on the stack, PRINT
prints and pops the top element on the stack, and EXIT stops execution:

     PUSHC 2
     PUSHC 5
     ADD
     PRINT
     SWAP 0
     PUSHC 2
     PUSHC 5
     ADD
     PRINT
     EXIT

The program thus prints 7 twice. SWAP n is a meta-instruction that says that
“from here on, the instruction set changes.” SWAP’s parameter n is a reference
to a node in the instruction decoding tree:

Each node in the tree has a number. Internal nodes (light gray) point to left
and right subtrees, and leaves (dark gray) contain references to the code that
implements the opcode semantics. Say that you see the bits 〈0, 0, 1, 1, 1,
1, 0 〉 in the instruction stream. To decode, you’d go left from the root
(since the first bit is a 0), find yourself at node 1, which is a leaf, and you
know that you should execute the PUSHC instruction. PUSHC takes a 3-bit integer
argument, so you extract the next three bits, 〈 0, 1, 1 〉, and push 3 on the
stack. The remaining bits are 〈 1, 1, 0 〉. You start at the root of the tree
again, go right (first bit is a 1) to node 2, go right (another 1) to node 4, go
left (a 0), and find that the next instruction is PRINT. PRINT pops the top
argument off the stack (the 3 that you just pushed) and prints it.

To diversify, or obfuscate, your program, all you have to do is to generate a
decoding tree and to translate each instruction from the original program
into the new instruction encoding. Notice that even if you start out with a
language that has a fixed-length instruction set (such as a RISC machine),
the resulting encoding is variable length.

Now it’s reasonable to assume that after stepping through the program for a
while, the attacker will learn that 0 is PUSHC, 1,1,0 is PRINT, and so on. For this
reason, Algorithm OBFAJV adds the SWAP instruction, which changes the
instruction encoding on the fly at runtime! Here, we’ve made SWAP n very
simple; it just swaps the children of node n. In Algorithm OBFAJV, there are
instructions that can make any modifications to the decoding tree. Here’s
what the tree looks like after SWAP 0 has been executed:

Here, now, is the complete encoding of the simple example program we
started with, bit by bit:
Notice how the operator encoding is different after the SWAP instruction has
executed! Before the swap, ADD is 〈1, 0〉; after the swap it’s 〈0, 0〉.

Implementing the execution engine isn’t hard. Here’s the definition of the
decoding tree nodes:

    class Node{}
    class Internal extends Node{
    public Node left,right;
    public Internal(Node left, Node right) {
    this.left = left; this.right=right;
    }
    public void swap() {
    Node tmp = left; left=right; right=tmp;
    }
    }

    class Leaf extends Node {
    public int operator;
    public Leaf(int operator) {
    this.operator=operator;
    }
    }

And here’s how you build the original decoding tree:
    static Node[] tree = new Node[9];
    static {
    tree[1]=new Leaf(0); // PUSHC
    tree[3]=new Leaf(1); // ADD
    tree[5]=new Leaf(2); // PRINT
    tree[7]=new Leaf(3); // SWAP
    tree[8]=new Leaf(4); // EXIT
    tree[6]=new Internal(tree[7],tree[8]);
    tree[4]=new Internal(tree[5],tree[6]);
    tree[2]=new Internal(tree[3],tree[4]);
    tree[0]=new Internal(tree[1],tree[2]);
    }

The program is just an array of bits, and the program counter is an index
into this array:

    static int prog[]={0,0,1,0,0,1,0,1,1,0,1,1,0,
    1,1,1,0,0,0,0,
    1,0,1,0,1,1,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,0,1,1,1};
    static int pc = 0;

You need a function decode() that reads one bit at a time from the program
array and walks the decoding tree until a leaf is found, and a function
operand() that decodes a 3-bit integer from the program array:

    static int decode() {
    Node t = tree[0];
    while (t instanceof Internal)
    t     =      (prog[pc++]==0)?((Internal)t).left:
    ((Internal)t).right;

    return ((Leaf)t).operator;
     }
     static int operand() {
     return 4*prog[pc++]+2*prog[pc++]+prog[pc++];
     }

Finally, here’s the interpreter itself, which calls the decode() and operand()
functions to decode the instruction stream and swap() to modify the decoding
tree:

     static void interpret() {
     int stack[] = new int[10]; int sp = -1;
     while (true) {
     switch (decode()) {
     case 0 : stack[++sp]=operand(); break; // PUSHC
     case 1 : stack[sp-1]+=stack[sp]; sp--; break;
     // ADD
     case   2   :    System.out.println(stack[sp--]);
     break; // PRINT
     case 3 : ((Internal)tree[operand()]).swap();
     break; // SWAP
     case 4 : return; // EXIT
     }
     }
     }

By itself, this transformation doesn’t hold up to a dynamic attack. Once the
adversary has found the interpret() function, he can ignore that the
instruction encodings change every so often and just concentrate on which
case of the switch statement gets executed! For this reason, Algorithm
OBFAJV makes use of several other diversification techniques. To make
sure that the instruction semantics are different from one copy of the
program to the next (i.e., that every interpret() function looks different),
Algorithm OBFAJV merges several instructions into new ones with unique
and unknown (to the attacker) semantics (Proebsting’s superoperators
[292]). Furthermore, rather than representing the interpreted program as a
static array of bits, as we did above, they break it up into basic blocks and
move these blocks around in memory by storing them in a self-adjusting
binary search tree.

As you can imagine, the main drawback of this algorithm, and any other
algorithm [35,193,254] that adds a level of interpretation and obfuscation to
the instruction set architecture, is that it incurs a significant runtime
overhead. The authors of Algorithm OBFAJV report slowdown factors of
between 50 and 3,500.

4.7 Discussion

Obfuscating transformations have many uses. One of the first applications
was to generate a large number of diverse versions of the same program.
The idea is to make every installation of the program unique and thereby
making it harder for an adversary to construct automated attack scripts that
work everywhere. In Chapter 8 (Software Watermarking), you’ll see a
related application: To prevent collusive attacks (where several differently
marked programs are compared to find the location of a watermark), you
apply different sets of obfuscations to every distributed copy of the
program, thereby making them all different and harder to compare. A
second application is to use obfuscation to make a program so convoluted
that it becomes difficult to find and reverse engineer a secret algorithm. A
third reason to obfuscate is to hide secret data, such as cryptographic keys.
Finally, obfuscation can be used by the bad guys. For example, before
making copies of your watermarked program, a software pirate can
obfuscate it to make it difficult for you to extract the mark.

Let’s have a look back at Section 2.2 86 to see which defense primitives
the different algorithms you’ve seen in this chapter make use of:

     split/merge: Many obfuscation algorithms are based on splitting and
          merging. You can use splitting to break a language construct into
    smaller pieces and then protect each piece individually. You can
    use merging to sow confusion by combining unrelated constructs.
Algorithm OBFCTJbool, for example, splits up a boolean variable into
two pieces that can then be stored in different parts of the program.
Splitting and merging often go together. Algorithm OBFCFinoutline splits
a function into smaller parts that can then be merged with other,
unrelated, functions. Similarly, Algorithm OBFCTJclass splits classes
into smaller ones as well as merges unrelated classes. Algorithm
OBFCTJarray splits arrays into pieces that can be scattered over the
program, or merges unrelated arrays.
Several authors have suggested protecting a function by splitting its
control flow graph into basic blocks and control flow edges and then
hiding or protecting each part separately. Ge et al. [42,135], for
example, store the control flow edges in a heavily obfuscated separate
process.
mimic: The mimic primitive is closely related to stealth. Whenever
   you insert new code or transform existing code, you want to make
   sure that it fits in with the rest of the code in the program, i.e., that
   it mimics some aspect (or all aspects) of the existing code. You
   can also use the mimic primitive to make unrelated program
   pieces all look the same. Algorithm OBFWCsig, for example, adds
   confusion by forcing all functions to have the same signature.
map: You can use the map primitive to systematically replace one
   construct with another. Algorithm OBFTP, for example, replaces
   identifiers with meaningless ones. Algorithms OBFCFinterp and
   OBFAJV both add a layer of interpretation. This is really just a
   mapping from the original instruction set to a new, constructed
   instruction set.
Algorithm OBFWHKD protects the basic blocks by reordering them
and the control flow edges by hiding them in a jump table, also an
instance of the map primitive.
duplicate: The duplicate primitive can make copies of an object to
   force the adversary to consider a large number of objects in the
    program while searching for the real secret. Algorithm
    OBFCTJbogus does this by hiding the real control flow behind
    inserted bogus control flow, and Algorithm OBFCFcopy similarly
    makes copies of functions.
indirect : As you’ve seen, adding a level of indirection is a common
    obfuscation technique. Algorithm OBFLDK replaces direct
    branches with jumps through a branch function, and Algorithm
    OBFCTJpointer creates opaque predicates based on the difficulty of
    pointer analysis.
Algorithm OBFWHKDalias adds a level of indirection to protect the
entries in the chenxification jump table from being discovered.
reorder: Algorithm OBFCFreorder reorders code and data, and
    Algorithm OBFZCW permutes the elements of an array.
