                     6. Dynamic Obfuscation

The static obfuscation algorithms we showed you in Chapter 4 (Code
Obfuscation) transform the code prior to execution. In this chapter, we’ll show
you dynamic algorithms that transform the program at runtime. In theory, you
could turn any static algorithm into a dynamic one simply by including the
obfuscator with the executable and transforming the code as it runs! In
practice, however, obfuscators are large and slow programs, and for
stealthiness and performance reasons we need small and quick runtime
transformers.

When an attacker looks at statically obfuscated code, he sees a mess, but every
time he runs the code, for example, under a debugger, he sees the same mess.
Running the code multiple times, with different input data, he may be able to
figure out what code is real and what is bogus. Dynamic obfuscation tries to
counter this by making the code and the resulting execution path change as the
program runs. Some algorithms are “semi-dynamic”—they perform a small,
constant number of transformations (often one) at runtime—but many are
continuous, making sure the code is in constant flux.

The first non-trivial dynamic obfuscation algorithm was published by
Aucsmith [26] in 1996. Intel eventually spun off a company to implement and
commercialize this algorithm for DRM applications. We will discuss this
algorithm in detail in Section 6.2.2 366.

Fred Cohen [76] suggests two dynamic obfuscation strategies. The first he
calls build-and-execute. The idea is to generate code for a routine at runtime
and then jump to it. The second idea is self-modification. Have a look at this
version of the modular exponentiation routine:
The idea is for the code in dark gray to be xored with a key (99) until it needs
to be executed, at which time it gets “decrypted,” executed, and re-encrypted.
The dashed code would normally execute at obfuscation time. When it gets
called, it sets up the initial configuration by “encrypting” the dark gray code
by xoring it with 99 and then returning. Every subsequent time the modexp
routine gets called, the light gray code first decrypts the dark gray code and
executes it, and then the dotted code re-encrypts it.

“Encrypting” binaries this way is an often reinvented protection technique, but
ultimately an ineffectual one: In order to be executed, the code must, at some
point in time, appear in cleartext! (See, however, Section 6.3.2 392 for an
algorithm that combines encryption and code mobility.) It’s therefore always
possible to run the program inside an emulator that prints out every executed
instruction:

The instruction trace can later be analyzed (re-rolling loops, removing decrypt-
and-jump artifacts, and so on) and the original code recovered.

In Section 6.1 360, we give initial definitions. In Section 6.2 362, we explore
algorithms that make use of self-modifying code to keep the program in
constant flux. In Section 6.3 383, we look at a special case of self-
modification, namely, the use of encryption as the runtime code transformer. In
Section 6.4 398, we conclude the chapter.

6.1 Definitions
A dynamic obfuscator typically runs in two phases. The first phase, at
compile-time, transforms the program to an initial configuration and then adds
a runtime code transformer. During the second phase, at runtime, the execution
of the program code is interspersed with calls to this transformer. As a
consequence, a dynamic obfuscator turns a “normal” program into a self-
modifying one.

We can illustrate this using our defense model from Section 2.2 86. Let
program P have a function f that you want to protect. f has one basic block b.
Let I be the initial and T the runtime transformers, respectively. At compile-
time, you transform f (using the map primitive) with I:

You then merge in T with P, since you will be using T as the runtime
obfuscator:

The resulting program is what you distribute to your customers. At runtime (or
program startup time), f is transformed using T:
Finally, the dynamic primitive models that T can be applied multiple times:

Different algorithms will schedule the transformations differently. Some will
apply T once at startup or right before f is called; others will apply T
continuously throughout the execution. It would, of course, be possible for
T(I(f)), T(T(I(f))), T(T(T(I(f)))),..., to form an infinite sequence of syntactically
different functions, but current algorithms cycle through a small number of
configurations. For example, if I encrypts f, T could decrypt once at startup,
leaving f in cleartext. Alternatively, T could decrypt f right before it gets called
and re-encrypt after f returns. In this case, f cycles through only two states,
ciphertext and cleartext, so that when control reaches f it must be in the
cleartext state.

More formally, we get the following definition:

     Definition 6.1 (Dynamic Obfuscation)
     Let O = (I, T, p)be a dynamic obfuscation system consisting of program-
     to-program transformations I and T. Let p be the period of T. Let P =
     〈 f0, f1, ..., fn–1 〉 be a program comprising n components to be
     obfuscated. Then P0 =〈T, I(f0), I(f1), ..., I(fn–1)〉 is an initial obfuscated
     version of P. At runtime, for i ≥ 1, Pi = 〈 T, Ti (I(f0)), Ti (I(f1)), ..., Ti
     (I(fn–1)) 〉 is a sequence of obfuscated configurations of P. Ti (f)
     represents i applications of T to f. Since p is the period of T, Pi = Pimod p.

6.2 Moving Code Around

All algorithms in this chapter produce self-modifying programs. At best, this
will have serious performance implications; at worst, it will require you to
insert highly unstealthy instructions to make sure that the newly modified code
gets executed rather than the code that is currently in caches and in the
instruction pipeline. On the x86 architecture, the processor will do the right
thing without any specific help from the programmer. On the PowerPC
architecture, however, before you jump to a modified code segment, you have
to issue the following four instructions (r0 is a register containing the address
of the modified instruction):

     dcbst 0,r0 // make sure the data cache line is
     written to memory
     sync // make sure that the last instruction
     completed
     icbi 0,r0 // invalidate the instruction cache
     line
     isync // clear the instruction pipeline

These instructions are highly unusual in normal code and will serve as an easy
target for an adversary.
An additional issue is that the code pages you modify must be both writable
and executable. Depending on your operating system, this will be more or less
easy, and stealthy, to arrange. On Linux, for example, you need to use the
mprotect system call to set the write bit for any page you intend to modify. See
Listing 6.1 363.

The algorithms in this section “move code around” to make it difficult to
analyze. Algorithm OBFKMNM is the most straightforward of them all: It
overwrites an instruction with a bogus one and then replaces the bogus
instruction with the original before it gets executed. As you will see, it’s not
hard to attack using a debugger or emulator. Algorithm OBFAGswap divides a
function into chunks and, as execution proceeds, cyclically swaps cells with
each other. Algorithm OBFMAMDSB, finally, arranges the code so that several
functions are merged so that they “share” the same location. At runtime, the
location is patched to contain the function that needs to execute next, in
essence making functions move in and out of the same location.

6.2.1 Algorithm OBFKMNM: Replacing Instructions

The first algorithm we’re going to show you, Algorithm OBFKMNM [189–
191], simply replaces instructions with bogus ones. At some point in the
execution, before the bogus instruction is about to execute, update code
restores the instruction back to the original. At some point after the instruction
has executed, a second piece of code again replaces the real instruction with a
bogus one. The idea is to create a small window of time when the code is
actually correct. Only during that small window can an adversary take a
snapshot of the code.

Listing 6.1. C functions and types used in the examples in this
book. makeCodeWritable and allocExecutablePages make code pages writable
and allocate pages that can contain executable code, respectively.
They are Linux-specific.

     #include <sys/mman.h>
     #include <unistd.h>
     typedef unsigned int uint32;
     typedef char* caddr_t;
     typedef uint32* waddr_t;

     void makeCodeWritable(char* first, char* last) {
     char*   firstpage   =  first   -   ((int)first   %
     getpagesize());
     char*   lastpage    =   last   -   ((int)last    %
     getpagesize());
     int pages = (lastpage-firstpage)/getpagesize()+1;
     if (mprotect(firstpage,pages*getpagesize(),
     PROT_READ|PROT_EXEC|PROT_WRITE)==-1)
     perror("mprotect");
     }

     char* allocExecutablePages(int pages) {
     template = (char*) valloc(getpagesize()*pages);
     if
     (mprotect(template,getpagesize(),PROT_READ|PROT_E
     XEC|PROT_WRITE)==-1)
     perror("mprotect");
     }

Have a look at Listing 6.2 364, where we give a simple example of a DRM
media player. The statements in dashes would normally be performed at
obfuscation time. They save the first byte of the instruction sequence that
makes up the call to printf and then overwrite that byte with 0. At runtime, the
code in light gray restores the byte and, after printf has finished executing, the
dark gray code sets it back to 0 again. A real implementation would be done at
the assembly or binary code levels and would more likely replace an
instruction by a similar, but wrong, one rather than just overwriting it with an
obviously bogus value.

An obvious attack on this algorithm is to run the program under emulation,
monitoring any writes into the instruction stream. In most programs, these are
unusual (jitting interpreters would be an exception) and likely to signal that
something fishy is going on. Even using a simple debugger would be possible.
Here, an attacker calls mprotect to set the code region to readable and
executable, but not writable:

Listing 6.2. Algorithm OBFKMNM example.

    (gdb) call (int)mprotect(0x2000,0x3000,5)
    (gdb) cont
    Program received signal EXC_BAD_ACCESS, Could not
    access memory.
    Reason:    KERN_PROTECTION_FAILURE   at   address:
    0x00002934
    0x000028c0       in      player_main      (argc=1,
    argv=0xbffff31c) at kanzaki.c:30
     30 (*(caddr_t)&&target) = orig;
     (gdb) x/i $pc
     0x28c0 <player_main+220>: stb r0,0(r2)
     (gdb) print (char)$r0
     $7 = -64
     (gdb) print/x (int)$r2
     $10 = 0x2934

When the program tries to write into the code stream, the operating system
throws an exception. Then, the attacker examines the instruction at address
0x28c0 that caused the trap and finds that it tries to store the value in register r0
(–64) into the address stored in register r2 (0x2934). Now, all he has to do is
replace the instruction at address 0x28c0, which does the modification, with a nop
and the byte at address 0x2934 with –64, and he’s done!

     Problem 6.1

     In a real implementation of OBFKMNM, there may be hundreds or
     thousands of updates to the code segment, and it would be infeasible for
     an attacker to remove each one of them by hand. Write an attack script
     that automates the process.

Algorithm 6.1 366 gives an overview of the obfuscation. The idea is to find
three points A, B, and C in the control flow graph, like this:
At A, you insert an instruction that overwrites the target instruction with its
original value orig, restoring the routine to an executable state. At C, you
likewise insert an instruction that overwrites the target with the bogus value.
You have to choose A, B, and C such that every path to B flows through A and
every path from B flows through C.

As you saw, this algorithm is susceptible to dynamic attacks. But what about
static attacks? If an adversary can statically determine that an instruction
modifies the text segment, and which location it modifies, then patching the
executable to rid it of the self-modification isn’t hard. To make things a bit
more difficult for the adversary, you can compute the address of the target
instruction using an opaque expression. Ideally, the expression is hard enough
to analyze that the adversary can’t determine whether the move modifies the
data or the text segment.

Algorithm 6.1. Overview of algorithm OBFKMNM. P is the
function to be obfuscated.

OBFUSCATE(P):

  1. Select three points A, B, and C in P, such that:

         (a) A strictly dominates B,
          (b) C strictly post-dominates B, and

          (c) any path from B to A passes through C.

  2. Let orig be the instruction at B.

  3. Select an instruction bogus of the same length as orig.

  4. Replace orig at B with bogus.

  5. At point A, insert the instruction move orig, v=B, where v is an opaque
     expression that evaluates to the address of point B.

  6. Similarly, at point C, insert the instruction move bogus, v=B.

6.2.2 OBFAGswap:Self-Modifying State Machine

Algorithm OBFAGswap [26,27] is the first known example of a serious attempt
at software protection. In 1996 it was published in the academic literature by
David Aucsmith and filed as a U.S. patent assigned to Intel. Later, Intel spun
off Convera, a company to explore the algorithm for DRM applications.

Aucsmith’s paper and patent incorporate three ideas worth exploring. First, the
algorithm keeps the program in constant flux by splitting it up in pieces and
cyclically moving these pieces around, xoring them with each other. This
means that an adversary who tries to examine a protected program under a
debugger will find that only some pieces of the program are in cleartext, and
that the program exhibits a very unusual address trace. We call this part of the
algorithm OBFAGswap, and we will show you this aspect of the algorithm in
this section. Second, the algorithm uses simple encryption to add a layer of
protection that keeps even fewer pieces of the program in the clear. We call
this part of the algorithm OBFAGcrypt, and we’ll talk about it in the section on
program encryption (Section 6.3.2 392). Finally, the algorithm builds up a
network of protected routines, each one checking one or more of the others, in
such a way that to be successful an adversary must disable several checkers at
once. We will explore this idea in the tamperproofing chapter when we discuss
Algorithm TPCA (Section 7.2.1 414).

To get the basic flavor of this algorithm, consider the following function f that
has been split into six pieces, which we’ll call cells:

The cells are divided into two regions in memory, upper and lower. Execution
proceeds in rounds, such that during each round every cell in upper memory is
xored with a cell in lower memory. Each time, a new cell becomes in the clear
and execution jumps there. During even rounds, the cells in upper memory are
xored into the cells in lower memory; during odd rounds, lower cells are xored
into upper memory cells. After a certain number of rounds, the function returns
to its initial configuration. This is important, because it means that every time
a function is called, its code is in the same, initial, state.

M0 is the initial, obfuscated configuration of the function:
The top cell, the light gray C0, is in cleartext—this is where execution will
start. Cells 1, 4, and 5 are also in the clear, but some of them are not in the
same location as in the unobfuscated code. C2 and C3, however, are not in
cleartext; they are the xored version of two cells. This is why they are striped
in the example above, to indicate they are a mixture of the two cells of the
corresponding shading. Keep in mind that because of the nature of the xor
operation, if you xor a “striped dark gray–medium gray” cell with a cleartext
dark gray cell, you get the cleartext dark gray cell! Or, in general:

Have a look at this example execution of the function above:
When the function is called, execution starts at the cleartext cell 0, C0. When
C0 has finished executing, every cell in upper memory is xored with every cell
in lower memory, leading to configuration M1. In this case, C0 is xored into C3,
C1 is xored into C4, and C2 is xored into C5, but a different schedule is, of
course, possible. Execution next jumps to C3, and after it has finished
executing, the cells in lower memory are xored into the corresponding cells in
upper memory: C3 into C0, C4 into C1, C5 into C2. Cell C1 is now in the clear,
and execution continues there. Notice that after six rounds you’re back to
where you started, i.e., configuration M6is the same as M0. As a consequence,
every time you call this function it starts off in the same, initial configuration.

The reason this algorithm works is because you can use xor to swap two
variables A and B:
Since it takes three applications of xor to swap two cells, six applications will
bring the cells back to their original state.

What should your attack model be for this algorithm? Well, the problem that
this and many similar algorithms has is that one piece of code, the entry point,
always has to be in cleartext. You have to start executing somewhere! It’s easy
to imagine an adversary crafting an attack where he sets a breakpoint at the
entry point, runs the program until the breakpoint hits, dumps the cleartext
code, sets a new breakpoint at the next cleartext cell, executes, dumps code,
and so on.

      Problem 6.2

      Can you craft an attack script for your favorite debugger that iteratively
      unwinds code obfuscated with OBFAGswap?

6.2.2.1 Building the State Machine

Algorithm 6.2 370 gives an overview of Aucsmith’s technique. The algorithm
takes the function P to be obfuscated as input, along with the number of pieces
n it should be split into. The output is n cells, where each cell Cc consists of
three pieces:

Algorithm 6.2. Overview of algorithm OBFAGswap. n is the number
of pieces into which P will be split.
OBFUSCATE(P, n):

  1. Split P into n pieces P0, ..., Pn–1

  2. Let C0, ..., Cn–1 be the memory cells in which the pieces will reside at
     runtime. The Ci:s are of equal size, large enough to fit the largest piece P
     j.

  3. Cells are, conceptually, divided into two spaces, upper (C0, ...,Cn/2–1)
     and lower (Cn/2, ..., Cn–1). Each cell in the upper space partners with a cell
     in the lower space. Select a partner function PF(c) that maps a cell
     number to the cell number of its partner, such as PF(c) = c ⊕ K, for some
     constant K.

  4. Let IV0, ...,IVn–1 be the initial values of cells C0, ..., Cn–1, respectively.

  5. Initialize a set of equations E1 = {C0 = IV0, ..., Cn–1 = IVn–1} that
     expresses the current state of the memory cells as a function of their
     initial values.

  6. Initialize a set of equations E2 = {} that expresses how a piece Pi can be
     recovered in cleartext from the initial values IV0, ..., IVn–1.

  7. Initialize a table next =〈P0=?, ..., Pn–1 =?〉 that maps each subprogram
     Pi to the cell it should jump to in order to execute Pi+1.

  8. For p   [0 ... n – 1] do the following:

          (a) Select a cell Cc to hold piece Pp in cleartext.

          (b) Consult E1 to find the current contents V of Cc. Update E2 such
             that E2 = {...,Pp = V, ...}. Using Gaussian elimination, try to invert
             E2 (i.e., find values for all the IVi:s). If there is no solution, select
             another cell for Pp.
          (c) Update next = 〈...,Pp–1 = Cc, ...〉.

          (d) For even (odd) p:s, simulate a mutation where every cell Ci in
             upper (lower) space is xored with its partner cell CPF(i) in lower
             (upper) space. Update E1 to reflect the new situation: E1 =
             {...,CPF(i) = CPF(i) ⊕ Ci}.

  9. Using Gaussian elimination, find values for all the IVi:s.

 10. Construct and return each cell Cc = (IVc, f = my space ⊕ other space, jump
     next(c)), where f is the mutation function.

IVc is the initial value of cell Cc, its value when the function is first called. f is
the mutation function, the function that xors this cell with its partner cell in the
other memory region. next, finally, is the number of the cell at which execution
should continue after this one.

To construct these cells, the algorithm makes use of three data structures: two
sets of equations E1 and E2, and a table next. E1 expresses the current state of
the memory cells as a function of their initial values. E2 expresses how you
can recover a piece Pi of the original program P from the initial values IV0,
...,IVn–1. The algorithm constructs the cells by “simulating” how they will be
executed during runtime, updating E1 and E2 with each round. At the end of
each round, the currently executing cell will issue a jump to the next cell. As
you’re constructing the cells, you’ll fill in a table next that maps each cell to
the cell it should jump to.

Let’s continue with the example above (it’s adapted from an example in
Aucsmith and Graunke [27]), where a program P is split into n = 6
subprograms P0, ...,P5, which reside in 6 cells C0, ...,C5. P is straight-line code,
so the subprograms will execute in the order P0,P1, ...,P5. In the initial
configuration in the simulation, each cell Ci contains its initial value IVi:
The goal of the algorithm is to construct these initial values IV0, ..., IV5 and
the schedule that determines which cell should be xored with which other cell.
Initially, C0 is in cleartext (shown in light gray); this is where execution will
start. From this, you can draw the conclusion that the initial value in cell 0
should be P0. You enter this fact into E2.

In this example, we’ll assume a very simple mutation function: During even
rounds, each cell i in upper memory is xored with cell i + 3 in lower memory,
and during odd rounds, cell i in lower memory is xored with i – 3.

During mutation round 1, you xor all the cells in upper memory with their
partner cells in lower memory:

Here, you’ve updated E1 so that it contains the current values of each cell at
this point in the simulation. You’ve also picked C3 as the cell where execution
should continue and updated next accordingly. Now, if C3 is the next cell that
will execute, then it must contain P1, because that’s the next piece of your
program that should execute. In other words, P1 = C3 and C3 = IV0 ⊕ IV3,
which is the reason you’ve updated E2 to contain P1 = IV0 ⊕ IV3.

What does all this mean? Well, what it means is that when, during execution,
you get to mutation round 2, cell C3 will contain the cleartext value of program
piece P1. Furthermore, you constructed the value in C3 by xoring the initial
value in cell C0 (P0) into C3. And that means that IV3, the initial value in cell
3, must have been P0 ⊕ P1. All this you can work out by Gaussian elimination
of E1 and E2!

OK, on to round 2. After executing C3, you xor all the cells in lower memory
with their parter cells in upper memory:

Let’s pick C1 as the cell to execute the next piece of your program, P2. This
means that IV4 (what was initially in cell C4 but which now has moved up to
cell C1!) must contain P2. You add this fact as an equation in E2.

At the end of mutation round 3, upper memory gets xored with lower memory,
and you pick C4 to contain P3 in cleartext:
At runtime, after executing the code in cell C4, in mutation round 4, lower
memory gets xored with upper memory. You pick C2 to contain P4 in cleartext:

Since, at this point, C2 contains IV2 ⊕ IV5, you add the equation IV2 ⊕ IV5 =
P4 to E2. Now it’s entirely possible that as you add equations to E2 it becomes
non-invertible, i.e., there’s no way to solve it for initial values IV0, ...,IV5. In
that case, you’ll need to backtrack and pick another cell to contain the next
cleartext subprogram.

In mutation 5, you pick C5 to contain the final subprogram, P5:
After the final xor operation, when the upper cells are xored with lower
memory, we’re back to the initial state, and the function is ready to be called
again:

The purpose of this exercise was one thing—to construct the set of equations
E2! Now you can invert E2 a final time to determine the initial values for the
cells:

Putting all this together, you get your final cells:
6.2.2.2 Example Execution

To illustrate what happens during execution, let’s assume you have a very
simple program consisting of the binary values P = 〈000, 001, 010, 011, 100,
101 〉 . Break P up into six pieces and use the equations above to solve for
initial values:

Here’s the initial state M0 and each of the mutation rounds M1 through M6:

Note how during each round a new cell (in light gray) becomes cleartext,
resulting in your executing the original program piece by piece: 000, 001, 010,
011, 100, 101. Also, after the last round, you’ve returned the program to its
initial configuration.

6.2.2.3 Coding the Example

Normally, you will code an algorithm like this using a binary code editor that
allows you to manipulate the program at the binary level. That doesn’t lend
itself well to explanation, however, so we’ve coded up a simple example here
in gcc C. The mutation schedule is exactly the same as in the example we
worked out above, except this time our source program is actual C code,
consisting of 6 printf statements:

Listing 6.3 377 contains some auxiliary definitions we’re going to need. The
xor(from,to,len) function xors the cell starting at the address from into the cell
starting at address to. The function swap(from,to,len) swaps two cells starting at
from and to. The function xor2(from,key,to,cellcount,cellsize) also xors in a
cryptographic key; we will use this function when we extend OBFAGswap to
also use encryption in Section 6.3.2 392.

Listing 6.4 378 contains the actual obfuscated function P. The dashed section
of code should be executed at obfuscation time—it uses xor and swap to set up
the initial configuration. ALIGN is a macro that makes sure that every cell is the
same size. The construct &&label is a gcc extension to C called labels-as-values.
It takes the address of a local label that can be stored in a variable. We use this
construct here to make the jump array next. One of the main headaches when
coding this type of program at the source-code level is that the compiler may
be too clever and start moving code around in unpredictable ways. For this
reason, we’ve added the dummy array a of cell addresses—this tricks the
compiler and prevents it from optimizing code between cells. This code should
run fine on the x86 architecture, but on other machines you will have to add
code to flush caches after each call to swap and xor. Notice how the main
program calls P() twice (in light gray); after the first call has ended, the body of
P is back to its initial state, ready for the second call.

6.2.3 OBFMAMDSB: Dynamic Code Merging

The goal of the algorithms in this chapter is to keep a program in constant flux
in order to make sure that every time the adversary looks at the code, it’s
different in some way. Algorithm OBFMAMDSB [235] accomplishes this by
letting two or more functions share the same location in memory. A region of
memory (which we’ll call a template) is set up containing some of the code-
bytes from the functions, more specifically, the ones they all have in common.
Before a particular function is executed, an edit script is used to patch the
template with the necessary code-bytes to create a complete version of that
function. When another function assigned to the same template is about to be
executed, the process repeats, this time with a different edit script.

Listing 6.3. Auxiliary routines used in Algorithms OBFAGswap and
OBFAGcrypt.

void xor(caddr_t from, caddr_t to, int len) {
int i;
for(i=0;i<len;i++) {
*to ^= *from; from++; to++;
}
}

void swap(caddr_t from, caddr_t to, int len) {
int i;
for(i=0;i<len;i++) {
char t = *from; *from = *to; *to = t;
from++; to++;
}
}
void xor2(caddr_t from,char           key[],caddr_t      to,int
cellcount,int cellsize) {
int i,c;
for(c=0;c<cellcount;c++) {
for(i=0;i<cellsize;i++) {
if (from != NULL) {
*to ^= *from;
from++;
}
if (key != NULL)
*to ^= key[c];
to++;
}
}
}

#define CELLSIZE 64
#define ALIGN asm volatile (".align 64\n");

Listing 6.4. Algorithm OBFAGswap. This example continues in
Listing 6.11 397, where cells are also continuously encrypted and
decrypted.
To illustrate this, suppose you want to obfuscate a program that contains two
functions, f1 and f2. They have the following code-bytes:
At obfuscation time, Algorithm OBFMAMDSB would replace f1 and f2 with the
template T and two edit scripts e1 and e2:

The template contains those code-bytes that f1 and f2 have in common. In the
locations where f1 and f2 differ (indicated above by question marks), you can
put whatever you want—the more confusing for an attacker the better.

At runtime, the first time the program wants to execute f1 it must first patch T
using e1, replacing the code-byte at offset 1 with 5 and the code-byte at offset
2 with 6. If there’s a subsequent call to f1 (without an intervening call to f2),
you can dispense with the editing and jump directly to T. When the program
calls f2, on the other hand, it must first modify T using the edit script e2. In this
way, the T memory region will constantly change, first containing an
incomplete function and then alternating between containing the code-bytes
for f1 and f2.

Algorithm 6.3 380 contains an overview of this technique. The first step is to
decide which functions should be in the same cluster, i.e., which should reside
in the same template at runtime. If your code looks like this

     main() {
     while(1) {
     f1();
     f2();
     }
     }
Algorithm 6.3. Overview of Algorithm OBFMAMDSB. P is the
program to be obfuscated, f1, f2, ... are the functions in P, G is its
call graph, and D is profiling data collected over representative
runs.

it would be unwise to put f1 and f2 in the same cluster, since much time would
be spent editing the template as control goes back and forth between the two
functions. Profiling data collected from representative runs can help you make
the best cluster assignment. No two functions on the same call chain can be in
the same cluster, since that would require them to both reside in cleartext in
the template at the same time, which of course isn’t possible.

Have a look at Listing 6.5 381 for a simple example. The unobfuscated
program looks like this:
   int val = 0;
   void f1(int* v) {*v=99;}
   void f2(int* v) {*v=42;}
   int main (int argc, char *argv[]) {
   f1(&val);
   f2(&val);
   }

Listing 6.5. Example of Algorithm OBFMAMDSB. Listing 6.6 382
gives the diff and patch routines.
Listing 6.6. Algorithm OBFMAMDSB routines for creating a script
and patching a template using that script.
typedef unsigned int uint32;
typedef char* addr_t;
typedef struct {uint32 offset; char value;} EDIT;

void diff (addr_t prof1, int len1, addr_t prof2, int
len2,
EDIT script1[], EDIT script2[], int *script_len,
char template[], int *template_len) {
int i, s=0;
*template_len = (len1>len2)?len1:len2;
for(i=0; i<*template_len; i++) {
if (i >= len1) template[i] = *prof2;
else if (i >= len2) template[i] = *prof1;
else if (*prof1 == *prof2) template[i] = *prof1;
else {
template[i] = 0;
script1[s].offset = script2[s].offset = i;
script1[s].value = *prof1;
script2[s].value = *prof2; s++;
}
prof1++; prof2++;
}
*script_len = s;
}

void patch (EDIT script[], int script_len,                                char
template[]) {
int i,t;
for(i=0; i<script_len; i++)
template[script[i].offset] = script[i].value;
}

In a real implementation, the dashed code in main would run at obfuscation
time, using the diff routine (Listing 6.6) to construct the template and two edit
scripts script1 and script2. In this simple example, we instead construct the
template at runtime and simulate removing the original functions from the
code by zeroing them out using memset. For each function call, you construct a
stub that uses the patch routine to edit the template and then executes an
indirect jump to it. We can use a state variable to bypass the patch in the cases
when the template is already in the right state.

Madou et al.’s [235] implementation does away with the extra (unstealthy)
state variable by overwriting the stubs with the appropriate code whenever
there’s a state change. The paper also shows how to create edit scripts that are
compact and minimize edit costs.

This algorithm has a simple trade-off between performance and level of
protection. The more frequently the templates change (i.e., the more often they
have to be edited from containing one function to containing another), the
harder the code is to understand and the slower it will be. Madou et al. give
some performance numbers: With an average of 3.6 functions per template, the
average slowdown for the SPEC benchmarks was 17.7%, with a maximum
slowdown of almost a factor of 2.

A major problem with this algorithm is that the patch routine and the edit
scripts are left in the clear. It should therefore not be hard for an adversary to
analyze the obfuscated program statically and recover the original program by
running each call that it finds to patch(Tk, ei). Madou et al. propose to,
essentially, keep the scripts in encrypted form and decrypt them at runtime.
This prevents a static attack (assuming the cryptographic key can be
effectively hidden), but it still doesn’t stop a dynamic attack where the
adversary intercepts and saves any code that becomes in the clear after a call to
patch.

     Problem 6.3

     Dynamic obfuscation is difficult to implement. Typical systems work by
     manipulating programs post-compilation, i.e., at the binary code level.
     Could you develop a system similar to the examples you’ve seen in this
     chapter that instead allows dynamic transformations to be written at the
     source-code level? The main problem is tricking the compiler into
     generating truly position-independent code so that functions, and parts of
     functions, can be moved around freely. Consider building your tool on top
     of a C source transformation system such as CIL [272].

6.3 Encryption

There have been any number of proposals for using encryption to protect
software: “We use encryption to protect the confidentiality of data with great
success,” so the argument goes, “so, surely this means encrypting a program to
protect the intellectual content it contains will work well too.” The basic idea
is simple: Encrypt the program at obfuscation time, store the key in the
executable (or force the user to enter it every time the program is run), and
decrypt and execute at runtime.

Unfortunately, by and large, software protection by encryption turns out to be
just a really bad idea. It affords little protection, it can have a huge
performance overhead, and in spite of being such a simple idea, there are
serious implementation issues.

Many descriptions of code encryption algorithms put much emphasis on which
cryptographic algorithm to use, what the proper key length should be, and so
on. However, the “security” that these algorithms affords is never contingent
on the strength of the underlying algorithm but on more mundane issues such
as where in the executable you store the key. In fact, the use of the term
“encryption” for what these algorithms do is really stretching the terminology.
Cryptographic systems assume that the key is secret, but in code encryption
systems it is merely “hidden”—both the decryptor and the key must reside in
the executable itself.

In many ways, the problem with code encryption is similar to the problem you
face in a DRM system. There, too, you use encryption, but to protect media,
not code. And there, too, you need to ship the key with the item you’re trying
to protect. And for the same reasons, the cryptographic system you use in a
DRM system is much less important than the techniques you use to hide the
key and the cryptographic primitives themselves.

There are basically two straightforward attacks against code-hiding systems:

  1. Since the key is embedded in the executable—find the key!

  2. Since the code must be decrypted in order to execute it—capture it when
     it is in cleartext!

In practice, therefore, you should think of code encryption more like
“temporary code hiding,” a way to ensure that code is in cleartext for as short a
period of time as possible. For this reason, there is no need to make
implementations any more complicated than necessary: Xoring the code with a
random “key string” is every bit as “secure” as encrypting it with Triple DES,
and quite a bit faster. Also, while in the cryptographic world using well known
and trusted algorithms such as DES and RSA is standard practice, in the code
encryption world this is a bad idea. These algorithms have easy-to-recognize
signatures, both in their code (fixed number of rounds, use of unusual
instructions such as xor) and in their dynamic behavior.

If you do want to build a protection-through-encryption system, you have to
make a number of engineering decisions:

     bulk/on demand: Do you decrypt the entire program at once at program
         load time or do you decrypt on demand, as code is needed for
         execution?
     fine/coarse granularity: Do you decrypt small pieces (say, a basic block)
          at a time (inefficient but ensures that only a small piece of code is
          ever in cleartext), or do you decrypt at the function or module level?
     key-as-data/key-as-code: Do you store the key as data values in the
         program, or do you derive the key from code?
     keep-in-the-clear/re-encrypt: Do you keep the decrypted code
         decrypted, or do you re-encrypt each piece of code as it is no longer
         needed, making sure that as little code as possible is ever in
         cleartext?
Regardless of the choices you make, whether in the end it’s worth the trouble
is still highly dubious.

We’re going to show you two algorithms in this section. OBFCKSP is a
straightforward medium-grained (function-level), on-demand, key-as-code, re-
encrypting algorithm. Algorithm OBFAGcrypt is an extension to OBFAGswap
from Section 6.2.2 366 that xors the code cells with a key stream as they are
moved back and forth between the upper and lower memory regions. Later in
the book (Section 7.2.4 431) you will see how the Skype VoIP client is
protected using a bulk, coarse, key-as-data, keep-in-the-clear encryption
scheme.

6.3.1 OBFCKSP: Code as Key Material

The goal of code encryption is to keep as little code as possible in the clear at
any point in time during execution. At one extreme, you can decrypt the next
instruction, execute it, re-encrypt it, decrypt the next instruction, execute, and
so on. This way, only one instruction is ever in the clear, but as a result, the
performance overhead will be huge. At the other extreme, you can decrypt the
entire program once, prior to the start of execution, and leave it in cleartext.
This will have little impact on execution time but will make it easy for the
adversary to capture the decrypted code.

Algorithm OBFCKSP [54] takes an intermediate approach and decrypts one
function at a time. When the program starts up, it’s all encrypted—all except
for the main function, which is in the clear. Before you jump to a function, you
first decrypt it, and when the function returns to the caller, you re-encrypt it.
However, if that was all that you did, all the functions on the current call chain
(from main to the current function) would be in the clear. For this reason, the
first thing a function must do when it’s called is to encrypt the function that
called it, and before it returns, it must decrypt it again. You can think of this as
walking around a house where every door is always kept locked—you unlock
one door at a time, walk through, and relock it behind you. This way,
Algorithm OBFCKSP makes sure that at any one point in time, two functions at
most will be in the clear.
Two questions remain, however. First, what should you use as the encryption
key? You could just store the key as data, of course, but this has some serious
problems. Cryptographic keys are much more “random” than ordinary data,
and this makes them easy to spot [325]. For this reason, Algorithm OBFCKSP
uses the code of one function as the key to encrypt/decrypt another function.
The second problem is deciding the cryptographic system to be used. This
turns out to be easy: It doesn’t really matter! Unlike “normal” cryptographic
applications, the key isn’t truly secret; instead, it’s hidden somewhere in the
program. Therefore, the normal assumptions of cryptography don’t apply.
Instead, all the security this and other code encryption algorithms afford you is
a function of how well the key is hidden. Using RSA over DES will not gain
any measurable improvement in security, since if you have access to the key
both will be equally easy to “break”! This is similar to the situation in DRM,
where it doesn’t matter much which algorithm you use to encrypt the media,
since all the security rests with how well you can hide and protect the key in
the media player. You can therefore go ahead and use the simplest (and fastest)
cryptographic algorithm you can think of.

Algorithm 6.4 387 gives an overview of OBFCKSP. There are three cases to
consider, depending on whether the call graph is a tree, DAG, or a circular
graph. In the simplest case, illustrated by the small DRM example in Listings
6.7 388, 6.8 389, and 6.9 390, the call graph is tree-shaped:

Before and after every procedure call, you insert calls to a guard function that
decrypts/re-encrypts the callee, using a hash of the cleartext of the caller as
key. These calls are in light gray in Listings 6.8 389 and 6.9 390. On entrance
and exit of the callee, you encrypt/decrypt the caller using a hash of the
cleartext of the callee as key. These calls are in dark gray. The code in dashed
produces the obfuscated program, where every function is encrypted with the
hash of the cleartext of its caller as key. In a real system, the dashed code
wouldn’t be shipped with the program but would be executed at protection
time, after which the encrypted code would be written to file.

Algorithm 6.4. Overview of algorithm OBFCKSP. P is the program
to be obfuscated; G its call graph.

OBFUSCATE(P, G):

  1. For every function call f → g for which there is no other call h → g,
     decrypt g before jumping to it and re-encrypt g after returning from the
     call:

     Modify P by encrypting g with the hash of the cleartext of f as the key.

  2. For every set of function calls f1 → h1 → g, f2 → h2 → g, . . . insert code
     to decrypt/encrypt g in all fi:s using a combination of the hashes of the
     encrypted h1, h2, . . . as key:
   Modify P by encrypting g with the hash of the ciphertexts of h1,h2,. . .as
   key.

 3. For every function g, insert code to encrypt g re-encrypt it when g
    returns, using the hash of the cleartext of g as the key:

 4. Add the functions in Listing 6.7 388 and a hash function from Section
    7.2.2 418 to P.

Listing 6.7. Encryption/decryption guards used in Algorithm
OBFCKSP. hash1 is defined in Section 7.2.2 418.

   void crypto (waddr_t proc,uint32 key,int words) {
   int i;
   for(i=1; i<words; i++) {
     *proc ^= key;
     proc++;
     }
     }

     void guard (waddr_t proc,int proc_words,
     waddr_t key_proc,int key_words) {
     uint32 key = hash1(key_proc,key_words);
     crypto(proc,key,proc_words);
     }

     void guard2 (waddr_t proc,int proc_words,
     waddr_t key_proc1,int key_words1,
     waddr_t key_proc2,int key_words2) {
     uint32 key1 = hash1(key_proc1,key_words1);
     uint32 key2 = hash1(key_proc2,key_words2);
     uint32 key = key1 ^ key2;
     crypto(proc,key,proc_words);
     }

So what if the call graph is shaped like a DAG, like this?

Listing    6.8.     Example       of   Algorithm    OBFCKSP.
Encryption/decryption functions are shown in Listing 6.7 388.
The code continues in Listing 6.9 390.
int player_main (int argc, char *argv[]) {
int user_key = 0xca7ca115;
int digital_media[] = {10,102};
guard((waddr_t)play,playSIZE,
(waddr_t)player_main,player_mainSIZE);
play(user_key,digital_media,2);
guard((waddr_t)play,playSIZE,
(waddr_t)player_main,player_mainSIZE);
}
int getkey(int user_key) {
guard((waddr_t)decrypt,decryptSIZE,
(waddr_t)getkey,getkeySIZE);
int player_key = 0xbabeca75;
int v = user_key ^ player_key;
guard((waddr_t)decrypt,decryptSIZE,
(waddr_t)getkey,getkeySIZE);
return v;
}
int decrypt(int user_key, int media) {
guard((waddr_t)play,playSIZE,
(waddr_t)decrypt,decryptSIZE);
guard((waddr_t)getkey,getkeySIZE,
(waddr_t)decrypt,decryptSIZE);
int key = getkey(user_key);
guard((waddr_t)getkey,getkeySIZE,
(waddr_t)decrypt,decryptSIZE);
int v = media ^ key;
guard((waddr_t)play,playSIZE,
(waddr_t)decrypt,decryptSIZE);
return v;
}

The problem is determining what key to use to decrypt a. Normally, you’d use
the cleartext of the caller as key, but now there are two callers, and hence two
possible keys! Algorithm OBFCKSP solves this by moving the decryption of a
from the direct callers (b1 and b2) to the callers’ callers (c1 and c2) and using a
combination of the ciphertexts of b1 and b2 as key. Listing 6.10 391 illustrates
this case. The decryption/encryption code is in light gray. Additional code, in
dark gray, is necessary since the actual caller of a can no longer be determined
statically.

The final case to consider is when the program is recursive, i.e., when the call
graph contains cycles:

Listing 6.9. Continued from Listing 6.8 389.
The simplest solution is to keep the entire cycle in cleartext, i.e., decrypt it as it
is entered and re-encrypt it when the cycle is exited. For programs that contain
many mutually recursive functions (such as recursive-descent parsers), this
would lead to much of the program being in cleartext for the duration of the
execution.

Cappaert et al. [54] report on the performance overhead for some small
programs. Execution speed was 2.7 to 91 times slower than the original
program. When inlining the guard code (a reasonable thing to do since leaving
the guard in cleartext makes it an obvious target of attack), one of their
programs was 2.8 times larger and ran 1,379 times slower than the original.

     Problem 6.4

     In practice, this algorithm is complicated by indirect function calls and
     especially multi-threading. If two threads can execute the same function
     simultaneously, they will have to coordinate (using appropriate locking)
     which does the decryption and which does the encryption. Work out the
     details and measure the additional performance overhead!

Listing 6.10. Dealing with multiple paths to the same function in
Algorithm OBFCKSP. Encryption/decryption functions are shown
in Listing 6.7 388.
6.3.2 OBFAGcrypt: Combining Self-Modification and Encryption

In Section 6.2.2 366, you saw how Algorithm OBFAGswap splits a function up
into pieces (called cells) that are continuously moved around during execution.
More specifically, the cells are separated into two memory regions, upper and
lower, and during each round, the cells of one region are xored into the cells of
the other. As a result, at each point in time some cells will be in cleartext while
others will be scrambled. Ideally, only the cell currently being executed should
be in the clear, but unfortunately, this isn’t the case with OBFAGswap. In this
section, you will see how this algorithm can be extended (to Algorithm
OBFAGcrypt [26,27]) by xoring in a secret key string to make more of the cells
unreadable.

6.3.2.1 An Example

Let’s continue with the example from Section 6.2.2 366. There, we started out
with a function broken up into six cells:

Then, in alternate rounds, we would xor the cells in upper memory with those
in lower, or those in the lower region with those in the upper. This time, we’re
also going to xor in a cryptographic key. In the graphical examples, we’ll
represent the key as a box with wavy lines. Here are some examples of the
type of operations we will be performing:

In the first operation, a cleartext cell is xored with a key to make an encrypted
cell. In the second, an encrypted cell is xored with a key to make it a cleartext
cell. In the third, a cell that consists of two cells (white and gray) xored
together with a key becomes a cleartext striped cell by xoring it with a
cleartext white cell and the key.

Have a look at this example:

M0 is the initial configuration, what the function looks like after it’s been
obfuscated but before execution starts. C0 (in light gray) is in cleartext since
this is where execution will start. All the other cells are xored with a key
string, and in some cases, with another cell. Different cells have been
encrypted with different keys. After C0 has finished executing, all the cells in
upper memory are xored into their respective partner cells in lower memory
and with a key, each cell with a different one. This gives you the configuration
in M1. We have fixed the schedule in such a way that execution should
continue in C3. For C3 to become cleartext, we’ve therefore fixed the keys so
that the following will happen:

In other words, the key that C3 was originally encrypted with is the same one
that it is now xored with. The final round, M6, yields a configuration identical
to the initial one, M0. This means that the process is ready to start over the next
time the function is called.

6.3.2.2 Deriving the Keystream

We’re not going to give a formal algorithm for constructing the keystream, but
we will work through an example to give you the basic idea of how it’s done.
You’re going to need two keystreams, which we’ll call KG = 〈KG0, KG1,...〉 and
KS = 〈 KS0, KS1,...〉. KG contains the values the cells will be xored with initially,

so it will contain one key per cell. In this example, we’re going to restrict the
keys to three values, {k, b, 0}. KS is a keystream from which you will extract
keys during execution. Every time the n cells of the upper half of memory get
xored with the n cells of lower memory, you’re also going to xor in n elements
from KS.

Let’s set KG = 〈0, k, b, k, b, 0〉. This gives you this initial configuration, M0:
We’re only showing the key values that get xored in. C1 actually contains k⊕
IV1 (IV1 is the initial value of C1) that we worked out in OBFAGswap. Since C0
must be in cleartext, KG0had to be 0. C5 also must be in cleartext because it
must be in the clear during M6, and so you set KG5 to 0 also. The rest of KG you
can choose freely. After C0 has finished executing, the upper region gets xored
with the bottom one and with the first three elements of the KS keystream, KS0–2.
Your schedule tells you that C3 must now be in the clear, and since it was
originally xored with k, you must again xor with k to get the cleartext cell back.
The rest of KG you can choose freely, so you set KS0–2 = 〈k, 0, 0〉.

After round M1 is finished executing, you xor low memory into high memory,
along with KS3–5 = 〈k, b, 0〉. Why did we choose these keys? Well, you know
that C1 must now become cleartext and that it will be computed as C1←
C5⊕C1⊕KS4. This gives you the little equation

     (k⊕b)⊕k⊕KS4 = 0

which you can easily solve with KS4 = b. The rest of KS3–5 you can choose
freely:
For the next round, you derive that KS6–8 = 〈b, k⊕b, k〉:

And for the next round, you get KS9–11 = 〈k, k, k⊕b〉:
And for the next round, KS12–14 = 〈k, k⊕b, k〉:

Computing the key for the final round involves more restrictions, since
configuration M6 must be the same as M0. Setting KS15–17 = 〈 b, b, b 〉 gives
you the required result:

The final keystream you’ve derived is

     KS = 〈k,0,0, k, b, k, b, k⊕b, k, k, k, k⊕b, k,
     k⊕b, b, b, b, b〉.

6.3.2.3 Coding the Example
You only need three minor changes to the code in Listing 6.4 378 to account
for the encryption. First, you need to add the KG and KS keystreams to the
program. Here, we’ve hardcoded them as literal arrays. This is, of course,
highly suspicious and easy for an adversary to locate, although we could have
done a bit better by making them character strings. Better still would be to
have a pseudo-random function that, given the appropriate key as input, will
generate the required keystream. Second, you have to replace the xor function
with another one, xor2 from Listing 6.11 397, which also xors in the
appropriate key. Finally, you have to initialize the cells with the KG keystream.
We show the new code in Listing 6.11 397. The code that, in a real
implementation, would be executed at obfuscation time has been marked
dashed.

Listing 6.11. Example of Algorithm OBFAGcrypt, combining self-
modification with encryption. This code extends that of Listing
6.4 378.
6.4 Discussion

All the algorithms in this chapter share one characteristic: They modify the
code segment of the program at runtime. This has three immediate
consequences:

  1. It makes the program harder to analyze statically.

  2. It has the potential of making the program much slower.

  3. It can make the protection routines less stealthy.

Static analysis becomes hard because the code segment is now treated both as
code and as data, and any modifications to the code have to be tracked by the
analyzer. In Section 3.1.1 119, you saw the kinds of contortions Algorithm
REAMB had to go through to build a control flow graph that, more or less
accurately, reflects the changes a self-modifying program goes through.

The significant overhead of these algorithms results from the very features that
make modern processors so efficient at being “confused” by self-modifying
code. At the very least, whenever the code segment changes, the instruction
pipeline must be flushed, the contents of data caches must be written to
memory, and instruction caches must be invalidated.

Stealth suffers for several reasons. First, few real programs use self-modifying
code. As you’ve seen, a simple attack is to write-protect the code segment and
see where the operating system throws an exception. Second, a consequence of
the high overhead of these algorithms is that it may not be possible to protect
an entire program. Instead, you may have to confine the obfuscation to those
routines that contain security-sensitive code. As a result, most of your program
will execute “normally” while a small part will write into its own code
segment. It won’t require much thought for the adversary to decide which part
of your program to examine first. Finally, many of the algorithms you’ve seen
in this chapter make extensive use of xor operations. With the exception of
cryptographic routines and low-level graphics primitives, xors are unusual in
real code.
Referring back to the model in Section 2.2 86, what types of operations do the
algorithms in this chapter perform? First, since they all continuously modify
the code at runtime, they must all make use of the dynamic primitive. In
addition to dynamic, Algorithm OBFAGcrypt uses the reorder primitive to
move cells between upper and lower memory regions. In addition to that,
Algorithm OBFAGswap uses map to xor a keystream with the encrypted cells to
recover the cleartext code. Algorithm OBFCKSP also uses map to
decrypt/encrypt functions. Algorithm OBFMAMDSB takes two functions, f1
and f2, and splits them up into two edit scripts e1 and e2 and a template t, such
that merge(t, e1) = f1 and merge(t, e2) = f2.
