                 7. Software Tamperproofing

To tamperproof a program is to ensure that it “executes as intended,” even
in the presence of an adversary who tries to disrupt, monitor, or change the
execution. Note that this is different from obfuscation, where the intent is to
make it difficult for the attacker to understand the program. In practice, the
boundary between tamperproofing and obfuscation is a blurry one: A
program that is harder to understand because it’s been obfuscated ought also
be more difficult to modify! For example, an attacker who can’t find the
decrypt() function in a DRM media player because it’s been thoroughly
obfuscated also won’t be able to modify it or even monitor it by setting a
breakpoint on it.

The dynamic obfuscation algorithms in Chapter 6 (Dynamic Obfuscation),
in particular, have often been used to prevent tampering. In this book, we
take the view that a pure tamperproofing algorithm not only makes
tampering difficult but is also able to detect when tampering has occurred
and to respond to the attack by in some way punishing the user. In practice,
tamperproofing is always combined with obfuscation:

  1. If you both obfuscate and tamperproof your code, an attacker who, in
     spite of the tamperproofing, is able to extract the code still has to de-
     obfuscate it in order to understand it;

  2. Code that you insert to test for tampering or effect a response to
     tampering must be obfuscated in order to prevent the attacker from
     easily discovering it.

Watermarking and tamperproofing are also related. In fact, if perfect
tamperproofing were available, watermarking would be easy: Just
watermark with any trivial algorithm, tamperproof, and by definition the
attacker will not be able to destroy the mark! It’s precisely because we don’t
have perfect tamperproofing that we need to worry about watermarking
stealth: We have to assume that an attacker who can find a watermark will
also be able to modify the program to destroy the mark.

The prototypical tamperproofing scenario is preventing an adversary from
removing license-checking code from your program. So ideally, if the
adversary is able to change your code on the left to the code on the right,
the program would stop working for him:

One way of thinking about this is to note that the program consists of two
pieces of semantics: the piece that both you and the adversary want to
maintain (because it constitutes the core functionality of the program) and
the piece that you want to maintain but that the adversary wants to remove
or alter (the license check). Clearly, maintaining the core semantics and
removing the checking semantics are both important to the adversary. If not,
it would be easy for him to destroy the tamperproofing code: Simply
destroy the program in its entirety! The adversary may also want to add
code to the program in order to make it perform a function that you have
left out, such as the print function in an evaluation copy of a program.

There are many kinds of invariants that you may want to maintain but that
your user may want to violate. For example, a free PDF reader might let
you fill in a form and print it but not save it for later use. This is supposed
to act as an incentive for buying the premium product with more
functionality. However, from the user’s point of view it’s also an incentive
for hacking the code to add this “missing feature.” Other products don’t
allow you to print, games don’t provide you with an infinite supply of
ammunition, evaluation copies stop working after a certain period of time,
VoIP clients charge you money to make phone calls, DRM media players
and TV set-top boxes charge you to watch movies or listen to music, and so
on. In all these scenarios, someone’s revenue stream is depending on their
program executing exactly as they intended it to, and an adversary’s
revenue stream (or debit stream) depends on modifying the semantics of the
program to execute the way they want it to.

While not technically a case of modifying the program, observing its
execution to steal algorithms, cryptographic keys, or any other proprietary
code or data from the program secrets is sometimes also considered a form
of tampering. For example, a common application of tamperproofing is to
protect cleartext data or the cryptographic keys themselves in a digital
rights management system. If an attacker can insert new code (shown here
shaded) in the media player, he will be able to catch and save the decrypted
media:

Observing the player under a debugger can achieve the same result without
actually modifying the code:

    > gdb player
    (gdb) break decrypt.c:3
    commands
    printf "%x\n",clear
    continue
    end

Here, we’ve set a breakpoint on the decrypt function such that, whenever we
enter it, the cleartext media gets printed and execution continues.
Technically, an attacker typically modifies the program with the intent to
force it to choose a different execution path than the programmer intended.
He can achieve this by:

  1. Removing code from and/or inserting new code into the executable file
     prior to execution;

  2. Removing code from and/or inserting new code into the running
     program;

  3. Affecting the runtime behavior of the program through external agents
     such as emulators, debuggers, or a hostile operating system.

A protected program can try to detect that it’s running under emulation, on a
modified operating system, or inside a debugger, but this turns out to be
hard to do reliably. For example, how can you detect that a user has turned
back the system clock so as not to trigger your “license-expired” check? We
will show a few popular techniques, but in practice, tamperproofing
algorithms tend to focus on making sure that the program’s static code and
data haven’t been changed, even if this certainly isn’t enough to ensure it’s
running properly.

Conceptually, a tamperproofing system performs two tasks. First, it
monitors the program (to see if its code or data have been modified), and
the execution environment (to see if this is hostile in any way). Second,
once it has determined that tampering has occurred or is likely to occur, a
response mechanism takes over and retaliates in a suitable manner. This can
range from making the program exit gracefully to punishing the user by
destroying his home directory. In simple systems, detection and response
are tightly integrated, such as if (emulated()) abort(), but this makes it easy
for an attacker to work backwards from the point of response to the point of
detection and modify the program to bypass the tamperproofing code. It’s
therefore important to separate the checking and the response functions as
widely as possible, both spatially (they should be far away from each other
in the executable) and temporally (they should be far away from each other
in the execution trace).
Typical software tamperproofing approaches rely on self-checking code,
self-modifying code, or adding a layer of interpretation. In general, these
techniques are not suitable for type-safe distribution formats like Java
bytecode—in Java it’s simply not possible to stealthily examine your own
code or generate and execute code on the fly. In this chapter, therefore, you
will mostly see algorithms that protect binary executables.

Some algorithms are based on the idea of splitting the program into two
pieces, allowing most of the program to run without performance penalty in
the clear (open to user tampering) and the remainder to run slower, but
highly protected. The protected part could be run on a remote trusted
machine, in a tamper-resistant hardware module such as a smartcard, or in a
separate thread whose code has been heavily obfuscated.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Section 7.1 405, we give essential
definitions. In Section 7.2 412, we present algorithms based on the idea of
introspection, i.e., tamperproofed programs that monitor their own code to
detect modifications. In Section 7.3 440, we discuss various kinds of
response mechanisms. In Section 7.4 444, we cover so-called oblivious
hashing algorithms that examine the state of the program for signs of
tampering. In Section 7.5 453, we discuss remote tamperproofing, i.e., how
we can determine that a program running on a remote machine has not been
tampered with. In Section 7.6 464, we summarize the chapter.

7.1 Definitions

An adversary’s goal is to force your program P to perform some action it
wasn’t intended to, such as playing a media file without the proper key or
executing even though a license has expired. The most obvious way to
reach this goal is to modify P’s executable file prior to execution. But this is
not the only way. The adversary could corrupt any of the stages needed to
load and execute P, and this could potentially force P to execute in an
unanticipated way. For example, he could force a modified operating
system to be loaded; he could modify any file on the file system, including
the dynamic linker; he could replace the real dynamic libraries with his
own; he could run P under emulation; or he could attach a debugger and
modify P’s code or data on the fly.

Your goal, on the other hand, is to thwart such attacks. In other words, you
want to make sure that P’s executable file itself is healthy (hasn’t been
modified) and that the environment in which it runs (hardware, operating
system, and so on) isn’t hostile in any way. More specifically, you want to
ensure that P is running on unadulterated hardware and operating systems;
that it is not running under emulation; that the right dynamic libraries have
been loaded; that P’s code itself hasn’t been modified; and that no external
entity such as a debugger is modifying P’s registers, stack, heap,
environment variables, or input data.

In the following definition, we make use of two predicates, Id(P, E) and Ia
(P, E), which respectively describe the integrity of the application (what the
defender would like to maintain) and what constitutes a successful attack
(what the attacker would like to accomplish):

     Definition 7.1 (Tampering and Tamperproofing)

     Let Id(P, E) and Ia (P, E) be predicates over a program P and the
     environment E in which it executes. P is successfully tamperproofed
     if, throughout the execution of P, Id(P, E) holds. It is successfully
     attacked if, at some point during the execution of P, Ia (P, E) ∧ not
     Id(P, E), holds and this is not detectable by P.

For example, in a cracking scenario, Ia could be, “P executes like a legally
purchased version of Microsoft Word,” and Id could be, “The attacker has
entered a legal license code, and neither the OS nor the code of P have been
modified.” In a DRM scenario, Ia could be, “P is able to print out the
private key,” and Id could be, “The protected media cannot be played unless
a valid user key has been entered ∧ private keys remain private.”

Conceptually, two functions, CHECK and RESPOND, are responsible for the
tamperproofing. CHECK monitors the health of the system by testing a set of
invariants and returning true if nothing suspicious is found. RESPOND queries
CHECK to see if P is running as expected, and if it’s not, issues a tamper
response, such as terminating the program.

7.1.1 Checking for Tampering

CHECK   can test any number of invariants, but these are the most common
ones:

        code checking: Check that P’s code hashes to a known value:

                   if (hash(P's code) != 0xca7ca115)
                             return false;

        result checking: Instead of checking that the code is correct, CHECK can
            test that the result of a computation is correct. For example, it is
            easy to check that a sorting routine hasn’t been modified by testing
            that its output is correct:

                               quickSort(A,n);
                            for (i=0;i<(n-1);i++)
                               if (A[i]>A[i+1])
                                return false;

        Checking the validity of a computed result is often computationally
        cheaper than performing the computation itself. For example, while
        sorting takes O(n log n) time, checking that the output of a sort routine
        is in sorted order can be done in almost linear time. Result checking
was pioneered by Manuel Blum [43] and has been used in commercial
packages such as LEDA [145].
environment checking: The hardest thing for a program to check is
    the validity of its execution environment. Typical checks include,
    “Am I being run under emulation?”, “Is there a debugger attached
    to my process?”, and, “Is the operating system at the proper patch
    level?” While it might be possible to ask the operating system
    these questions, it’s hard to know whether the answers can be
    trusted or if we’re being lied to! The actual methods used for
    environment checking are highly system-specific [166].
As an example, let’s consider how a Linux process would detect that
it’s attached to a debugger. As it turns out, a process on Linux can be
traced only once. This means that a simple way to check if you’re
being traced is to try to trace yourself:

                   #include <stdio.h>
                #include <sys/ptrace.h>
                      int main() {
              if (ptrace(PTRACE_TRACEME))
             printf("I'm being traced!\n");
                           }

If the test fails, you can assume you’ve been attached to a debugger:

               > gcc -g -o traced traced.c
                         > traced
                       > gdb traced
                        (gdb) run
                    I'm being traced!

Another popular way of detecting a debugging attack is to measure the
time, absolute or wall clock, of a piece of code that should take much
longer to execute in a debugger than when executed normally. In the
light gray code in the example in Listing 7.1 408, a divide-by-zero
    exception is thrown that the gdb debugger takes twice as long to handle
    as non-debugged code.
    Here’s the output when first run normally and then under a debugger:

                   > gcc -o cycles cycles.c
                           > cycles
                 elapsed 31528: Not debugged!
                         > gdb cycles
              (gdb) handle SIGFPE noprint nostop
                           (gdb) run
                   elapsed 79272: Debugged!

Listing 7.1. Code to detect if a Linux process is running under a
debugger or not. The code in light gray throws a divide-by-zero
exception. The x86 rdtsc instruction returns the current
instruction count, and the cpuid instruction flushes the
instruction pipeline to ensure proper timing results.

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdint.h>
    #include <signal.h>
    #include <unistd.h>
    #include <setjmp.h>

    jmp_buf env;

    void handler(int signal) {
    longjmp(env,1);
    }

    int main() {
    signal(SIGFPE, handler);
    uint32_t start,stop;
    int x = 0;
    if (setjmp(env) == 0) {
    asm volatile (
    "cpuid\n"
    "rdtsc\n" : "=a" (start)
    );
    x = x/x;
    } else {
    asm volatile (
    "cpuid\n"
    "rdtsc\n" : "=a" (stop)
    );
    uint32_t elapsed = stop - start;
    if (elapsed > 40000)
    printf("elapsed %i: Debugged!\n",elapsed);
    else
    printf("elapsed %i: Not debugged!\n",elapsed);
    }
    }

The bound on the instruction count will have to be adjusted depending on
the architecture and the debugger on which the program is run.

Depending on our needs, CHECK may be more or less precise, i.e., it could
detect tampering close in time to when the tampering occurred, or not. A
really imprecise detector is unsafe, in that it may fail to detect tampering
until after the tampered program is able to cause permanent damage.
Consider this timeline of the execution of a program P:
At some time t0, a location L in P is modified by the attacker. The timeline
doesn’t show it, but this could either be prior to execution (if P’s executable
file is modified), during program start-up (if the loader is doing the
modification), or during execution (if an attached debugger is doing the
modification). At some later time t1, the program reaches location L and the
modified code gets executed. At time t2, the first “interaction event” after t0
occurs, i.e., this is the first time that the modified P has the chance to cause
permanent damage by writing to a file, play protected content, send secret
data back over the Internet, and so on.

A precise checker detects the attack “immediately” after the modification
has taken place, perhaps within a window of a few instructions. With a
precise detector, you’re able to immediately punish a user who is
experimenting by making random changes just to see “what happens.” An
accurate checker detects at some later time, but before t1, which allows it to
prevent the modified code from ever being executed, for example, by
patching L.A safe detector waits until after the modified code has been
executed, but before the first interaction event. At that point, the program is
in an unintended and indeterminate state, but the detector knows this and
can prevent any permanent damage by terminating the program. Finally, an
unsafe detector waits until after the interaction event at t2 or even until after
program termination (postmortem detection) to detect tampering. At this
point, permanent damage may have been inflicted, and the only remaining
course of action may be to report the violation.

     Definition 7.2 (Detector precision)
     Let t0 be the time tampering occurs, t1 the time the tampered code gets
     first executed, and t2 the time of the first interaction event following
     the tampering. A precise detector detects tampering at time t0, an
     accurate during (t0, t1), a safe detector during [t1, t2), and an unsafe
     detector during [t2...).

Some tamperproofing systems will run CHECK only once on start-up. Such
static systems catch modifications to the program’s executable file, but not
tampering that happens at runtime, for which a dynamic detector is
necessary:

     Definition 7.3 (Detector execution)

     A tamper-detector is static if detection happens only once at program
     load time and dynamic if detection is continuous throughout program
     execution.

7.1.2 Responding to Tampering

RESPONDexecutes a predetermined response to a detected attempt at
tampering. Here are some possible responses:

     terminate: Terminate the program. Some time should pass between
         detection and termination to prevent the attacker from easily
         finding the location of the detection code.
     restore: Restore the program to its correct state by patching the
         tampered code and resetting any corrupted data structures.
     degrade results: Deliberately return incorrect results. The results
         could deteriorate slowly over time to avoid alerting the attacker
         that he’s been found out.
     degrade performance: Degrade the performance of the program, for
         example, by running slower or consuming more memory.
     report attack: Report the attack, for example, by “phoning home” if
         an Internet connection is available.
     punish: Punish the attacker by destroying the program or objects in its
        environment. For example, if the DisplayEater program detects
        that you’re trying to use a pirated serial number, it will delete your
        home directory [126]. More spectacularly, the computer itself
        could be destroyed by repeatedly flashing the bootloader flash
        memory.

7.1.3 System Design

There are many possible locations within a computing system for CHECK and
RESPOND. Most obviously, you could integrate them directly in the binary code
of your program:
CHECK can check invariants over the binary code itself, over the static and
dynamic data of the process, or over the environment (hardware and
operating system) in which the program is running. We call this kind of
organization a self-checking system. Note that in this design it’s possible
(and desirable!) for one of CHECK’s invariants to be a check on the integrity of
its own code and RESPOND’s code. Without such a check, the adversary will
start his attack by disabling CHECK or RESPOND, leaving himself free to further
tamper with the program itself.

It’s also possible for CHECK and RESPOND to run from within the hardware, the
operating system, the dynamic loader, or a separate process.

        Definition 7.4 (Integration)

        A tamperproofing system is self-checking/self-responding if the
        checker/responder is integrated within P itself. It is external-
        checking/external-responding if it runs in a different process from P
        but on the same computing system as P, and it is remote-
        checking/remote-responding if it is running on a different computing
        system than P.

A tamperproofing system can be self-checking but remote-responding, and
so on.

Remotely checking the health of a program is an important subproblem
known as remote tamperproofing. Here, you’ve put self-checkers in your
program on the user’s site:
In addition, checkers running on your own server site check for tampering
by monitoring the communication pattern for anomalies. You’ll read more
about remote tamperproofing in Section 7.5 453.

7.2 Introspection

We will devote the remainder of the chapter to describing tamperproofing
algorithms from the literature. In this section, we will talk about two
algorithms that use introspection. This essentially means the program is
augmented to compute a hash over a code region to compare to an expected
value. While this is a straightforward idea, as always, the devil is in the
details.

Introspection algorithms insert code like this into the instruction stream:1
The light gray part (the initialization) sets up the code region that is to be
checked. The dark gray part (the loop) computes a hash value over the
region using some operation ⊕. The light gray and dark gray parts together
form the CHECK function, while the dashed and dotted parts show two
possible RESPONDers. The dashed responder simply terminates the program if
the loop computes the wrong value (i.e., if the code region has been
tampered with). The dotted responder instead uses the value computed by
the loop to jump to the next program location. If the code region has been
tampered with, the program will jump to the wrong location and eventually
malfunction. This idea is used in the tamperproofing of the Skype client,
which you’ll learn more about in Section 7.2.4 431. There are many
possible variants of this idea. You could use the hash value as part of an
arithmetic computation, for example, causing the program to eventually
produce the wrong output, or you could use it in an address computation,
eventually causing a segmentation fault.

Prototypical attacks on an introspective tamperproofing systems are based
on pattern matching. They run in two steps:

  1. Find the location of the checker and/or responder, either by

       1. searching for suspicious patterns in the static code itself, or by

       2. searching for suspicious patterns in the dynamic execution.

  2. Disable the response code, either by

       1. replacing the if-statement by if (0)..., or by

       2. pre-computing the hash value and substituting it into the response
          code.
Static pattern matching could, for example, target the initialization section.
If the loop bounds are completely unobfuscated, it should be easy for the
adversary to look for two code segment addresses followed by a test:

     start = 0xbabebabe;
     end = 0xca75ca75;
     while (start < end) {

A dynamic pattern matcher could look for data reads into the code segment,
which will be unusual in typical programs. Depending on the nature of the
tamper response, disabling means ensuring that the test on the hash value
never succeeds or that the jump goes to the correct location, regardless of
what value the loop actually computes:

In this section, we’ll show you two algorithms that make these types of
attacks harder. The idea is to have multiple checkers and for checkers to
check each other so that it’s never enough to just disable one of them—you
have to disable many or all of them. The TPCA algorithm builds up a
network of checkers and responders so that checkers check each other and
responders repair code that has been tampered with. Algorithm TPHMST
refines this further by hiding the expected_value hash which, because of its
randomness, is an easy pattern-matching target.

Another strategy to make pattern-matching attacks harder is to use a library
of a large number of hash functions and to be able to obfuscate these
thoroughly. We discuss this in Section 7.2.2 418.

In Section 7.2.4 431, we’ll show you the heroic effort the Skype engineers
went through to protect their clients and protocol from attack (in part, using
introspection), and the equally heroic effort two security researchers went
through (in part, using pattern matching) to crack the protection.
As it turns out, pattern matching is not the only possible attack against
introspection algorithms. We will conclude the section by showing you
algorithm REWOS, which is a generic and very clever attack that with one
simple hack to the operating system disables all introspection-based
algorithms! We’ll also show you Algorithm TPGCK, which uses self-
modifying code to counter this attack.

7.2.1 Algorithm TPCA: Checker Network

The TPCA [24,59] algorithm was invented by two Purdue University
researchers, Hoi Chang and Mikhail Atallah. The algorithm was
subsequently patented and with assistance from Purdue a start-up, Arxan,
was spun off. The basic insight is that it’s not enough for checkers to check
just the code: they must check each other as well! If checkers are not
checked, they are just too easy to remove. The algorithm builds up a
network of code regions, where a region can be a block of user code, a
checker, or a responder. Checkers compute a hash over one or more regions
and compare it to the expected value. Responders in this algorithm are
typically repairers, and if the checker has discovered that a region has been
tampered with, a responder will replace the tampered region with a copy
stored elsewhere. Multiple checkers can check the same region, and
multiple responders can repair a tampered region. A nice consequence of
this design is that you can achieve arbitrary levels of protection (at a
concomitant increase in size and decrease in performance) by adding more
checkers and responders and more complex relationships between them.

Algorithm 7.1. Overview of algorithm TPCA. P is the program
to be protected, in a form that makes control explicit, such as a
control flow graph or a call graph. G is a directed guard graph
describing the relationship between code regions, checkers, and
responders.

TAMPERPROOF(P, G):
  1. Let P’s nodes be n0, n1,..., representing code regions.

  2. Let G’s nodes be n0, n1,... (representing code regions), c0, c1,...
     (checkers), and r0, r1,... (responders). G has a edge                if cj
     checks region nj and an edge            if ri repairs region nj.

  3. Insert the responders in P so that they dominate the region they check.

  4. Insert the checkers in P so that at least one checker dominates every
     corresponding responder.

  5. Connect checkers to responders by inserting variables, as necessary.

Have a look at the example in Listing 7.2 416, a program that implements a
simple DRM system. For simplicity, we’ve made code regions identical to
functions, but in general this isn’t necessary. A region could comprise
multiple functions or parts of functions, and regions could be overlapping.
We’ve inserted the checkers (in dark gray) and responders (light gray) so
that they dominate the call to the function they check and repair. This way,
you’ll know that when a function gets executed it will be correct. For
example, consider the decrypt function in Listing 7.2 416. Before making
the call to getkey, decrypt computes a hash of getkey’s code, and if it doesn’t
match (i.e., getkey has been tampered with), it repairs getkey by replacing it
with a stored copy (getkeyCOPY).

Algorithm 7.1 gives an overview of the technique. To tamperproof a
program, you need two graphs. P is the program’s control flow graph (if
you want to protect individual basic blocks) or a call graph (if you’re
content protecting one function at a time). A second graph G, the guard
graph, shows the relationship between regions to be protected and the
checkers and responders that check them. Corresponding to the example in
Listing 7.2 416, here is P (left) and G (right):
Listing 7.2. DRM player tamperproofed with algorithm TPCA.

#define getkeyHASH 0xce1d400a
#define getkeySIZE 14
uint32                getkeyCOPY[]                           =
{0x83e58955,0x72b820ec,0xc7080486,...};
#define decryptHASH 0x3764e45c
#define decryptSIZE 16
uint32                decryptCOPY[]                          =
{0x83e58955,0xaeb820ec,0xc7080486,...};
#define playHASH 0x4f4205a5
#define playSIZE 29
uint32                 playCOPY[]                            =
{0x83e58955,0xedb828ec,0xc7080486,...};

uint32 decryptVal;

int main (int argc, char *argv[]) {
{uint32 playVal = hash((waddr_t)play,playSIZE);
int user_key = 0xca7ca115;
{decryptVal = hash((waddr_t)decrypt,decryptSIZE);
int digital_media[] = {10,102};
if (playVal != playHASH)
{memcpy((waddr_t)play,playCOPY,playSIZE*sizeof(uin
t32));
play(user_key,digital_media,2);
}

int getkey(in0 user_key) {
{decryptVal = hash((waddr_t)decrypt,decryptSIZE);
int player_key = 0xbabeca75;
return user_key ^ player_key;
}

int decrypt(int user_key, int media) {
{uint32                 getkeyVal                 =
hash((waddr_t)getkey,getkeySIZE);
if (getkeyVal != getkeyHASH)
{memcpy((waddr_t)getkey,getkeyCOPY,getkeySIZE*size
of(uint32));
int key = getkey(user_key);
return media ^ key;
}

float decode (int digital) {
return (float)digital;
}
void play(int user_key, int digital_media[], int
len) {
if (decryptVal != decryptHASH)
{memcpy((waddr_t)decrypt,decryptCOPY,decryptSIZE*s
izeof(uint32));
int i;
for(i=0;i<len;i++)
printf("%f\n",decode(decrypt(user_key,digital_medi
a[i])));
}
In G, edges              are black and represent m checking if n has been
tampered with. Edges               (light gray) represent m responding to a
crack of n. In this algorithm, responding usually means repairing, but this
isn’t necessary, of course.

Here’s the corresponding code as it is laid out in memory:

Again, dark gray represents checkers, and light gray represents repairers.

     Problem 7.1

     Ideally, you want no checker to be unchecked itself, but TPCA doesn’t
     allow such circularity among checkers. Chang and Atallah [59] write,
     Fermat style, “[W]e’ve solved the problem, but due to page limitation,
     we omit the discussion.” Can you figure out what they had in mind?

7.2.2 Generating Hash Functions
To prevent pattern-matching and collusive attacks, it’s important to be able
to generate a large number of different-looking hash functions. If you’ve
included more than one hash computation in your tamperproofed program,
you even have to worry about self-collusive attacks. That is, an adversary
who doesn’t know what your hash functions look like can still scan through
the program for pieces of similar-looking code: Any two pieces that look
suspiciously similar and include a loop would warrant further study. In
Chapter 10 (Software Similarity Analysis), you’ll see clone detectors that
are designed to locate exactly this kind of self-similarity.

In contrast to other applications that need hash functions, there’s no need
for ours to be “cryptographically secure,” or even to compute a uniform
distribution of values. Cryptographic hash functions such as SHA-1 and
MD5 are large and slow, and have telltale static and dynamic signatures that
an attacker could exploit in pattern-matching attacks. Once the attacker has
located a hash function, disabling it isn’t hard, and it matters little if it’s
SHA-1 or one of the trivial ones you’ll see below. Therefore, the most
important aspects of a hash function used in introspection algorithms are
size (you’ll include many of them in your program), speed (they may
execute frequently), and above all, stealth (they must withstand pattern-
matching attacks).

Here’s a straightforward function that computes the exclusive-or over a
region of words:

     typedef unsigned int uint32;
     typedef uint32* addr_t;

     uint32 hash1 (addr_t addr,int words) {
     uint32 h =*addr;
     int i;

     for(i=1; i<words; i++) {
     addr++;
     h ^= *addr;
     }
    return h;
    }

To increase stealth in an actual implementation, you should inline the
function.

Any tamperproofing algorithm based on introspection will need a library of
different-looking hash functions. Here’s one simple variant of hash1 above:

    uint32 hash2 (addr_t start,addr_t end) {
    uint32 h = *start;
    while(1) {
    start++;
    if (start>=end) return h;
    h ^= *start;
    }
    }

You have to be careful, however, to make sure that superficial syntactic
changes at the source-code level actually lead to significantly different
compiled code. It’s entirely possible that a good optimizing compiler will
generate very similar code for hash1 and hash2. For this reason, some
tamperproofing implementations generate their hash functions directly at
the assembly-code level.

You can add a parameter to step through the code region in more or less
detail, which allows you to balance performance and accuracy:

    int32 hash3 (addr_t start,addr_t end,int step)
    {
    uint32 h = *start;
    while(1) {
    start+=step;
    if (start>=end) return h;
    h ^= *start;
    }
    }

There’s, of course, no particular reason to scan forward, you can go
backwards as well, and you can complicate the computation by adding (and
then subtracting out) a random value (rnd):

    uint32 hash4 (addr_t start,addr_t end,uint32
    rnd) {
    addr_t t = (addr_t)((uint32)start + (uint32)end
    + rnd);
    uint32 h = 0;
    do {
    h    +=     *((addr_t)(-(uint32)end-(uint32)rnd+
    (uint32)t));
    t++;
    } while (t <(addr_t)((uint32)end+(uint32)end+
    (uint32)rnd));
    return h;
    }

The following function is used by algorithm TPHMST, where C is a small
constant, odd multiplier:

    uint32 hash5 (addr_t start, addr_t end, uint32
    C) {
    uint32 h = 0;
    while (start < end) {
    h = C*(*start + h);
    start++;
    }
     return h;
     }

To prevent pattern-matching attacks, Horne et al. [168] describe how to
generate a large number of variants of hash5. The variants are generated by
reordering basic blocks: inverting conditional branches; replacing
multiplication instructions by combinations of shifts, adds, and address
computations; permuting instructions within blocks; permuting register
assignments; and replacing instructions with equivalents. This results in a
total of 2,916,864 variants, each less than 50 bytes of x86 code in length.

     Problem 7.2

     Is generating three million different hash functions enough to confuse
     an attacker? Does knowing our hash function obfuscation algorithm
     help him, if the number of generated functions is large but finite? Can
     you combine the obfuscation ideas of hash5 with those of hash4 (adding
     redundant computations) to generate an infinite number of functions
     without losing too much performance?

This final hash function we’re going to show you has been designed with
some very special properties. You will see it used in Algorithm TPSLSPDK,
in Section 7.5.4 459, to verify that a client on a remote machine is actually
running the correct code. An important part of this check is to measure the
time it takes the client to compute a hash over the code. For this to work,
it’s essential that the hash function runs in very predictable time. A
malicious user who can modify the function to run faster than you were
expecting will be able to cheat you into believing they’re running correct
code when in fact they’re not. To accomplish predictability, you must make
sure that there are no ways for the user to optimize the code, for example,
by parallelizing it or rearranging it into a faster instruction schedule. To
make sure that the adversary can’t rearrange the code, you must make it
strongly ordered, i.e., each instruction must be data-dependent on previous
ones. Specifically, these functions interleave adds and xors.

Also, you need to make sure that the adversary can’t predict the order in
which you’re hashing the data. Therefore, rather than sweeping sequentially
through the data, as in the previous functions, you should generate a
random sequence of probes into the data segment. You can use a T-function
[199] x ← x +(x2 ∨ 5) mod 232 to provide the necessary randomness. It’s
enough to probe n log n times (n is the length of the segment), since this
makes you visit each word with high probability.

To make sure that the user doesn’t try to save time by computing the
function in advance, you should initialize the hash value to a random
number rnd that you don’t give him until it’s time to compute the hash.
Here, then, is the function:

    #define ROTL(v) (((0xA0000000&v)>>31)|(v<<1))

    // The segment should be a power of two long.
    uint32 hash6 (addr_t start, addr_t end, uint32
    rnd) {
    uint32 h = rnd;
    uint32 x = rnd;
    uint32 len = end_start;
    uint32 bits = ceil(log2(len));
    uint32 mask = 0xFFFFFFFF >> (32-bits);
    uint32 n = len*ceil(log2(len))/2;
    addr_t daddr = start;
    while (n>0) {
    x = x + (x*x | 5);
    daddr = start+(((uint32)daddr^x)&mask);
    h = h ^ *daddr;

    x = x + (x*x | 5);
    daddr = start+(((uint32)daddr^x)&mask);
    h = h + *daddr;
    h = ROTL(h);
    n- -;
    }
    return h;
    }

(The rotation makes the function immune to a particular attack [324].) To
ensure predictable execution time, you must also consider cache effects.
First, the hash function itself must be small enough to fit inside the
instruction cache of the CPU, and second, the region you’re hashing must
fit into the data cache.

The Skype VoIP client inserts hundreds of hash functions that check each
other and check the actual code. We’ll show you the details of their
protection scheme later, in Section 7.2.4 431, but for now, here is the
family of functions they’re using:

    uint32 hash7() {
    addr_t addr;
    addr = (addr_t)((uint32)addr^(uint32)addr);
    addr = (addr_t)((uint32)addr + 0x688E5C);
    uint32 hash = 0x320E83 ^ 0x1C4C4;
    int bound = hash + 0xFFCC5AFD;

    do {
    uint32 data = *((addr_t)((uint32)addr + 0x10));
    goto b1;
    asm volatile(".byte 0x19");
    b1:
    hash = hash ⊕ data;
    addr -= 1;
     bound- -;
     } while (bound!=0);
     goto b2;
     asm volatile(".byte 0x73");
     b2:

     goto b3;
     asm                              volatile(".word
     0xC8528417,0xD8FBBD1,0xA36CFB2F");
     asm volatile(".word 0xE8D6E4B7,0xC0B8797A");
     asm volatile(".byte 0x61,0xBD");
     b3:
     hash-=0x4C49F346;
     return hash;
     }

To prevent the address of the region we’re checking from appearing literally
in the code, the initialization section is obfuscated so that the address is
instead computed. The routine is further obfuscated by inserting random
data within the code, selecting a different operator ⊕ (add, sub, xor, and so
on) for the hash computation, and stepping through the data in different
directions and with different increments. As you’ll see, hash7 wasn’t
obfuscated sufficiently: The Skype protocol was broken by looking for a
signature of the address computation.

7.2.3 Algorithm TPHMST: Hiding Hash Values

In real code, large literal integer constants are unusual. So a simple attack
on a hash-based tamperproofing algorithm is to scan the program for code
that appears to compare a computed hash against a random-looking
expected value:
    h = hash(start,end);
    if (h != 0xca7babe5) abort();

If every copy of the program you’re distributing is different, perhaps
because you’re employing fingerprinting, then you leave yourself open to
easy collusive attacks: Since the code of every program is different, the
hash values that your tamperproofing code computes must also be different
and will reveal the location of the hash computation!

A simple fix is to add a copy of every region you’re hashing to the program
and then compare the hashes of the two regions:

    h1 = hash(orig_start,orig_end);
    h2 = hash(copy_start,copy_end);
    if (h1 != h2) abort();

Algorithm 7.2. Overview of algorithm TPHMST. P is the
program to be obfuscated, and n is the number of overlapping
regions.

TAMPERPROOF(P, n):

  1. Insert n checkers of the form if (hash(start,end)) RESPOND() randomly
     throughout the program.

  2. Randomize the placement of basic blocks.

  3. Insert at least n corrector slots c1,..., cn.

  4. Compute n overlapping regions I1,..., In, each Ii associated with one
     corrector ci.
   5. Associate each checker with a region Ii and set ci so that Ii hashes to
      zero.

An obvious disadvantage of this fix is that, in the worst case, your program
has now doubled in size! Also, f () = f () may not be all that common in real
code, in which case the adversary might be able to guess what tricks you’re
up to.

Algorithm TPHMST [167,168] uses a very clever way of hiding the
expected value literals. The idea is to construct the hash function so that
unless the code has been hacked, the function always hashes to zero. This
yields much more natural code:

      h = hash(start,end);
      if (h) abort();

To accomplish this, TPHMST [167,168] uses the hash5 hash function from
Section 7.2.2 418, which has the advantage of being invertible. This allows
you to insert an empty slot (a 32-bit word, shown here in light gray) within
the region you’re protecting, and later give this slot a value that makes the
region hash to zero:

      start: 0xab01cd02
      0x11001100
      slot: 0x????????
      0xca7ca7ca
      end: 0xabcdefab

      h = hash(start,end);
      if (h) abort();

7.2.3.1 System Design
Algorithm 7.2 is also interesting, because the paper [167] in which it was
first presented, and the subsequent U.S. patent application [168], describe a
complete and practical system for tamperproofing and fingerprinting. To
build a functioning system, you have to solve many practical problems. For
example, when during the translation and installation process do you insert
fingerprints and tamperproofing code? Do you do it at the source-code level
before compilation, at the binary code level at post-link time, or during
installation on the end user’s site? Each has different advantages and
problems. The more work you do on the user’s site during installation, the
more he can learn about your method of protection, and the more you leave
yourself open to attack. On the other hand, if all the work is done before
distribution (that is, every distributed copy has already been individually
fingerprinted and tamperproofed), then the distribution process itself
becomes difficult: Are you only going to allow downloads and not sell
shrink-wrapped CDs in normal retail outlets? If so, are you going to
generate and store thousands of different copies of your program in
anticipation of a surge of downloads? It’s also important that the protection
work doesn’t interfere with the normal development cycle, including
making debugging and quality assurance harder.

TPHMST spreads fingerprinting and tamperproofing work out over compile
time, post-link time, and installation time. To illustrate the process, let’s
look at a program P with three basic blocks, A, B, and C. At the source-code
level, you insert checkers of the form if (hash(start,end)) RESPOND():

You want to make sure that any protection code added at the source-code
level doesn’t interfere with the normal development process. In this
particular case, you can compile and link the program as usual, and you can
set the [start,end] interval so that during development the response
mechanism isn’t triggered. Inserting the testers at the source-code level also
has the advantage that the compiler will take care of register allocation for
you.

Next, you randomize the placement of the basic blocks and checkers. This
is done on the binary executable. Randomization spreads the checkers
evenly over the program and also helps with preventing collusive attacks.
You then insert empty 32-bit slots for correctors and fingerprints. They will
be filled in with actual values during installation. Finally, you create
overlapping intervals and assign each checker to a region by filling in start
and end of each if (hash(start,end)) RESPOND():

Here, the first checker (in light gray) checks the dark gray region, and the
second checker (in dark gray) checks the light gray region.

The fingerprinting and corrector slots can be added between basic blocks or
after unconditional jump instructions. Finding suitable non-executed
locations at the source-code level is difficult (a good compiler will typically
optimize away any dead locations!), which is a good reason why this step is
best done at the binary-code level.

The final stage occurs on the customer’s site, during installation. In the
form the program is in after being downloaded or bought on a CD, it’s
unusable. Since all the corrector slots are still empty, every checker will
always trigger the response mechanism. Your first step during installation is
to fill in the user’s fingerprint value, possibly in multiple locations. Then
you compute and fill in corrector values so that each checker hashes to zero:

Since the fingerprint slots are in the executable code, they are covered by
the checkers (this is what makes them tamperproof!), but that also means
that you cannot compute corrector values until the fingerprints have been
filled in. As a result, if you want to fill in the fingerprints at installation
time, you also must fill in the correctors at installation time.

7.2.3.2 Interval Construction

In algorithm TPCA, you insert checkers so that they dominate the piece of
code they’re checking. This way, you can be sure that before control
reaches a particular function or basic block, you’ve checked that it hasn’t
been tampered with. TPHMST instead randomly places large numbers of
checkers all over the program but makes sure that every piece of code is
covered by multiple checkers. To see how this works, have a look at
Listings 7.3 428 and 7.4 429. The checkers are in light gray, the
responders in dark gray, and the corrector slots are dashed. This is the same
example program that we used to illustrate TPCA, but this time it is
tamperproofed using algorithm TPHMST. We’ve defined three overlapping
intervals, like this:
Each interval has a checker that tests that interval, and each interval Ii has a
corrector ci that you fill in to make sure that the checker hash function
hashes to zero. You must compute the correctors in the order c1, c2, c3,... to
avoid circular dependencies. That is, first you set c1 so that interval I1
hashes to zero, after which I2 only has one empty corrector slot, c2. You
next fill in c2 so that I2 hashes to zero, and so on.

In this example, the overlap factor is 2, meaning most bytes in the program
are checked by at least two checkers. The authors of TPHMST suggest that
an overlap factor of 6 gives the right trade-off between resilience and
overhead.

In the examples in Listings 7.3 428 and 7.4 429, we’re inserting correctors
at the source-code level. This is complicated, because the corrector (not
being executable code, just a 32-bit data word inserted in the instruction
stream) has to be inserted in a dead spot. A smart compiler (one that is too
smart for our needs!), however, will remove dead code! In the example,
therefore, we’ve either inserted the corrector right after a call to RESPOND
(which will never return), and where our compiler’s lack of interprocedural
analysis will stop it from removing the slot, or by adding a jump around the
slot.

Listing 7.3. DRM player tamperproofed with algorithm
TPHMST. Continues in Listing 7.4 429.
Listing 7.4. DRM player tamperproofed with algorithm
TPHMST. (Continued from Listing 7.3 428.)
7.2.3.3 Computing Corrector Slot Values

Algorithm TPHMST uses the chained linear hash function hash5 from
Section 7.2.2 418. This function has the advantage that you can hash an
incomplete range (incomplete means that the corrector slot value is
unknown) and then later solve for the corrector slot. Let’s see how that’s
done.

Let x = [x1, x2,..., xn] be the list of n 32-bit words that make up the region
you want to protect. The region can be made up of code and static data, and
will have one empty corrector slot. The region hashes to h(x):

C is a small, odd, constant multiplier. All computations are done modulo
232. Let’s assume that one of the values in the region, say xk, is the empty
corrector slot. You want to fill this in so that h(x) = 0.Let z be the part of the
hash value that excludes xk:

This means you’re looking for a value for xk so that

                             Cn–k+1xk + z = 0 (mod 232)

This is a modular linear equation that you solve according to this theorem
[94]:

     Theorem 7.1: (Modular linear equation)

     The modular linear equation ax≡ b (mod n) is solvable if d|b, where d
     = gcd(a, n) = ax’+ ny’ is given by Euclid’s extended algorithm. If d|b,
     there are d solutions:
You get,

Since C is odd, d = 1, and you get the solution

x0 = –zx′(mod 232)

To illustrate, given a region x = [1, 2, x3, 4] and a multiplier C = 3, let’s find
a value for x3 so that h(x) = 0:

Thus you get

           h(x) = (1 · 34 + 2 · 33 + 1431655749 · 32 + 4 · 31) mod 232 = 0
as expected.

    Problem 7.3

    Like TPCA, TPHMST doesn’t allow circularity among checkers; some
    region will always be unchecked! The authors state [167] that it’s
    possible to modify the interval construction by solving “the resulting
    system of linear equations,” giving no further details. Work out the
    details!

7.2.4 The Skype Obfuscated Protocol

Skype is a Voice-over-IP service that operates on a peer-to-peer model.
Users can make computer-to-computer voice calls for free but are charged
for computer-to-phone and phone-to-computer calls. Skype was bought by
eBay in September 2005 for $2.6 billion.

The Skype client is heavily tamperproofed and obfuscated. The protocol by
which clients communicate with each other is proprietary and also
obfuscated. The clients remained unhacked for quite some time, but the
protection techniques were eventually revealed by some clever work by two
researchers at the EADS Corporate Research Center in France and
subsequently published at the BlackHat Europe conference in 2006. We’ll
sketch their attack algorithm REBD [41] below.

The client binary contains hard-coded RSA keys and the IP address and port
number of a known server that is used when the client first connects to the
network. If you could break the protection and build a new client binary
with your own keys and IP addresses, you could create your very own
Voice-over-IP network and steal Skype’s customer base by undercutting
their calling rates.
Here, we’ll only concern ourselves with how Skype protects their secrets by
obfuscating and tamperproofing the client binary. This can give us
interesting and uncommon insights into how protection techniques are
actually used in the field! Equally interesting is how Skype obfuscates the
network protocols; you can read more about that in reference [41].

Here’s an overview of the initial execution stages of the Skype client:

The client starts executing the light gray cleartext code, performing
initializations and loading any necessary dynamic linked libraries (dll:s).
The execution continues with the dark gray code, which first erases the light
gray code and then decrypts the remaining dashed code. The executable
itself contains the decryption key, key. The encryption is a simple xor with
the key. Erasing the light gray code after it has executed makes it difficult
for the adversary to create a new binary by dumping the in-memory process
to a file. From this point on, the binary is in cleartext—it is never re-
encrypted. In the final step, the decrypted dashed code gets executed. It
starts by loading a hidden dll table (dotted), partially overwriting the
original one. In total, the client loads 843 dynamically linked libraries, but
169 of these are not included in the original dll table. Hiding the dll table
also makes it hard for the attacker to create a new binary by writing out the
memory image to a file.
The client continues by checking for the presence of debuggers, using
techniques similar to those you saw in Section 7.1.1 406: It checks for
signatures of known debuggers and also does timing tests to see if the
process is being run under debugging.

In the final tamperproofing stage, a network of nearly 300 hash functions
checks the client code, and also checks each other. Each hash function is
different and is based on the hash7 family of functions you saw in Section
7.2.2 418. They are executed randomly. The test on the hash function value
is not a simple if (hash() != value)... . Instead, the hash function computes
the address of the next location to be executed, which is then jumped to.

You’ve seen the technique of hash functions checking each other before,
namely, in Algorithm TPCA. Here, however, the network is much simpler,
with each real region (light gray) checked by a large number of checkers
(dashed), each of which, in turn, is checked by one other checker (dark
gray):

Also, unlike Algorithm TPCA, the Skype client doesn’t attempt to repair
itself when it has detected tampering. Instead, it simply crashes, but does so
in a clever way. On detection, the client allocates a random memory page,
randomizes the register values, and then jumps to the random page. This
loses track of all the stack frames, which makes it hard for the attacker to
trace back to the location where the detection took place.

In addition to the tamperproofing, the client code is also obfuscated. The
target address of function calls are computed at runtime, i.e., all function
calls are done indirectly. Dummy code protected by opaque predicates is
also inserted. The code is also obfuscated by occasionally raising a bogus
exception only for the exception handler to turn around, repair register
values, and return back to the original location.

     Problem 7.4

     It is interesting to note that although Skype is a distributed application,
     it doesn’t use any of the distributed tamperproofing techniques you’ll
     see later in Section 7.5 453. The reason might be that much of the
     communication is client-to-client rather than client-to-server. Can you
     think of a way for clients to check each other in a peer-to-peer system
     without being able to collude?

7.2.4.1 Algorithm REBD: Attacking the Skype Client

The ultimate goal of an attack on the Skype client is to be able to build your
own binary, complete with your own RSA keys. To do that, you need to
remove the encryption and tamperproofing.

The first steps of Algorithm REBD do the following:

     1. Find the keys stored in the binary and decrypt the encrypted
       sections.

     2. Read the hidden dll table and combine it with the original one,
       making a complete table.

     3. Build a script that runs over the decrypted binary and finds the
       beginning and end of every hash function.
If you look at hash7 in Section 7.2.2 418, you’ll notice that the routine has a
distinctive structure, consisting of initialization, looping, read memory, and
compute hash. Unfortunately (for Skype), there’s not enough variability in
this code, and it’s possible to build a pattern matcher that can reliably find
the beginning and end of all the functions.

The next step is to run every hash function, collect their output values, and
replace the body of the function with that value. You could just set software
breakpoints on every function header, but since software breakpoints
change the executable by replacing an instruction with a trap, that is sure to
trip the tamper detectors! The solution is to use hardware breakpoints,
which don’t affect the executable. However, processors only have a small
number of such breakpoints, typically four. To get past that limitation, you
can run Skype twice, in parallel, with both processes under debugging but
one using hardware breakpoints and the other software breakpoints. Here’s
the idea:

     4. Run Skype to collect the values computed by all the hash functions,
       using twin-processes debugging:
     a. Start one Skype process Ssoft, setting software breakpoints at the
        beginning of every hash function.
     b. Start another Skype process Shard.
     c. Run Ssoft until a breakpoint at the beginning of a hash function is
        reached at some address start.
     d. Set a hardware breakpoint at start in the Shard process and also at the
        end of the hash function, at address end.
     e. Run Shard until end is reached.
     f. Record the result hash of the hash computation.
     g. Restart Ssoft starting at address end and with the return value of the
        hash function set to hash.
     5. Replace all hash function bodies with their computed values.
An alternative attack is to run each function in an emulator (see Section
3.2.4 168) to find the value it computes.

     The final step bypasses the obfuscation and removes the tamper
     response code:
     6. Put a breakpoint on malloc and wait for a page with the special
       characteristics of the random tamper response page to be created. Put
       a hardware breakpoint on the pointer that stores the page address to
       locate the detection code.

7.2.5 Algorithm REWOS: Attacking Self-Hashing Algorithms

When you think about attacking a tamperproofed program, what first comes
to mind is directly removing any tamperproofing code from the executable.
This, of course, means that you first have to analyze the code, then locate
the checkers or responders, and finally remove or disable them without
destroying the remainder of the program. But an attack can just as well be
external to the program, modifying the environment in which it is executed.
Algorithm REWOS [379], which we’ll show you next, does exactly that. By
adding just a few instructions to the memory management routines of the
operating system kernel, you can craft an attack that is successful against all
hash-based tamperproofing algorithms!

The basis for the attack is that modern processors treat code and data
differently. Code and data have different access patterns (a small region of
contiguous instructions might constitute a loop that fits easily in the cache
but which accesses a large scattered data set that doesn’t), and hardware
designers have taken advantage of this by splitting TLBs (Translation
Lookaside Buffers) and caches in separate parts for code and data. In the
hash-based algorithms you’ve seen, code is accessed in two different ways:
as code (when it’s being executed) and as data (when it’s being hashed). So
sometimes a function will be read into the I-cache and sometimes into the
D-cache. The hash-based algorithms assume that the function, regardless of
how it’s read, will be the same—i.e., that the code being executed through
the I-cache is the same as that hashed through the D-cache. By a simple
hack to the operating system, REWOS violates that assumption! The idea is
this: Redirect reads to the code to the original, unmodified program (this
ensures that the hash values will be computed as expected) and redirect
execution of the code to the modified program (this will ensure that the
modified code gets executed). You can see a sketch of this idea in
Algorithm 7.3 436.

The actual implementation of the attack depends on the capabilities of the
processor and the design of the memory management system of the
operating system.

Algorithm 7.3. Overview of algorithm REWOS.

ATTACK(P, K):

  1. Copy program P to Porig.

  2. Modify P as desired to a hacked version P’.

  3. Modify the operating system kernel K so that data reads are directed to
     Porig, instruction reads to P’.

What we’ll show you here is the implementation for the UltraSparc
processor, because it displays the basic idea very simply. The details for
other architectures will be different, but the principle will remain the same.

Here’s a sketch of a typical memory management system:
Each process operates within its own seemingly contiguous and large
virtual address space. The operating system or the CPU maintains a set of
page tables that map the virtual addresses seen by the process to physical
addresses of the underlying hardware. To avoid having to look up every
memory access in the page tables, you first consult a translation lookaside
buffer, which caches recent lookups. On a TLB hit (which is very fast), you
don’t have to do anything else, but on a TLB miss you must walk the page
tables (slow) and update the TLB with the new virtual-to-physical address
mapping. Depending on the system architecture, these lookups and updates
can be done in hardware or in the operating system kernel.

On the UltraSparc, the hardware gives the OS control on a TLB miss by
throwing one of two exceptions depending on whether the miss was caused
by a data or an instruction fetch. The OS then looks up the virtual address in
the page tables and either updates the instruction TLB or the data TLB with
the new virtual-to-physical mapping.

To implement the attack against a self-hashing algorithm, you need to do
four things:

  1. Copy P to Porig.
  2. Modify P however you like.

  3. Arrange the physical memory so that frame i comes from the hacked P
     and frame i + 1 is the corresponding original frame from Porig.

  4. Modify the kernel so that if a page table lookup yields a v → p virtual-
     to-physical address mapping, I-TLB is updated with v → p and D-TLB
     with v → p +1.

Here’s an example to illustrate this:

Here, the attacker has modified the program to bypass a license-expired
check. The original program pages (dark gray) are interleaved with the
modified program pages (light gray) in physical memory. Page 3 and page 4
are actually the same page, except that in page 3 the license check has been
hacked. When the program tries to read its own code in order to execute it,
the processor throws an I-TLB-miss exception, and the OS looks up the
correct mapping in the page tables and updates the I-TLB to refer to the
modified page. When the program tries to read its own code in order to
hash it, the processor throws a D-TLB-miss exception, and the OS updates
the D-TLB to refer to the original, unmodified page. The result is that
during hashing the original dark gray pages will be read and the tamper-
response code won’t be triggered, and during execution the light gray code
that the attacker has modified to his heart’s content will be run.
7.2.5.1 Algorithm TPGCK: Detecting Memory Splits

Algorithm REWOS attacks tamperproofing through self-hashing by
essentially splitting the memory into separate pieces, one for code and one
for data. Algorithm TPGCK [138,139] uses a self-modifying code trick to
detect this split—if a program detects that it’s being run in an environment
where writes to the code segment don’t affect the data segment, it can
invoke its normal tampering response.

Have a look at this self-modifying C and assembly code:

Let’s first assume that the operating system hasn’t been hacked, i.e., code
and data share the same address space. Then, the light gray instruction
overwrites the 0 value in the dashed instruction with a 1. The dark gray
instruction reads that value back into the result variable, and thus result=1.
The modified dashed instruction, finally, executes, setting result = result &&
1, i.e., result=1. The last instruction resets the dashed instruction back to its
original.

But what if you’re under attack from algorithm REWOS? Assume, as before,
that the attacker has duplicated an original memory page Morig as a new
page M. Instructions are executed from the modified M page and data reads
are redirected to the unmodified Morig:
The light gray write into the instruction stream will propagate through the
data cache and alter the dashed instruction on Morig. When the dark gray
instruction tries to read data from the instruction stream, it accesses Morig
and the correct value 1. However, the dashed instruction will execute from
page M, which was not modified by the light gray instruction. The program
will execute result = result && 0, resulting in result=0.

On modern processors, self-modifying code inflicts a performance
overhead: Caches and processor pipelines may have to be flushed whenever
the processor detects that the code segment has been modified. In reference
[138], the authors estimate that the worst-case cost of the check above will
be similar to a lightweight system call.

7.2.6 Discussion

The nice thing about both TPCA and TPHMST is that security is tied to
easily modified parameters. In the case of TPCA, you adjust the number of
guards and the complexity of the guard graph. In the case of TPHMST, the
interval overlap serves the same purpose.
We have no hard performance numbers for either algorithm. Obtaining
meaningful numbers is actually difficult, because these will always depend
on the number of checkers you insert, where in the executable you insert
them, and therefore how often they will run. It’s certainly possible to say,
“Using the SPEC benchmark suite, we’re inserting n checkers, each hashing
k kilobytes of code, at random locations, and we get the following reduction
in performance.” However, the resulting numbers will tell you very little,
since you have no way of relating that to how much security this actually
buys you! TPHMST suggests an interval overlap of 6 but gives no support
for why this results in the right level of protection.

Checkers are typically small in size, less than 50 x86 code-bytes for
TPHMST and more than 62 bytes for TPCA.

In practical situations, you will not want to insert checkers in random
locations, since that may land you inside a tight loop. Instead, you will need
some way for the user to specify where checkers should be inserted, what
range of code they should check, and how often they should be executed.
TPCA’s guard graph serves this purpose. They also suggest using a graphical
user interface to allow users to interactively select regions to be protected.
TPHMST, on the other hand, avoids hot spots by having programmers insert
testers manually at the source-code level. If you don’t anticipate dynamic
attacks (i.e., the code being changed as it is running), then you can reduce
the performance penalty by hashing each segment of code only once, right
before it is first executed or when it is first loaded into memory.

     Problem 7.5

     Neither TPCA nor TPHMST has public implementations. It would be
     interesting to develop a complete implementation that combines the
     best features of each: the automatic repairs of TPCA and the
     watermarking and implicit hash values of TPHMST.
Algorithm REWOS is interesting because it is clearly a class attack—in one
fell swoop it makes all self-hashing algorithms impotent. Its one drawback
is that it requires an operating system patch, which the average user might
be reluctant to or find difficult to install. Algorithm TPCA is the cornerstone
of Arxan’s (arxan.com) GuardIT product line. If GuardIT becomes
prevalent for desktop applications, it will be interesting to see how long it
will take for REWOS-style operating system hacks to become available, and
how long it will take Arxan to add TPGCK-style counterattacks.

7.3 Algorithm RETCJ: Response Mechanisms

So far, we’ve told you that tamperproofing happens in two stages,
implemented by the functions CHECK and RESPOND. CHECK tests whether the
program has been tampered with, sets a flag if it has, and some time later
RESPOND takes action, making the program fail, phone home, and so on.
Actually, however, in a real system you want a three-pronged approach,
where CHECK checks for tampering, later RESPOND takes action, and later still,
the program actually fails:

This is the basic premise behind algorithm TPTCJ [344]. The idea is that
RESPOND corrupts program state so that the actual failure follows much later:
Here, CHECK (light gray) and RESPOND (dark gray) communicate through the
variable tampered, and RESPOND manipulates the variable global so that the
program will eventually fail on a divide-by-zero exception (dashed). It is, of
course, possible to merge CHECK and RESPOND so that CHECK sets the failure
variable directly.

You could also introduce a number of failure sites and probabilistically
choose between them at runtime:

In this way, every time the attacker runs the hacked program, it is likely to
fail in one of the two dashed spots. You will need to add a “catchall” failure
site (light gray) to make sure that, no matter what, if the program has been
hacked it will eventually fail.

In general, you want the response mechanism to display the following
characteristics:

     spatial separation: There should be as little static and dynamic
         connection between the RESPOND site and the failure site as possible.
         To accomplish this, you could make them be statically far away
         from each other by reorganizing the executable. You could also
         make them be dynamically separated by ensuring that RESPOND is not
         on the call stack when the failure occurs, or by ensuring that as
         many function calls have occurred between them as possible.
     temporal separation: A significant length of time should pass
        between the execution of RESPOND and the eventual failure, since this
        will make it harder for the attacker to trace back from the failure
        site to the response that caused it. At the same time, not too much
        time must pass, or the attack code will be able to cause damage
        before the program exits.
    stealth: The test, response, and failure code you insert in the program
        should exhibit both local stealth (they have to fit in with the code
        in their immediate surroundings) and global stealth (they can’t be
        too different from code found in typical programs).
    predictability: Once the tamper response has been invoked, the
        program should eventually fail.

Algorithm 7.4. Overview of algorithm TPTCJ. P is the program
to be protected, I is the profiling input, δ is the desired
threshold distance between corruption and failure sites, and T
is a function-distance matrix. SELECT computes a set of good
corruption sites C for each global variable v.
It’s important that you keep any legal implications of your tamper-response
mechanism in mind. Deliberate destruction of user data is likely to invite
legal repercussions, particularly if the user can show that the tamper
response was issued erroneously (“I forgot my password, and after three
tries the program destroyed my home directory!”) But what about data that
gets destroyed as an unintended consequence of the tamper response? If the
tamper response is the least bit probabilistic (which you would like it to
be!), then how can you ensure that the eventual failure happens in a “safe”
place? It’s easy to imagine a scenario where the program crashes with a file
open and the last write still pending, leaving user data in a corrupted and
unrecoverable state.

Algorithm 7.4 shows an overview of TPTCJ [344]. The basic idea is for
RESPOND to set a global pointer variable to NULL, causing the program to crash
when the pointer is later de-referenced. If the program doesn’t have enough
pointer variables, TPTCJ creates new ones by adding a layer of indirection
to non-pointer variables. The algorithm assumes that there are enough
global variables to choose from; while this may be true for procedural
programming languages like C, it may be less true for object-oriented
languages like Java.

     Problem 7.6

     In their example program, the authors of TPTCJ found 297 globals over
     27,000 lines of code, or one global for every 90 lines of code. Is this
     normal? How many usable global variables can you find in real code?
     For cases where there are not enough global variables, can you
     develop a static analysis algorithm that allows you to create new
     usable globals, either by “globalizing” local variables or by creating
     completely bogus new ones?
Here’s an example where main sets the variable tampered to 1 if it detects that
the program is under attack:

In the first transformation step, the algorithm creates a global pointer
variable p_v that references a global v indirectly. This is the code in light
gray. Variable v is assigned to function f, so one way to make the program
crash if it’s been tampered with is to set p_v to NULL before f is called. But
where? You could set p_v=NULL in g or main, but this would be a bad idea. You
want to avoid g and main, since they will be on the call stack when f throws
the pointer-reference-to-nil exception. Most systems will provide a
backtrace of what was on the stack when the program failed, and it would
be easy for the attacker to trace back to the cause of the crash using a
debugger. Instead, you should choose to insert the failure-inducing code in
h, which is “many” calls away (dark gray code), and not in the same call
chain as f.

     Problem 7.7
     Can you think of interesting ways to construct stealthy tamper-
     response mechanisms for different classes of programs, such as
     concurrent programs, distributed programs, database programs,
     programs with complex graphical user interfaces, and so on? For
     example, would it be useful to make a concurrent program deadlock or
     the buttons of a user interface stop responding?

                                          •••

     Problem 7.8

     Can you find any statistical anomalies for the kind of code that TPTCJ
     adds that could be used to stage a counterattack? What do real pointer
     manipulations look like in a C/C++ program? Is p=NULL all that
     common? Does this usually occur under very special circumstances,
     such as close to a malloc, where a new data structure node is created?

Comparatively little work has been done developing stealthy tamper-
response mechanisms. This is a shame, because when the response isn’t
stealthy, it gives hackers a really straightforward entry point for exploring
the tamperproofing mechanisms in a program: Run the program until it
crashes, use a debugger to examine the call stack, and then trace backwards.
Similar techniques can be used to disable TPTCJ: Find the offending pointer
variable that caused the failure, restart the program, set a data breakpoint on
the variable, run with the same input as before, and then find the location
that last changed it. This tells you that a straightforward implementation of
TPTCJ may not be enough. You may have to add multiple levels of
indirection, and above all, make sure that the program has multiple failure
points and multiple locations where RESPOND induces the failure.
7.4 State Inspection

There are two fundamental problems with the introspection algorithms in
Section 7.2 412:

  1. They perform operations that are highly unusual—real programs
     typically don’t read their own code segment!

  2. They only check the validity of the code itself—the user can still affect
     the program by modifying runtime data, for example, by using a
     debugger to change a function’s return value right before it returns.

So what’s the alternative? If you can’t check that your program is intact by
verifying the correctness of the code, what can you do? Well, you can try to
verify the correctness of the data or the control flow! The idea is that you
might be able to detect tampering of the code by the side effects the code
produces, i.e., in the way that the code makes data change and in the way it
forces control to take different execution paths.

In addition to being more stealthy than introspection, these techniques have
the advantage that you can use them not only on binary code but also on
type-safe code like Java bytecode. You might want to think of this as an
advanced form of assertion checking—you’ll be adding checks to the
program to ensure that at no point does it get into an unacceptable state.
You’re not checking, “Is this code correct?” but rather, “Is the program in a
reasonable state?” The state is a combination of all your static data, the
stack, the heap, and the program counter, and you can access all of these
whether you’re running a binary executable or Java bytecode. (The PC you
can’t access directly from Java, of course, but you know where in the code
you are when you’re doing the assertion check, which amounts to the same
thing.)

Unfortunately, automatically adding assertion checks to a program isn’t
easy. The current state of a program depends on all previous states, so how
could you possibly analyze your user’s program to come up with non-trivial
invariants to add as checks?

An alternative to adding assertions on the entire state of the running
program is to call, say, a function at a time, feeding it challenge data and
checking that the result is as expected:

     ...
     int challenge = 5;
     int expected = 120;
     int result = factorial(challenge);
     if (result != expected)
     abort();
     ...

“Hash values” (the expected results of the functions, given the challenge
inputs) are easy to compute at protection time—just generate random
challenge inputs, call the functions, and record the results! Just like you saw
in Algorithm TPHMST, however, you have to be careful not to generate
suspicious-looking hash values or challenge data that the attacker could
easily spot as unusual:

     if (factorial(17) != 355687428096000)
     abort();

Neither 17 nor 355687428096000 is likely to occur frequently in real
programs.

If you’re willing to sacrifice code space, you could make copies of every
function, forcing the adversary to hack two functions simultaneously in
order to avoid detection. This will hide the hash value but not the challenge
data:
     int challenge = 17;
     if         (factorial_orig(challenge)                                 !=
     factorial_copy(challenge))
     abort();

Automatically generating challenge data that actually exercises important
aspects of a function is not easy, particularly for functions that take complex
data structures as input. Hiding that data in your program is also an issue.
Imagine inserting tests in your program for an all-pairs-shortest-path
algorithm:

     int[][] challenge = {{1,1,0},{0,1,1},{0,0,1}};
     int[][] expected = {{1,1,1},{0,1,1},{0,0,1}};
     int[][] result = warshall(challenge);
     for(int i=0;i<3;i++)
     for(int j=0;j<3;j++)
     if (result[i][j]!=expected[i][j])
     abort();

It wouldn’t be hard for an adversary to pick out this code as being
suspicious—real programs typically don’t build many large, complex,
literal data structures. Functions that get their inputs externally, such as
reading from a file or accepting network packets, will also be difficult to
challenge.

Another problem when trying to automate this technique is that it’s hard to
predict what side effects a function might have—if you call it an extra time
on challenge data to verify that it hasn’t been tampered with, it might have
the undesirable side effect of destroying valuable global data or allocating
extraneous dynamic memory that will never be properly freed. Have a look
at this class:
     class Widget {
     String thing;
     static List all = new List();
     public Widget(String thing) {
     this.thing = thing;
     all.add(thing);
     }
     }

If you make many challenges to this class without realizing that it keeps
track of every instance ever created, you might get into nasty memory
problems. To avoid (some of) these problems, you could challenge
functions only at certain times during execution, such as at start-up time,
when changes to global state are less likely to have ill effects. Of course,
this gives the adversary more opportunities to attack your code.

Finally, what should you do about functions that have non-deterministic
behavior? If you’re lucky, you’ll at least discover this at protection time, by
running the function multiple times on the same challenge input and
realizing it doesn’t always generate the same output. But then what? You
can always rely on programmer code annotations, but as programs evolve
these are notoriously difficult to maintain.

In the remainder of this section, you will see two oblivious hashing
algorithms. They’re called oblivious because the intent is that the adversary
should be unaware that his code is being checked. The first algorithm,
TPCVCPSJ, inserts hash computations at the source-code level (although
there’s no reason why it couldn’t be done at lower levels). The hash is
computed based on the values of variables and the outcome of control flow
predicates. The second algorithm, TPJJV, very cleverly hashes binary
instructions without actually reading the code!

7.4.1 Algorithm TPCVCPSJ: Oblivious Hash Functions
To verify that a program is executing correctly, you could, conceptually at
least, collect the entire execution trace, compress it, and compare it to the
expected trace. For example, in Section 3.2.3 163 you saw how Algorithm
RELJ compresses a trace into a context-free grammar. In practice, even these
compressed traces are too large for our purposes, and as is always the case
when you add protection code to a program, you also have to worry about
stealth. Algorithm TPCVCPSJ [61,178] computes a hash over the execution
trace by inserting instructions that monitor changes to variables and control
flow. You can balance the level of protection against the amount of
overhead by varying the number of hash computations that you insert.

At the source-code level, you can imagine defining a global hash variable
and a macro UPDATE(h,v), which uses some combination of arithmetic and
logical operations to include a value v into the hash:

     int hash;
     #define UPDATE(h,v) (h+=v)

You’d then transform assignment statements like this:2

To hash the outcome of a conditional expression, you’d perform this
transformation:

Have a look at this example, an extract from a DRM system:
     int play (int user_key, int player_key,
     int digital_media[], int len) {
     int i=0;
     while(i<len) {
     printf("%f\n",(float)(user_key^player_key^
     digital_media[i]));
     i++;
     }
     }

The procedure unlocks an encrypted media file by decrypting it with a user
and a player key. To protect play, you first modify it to compute a hash value
using the transformations above to insert calls to the UPDATE macro:

     int play (int user_key, int player_key,
     int digital_media[], int len) {
     int i=0;
     int t;
     while(t=i<len,UPDATE(hash,t),t) {
     printf("%f\n",(float)
     (t=user_key,UPDATE(hash,t),
     t^player_key^digital_media[i]));
     i=(t=i+1,UPDATE(hash,t),t);
     }
     }

You then generate some challenge input for play, run it on that input, and
record the result. At some appropriate places in the program, you then insert
a challenge call and check the result against the expected hash value:

     int player_main (int argc, char*argv[]) {
     ...
     int user_key = 0xca7ca115;
     int player_key = 0xbabeca75;
     int digital_media[] = {10,102};
     hash = 0;
     play(user_key, player_key, digital_media, 2);
     if (hash != -1795603921) {
     printf("HACKED!");
     abort();
     }

     ...
     }

Regardless of whether you call play as part of the regular computation or as
a challenge, the hash is still computed, so there will be a general slowdown,
depending on how many hash computations you add.

Global variables are quite uncommon, so to avoid inserting code that is too
unstealthy you can pass the hash variable as an extra argument to the
function:

     int player_main (int argc, char *argv[]) {
     int hash = 0;
     play(user_key, player_key, digital_media,                           2,
     &hash);
     ...
     }

     int play (int user_key, int player_key,
     int digital_media[], int len, int* hash) {
     ...
     }
Also for stealth reasons, you should vary the operators used in the hash
computation to match those found in the function you’re protecting. This is
easy to do by providing a collection of UPDATE macros:

     #define UPDATE1(h,v) (h+=v)
     #define UPDATE2(h,v) (h^=v)
     #define UPDATE3(h,v) (h-=v)

A serious issue is what to do with functions that have side effects. You
could always add an extra parameter to functions that access a global
variable and pass a reference to the global variables along to all calls. This
assumes you can do an accurate static analysis to determine which functions
need access to which global variables (either to use themselves or to pass
along to functions they call that may need them), and this becomes difficult
in the presence of function pointers, for example.

An even worse problem is functions that are non-deterministic because they
depend on the time of day, network traffic, thread scheduling, and so on.
You could try to statically detect such locations in the code, you could rely
on code annotations provided by the programmer, or you could try to run
the program a few times on the same data and find locations where the
computed hash varies. None of these solutions is particularly attractive.
Static analysis of non-deterministic programs is likely to be hard and
produce overly conservative results, programmer annotations are
notoriously unreliable, and dynamic analysis is unlikely to catch all non-
deterministic locations in the program.

7.4.2 Algorithm TPJJV: Overlapping Instructions

The x86 architecture has some interesting properties that allow you to play
cute tricks unavailable on a RISC architecture. In particular, the x86 uses a
variable-length instruction encoding (instructions can be anywhere from
one to fifteen bytes long) and has no alignment requirements for
instructions (an instruction can start at any address). This allows you to
have one instruction inside another, or one instruction overlapping another,
and to share instructions between two blocks of code. Overlapping two
blocks in itself adds a level of tamperproofing, since modifying one
instruction will affect both pieces of code.

Algorithm TPJJV [178,179] takes the tamperproofing to another level by
overlapping basic blocks of x86 instructions so that when one block
executes, as a side effect it also computes a hash over the second block. The
hash value can then be compared to the expected value, much as you’ve
seen in previous algorithms. The real advantage of this technique is that
(unlike Algorithms TPHMST and TPCA) the hash is computed without
explicitly reading the code. This makes the algorithm invulnerable to
memory-splitting attacks like REWOS.

Here are two basic blocks with entry points B0 and B1:

The easiest way to merge them is to interleave the instructions and insert
jumps to maintain semantics:

     B0:
     shll 2,%eax
     jmp I1

     B1:
     decl %eax
     jmp I2

     I1:
     incl %eax
     jmp I3

     I2:
     shrl 3,%eax

     I3:
     ret

The merged block has two entry points, B0 and B1. This merging by itself
doesn’t accomplish much. What you really want is for the two blocks to
also share instruction bytes. To accomplish this, you replace the jump
instructions with bogus instructions that take a (large) immediate value as
one of its operands. This operand will mask out the instruction from the
other basic block by including the instruction in its immediate operand.
Look here:

     B0:
     shll 2,%eax
     xorl %ecx,next 4 bytes // used to be jmp I1
     B1:
     decl %eax
     jmp I2
     nop
     incl %eax
     ...

What happened? Well, we replaced the jump from B0’s first instruction to
its second with an xorl instruction. This instruction takes a four-byte
immediate operand, the first byte of which will be the decl %eax instruction,
the second and third byte will be jmp I2, and the fourth will be a nop that we
had to add as padding. What does this mean? Well, at runtime when you
jump to B1, you will execute the decl instruction just as before and then
jump to B1’s second instruction, also as before. In other words, the B1 block
will execute unchanged. When you jump to B0, however, things are a little
different. You start by executing the shll instruction as before, and then
proceed to execute the new xorl instruction, which has embedded in its
immediate operand the four bytes from decl;jmp;nop! After the xorl, you go
straight to B0’s second instruction, incl. If you had properly initialized
register %ecx, the xorl instruction would compute a hash over the instructions
from block B1. You could test this value later, and if it’s incorrect execute
the appropriate response.

Let’s look at this example in more detail. Here are the two blocks again, but
this time we give the x86 code bytes explicitly:

Each block has three instructions, which translates into five code bytes
each. We’ve given the offset of each code byte below the byte and indicated
the start of execution for each block with an arrow.

After merging the two blocks and inserting hashing and padding
instructions, you get the following seventeen code bytes:
On top of the bytes, we indicate what instructions we execute when we start
at offset 0 in order to execute block B0. Below the code bytes, we show
what gets executed when you start at offset 5 in order to execute block B1.
In either case, as you execute one block, you also compute a hash over the
other block into register %ecx. If the adversary were to change the byte at
offset 9, for example, changing the incl %eax instruction to something else,
this will be caught when you execute B1 and use the subl instruction to
compute the hash.

One problem with this algorithm is that it’s hard to predict its precision.
When will you actually detect tampering? In our example, you won’t detect
any tampering of B0 until you execute B1 and when that occurs will, of
course, depend on the flow of control.

Whether this algorithm as state inspection or introspection is debatable.
Since you’re hashing instructions, this makes the algorithm closer in flavor
to TPHMST and TPCA, but on the other hand when you’re actually
computing the hash you’re working on runtime values (or, at least, runtime
immediate operands of instructions)! Classification aside, this is a clever
use of the x86’s architectural (mis-)features.

The overhead depends on the level of overlap. Jacob et al. [178] (from
where the example above has been adapted) report that the protected binary
can be up to three times slower than the original.

7.5 Remote Tamperproofing

Remote tamperproofing is an important special case of tamperproofing. In
this scenario, the program you want to protect (which we’ll call C) runs
remotely on the adversary’s untrusted site (the client site) but is in constant
communication with a trusted program S on your (server) site. In addition
to providing services to the client, the server wants to detect and respond to
any tampering of C:
As in typical client-server scenarios, the client sends request-for-service
packets (dotted) over the network to the server, which returns service-
response packets (dark gray). In a computer game, for example, the client
may tell the server, “I just entered dungeon 372!” to which the server
responds with a list of the nearby monsters. The server may also ask the
client for information about the state it’s in (or deduce that state from the
service-request messages it receives) in order to detect if C is under attack.

There are many applications that fit neatly into this model. In networked
computer games, for example, the game server provides continuous
information to the player clients about their surroundings. Players will often
try to hack the clients to gain an unfair advantage over other players, for
example, by being able to see parts of a map (which, for performance
reasons, is being held locally) that they’re not supposed to see.

7.5.1 Distributed Check and Respond

Just like in single-processor tamperproofing, in the client-server scenario
you need two functions, CHECK and RESPOND. As you’ve seen, responding to
tampering can take many forms, including reporting violations back to you.
In the client-server scenario, response is even simpler: Just terminate
communication! The assumption here is that the server is providing a
service without which the client can’t make progress, and this means that
refusing to provide that service is the ultimate punishment.

Unfortunately, while responding is easy, the CHECK function is harder to
implement. The reason is that you have no direct access to C’s code—it’s
running on a remote site! For example, while it’s certainly possible for you
to ask the client to send you a hash of C’s code to verify he hasn’t tampered
with it, there’s nothing stopping him from lying about the hash value!

There are four classes of attacks:

  1. The attacker can reverse engineer and modify C’s code.

  2. The attacker can modify the running environment of C, for example,
     by running it under debugging or emulation, or under a modified
     operating system.

  3. The attacker can execute multiple simultaneous instances of C, some
     of which might have been modified.

  4. The attacker can intercept and replace network messages.

7.5.2 Solution Strategies

Many solutions to the remote tamperproofing problem are variants of
various levels of “sharing” the C code and data between the server and the
client. At one extreme, all of the C code and data resides on and is executed
by the server. This is sometimes known as software as a service. Whenever
the client wants to make progress, it has to contact the server, passing along
any data it wants the server to process, and wait for the server to return
computed results. This kind of server-side execution can lead to an
unacceptably high compute load for the server and unacceptably high
latency for the client. On the other hand, since all the sensitive code resides
server-side, there is no risk of the client tampering with it. At the other
extreme, the client runs all its own code and does all the work. This requires
the server to share all its data with the client, which can be bandwidth-
intensive. Since all computation is done client-side, it’s more difficult for
the server to guarantee that the client has not tampered with the code. Most
systems will settle on an intermediate level solution: Some computation is
done server-side, some client-side, and this balances computation, network
traffic, and tamper-detection between the two. In Section 7.5.3 we’ll show
you Algorithm TPZG, which automatically splits the computation of a
sequential program over the client and the server. It was originally designed
to protect against piracy, but subsequent development [57] has extended this
idea to the remote tamperproofing scenario.

A second idea is to extend the introspection algorithms of Section 7.2 412
to the client-server scenario. The idea is for the server to ask the client to
compute a hash over its code and compare it to the expected value.
However, this isn’t enough, since there’s nothing stopping the client from
lying about the hash! Algorithm TPSLSPDK(Section 7.5.4 459) solves this
problem by measuring the time it took for the client to compute the hash,
making sure that it didn’t have time to tamper with the code.

Finally, Algorithm TPCNS (Section 7.5.5 462) extends the idea of dynamic
obfuscation from Chapter 6 to the client-server scenario. The idea is for the
server to force the client to accept newly obfuscated versions of its code,
ideally at such a quick pace that it can’t manage to keep up its reverse
engineering efforts.

7.5.3 Algorithm TPZG: Slicing Functions

Algorithm TPZG [382] was developed to prevent piracy. The idea is to slice
the program into an open part that resides on the client and a hidden part
that resides on the server. Extra communication is added so that the client
can access those parts of the code that reside on the server. Assuming that
this extra communication doesn’t leak too much information, it should be
difficult for the adversary to reconstitute the hidden parts. This prevents
piracy (if the adversary can’t get access to all the code, he can’t copy it!)
but also prevents tampering with the part of the code that is hidden on the
server.

There are three main obstacles that make this idea impractical. First, being
tied to a server works well when you’re connected to a network but less
well when you’re on an airplane. This is a problem for piracy prevention,
but not for remote tamperproofing, where the assumption is that you are
always connected. The second problem is latency. Networked applications
are carefully designed to tolerate high latency—functions where high
latency is unacceptable are kept on the client side, and the remaining
functions can be kept on the server. If you move additional functions to the
server side, latency may become intolerable. The final problem is
bandwidth. If the client keeps large data structures and some of the
operations on these structures are moved to the server, there may not be
enough bandwidth to move the data back and forth.

Algorithm 7.5. Overview of algorithm TPZG. f is a function
selected for splitting, and v is a local variable in f.

PROTECT(f, v):

  1. Compute a forward slice of f, starting with the statements that define v.

  2. Determine which variables should be completely hidden (i.e., should
     reside only on the server) and which should be partially hidden (i.e.,
     should reside both on the client and the server).

  3. Examine each statement in the slice and split it between the client
     function Of and the server function Hfi.

  4. If x is a partially hidden variable, then

          • translate x ← rhs to x ← rhs; Hfi (x) where Hfi (x) updates x on
            the server.

          • translate

                                       lhs ← ...x...

          to
                                       x ← Hfi();
                                      lhs ← ...x...

          where Hfi (x) gets the current value of x from the server.

Algorithm TPZG bypasses the network latency and bandwidth problems by
only considering scalar data (functions on arrays and linked structures are
kept on the client) and restricting the client and server to both run on the
same local area network.

Algorithm 7.5 sketches how to split a function f into one part, Of, which runs
on the client, and several parts, Hfi, which run on the server and which the
client accesses through remote procedure calls.

Let’s look at a simple example to illustrate the algorithm. Below left is the
original function f that runs client-side. You’ve determined that you want to
hide variable a on the server. You start by computing a forward slice on a
(see Section 3.1.5 141). We show this in light gray to the right:

You want to protect all the light gray code, so you put it server-side in the
six functions Hf1... Hf6:
Finally, you rewrite f to Of, the new function that will run client-side:

The client accesses the hidden functions by making remote procedure calls
to the server. The variable c is partially hidden. This means that, for
performance reasons, it resides both on the client and the server, and the
code that updates it is split between the two.
Zhang and Gupta [382] report runtime overhead from 3% to 58%, but as
always, this depends on the amount of protection that is added, in this case,
how much of the program is hidden on the server and the amount of extra
communication overhead this introduces. Zhang and Gupta’s measurements
were done over a local area network. In many scenarios, it is more likely
that the server and client are farther away on the network and the extra
latency that is introduced may well make this method too slow, or at the
very least, will significantly reduce the size of the slice that can remain
hidden. Here’s a rough measurement of packet turnaround times, as
reported by tracepath, starting at york.cs.arizona.edu:

Going to www.stanford.edu from york.cs.arizona.edu is 125 times slower
than staying within the local area network, even though Stanford is
geographically in the state next to Arizona.

7.5.4 Algorithm TPSLSPDK: Measuring Remote Hardware

If you find yourself in a very restricted environment, it should be possible to
measure aspects of the untrusted client to verify that it is running the correct
software. This is the premise behind Algorithm TPSLSPDK [322–324],
known as the Pioneer system. After the Pioneer protocol has run, the server
can be sure that

  1. a particular executable E on the client hasn’t been modified,
  2. the client has executed E, and

  3. E was not tampered with during execution.

To get these guarantees, you have to assume a system configuration with
some very limiting properties:

  1. The server knows the exact hardware configuration of the client,
     including CPU model, clock speed, memory latency, and memory size.
     The client only has one CPU.

  2. The communication latency between the server and the client is
     known, for example, as a result of their being on the same LAN
     segment of the network.

  3. The network is configured so that during verification the client is
     unable to communicate with any system other than the server.

  4. The executable the server wants the client to run should not need to
     invoke any other software on the client, and it can execute at the
     highest processor privilege level with interrupts turned off.

Given these restrictions, the server can ask the client to compute a hash
over its own code and return the value to the server. The hash function is
carefully constructed so that if the client tries to cheat, he will either return
the wrong hash value or the hash computation will take longer than
expected to compute. This explains the very strict requirements above: If
the server doesn’t know the client’s computational power and the speed of
communication, it can’t estimate what is a reasonable time in which to
compute the hash, and if the client isn’t prevented from arbitrary network
activity, it could farm out the hash computation to a faster machine. A
successful cheat by the client means that he is able to return the correct hash
value within the expected time while at the same time running tampered
code.
7.5.4.1 Applications

In spite of such a restricted scenario, there are potential applications. For
example, say that you want to check a small device such as a cell phone,
PDA, or smartcard for viruses. You could plug it in directly to your
computer over a dedicated wire and use the Pioneer protocol to verify that
the phone is running uncompromised code. Similarly, if you’re a network
administrator, you could configure the routers on your LAN so that the
machine you want to check for malware cannot communicate with any
other machine during the verification process. Or say you’re an inspector of
voting machines. You could unplug a machine from its network connection,
connect it to your laptop, and then use Pioneer to check that the machine is
running the correct certified code.

In all these cases, it is reasonable to assume that you have perfect
knowledge of the computing power of the client—you just have to make
sure that your communication with it has predictable latency and that there
is no way for it to communicate with other systems. Given that, Pioneer
guarantees that the desired executable is loaded into memory and executed,
and that there is no rogue code on the client that can interfere with the
execution.

7.5.4.2 The Pioneer Protocol

Have a look at this overview of the Pioneer protocol (numbers indicate the
order of events):
On the client-side is the executable E, which the server wants the client to
run untampered. At the heart of the system is the verifier V, which the client
will use to prove its trustworthiness to the server. V includes the three
functions hash6(), send(), and SHA-1(). The send() function is used for data
transfer with the server, hash6() we defined in Section 7.2.2 418, and SHA-1()
is a cryptographic hash function.

In the first steps of the protocol, the client must convince the server that
none of the functions in V has been tampered with. The client can then use
these functions to send the server a SHA-1 hash over E. If the hash
matches, the server can be sure that E has not been tampered with. The final
step is for the client to run E and return the result to the server.

To convince the server that he hasn’t tampered with V, the client sends him
a hash (computed by hash6()) over the verifier code. Notice that hash6()
computes the hash over itself, thus verifying itself! The server then
compares the hash against the expected value.

There are several potential problems here. First, the client could pre-
compute the hash value, tamper with the code, and when challenged, send
the server the value it expects. The protocol, therefore, starts with the server
creating a nonce (a random value) and sending it to the client. The client is
forced to use the nonce to initialize hash6(), and this makes it impossible for
him to cheat by pre-computing the hash value.

The second problem is that the client can cheat by executing extra
instructions. To prevent this, the server measures the time it takes for the
client to compute the hash over V. This leads to a third problem: The client
could run an optimized version of hash6() that allows him to slip in extra
instructions and still return the hash value within the expected time! For this
reason, hash6() has been designed to be time optimal, i.e., there should be no
way to speed it up by reordering instructions, replacing one instruction with
another, and so on.

In step 3 of the protocol, the server verifies that the client has computed the
expected hash value over V within the expected amount of time. In steps 4
and 5, the client computes a SHA-1 hash of the executable E and the server
compares it against the expected value. Again, the client has to factor in a
nonce to prevent precomputation. At this point, the server knows that E
hasn’t been tampered with. In steps 6 and 7, finally, the client runs E and
transfers its return value to the server.

You must also make sure that no other process is running on the system
until after V and E have finished executing. To accomplish this, you must
require V and E to run at the highest CPU privilege level with all maskable
interrupts disabled. We don’t show it in the protocol sketch above, but the
hash computation in step 2 also includes processor state in order to assure
the server that the V and E run unperturbed. During step 2, you therefore
install new handlers for all non-maskable interrupts and exceptions.

     Problem 7.9

     This algorithm extends the code-hashing idea to the remote
     tamperproofing scenario. Can you do the same for the oblivious
     hashing idea from Section 7.4 444?

7.5.5 TPCNS: Continuous Replacement

The final idea to prevent tampering of remotely executing code that we’re
going to show you we call remote tamperproofing by continuous
replacement. The basic idea is to make the client code difficult to analyze
by keeping it in constant flux, i.e., by continuously obfuscating the client
code. Ideally, the adversary will find that the client code is changing so
quickly that before he has managed to analyze and modify the current
version, the server has generated a new one. Algorithm TPCNS [83] presents
this high-level overview of a continuous replacement system:

In this design, both the server and the client maintain a representation of the
C code (the code run by the client) in what we’ll call a bag of blocks. The
client executes out of its bag by selecting a block to run, jumping to it,
selecting the next block, and so on. The server, on the other hand, has a
mutator process that continuously modifies its bag of blocks and shares any
modified blocks with the client. Sharing can happen if the client asks the
server for a block it doesn’t have (at any one point in time, the client might
hold only a subset of all the code blocks), sending a request-block packet
(in dashed) to the server, and getting a new block (in light gray) in return.
The server may also push blocks onto the client. A block scheduler process
on the server determines which blocks to return or push to the client and at
what time.

The level of tamperproofing you achieve through this setup is determined
by

  1. the rate at which the server generates mutated blocks and pushes them
     onto the client, and

  2. the rate at which the adversary can analyze the client code by
     monitoring the continuously changing bag of blocks.

To reduce network traffic, you want to keep the block replacement rate as
low as possible. At the same time, you want to make the rate high enough to
be sure the client doesn’t have enough time to analyze the program between
updates!

The obfuscating block transformations should have the following
properties:

     • The server must be able to apply the transformations over and over
       again, creating an infinite stream of differently obfuscated blocks.

     • It should be more resource-consuming for the client to analyze new
       blocks than for the server to generate them.

     • The client shouldn’t be able to simply ignore new blocks pushed to it.

The last point is important. An adversary can simply monitor the bag of
blocks, and once it has received all of C’s code, just take a snapshot of the
bag and analyze it off-line.

Several of the obfuscating transformations you saw in Chapter 4 (Code
Obfuscation) can be applied multiple times. A simple implementation of
TPCNS could, for example, have only two transformations, one that splits a
block in two and another that merges two blocks together. Together these
two transformations would generate an infinite sequence of different blocks.

Unfortunately, such transformations won’t stop the adversary from ignoring
new blocks sent to it and simply executing old blocks it has already seen,
analyzed, and tampered with. To prevent such attacks, TPCNS requires the
server to support a third type of transformation, interface obfuscation. The
idea is to continuously modify the remote procedure call (RPC) interfaces
by which the server provides services to the client. The server can transform
these RPCs by, for example, renaming them, reordering their arguments,
adding bogus arguments, changing argument types, and splitting and
merging calls. An adversary who chooses to ignore block updates will
eventually execute an old block that issues an expired RPC. This will alert
the server that the client is under attack.

The main advantage of continuous replacement tamperproofing is that you
have several knobs that you can tweak to balance the level of protection
versus performance degradation:

  1. You can increase the rate of block push (the server telling the client to
     invalidate an old block and replace it with a new one) in order to
     increase the amount of analysis work the client has to do, at the cost of
     increased network traffic.

  2. You can make blocks more or less obfuscated using any of the
     algorithms in Chapter 4 (Code Obfuscation), with more obfuscation
     leading to longer analysis times but worse client performance.

There’s no known implementation of the continuous replacement idea. We
therefore don’t yet know the push rate and level of obfuscation necessary to
ward off attacks. It seems reasonable to believe, however, that “reasonable”
replacement and obfuscation rates would be enough to defend the client
against manual attacks, i.e., attacks where the adversary analyzes the client
code by executing it interactively under a debugger. Whether it’s enough to
protect the client against automated attacks (where the adversary attaches a
static analysis tool to the client in order to analyze new blocks
automatically as they appear in the block bag) is an entirely different
question.

7.6 Discussion

Tamperproofing addresses the trustworthiness of a piece of code and the
environment in which it executes. As the producer of a program, you want
to include certain restrictions on how it’s used—maybe it can’t be executed
after a certain period of time—and you include code in the program to
check that the conditions of use are met. If a user changes the program in
any way, you can no longer trust it, since these usage checks may have been
disabled. To trust a program, you have to be sure that absolutely nothing
about it has changed: code can be neither removed nor added. If, for
example, you have removed pieces of the program—to distribute a partially
functional trial version, for example—you want to be sure that no one adds
the missing pieces back in.

We’ve shown you five basic methods for making a program difficult to
tamper with:

  1. You can add code to the program that checks that the original bits have
     not been changed (Algorithms TPCA and TPHMST, and for remote
     tamperproofing, TPSLSPDK);

  2. You can add code to the program to check that it’s not running in a
     hostile environment (Algorithm TPGCK);

  3. You can check that the program’s runtime data structures are always in
     acceptable states and that the control flow follows reasonable paths
     (Algorithms TPCVCPSJ and TPJJV);

  4. You can split the program into two pieces, where one piece is protected
     from the attacker by running it remotely or on tamper-resistant
     hardware (Algorithm TPZG).
  5. You can use the obfuscation algorithms from Chapter 4 (Code
     Obfuscation) and Chapter 6 (Dynamic Obfuscation) to make the
     program harder to understand and hence tamper with (Algorithm
     TPCNS uses this for remote tamperproofing).

In practice, these algorithms are often combined. For example, we normally
don’t think of obfuscation as a tamperproofing technique in its own right,
since it lacks the ability to execute a response when an attack has been
discovered. However, obfuscation plays an important role in making
tamperproofing code more stealthy. You saw this in Section 7.2.2 418,
where we obfuscated the hash functions used in introspection algorithms in
order to make them less susceptible to pattern matching attacks.
Introspection algorithms like TPCA and TPHMST are also commonly
augmented with code to check if the program is running under a debugger
or emulator.

In Section 2.2.10 110, we presented the detect-respond defense model
primitive. In the model, an object is protected by monitoring a desirable
invariant and executing a response if the check fails. Algorithms TPCA,
TPHMST, TPSLSPDK, TPCVCPSJ, and TPJJV all fit in this primitive. For
TPCA and TPHMST, the invariant is a simple hash of the code, whereas for
TPCVCPSJ and TPJJV, the invariant is the hash of runtime data values.

The TPZG algorithm first applies the split primitive, breaking up the
application into two parts and making one part inaccessible to the attacker.
Since the hidden part is protected by running it on a remote server or on
tamperproof hardware, the attacker can’t tamper with it at all. TPZG can
combine splitting with tamperproofing by monitoring the communication
between the two parts of the program, reporting any suspicious exchanges
as possible tampering.

    Problem 7.10
None of the algorithms in this chapter has public implementations, so
it would be interesting to develop working systems that could be
compared for efficiency and resilience to attack.
