                  8. Software Watermarking

In the last few chapters, we have shown you techniques you can use to
prevent an attacker from deciphering the inner workings of your program or
from modifying it. But what happens if these lines of defenses fail? In this
chapter, we will discuss software watermarking—a technique for
embedding a unique identifier into the executable of a program. A
watermark is much like a copyright notice; it asserts that you claim certain
rights to the program. Just like the copyright notice in this book won’t
prevent you from making photocopies for all your friends,1 the presence of
this unique identifier in your program won’t prevent an attacker from
reverse engineering it or pirating it. However, if the identifier continues to
exist in every pirated copy, then it will allow us to show that the program
the attacker claims to be his is actually ours. Software fingerprinting is
similar to watermarking, but here, every copy you sell will have a different
unique mark in it, one per customer. If you happen on an illegally
redistributed copy of your program, you will be able to trace it back to the
original owner and take legal action.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Section 8.1 468, we will introduce
watermarking by looking at its history, some simple algorithms for marking
media objects, and the ways in which watermarking an object can help you
protect it as intellectual property. In Section 8.2 478, we will show you
some simple examples of how software can be watermarked and give
formal definitions needed for the rest of the chapter. In Sections 8.4 486,
8.5 494, and 8.6 498, we describe static watermarking algorithms, that is,
watermarks that are embedded in the executable itself. In Chapter 9
(Dynamic Watermarking), you will see a different class of algorithms that
embed the watermark in the dynamic behavior of the program. In Section
8.8 522,we look at steganographic embeddings, i.e., ways to secretly
embed a long message into a program as a means of covert communication.
In Sections 8.9 526 and 8.10 533, we discuss algorithmic techniques
needed to implement many software watermarking algorithms. In Section
8.11 537, finally, we summarize.
8.1 History and Applications

The art of media watermarking may have first been practiced in the West in
the late thirteenth century, when discerning Italian customers and merchants
in the town of Fabriano could examine paper for embossed watermarks.
This was apparently a reliable means of identifying the paper mill at which
it was produced, and perhaps even the artisan who smoothed the paper with
a “calendar” stone [217]. Over the next seven hundred years, watermarking
found many more applications. These include making currency difficult to
forge and allowing artists to secretly but deliberately sign their paintings,
and more esoteric uses such as identifying pirates of logarithm tables and
astronomical data [358]. Since the 1990s there has been considerable
interest in using digital watermarks as a protective measure for digital
imagery. Since then, many algorithms targeting all kinds of media objects
have appeared. Now, there are algorithms to protect video, images, music,
DNA, network traffic, three-dimensional meshes, natural language,
shredded documents, radio and television communication, and so on. In
1996, the idea of embedding identifiers was first applied to software,
namely, algorithm WMDM (patented by Microsoft [104]), which we will
discuss further in Section 8.4.1 488.

8.1.1 Applications

Assume for a moment that you have algorithms available to embed an
identifier (a string or an integer, typically) into a media object. That is, you
have a function embed(M, k, w) that embeds the watermark w into the
audio/video/image object M, using the secret key k, and a function
extract(Mw, k), which extracts w from the marked object Mw using the same
secret key. In the next few sections, we will show you how this can actually
be done, but for now let’s concentrate on how you could use such marks to
protect your rights [97] to an object. Although we’ll be considering media
objects here, the same ideas apply to software [266], which will be our
focus in the rest of the chapter. We use the images in Figure 8.1 469 to
illustrate the different kinds of applications of watermarking.

Figure 8.1. Examples of watermark applications.

8.1.1.1 Visible vs. Invisible Marks

Depending on what aspect of your rights you’re trying to protect, you will
want the embedded mark to be visible or invisible. A visible mark is
sometimes exactly that—conspicuously displayed on the media object for
anyone to see—and thereby acting as a deterrent against misuse. The
copyright notice displayed on the inside cover of this book is an example.
But we’ll take a broader view here and define a visible mark as one that the
end user could be able to view, whether it is directly visible or not. The
watermark that you can see when you hold a bank note up to the light is an
example. An invisible mark, then, is one that can only be extracted using a
secret not available to the end user.
8.1.1.2 Robust vs. Fragile Marks

In addition to the visibility of a mark, we will also classify it as being robust
or fragile. A robust mark is difficult to modify, either accidentally (for
example, by converting an image or audio clip between the digital and
analog domains) or deliberately (by actively launching an attack to destroy
the mark). A fragile mark could be easily destroyed by transformations to
the cover object. A further distinction is sometimes made between a robust
mark that survives common signal processing operations and a tamper-
resistant one that also survives hostile attacks.

Common lossy compression schemes (such as jpeg and mpeg) remove
information from the media object that we wouldn’t be able to perceive
anyway, and a robust mark must withstand this. Shrinking an image or
cropping pieces from it are also dangerous attacks, since they, too, remove
information. There are also many signal-processing operations (resampling,
contrast and color adjustment, dithering, recompression) that can destroy
the mark. Finally, you cannot assume that the media will stay in the same
form, and so the mark has to remain, even if an image gets printed,
photocopied, and rescanned; an mp3-file gets played through speakers; or a
video gets transfered from PAL to NTSC. As you will see later in this
chapter, in the software watermarking domain you also have to make sure
the mark survives format conversions (compiling source to binary,
decompiling, translating from one language to another) and distortive
transformations (obfuscation and optimization).

In media watermarking, the robustness of an algorithm is typically
evaluated by attacking a marked object with a collection of transformations.
Benchmark programs such as Stirmark [282] (which is used to evaluate
image watermarking algorithms) are designed to distort a marked object
enough to destroy embedded marks but to be subtle enough to not diminish
the value of the object. You can similarly evaluate the robustness of a
software watermarking algorithm by subjecting it to the obfuscating
transformations from Chapter 4.

8.1.1.3 Authorship Marks
The most obvious application of watermarking is to embed an identification
of the copyright owner in the cover object. This is called an authorship
mark. If you want the mark to act as a deterrent to would-be thieves, you’ll
want it to be visible. However, you also want to prevent an attacker from
removing the mark (you’ll want it to be robust) and for that reason many
authorship marks are made invisible.

Digimarc’s MyPictureMark tool can embed both visible and invisible marks
in your images. The visible marks act as a deterrent, and the invisible ones
allow a special web-spider to search for images on the Web with embedded
marks. Playboy uses this tool to track illegal uses of pictures downloaded
from its Web site.

8.1.1.4 Fingerprint Marks

A second application is to serialize the cover object, i.e., to embed a
different mark in every distributed copy. This is often called fingerprinting.
While the authorship mark identifies the copyright owner, the fingerprint
uniquely identifies the purchaser of the object. If you should find a copy of
your content where you don’t expect it to be (such as downloadable from a
Web site, on a pirated DVD, and so on), you can extract the mark and trace
the content back to the person who originally purchased it. A famous
example is the case of the actor Carmine Caridi, who gave away copies of
Academy Award screening tapes, unaware that they had been marked with
his name [181].2 This idea can also be applied to programs, where it is
common for a company to distribute beta copies of its software to
collaborating companies in order to allow them to check for compatibility
issues. If a collaborator leaks their fingerprinted beta copy into the public
domain, you can extract the name of the culprit from the copy and take
legal action.

In 1997 [198], it was discovered that for over twenty years Japanese
advertisers had paid for TV ads that were never actually run. Broadcast
monitoring is another application of fingerprinting that can be used to
combat this practice. The idea is to fingerprint a piece of music with the
radio station that purchased it for airplay and then to monitor all stations to
count the number of times each song is played. This ensures that only those
stations that bought the rights can play the song and allows you to collect
accurate royalties. The same technique can be used to count the number of
times TV stations run ads in order to ensure that the customer gets the
number of broadcasts they paid for.

8.1.1.5 Licensing Marks

A licensing mark encodes, invisibly and robustly, the way the cover object
can be used by the end user. It can be as simple as the date after which a
downloaded review copy of a program cannot be executed, or it can be
complex business rules that describe the ways in which a digital movie can
be read, copied, played, resold, and so on. Any system that processes the
marked object (such as by playing the video or executing the program) will
have to extract these rules and abide by them.

Licensing marks are an integral part of any DRM system. The usage rules
could be stored as meta-data (in file headers, for example), but using
watermarking ensures that the data remains, even after transformations on
the object such as translation from one video format to another or one
programming language to another.

8.1.1.6 Meta-Data Marks

Meta-data marks are visible and (possibly) fragile marks that embed data
that the end user might find useful. An image could encode a caption, for
example, or the shutter speed and aperture of the shot.

8.1.1.7 Validation Marks

A validation mark is used by the end user to verify that the marked object is
authentic and hasn’t been altered or falsified. For example, you may want to
detect if a crime scene photo has been doctored by moving, say, a gun from
one person’s hand to another. A common technique is to compute a digest of
an object and embed it in the object itself as a watermark. A digest is a
cryptographic hash such as computed by MD5 or SHA-1. The user can
verify that the object hasn’t been changed by comparing a digest of the
photo to the one embedded in the photo. Java signed applets similarly
embed a digest of the code in the distributed jar-file. Validation marks need
to be fragile (even a miniscule change to the document should change the
embedded mark) and visible (since the user needs to be able to see it to use
it for validation).

8.1.1.8 Filtering Marks

A filtering or classification mark carries classification codes to allow media
players to filter out any inappropriate (pornographic or otherwise
objectionable) material. The mark needs to be robust so that your fifteen-
year-old son can’t easily remove it and visible so that media players can
read it.

8.1.1.9 Secret Marks

A secret mark is used for covert communication, i.e., to let two parties
communicate without anyone noticing. This is also known as
steganography, and you will see more of this in Section 8.8 522. The
requirements of steganography are different from those of watermarking
and fingerprinting in that robustness matters not at all, but invisibility is
vitally important. Steganography appeared on the public’s radar screen
when USA Today [195] claimed that:

                  Hidden in the X-rated pictures on several pornographic Web
                  sites and the posted comments on sports chat rooms may lie
                  the encrypted blueprints of the next terrorist attack against
                  the United States or its allies.

These ideas resurfaced after the September 11, 2001, attacks [206], but
subsequent studies failed to find any evidence of steganographic content on
the Internet [294].

8.1.1.10 Inadvertent Authorship Marks
An inadvertent authorship mark, or birth-mark, appears naturally in the
cover object without your having to insert it explicitly. They are therefore
not really watermarks. For example, the markings of the kitten in Figure 8.1
  469 could be seen as its birthmarks, and they allow you to distinguish him
from all other cats. You’ll read more about birthmarks in Chapter 10
(Software Similarity Analysis).

8.1.2 Embedding a Mark in Audio

Before we show you how to embed a mark in a program, let’s have a look at
some media watermarking algorithms. A common theme in media
watermarking is that in all digital media objects there is some “extra space”
that can be used to embed data. This space is the result of the limits of
human perception. Our auditory system is limited in frequency range and in
the dynamic changes we can perceive, the human eye can only detect a
certain range of colors, and so on. Lossy compression schemes such as jpeg
make use of this, “throwing away” parts of an image that a human wouldn’t
be able to perceive anyway. In watermarking, instead of throwing away the
extra space, you can use it to embed data. We’re going illustrate this by
looking at a few media watermarking algorithms [37,98], starting with
those that target audio.

     Problem 8.1

     As you read the rest of this chapter, keep these media-marking
     algorithms in the back of your head. Can you think of ways to reuse
     these ideas to mark software? It would seem that software and natural-
     language algorithms would have much in common, since natural and
     programming languages share many features.
A popular way of marking audio such as mp3-files is echo hiding. The idea
is to embed echoes that are short enough to be imperceptible to the human
ear. Here, we’ve added a really short echo to represent a 0-bit, a longer one
to represent a 1-bit:

But how do you know where in the audio file to insert the mark? And how
do you find the mark again? A common method is to use a pseudo-random
number generator initialized by a secret key key to trace out the sequence of
locations p0, p1, ... in the file where the echoes should be embedded. To
extract the watermark, you use the same secret key to visit the same
locations.

It is likely that there are some parts of a piece of music that you shouldn’t
alter, and so the embedder needs to avoid them. For example, an artificial
echo during a very quiet section of a performance is likely to be noticeable.
The same is true of watermarking images: It’s probably not a good idea to
make wholesale changes to a uniformly blue sky. When marking software,
you face similar problems, such as the need to stay away from hot spots and
from parts of the code where the particular watermarking code you embed
would be unstealthy.

A popular media watermarking technique is Least Significant Bit (LSB)
encoding. By definition, the LSB of an audio sample or pixel value is the
one that contributes least to your perception and so should be possible to
alter without adversely affecting quality. For example, to embed a message
in a piece of music, you could subtly alter samples:
As usual, a pseudo-random number generator initialized by a secret key can
trace the locations in which to embed a mark. Without access to the key, it
is difficult for an adversary to extract the mark. Destroying the mark, on the
other hand, is not so hard: Simply randomly replace the least significant bit
of every sample with a randomly chosen 0 or 1!

8.1.3 Embedding a Mark in an Image

Patchwork [37] is a simple image watermarking algorithm that embeds a
single bit by manipulating the brightness of pixels. In this algorithm, you
use a pseudorandom number sequence to trace out pairs (A, B) of pixels.
During embedding, you increase the brightness of A by a small amount, and
decrease B by the same small amount. Here’s an exaggerated example:

What’s so clever about this scheme is that the average brightness of the
image hasn’t changed! This means that it is hard for the adversary to detect
that the image has been marked. To extract the mark, you visit the same
sequences of pairs of pixels (A, B) and sum up the differences of their
brightness. For a completely random sequence of pixels, you’d expect this
sum to be zero. If it’s much greater than 0, you’ve detected that the image
has been marked. Algorithm 8.1 has a sketch of the technique.

Algorithm 8.1. Sketch of the Patchwork image watermarking
algorithm.

We classify watermarking recognizers as blind or informed. To extract a
blind mark, you need only the marked object and the secret key, whereas to
extract an informed mark, you need extra information, typically the
original, unwatermarked object. So far, the algorithms you’ve seen have had
blind recognizers.

8.1.4 Embedding a Mark in Natural-Language Text

In natural-language watermarking you embed a message in, for example,
an English language text. The algorithms you choose for embedding will
naturally depend on the actual representation of the text. There are three
basic representations that can be marked:

    • The text itself with formatting (spaces and line breaks) intact, such as
      an ASCII text representation; or

    • Free-flowing text, i.e., the sequence of letters, words, sentences, and
      paragraphs that make up the text, without regard for formatting; or
    • An image of the text (such as a PostScript or PDF representation).

In a PDF document, say, marking is very similar to marking audio or
images. You embed data in alterations that are too minor to be perceptible
by humans. For example, you can encode a 0-bit or a 1-bit by subtly
changing the spacing between words or lines:

In a plain text file with formatting, you can encode the mark in white space
so that one space means a 0-bit and two spaces mean a 1-bit:

A very popular way of watermarking free-flowing text is to replace words
with synonyms. If you assume that the words {nude, unclothed, undressed,
naked} are equivalent, i.e., wherever one occurs the others could be used
equally well then you can embed two bits of watermark whenever one of
them occurs in a sentence:
There are many similar techniques, for example, based on inserting spelling
or punctuation errors.

More interestingly, you can encode a mark in the syntactic structure of an
English text. The idea is to devise a watermark extraction function that
computes a bit from a sentence, and then, by means of syntactic
transformations, modify the sentence until it embeds the right bit (your
watermark bit). Say, for example, that you want to embed a 1-bit in the
sentence below left. However, your watermark extraction function returns a
0-bit. You then apply the cleft sentence syntactic transformation in the hope
that the extractor function will now return 1:

If that doesn’t work, you can continue trying other transforms such as
passivization, or even combinations of transforms.

Atallah et al. [25] implemented and expanded on this scheme. Their
algorithm has three main ideas. First, since a single sentence is too small to
embed an entire watermark, you chunk up the watermark in pieces and
embed one piece per sentence. Many software watermarking algorithms
that you will see do the same thing. Second, you will need a function that
computes a sequence of bits, one per syntax-tree node, for a sentence.
Modifying the structure of the sentence will modify these bits, which then,
hopefully, will embed a piece of the watermark. Some software
watermarking algorithms (such as WMSHKQ) use a similar iterative process
to embed a mark. Third, you will need a special marker sentence that
precedes every watermark-bearing sentence and that points out where in the
modified syntax tree the watermark chunk is embedded. Algorithm 8.2 478
has a sketch of the watermark embedder and recognizer.

The scheme can be extended to work not just at the syntactic but also at the
semantic level [23]. For example, information given in one sentence can be
copied or moved into another sentence, information that is repeated
multiple times in a paragraph can be removed, or information can be
replaced with equivalent information:

Algorithm 8.2. Sketch of the natural-language watermarking
algorithm of Atallah et al. [25]. The input document 〈 s1, s2
...〉 consists of English language sentences.
The idea is to keep trying different semantic transformations, including
combinations of transformations, until each sentence embeds the required
bits.

8.2 Watermarking Software

To understand how you could watermark a program, let’s start by
considering some simple means of embedding an identifier in a program.
The simplest and perhaps most obvious way is to place a copyright notice
comment in the source files or to include the notice in the set of files you
distribute with your program. But these sort of identifiers are trivial for an
attacker to remove. In fact, comments are automatically stripped out by a
compiler during compilation. For an embedding technique to be useful, it
must be resilient to such simple attacks. For this purpose, a watermark must
be an integral part of the program. For example, you could embed the
watermark as string constants included in the source of a program:

     public class Fibonacci {
     String copyright = "Copyright © Doris";
     public int fibonacci (int n) {
     if (n <= 2)
     return 1;
     else
     return fib(n - 1) + fib(n - 2);
     }
     }

Such an embedding is called a static watermark. Static watermarks take a
program P and a watermark w and produce a watermarked program P′.
These types of embeddings typically permute the original code or they
insert new but non-functional code. In either case, to extract a static
watermark, a static recognizer analyzes the code directly:

As usual, embedding and extracting the watermark can be done at the
source level, on architecture-neutral bytecode, or on binary code, and just as
we saw for media watermarking algorithms, embedding and recognition
make use of a secret key.

In a sense, copyright notices already serve as a static watermark in some
existing programs. Try extracting some from your favorite executable:3
     bash>   strings    /usr/bin/netscape | grep
     Copyright
     Copyright (C) 1995, Thomas G. Lane
     Copyright (C) 1998 Netscape Communications
     Corporation.
     bash>

Are such static strings embedded in a program sufficient to watermark a
program? How can he remove such static marks? Clearly, an attacker can
simply search for strings that appear to contain copyright information. If
these strings are not used anywhere else in the program, removing them is a
simple matter. In order to make your mark resilient to these sorts of attacks,
you can use the opaque predicates from Chapter 4 to make it appear that the
watermark string is actually being used. Now the attacker cannot
mechanically remove all copyright strings with the same level of
confidence:

In the remainder of the chapter, we will examine more sophisticated
techniques for encoding and embedding a software watermark. As you can
probably imagine, a program has many places where a signal can be hidden,
such as in the choice of variable names, the order of instructions, and the
structure of a program’s control flow graph. What makes some of these
places more suitable than others?

     Problem 8.2

     Which comes first, watermarking or obfuscation? If you were trying to
     protect your program, would you watermark it before or after
     obfuscation? Does it make a difference? If so, what are the advantages
     and disadvantages of each order?

8.3 Definitions

A software watermarking or fingerprinting system is comprised of three
functions:

The embed function takes a program P as input and transforms it into Pw by
embedding the mark w. Since you must assume that the attacker knows the
marking algorithm you’re using, there needs to be some other secret that
you have but the attacker doesn’t; if there wasn’t, he’d be able to extract the
mark as easily as you can! That secret is the key. The key used by embed is
also used by the extract function to retrieve w from Pw. Exactly how the key
is used is up to the algorithm, but typically it traces out the location(s)
where the watermark is embedded. The embedding must preserve program
semantics, i.e., P and Pw must have the same input/output behavior. The
recognize function takes the watermark w as input and returns how
confident we are that Pw contains w. These and the other definitions in this
section are taken from reference [90].

There are many possible variations of these definitions. For example, in a
non-blind watermarking system, the extract and recognize functions take an
additional argument, the unwatermarked program:

In certain situations, recognition might be easier or more reliable in a non-
blind system than in a blind one. For example, an algorithm could compare
Pw with P to help get a fix on the location of w.

The job of the attacker is to discover the functions detect and attack:

The detect function models the attacker’s ability to figure out whether a
program is in fact watermarked or not. The detect function is really the
attacker’s version of your recognize function, where he doesn’t have access
to the key. The attack function models the attacker’s ability to disturb Pw in
such a way that you will no longer be able to reliably extract w from it. A
perfectly accurate detect function doesn’t have false negatives (i.e., it never
says Pw isn’t watermarked when in fact it is):

                        ∀P, w: detect(embed(P, w)) ≥ 0.5
Nor does it have false positives (i.e., it never says that P is watermarked
when in fact it isn’t):

              ∀X : detect(X) < 0.5 ⇒ ∀S, P, w: embedS (P, W) ≠ X

8.3.1 Watermark Credibility

The terms true/false positive/negative occur frequently in the literature, so
we’ll spend some time explaining them in detail. In this context, true/false
expresses whether your recognizer returns a correct result or not, and
positive/negative represents whether that result is, “Yes, watermarked!” or
“No, not watermarked!” Have a look at Figure 8.2, where we’ve
summarized the four possible results that the recognize function can return.

Figure 8.2. The results that the recognize function can return
   for a watermarked program Pw and an unwatermarked
                           program P.

When given a watermarked program Pw as input, the recognize function
could say that Pw is in fact watermarked, and we call this a true positive. Or
it could say that Pwisn’t watermarked when in fact it is—a false negative.
Often, recognize isn’t perfect (it will sometimes produce false negatives,
i.e., say that Pw isn’t watermarked), and so we want it to have a false
negative rate as low as possible. False negatives can occur because the
recognizer is broken or because your adversary has modified Pw to prevent
you from extracting the mark.
When given an un-watermarked program P as input, a good recognize
function should tell us that P isn’t watermarked, a true negative. But it
could wrongly say that P is watermarked, a false positive. It’s very
important that your recognizer has a low false positive rate. If it doesn’t, if
there’s a high risk that for many unwatermarked programs (or programs
watermarked with your competitor’s mark) the recognizer will say that it
contains your mark, then it will be hard for you to argue in court that it is a
credible recognizer. Your adversary will just argue that, sure, your
watermark occurs in the program on his hard disk, but your recognizer is so
unreliable that you can use it to extract just about any mark from any
program!

The credibility of a watermarking algorithm is a measure of how strongly it
proves authorship. In this book, we will define credibility of a watermark
recognizer as having a low false positive rate. We can illustrate credibility
with this figure:

Here, U is the universe of programs, P is the set of positives (the set of
programs for which the recognizer returns 1), and N is the set of negatives
(the set of programs for which the recognizer returns 0). PF is the set of
false positives. A recognizer with high credibility should have a low value
for
Thus, in an ideal scenario with a perfect recognizer that has neither false
positives nor false negatives, the dark gray area and the dashed area above
are both empty.

In this situation, the recognizer will return true only for programs that have
actually been watermarked, and false for programs that have not.

8.3.2 Attacks

Let’s look at the possible attack scenarios. In the following, let’s assume
that Doris marks a program P with w using key key, and then sells Pw to
Axel:

                             Pw = embed(P, w, key)

In a brute-force attack, Axel simply generates all possible keys and finds
the correct one by applying Doris’ public recognize function. If he knows
something about Doris’ key distribution, he can cut down the expected
search time by generating the more likely keys first.

Before Axel can resell Pw, he must ensure that the fingerprint has been
rendered useless, or else Doris will be able to prove that her intellectual
property rights have been violated.

In an additive attack, Axel adds his own watermark w′ to Doris’ already
watermarked program Pw:

Since both marks are now present in Pw, this will sow confusion when
Doris takes Axel to court—he can argue that her mark is bogus, or at least
that his mark predates hers!

If Axel can figure out where in Pww is hidden, he can try to crop it out.
After the attack, Doris can no longer recognize the mark (because it is no
longer there!):

                    recognize(attack(Pw), key, w) < 0.5

This is called a subtractive attack. Obviously, Axel’s attack must be
semantics-preserving. To be more precise, after he has cropped out the
watermark, the attacked program must still be intact enough that it has some
value to him. For example, if, after the attack, the mark is indeed gone but
the program has become prone to random crashes, his customers probably
won’t be happy buying his pirated wares, regardless of his cut-rate pricing.

In a distortive attack, Axel applies semantics-preserving transformations
uniformly over the program. His hope is that the transformations will
scramble the program, and the mark it contains, so that Doris can no longer
extract the mark:
The advantage of a distortive over a subtractive attack is that there is no
need to know the exact location of the mark—the adversary applies
transformations over the entire program, so that regardless of where the
mark is located, it will be affected. Of course, the disadvantage is that many
distortive transformations will degrade the program, either making it larger
or slower. So Axel has to come up with a set of transformations that are
highly likely to sufficiently distort the mark but that will leave the program
fast enough and small enough to still be of value to him and his customers.

In image, audio, and video watermarking, distortive attacks are very
common and can be quite devastating. The reason is that there are many
transformations that change the digital object quite substantially (and hence
are likely to destroy the mark) but cannot be perceived by humans [18,283].

Craver [100] describes several so-called protocol attacks. For example, say
that Doris takes Axel to court for intellectual property infringement and
shows the judge that she can extract her mark w from Pw using her key k:

                          recognize(Pw, k, w) > 0.5

Axel can counter by producing his own bogus key k′ and mark w′ that he
“extracts” from Pw:

                         recognize(Pw, k′, w′) > 0.5

Since recognize is a public function, he can spend as much time as he needs
to come up with this (k′, w′)-pair.

Or Axel can tell the judge that it is Doris who is not playing by the rules of
the protocol, and that he is the one who has the “correct” recognition
function, recognize’. It is easy enough for him to come up with a function
that extracts his bogus mark w′ using a key k′ from Pw:

                         recognize’(Pw, k′, w′) > 0.5
Protocol attacks have to be countered legally rather than technically. For
example, Doris’ lawyer could call an expert witness to examine Axel’s
embedder, recognizer, and extractor, and Axel would have to explain how
they work. The witness could expose, for example, if Axel’s recognize’
function is designed to always return ''Axel's program!'' for any program it’s
applied to.

8.3.3 Watermarking vs. Fingerprinting

In a watermarking scenario, copies of the program that you distribute are
identical and all contain the same mark in the same place. In a
fingerprinting scenario, on the other hand, every copy you’re distributing
contains a different mark. In other words, each user gets his own unique
version of the program, and as a result, you can trace an illegal copy back to
whoever bought it first. The problem with this scenario is that you leave
yourself open to collusive attacks: The attacker can buy several differently
marked programs and find the location of the marks through the programs’
differences. We model this as detect( ) and attack( ), where         is the set
of programs that the attacker has access to.

Algorithm 8.3. Convert between an integer V and a
permutation of 〈 0, 1, ...,len – 1 〉 . len should be at least n,
where V <= n!. Adapted from reference [202].
8.4 Watermarking by Permutation

In his book Disappearing Cryptography [367], Peter Wayner shows how
you can embed a secret message in any ordered list, such as a shopping list,
a top-10 list, and so on.4 In this section, we’re going to show you that the
same idea can be used to embed a watermark in any list of programming
language constructs that can be reordered, renumbered, or renamed.

The fundamental insight is that you can easily convert between an integer
and a permutation. Algorithm 8.3 gives the details. To embed the watermark
6, you compute int2perm(6) = 〈2, 3, 1, 0〉, find some part of your program
that has four “items” that can be reordered without changing the meaning of
the program, perform the reordering, and you’re done. There are plenty of
such “items” in most programs.

In many languages, for example, the order of declarations is free. This
means that functions or variable declarations can be reordered to embed a
mark. In the example in Listing 1.6 39, we showed that the case-labels in a
switch-statement may be reordered to embed a mark. You can even reorder
assignment statements within a function, as long as there are no
dependencies between them. For example, because of the data dependencies
in the example below (see Section 3.1.3 132), statements A and B can be
reordered but B and C cannot, and neither can C and D:

    A: X = 5;
    B: Y = 8;
    C: X = X + Y;
    D: Y = 9;

Recognition isn’t as straightforward. To extract the permutation from the
watermarked program, you need to know what each item’s order was in the
original program. Say, for example, that you used the permutation
int2perm(4) = 〈1, 0, 2〉 to reorder the three original statements to the left,

yielding the marked program on the right:

Unfortunately, during recognition there’s no way of knowing that Y=8 was
originally the second statement, and so there’s no way of recovering the
permutation! There are two ways of solving this problem. The first is to
make the recognizer non-blind, i.e., to give it access to both the original and
the watermarked program. The second is to put the program in a canonical
form prior to marking. Here, we first sort the statements lexicographically
and then apply the permutation:

To extract the permutation, you compare the location of each statement with
its location in the lexicographically sorted order.

8.4.1 Algorithm WMDM: Reordering Basic Blocks

The first actual algorithm we’re going to show you, WMDM [104,156,263],
appears in a patent from 1996 issued to Microsoft [104]. As published, it’s
actually just half of an algorithm: It shows how to embed a fingerprint in a
program but says nothing of how to extract it again. Myles et al. [263] and
Hattanda and Ichikawa [156] later presented more detailed
implementations.
A typical compiler will translate each function in a program into a control
flow graph. These graphs are manipulated by the code optimizer and code
generator to improve code quality. The final step of compilation is to
linearize [5] the graph to find the order in which the basic blocks should be
placed in the executable file. Algorithm 8.4 embeds the watermark by
reordering the basic block placement. Figure 8.3 shows an example.

Figure 8.3. Reordering the basic block placement to embed a
   watermark using the WMDM algorithm. In the center is the
    original control flow graph, to the left is the “standard”
linearization generated by a typical compiler, and to the right is
  the linearized graph after reordering. Extra goto statements
that had to be inserted to maintain semantics are shown in light
               gray. Adapted from reference [104].

Algorithm 8.4. Overview of algorithm WMDM. Embedding and
recognition can be repeated for some or all functions in the
program. Long watermarks can be split over several functions.
If the recognizer is non-blind, it needs the original,
unwatermarked program as input.

There are two wrinkles with this method. First, the basic block reordering
will sometimes cause fall-through cases to change, and this means that extra
branches may need to be inserted to maintain the correct semantics. We’ve
marked these branches in light gray in the example in Figure 8.3 488. A
second problem is that the same function may contain several basic blocks
that are identical. If you can’t tell one block from another, the recognizer
can no longer recover the permutation! To prevent this situation, the
embedder can either simply ignore functions with identical basic blocks, or
it can insert bogus code (such as nops) until all blocks are unique.

All algorithms based on reordering, regardless of whether they reorder basic
blocks, function declarations, statements, and so on, display similar
advantages and disadvantages. First, they are really easy to defeat: The
attacker simply has to reorder every “reorderable” list of items in the
program himself! Second, reordering typically suffers very minor overhead,
both for the defender and the attacker. Hattanda and Ichikawa report
performance overhead of 0%–11% for three standard high-performance
computing benchmarks, and Myles et al. show negligible slowdown for a
set of Java benchmarks. WMDM does require us to insert a few extra
branches, but except for highly performance-critical kernels, this is unlikely
to cause much of a problem. Third, the data rate depends on the number of
reorderable items, and this will be highly dependent on what kind of items
you’re reordering and on the application itself. If you have m items to
reorder you can encode

watermarking bits. Hattanda and Ichikawa report a watermark data rate of
roughly 2% of code size. Stealth is also an issue for these algorithms. The
code generated from WMDM will look weird: No self-respecting compiler
would generate such convoluted linearizations! Similarly, algorithms that
embed the mark by reordering declarations will be unstealthy, since
programmers don’t order declarations randomly, and compilers typically lay
out variables and functions in the order in which they occur in the source
code.5

8.4.2 Renumbering

Closely related to reordering is renumbering. If a language has m identical
items R = {R0, R1, ..., Rm–1}, you can embed a mark by providing a function
f : R → R that replaces every use of Ri with f (Ri).

The most obvious source of interchangeable objects in a program is the
register file. To simplify, let’s assume that the function you want to mark
uses every register {R0, ..., Rm –1}. Start by normalizing the function by
renumbering the registers so that the first register being assigned to is R0,
the second is R1, and so on:

Next, convert your watermark into a permutation. Let’s make the
watermark be 4 and the permutation int2perm(4) = 〈1, 0, 2〉. Then apply
the register renumbering permutation п = 〈π(R0) = R1, π(R1) = R0, π(R2) =
R2〉 to the normalized code:

To extract the permutation, you just have to consider the first definition of
every register in the function.

Watermarking by renumbering registers in this way is just as weak as
reordering basic blocks. To destroy the mark, you simply renumber the
registers randomly. If your compiler’s register allocator doesn’t select
registers uniformly (and I bet it doesn’t), then stealth will suffer also.

8.4.3 Algorithm WMQP: Improving Credibility
A problem with reordering and renumbering algorithms is weak credibility.
Since any order could represent a potential watermark, you get a high false
positive rate. One simple way to lower the false positive rate (and thereby
increase credibility of the mark) is to increase the length of the watermark
—the longer the mark is, the less likely it is to occur in a program by
chance. Naturally, you prefer shorter marks in order to avoid growing the
executable. In their implementation of WMDM, Myles et al. pre- and post-
pended the watermark with a magic number, effectively making the mark
both longer and less likely to occur by chance. An alternative is to select
watermarks from a sparse space: In Section 8.9.3 531, you will see how to
turn a 32-bit watermark into a 48-bit sparse code.

The next algorithm we’re going to show you, WMQP [263,297], selects the
register assignment in a way that gives a credible watermark. The origin of
this algorithm is a series of papers by Qu et al. [210,297–299,377] dealing
with the watermarking of hardware designs. They suggest that the algorithm
can also be applied to software, which Myles [260,261] did. The general
idea is that for any approximation algorithm, there are many solutions that
are equally good, or at least “good enough” for the application. By adding
extra constraints to a problem, where these constraints represent the
watermark you want to embed, you get a solution that contains the mark.

To illustrate this idea, we’re going to consider the NP-complete Graph
Coloring problem. Graph coloring is often used in compilers to do register
allocation. Have a look at this little example program:

    B = B + A
    C = C + A
    D = D + A

We say that two variables interfere if they are live at the same time. This
means they both can’t be assigned to the same register at the same time. To
represent this information, you create an interference graph, where the
nodes are the variables of the program and there’s an edge between two
nodes if the corresponding variables interfere. For the example above,
variable A has to reside in different registers than B, C, and D, resulting in this
interference graph:

A compiler would build such a graph to decide which variable should reside
in which register. To find an acceptable register assignment, the compiler
would next color the graph so that two nodes connected by an edge don’t
have the same color. The colors represent registers, so this is the same as
saying, “Assign any two variables alive at the same time to different
registers.” Assuming there are two registers, you get the following coloring,
where we’ve used light gray for register R0 and dark gray for R1:

Given this coloring, the compiler can assign variable A to register R0 and B,
C, D to R1 and then generate this machine code for the program:

Now, to embed the watermark you add fake dependencies to the graph,
forcing a different coloring. For example, let’s add an edge between C and D,
giving you this new interference graph:
This graph needs to be colored differently, since C and D cannot reside in the
same register anymore. We use dashed for register R2. The new code looks
like this:

Algorithm 8.5 494 gives an overview of the idea.

As a watermarking algorithm for software, WMQP isn’t very interesting.
Just like other renumbering and reordering embeddings, it’s easy for your
adversary to use randomization to destroy the mark. What’s more
interesting is how it allows for a clean definition of credibility. Since you’re
adding constraints to the original interference graph Iorig to make the
watermark graph IW, IW must have fewer solutions than Iorig. Also, every
solution to IW must also be a solution to Iorig:

Algorithm 8.5. Overview of WMQP.
The more constraints you add, the fewer solutions you’ll get. If the
difference between the number of solutions to IW and Iorig is large, the odds
that a particular solution S appears in the program by chance become low
enough that it can be used as credible evidence in a court of law.

Another reason why this algorithm isn’t of practical interest is that for
architectures with small register files, the extra constraints you add may
cause a performance hit. Coloring a graph with many constraints may
require the compiler to insert spill code (extra instructions to store and
restore the value of a register into memory) to free up registers.

8.5 Tamperproofing Watermarks
If we had perfect tamperproofing, watermarking would be easy! Just pick
whatever embedding algorithm has the highest data rate or credibility,
embed your mark, tamperproof the program, and you’re done! Since no one
can, by definition, modify the program, the recognizer will have no problem
extracting the mark. Unfortunately, there are a few problems with this idea:
Unbreakable software tamperproofing doesn’t exist, the watermark
recognizer might be confused by the changes the tamperproofer makes to
the program, and tamperproofing will typically have a performance hit on
the program. An alternative to tamperproofing a watermarked program is to
use an error-detecting or error-correcting mark, one for which you can
either detect that it has been tampered with, or which can withstand some
(usually small) degree of tampering.

In Chapter 7 (Software Tamperproofing), you saw general algorithms for
tamperproofing. Here, we’re going to show you one watermarking
algorithm that has been designed specifically with tamperproofing in mind.

8.5.1 Algorithm WMMC: Embedding Media Watermarks

In a patent from 1996, Moskowitz and Cooperman presented Algorithm
WMMC [255], which includes two interesting insights. The first observation
is that because these days many programs contain media objects (images,
video, audio), and we already know how to watermark them, a simple way
to watermark a program is to find a media object stored in the code and
watermark it. If the program doesn’t contain a media object, you can easily
add a bogus one. Here’s an example:6
Unfortunately, there are many ways to disturb the mark in an image.
Peticolas’ Stirmark [282] tool, for example, contains a collection of
transforms known to make most image watermarks un-extractable without
introducing visible distortions. So a simple attack is to apply Stirmark to all
the images in a program, obliterating any watermarks. The second clever
insight of the WMMC algorithm is to protect the mark by encoding an
“essential” part of the program into the image! To invoke that piece of code,
you first have to extract it and then jump to it:

Here we’ve taken function foo and embedded it into the image. Every call to
foo has to be replaced by a decode and an indirect jump. What’s so neat
about this idea is that any attack to the image (such as running Stirmark on
it) is likely to modify the embedded code as well, and this is very likely to
cause the program to crash.

As clever as this algorithm is, it has serious stealth issues. Very few
programs extract code from an image and then jump to it! If you can’t hide
that this is going on, you leave yourself open to a simple attack: Your
adversary will locate the point where the code is extracted, capture it, add it
to the program, modify every call to go directly to the new code, and then
destroy the watermark in the image using Stirmark.

In type-safe languages like Java, there will typically be one easily
identifiable function that loads new code into a running program. Your
adversary only has to search through the program for a call to this function
in order to find an easy target for attack. In Java, you have to add a special
class loader to the program that will extract the new class and load it into
the executing program:

     class ImageLoader extends java.lang.ClassLoader
     {
     public java.lang.Class findClass(String name) {
     java.awt.image.BufferedImage        bi         =
     javax.imageio.ImageIO.read(
     ClassLoader.getSystemResourceAsStream("tudou.pn
     g"));
     byte[] b = extractClassFromImage(bi);
     return defineClass(name,b,0,b.length);
     }
     }

This type of code doesn’t occur frequently in normal programs and should
be easy for an adversary to identify.

You might think that in untyped binary machine code the situation would be
different, but there are surprising similarities. Consider the following C
program:

     #include <stdio.h>
     int foo (int x) {
     return 6*x;
     }
     int main (int argc, char *argv[]) {
     printf("%i\n",foo(7));
     }

We compiled foo to x86 machine code and inserted it inside an array TUDOU
that simulates an “image”: first the picture itself (the first 8 bytes), then foo
(16 bytes), and then a copyright notice (the final 9 bytes). We used memcpy to
simulate extracting foo into an area FOO, and then converted the call to foo to
a jump into this area:

     #include <string.h>

     char TUDOU[] =
     {'T', 'U', 'D', 'O', 'U','!', '!', '!',
     0125,0211,0345,0213,0125,0010,0211,0320,
     0001,0300,0001,0320,0001,0300,0135,0303,
     'C', 'O', 'P', 'Y', 'R', 'I', 'G', 'H','T'};

     int main (int argc, char *argv[]) {
     char* FOO = allocExecutablePages(...);
     memcpy(FOO,TUDOU+8,16);
     printf("%i\n",((int(*)(int))(FOO))(7));
     }
Just like in the Java case, we had to add some extra system code. In Linux,
data pages are non-executable by default, so we had to call mprotect in
allocExecutablePages (Listing 6.1 363) in order to remap the code page. Again,
this type of code is unusual in real programs. The indirect call to the
decoded foo, on the other hand, actually doesn’t look that strange. Here’s the
original call to the static foo (left) and the indirect call of the decoded foo
(right):

Indirect calls like these are common in object-oriented languages, where
they are the result of translating virtual method invocations.

     Problem 8.3

     Implement a machine-code version of WMMC for the
     architecture/operating system of your choice. Pay particular attention
     to stealth—how many easy-to-identify attack targets can you
     eliminate?

     Problem 8.4

     WMMC      states that an “essential” piece of the software should be
     embedded. Can you give a formal definition of “essential?” How easy
     is it to identify such pieces? Do all/most programs have them? Do
     essential pieces of real programs also take up a large fraction of the
     execution time? If so, does that make them unsuitable for embedding?
8.6 Improving Resilience

Improving the resilience of watermarks turns out to be difficult. As you saw
in Chapter 4, code is so fluid and so susceptible to transformation that there
seems to be an infinite number of ways of moving code around, splitting
and merging pieces of code, adding redundant code, and so on. Given this
situation, constructing a watermark that will remain intact after an
adversary attacks it with extensive code transformations seems an
impossible task. In the next chapter, you will see several algorithms where
the recognition procedure is dynamic, i.e., the watermark is revealed only
when the program executes, and only for a special input sequence that takes
the place of the watermark key. These watermarks definitely seem more
resilient to attacks than the static ones we’ve showed you so far, but they
achieve this at the cost of being more cumbersome to use. Algorithm
WMSHKQ, which you will see in this section, makes a valiant attempt at
improving resilience while keeping the recognition procedure static. The
idea is to modify some statistic property of the program, in this case, the
frequencies of instruction patterns.

8.6.1 Algorithm WMSHKQ: Statistical Watermarking

Algorithm WMSHKQ [85,147,336] embeds a watermark by changing the
statistical properties of the program. The technique is modeled on a method
of watermarking media known as spread spectrum. The basic idea is to
identify a set of statistical measures m1, ..., mn, compute a vector c = 〈c1,
..., cn 〉, where ci is the frequency of measure mi in the cover program P,
and then iteratively modify the program until c is “different enough” from
the original to embed the watermark. Algorithm 8.6 499 gives a more
detailed description.
Algorithm 8.6. Overview of algorithm WMSHKQ. On success,
EMBED returns a pair (P, w) of the watermarked program and
the chosen watermark vector w.0 < σ < 1 is the detection
threshold. The code book      is a set of n code transformers
where each τi increases the occurrence of the code group group
by replacing the instructions in pat with those in rep:
8.6.1.1 Embedding

There’s nothing stopping you from choosing any statistical measure you
want as the basis for the algorithm, but the security of the algorithm relies
on there being enough measures (n has to be large), and so it’s natural to let
each mi be the frequency of a particular group of instructions in the
program. Also, there should already be a high occurrence of the mi:s in the
program, since increasing the frequency of an instruction group that occurs
infrequently would be highly unstealthy. The algorithm keeps a codebook
of transforms τ : (G, P) ⇒ R that increase the number of occurrences of
instruction group G, given a code pattern R, by replacing P with R.

     Problem 8.5

     Can you think of statistical measures other than instruction groups in
     which to embed the mark?

There are a couple of different ways to increase the frequency of an
instruction group G. The most obvious one is to add a copy of G in such a
way that it is never executed. It could, for example, be protected by an
opaque predicate: if (PF) G. In languages with overloading (such as Java,
Ada, and C++), you can alternatively add an entire new function with a
formal parameter list that ensures that it can never be called. In this
transformation, the frequency + is increased by adding an overloaded
function P(int x) that will never be called:
In languages with inheritance, you can similarly find the first definition of a
virtual method P in a class C in the class hierarchy and add a new method
with the same name and signature in a superclass of C. Since the type
system will ensure that P can never be called, you can add whatever code
you want to it. Here, E.P() will never be called:

A second method is to replace a section of code with a different but
semantically equivalent one that contains the instruction group G. For
example, if you need to increase the number of divisions in the program,
you can use this simple transform, using the arithmetic identity “0 divided
with anything is still 0”:

The final method is to insert a piece of code that is not semantically neutral
(i.e., it has an effect on the behavior of the program). Before any use of an
affected variable, you have to add “fix-up” code that restores semantic
neutrality. Here’s a transformation where we increase the number of
additions by two first by subtracting one from a variable and then by adding
the one back in before using the affected variable:

Above, we pretended that the transformations are done at the source-code
level rather than the compiled-code level. This hides the fact that the
transformations typically insert instructions other than the ones we want to
increase. For example, here’s a transformation on stack code that replaces
an inc instruction to increase the occurrence of the push_const;add instruction
group:

The problem is that by applying this transformation you’ve now also
increased the number of loads and stores, the number of load; push_const
groups, and the number of add; store groups, and maybe this is not what you
wanted to do—maybe you’re now farther away from the vector of metrics
you’re looking for than you were before! The consequence is that your
watermark embedder will have to employ a heuristic to search its way to a
version of the program with the right instruction group distribution. For
example, you could simply try the transformation and if it gets you closer to
a solution accept it, if not undo it and try another one. There’s no guarantee
that this procedure will terminate, which means that at some point you may
have to give up and report embedding failure.

8.6.1.2 Recognition

Recognition is mostly straightforward. WMSHKQ is an informed
watermarking algorithm, so the input to the recognizer includes the original
cover program Porig, the watermark vector w that was generated by the
embedder, and a confidence variable σ. Cox [98, page 408] defines the
following correlation coefficient:

where      is the result of subtracting out the mean from x:

The confidence variable σ could be set, for example, to 0.6, but this needs
to be experimentally verified.

Listing 8.1. Original Java bytecode GCD method (on the left)
and corresponding code watermarked with WMSHKQ (on the
right).
Have a look at the example in Listing 8.1, where we watermark a GCD
method using a code book of three rules:

    • Replace x%y with x-(x/y)*x (in light gray),

    • Insert never-executed code protected by an opaque predicate (dark
     gray), and

    • Insert x=const-(x+1) followed by fixup code x=const-(x+1) (in dashed and
      dotted boxes).
All three rules increase the frequency of the isub;istore instruction group.
Note that in addition to the four new copies of isub;istore, we had to insert a
multitude of other instructions.

8.6.1.3 Discussion

A serious problem with WMSHKQ is that it’s difficult to come up with a
large set of transformations that:

   1. Are small (say, on the order of four instructions),

   2. Affect instruction groups that occur frequently in common programs,
      and

   3. Are not trivially undoable.

The transformations proposed in the three known implementations of this
algorithm (Stern et al. [336] for x86, Collberg et al. [85] and Hachez [147]
for Java bytecode; only the Collberg implementation is publicly available)
all seem to be undoable by trivial obfuscations or by a competent optimizer.
Hachez, for example, suggests a register-renumbering scheme for marking
Java programs, a transformation that is obviously trivial to undo—a
decompile-recompile is likely to do it. The result is that any inherent
robustness of the algorithm is canceled out by the lack of robustness of the
transformations.

Other problems with the algorithm are that it is informed and has a low
bitrate. As described here, we embed a single bit in the program,
watermarked or not watermarked. Hachez [147] suggests to separate the
program into k collections of functions of size , and mark each set
individually. That begs the question of how to reliably recover the sets.
Hachez uses a hash of “the maximum stack size, the number of exceptions,
the size of the code, and the size of the local variables table,...” to identify
each function, all properties that are easy for an attacker to modify.
    Problem 8.6

    Can you think of a way to increase the resilience of WMSHKQ by
    adding some simple tamperproofing? Since there’s a multitude of
    small transformations done all over the program, this may mean that
    you will have to add multiple small tamperproofing code all over the
    program! Does your tamperproofing code reduce the stealthiness by
    indicating which parts of the code embed the watermark?

8.7 Improving Stealth

There are essentially three approaches to making introduced watermarking
code more stealthy. You can:

  1. Make the introduced code look more like original code, or

  2. Make original code look more like the introduced code, or

  3. Make all code, original and introduced, look like some third type of
     code.

In this section, we’ll show you three algorithms that attempt to improve
stealth. The first one, WMMIMIT [251–253], makes a copy of an existing
function and makes small changes to it in order to embed the mark. Since
the function originates in the cover program, presumably it looks like the
type of code the programmer typically writes. The second algorithm,
WMVVS [79,80,354,355], creates a function that embeds the watermark
from scratch. It then adds a uniform mess of branches all over the program
to make it appear as if the watermark belongs to the cover program. In other
words, it turns the entire program into something that is definitely
unstealthy, unusual, and suspicious-looking, but at least the cover program
and the watermark function will look equally funky. Algorithm WMCC
[95,96] tries to be both statically and dynamically stealthy: It only inserts
integer additions and multiplications (very common operators), and the
inserted code executes in tandem with the code of the cover program.
Unfortunately, as you will see, the integer constants that it inserts and the
integer values that it computes at runtime are both highly unusual and thus
prime targets for attack.

8.7.1 Algorithm WMMIMIT: Mapping Instructions

Algorithm WMMIMIT [251–253] is a very simple watermarking algorithm,
where embedding a mark is done in three steps:

  1. Add an unrelated dummy function D to the program.

  2. Modify D’s opcodes and literal arguments to embed the mark.

  3. Add a bogus call if (P F) D(), protected by an opaque predicate, to tie
     D to the cover program.

For example, in Java bytecode you can embed three bits of watermark for
any binary integer arithmetic instruction that you find, replacing the
instruction with an instruction that has the same signature. Here’s an
example translation table:

     000 → iadd, 001 → isub, 010 → imul, 011 → idiv,
     100 → irem, 101 → ior, 110 → iand, 111 → ixor
Similarly, you can replace any immediate operands by pieces of the
watermark value.

Introducing some random outside function into the program really isn’t a
good idea, since it might look vastly different from the rest of the code. An
obvious improvement (suggested by Myles et al. [263]) is to instead embed
the mark in a copy of a function already in the program. This should greatly
increase stealth.

Even with this improvement, the resulting code is still likely to be
unstealthy: In real code, not all arithmetic instructions occur with the same
frequency (additions are much more common than divisions, for example),
and some immediate operands (think –1, 0, 1, 2) are much more common
than others.

8.7.2 Algorithm WMVVS: Watermarks in CFGs

In a paper from 2001 [355] and a subsequent patent [354] assigned to
Microsoft, Venkatesan et al. describe a technique that is equal parts
watermarking and obfuscation. The problem they attack is hiding a sparse
cut between the original program and the added watermark code. Say, for
example, that you added a single bogus function f () containing the
watermark code to the program, but you never called it anywhere. Since it’s
reasonable to assume that most functions in a program are actually called at
least once, f () would be easy to find and remove. To prevent this, you
could, like in the previous algorithm, add a single bogus call if (P F) f () to
confuse the attacker. However, if typical functions in the program get called
more than once, then again, the watermark would be easy to find! The
attacker could build the call graph for the program and examine any
functions that appear to be called from only a few places. He’d be looking
for a sparse cut in the graph, a set of edges that, when removed, will
separate the graph into two pieces with as few edges broken as possible.
There are many such algorithms.
The solution is to bind the watermark function to the rest of the program as
tightly as possible so that it appears to be just as “important” as the original
functions. In WMVVS [79,80,354,355], this is done by adding bogus control
flow edges between the original code and watermark code. In fact, the
algorithm adds bogus control flow edges between every piece of code in the
program! The ultimate goal is to make the resulting program a uniform
mess of branches so that the adversary has no way of separating “essential”
parts of the program that get called everywhere from less essential, less
well-connected parts, such as watermark code. This technique can, of
course, be used not just to protect a watermark but to tie any piece of code
tightly to the rest of the program. For example, you could use it to make it
hard to remove license checking code.

Algorithm 8.7. Overview of WMVVS.
Although we suspect Microsoft has an internal implementation of WMVVS,7
the paper gives no implementation details. Here, we’ll describe a Java
implementation by Collberg et al. Algorithm 8.7 gives an overview of the
technique. The difference between an implementation for a binary machine
code and one for a typed bytecode is essentially that the latter has severe
restrictions on what kind of branches can be added. In binary machine code,
there’s nothing stopping us from jumping from any place in the code to any
other place, including jumping into the middle of a function body. In Java,
jumps to a method can only go to its entry point, and branches within a
method are restricted by what the Java verifier can analyze.

     Problem 8.7

     It would be interesting to examine some Microsoft programs to look
     for evidence that WMVVS is being used in practice. Before attempting
     this, consult a (good) lawyer to make sure you are not violating the
     DMCA or any other pertinent laws in your jurisdiction.

8.7.2.1 Embedding

The WMVVS embedding routine has four main stages:

  1. Encode the watermark integer W as a graph G.

  2. Turn G into a control flow graph C.

  3. Add C to the original program P.

  4. Tie C to P by adding bogus control flow edges.
Real functions in real programs are typically small. A preliminary step is
therefore to break up any large watermark integer into a set of smaller
numbers {w0, ..., wk–1}, each of which can then be encoded into reasonably
sized functions.

The goal of the embedding is to produce, from each watermark piece wi, a
function fi that encodes that piece. We’ve already seen two ways of doing
this: WMDM permutes the linearization of the function’s basic blocks, and
WMMIMIT selects new arithmetic instructions. Here, we’re going to use a
different idea, namely, to convert wi into a control flow graph whose
structure embeds the graph. Embedding watermarks as graphs is an idea
you will see again in the next chapter on dynamic watermarking, in Section
9.1 546. In Section 8.10 533, you will see several different kinds of graph
encodings. We call the functions that convert between graphs and
watermark integers graph codecs. The RPG graphs of Section 8.10.5 536
are particularly well suited for this algorithm.

If you care about the stealth of the watermark function, you have to
consider the structure of the CFG very carefully. In addition to being a legal
CFG, you want it to be a likely CFG. This means that the following
conditions must hold:

     1. The basic blocks should have out-degree of one or two, since that’s
       what the translation of normal control structures like if- and while-
       statements result in. Only switch-statements generate basic blocks
       with higher out-degree, and they’re unusual in real code.

     2. The CFG should be reducible (see Section 4.3.4 235), since
       programs built from properly nested control structures (if, while,
       exit, continue, and so on) result in reducible CFGs.

     3. The CFG should be “shallow,” since in real code few functions have
       deeply nested control structures.

If you embed your mark in the structure of a CFG, there is one attack, the
edge-flip attack, that is so trivial that it’s essential that the CFGs protect
against it: To disrupt the watermark, your adversary could simply run
through the entire program and randomly flip the jump case and the fall-
through case of all conditional branches! Like this:

With only a small performance hit,8 the adversary has now completely
obliterated the mark. So you need to add one more condition:

    4. The CFG should be resistant to edge flips.

Of the graph families of Section 8.10 533, the reducible permutation
graphs (RPGs, Section 8.10.5 536) are the best fit: They have a maximum
outdegree of 2, are reducible and shallow, and are resistant to edge flips.

Let’s watermark a simple program with the watermark W = 1024. This
number is too large to encode as a single function—it would be huge and
easy to find. Instead, let’s use the partial sum-splitting algorithm in
Algorithm 8.9 524 to turn W into the set of smaller integers           .
We then turn each integer into an RPG. Here’s the one that encodes the
number 4:
The next step is to convert this graph into a CFG by populating each basic
block with executable code. Here’s method m4 that corresponds to the graph
above:

Algorithm 8.8. Overview of algorithm WMASB. P is the original
program, W the message to be embedded, B the codebook used
for embedding through instruction selection, and a statistical
model of real code.
BUILDCODEBOOK(maxlen):

  1. Let   be an empty codebook.

  2. Let I be a set of common short instruction sequences for the
     architecture.

  3. Pick an instruction sequence S = 〈o1, o2...〉 ← 〈n1, n2...〉 ← 〈i1,
     i2...〉 from I, where 〈n1, n2...〉 is a list of instructions, 〈i1, i2...〉 a
     list of their inputs (registers, immediate operands, and flags), and 〈o1,
     o2...〉 is a list of their outputs.

  4. Randomly          generate       an         instruction       sequence
                                     where                is no longer than
    maxlen, only contains integer instructions, does not contain any control
    flow instructions, and where all immediate operands are chosen from a
    small set of common values, such as {–1, 0, 1, 31}.

  5. Execute S and Q for all possible input values. If they return the same
     outputs for all the same inputs, add S = Q to .

  6. Repeat from 3.

EMBED(P, W, B, M, key):

  1. W′ = W encrypted with key.

  2. Let P′ be a canonicalized version of P. Sort block chains within
     procedures, then procedures within modules, and finally modules
     within the program. Order the instructions in each block in a standard
     order. Replace each instruction with the first alternative from the
     codebook .
  3. Code layout: Embed bits from W′ by reordering code segments within
     the executable. To avoid long, unstealthy jumps, first reorder basic
     block chains within procedures, then procedures within modules, and
     finally modules within the program.

  4. Instruction scheduling: For each basic block b in the program, build
     the dependency graph and generate all valid instruction schedules
     (orderings). Embed bits from W′ by picking one of the schedules.
     Avoid generating bad schedules. Use the statistical model      to find
     the appropriate frequency by which to generate different schedules for
     blocks with the same dependency graphs.

  5. Instruction selection: Embed bits from W′ by replacing instructions
     from P′ with equivalent ones from the code book . Use     to match
     instruction frequencies of real programs.

  6. In the first instructions of the program, embed information necessary
     for the recognizer to locate basic blocks it could not find by itself.

RECOGNIZE(P, , key)

  1. Discover basic blocks using information stored in the first instructions
     of P.

  2. As in the EMBED algorithm, let P′ be a canonicalized version of P.

  3. Recover bits W from the code layout, instruction scheduling, and
     instruction selection by comparing P and P′.

  4. Return W decrypted with key.

The code for each basic block has the same shading as the corresponding
graph node. We would have to add four additional methods m0,m1,m2,m3
corresponding to the remaining watermark pieces. They would all have the
same structure (since every piece corresponds to the watermark 2), but the
basic blocks could be made completely different to foil pattern matching
attacks.

     Problem 8.8

     Even though RPG graphs were designed to mimic the CFGs of real
     functions, clearly they don’t. Examine RPGs and random CFGs from
     real programs, and analyze why this is the case. Can you find a
     different class of graphs that maintains the benefits of RPGs but that
     are closer to real CFGs? Consider, for example, series-parallel graphs
     [187].

It’s a good idea to make sure that the watermark functions can actually
execute, and that they will execute predictably and efficiently. This will
make it much easier to embed calls to them. In this case, m4(x) has been
designed to always return a non-negative integer, regardless of what
argument is passed to it. This way, you can use it as an opaque predicate!
It’s also important that you ensure that the control flow can’t be optimized
away. Method m4 uses a global variable bogus in the guards of all control flow
statements. An adversary or compiler would need to do some serious inter-
procedural static analysis to determine that m4 or any of its internal flow
could be safely removed.

The main contribution of WMVVS is the way the algorithm ties the
watermark code to the surrounding program. The idea is to add bogus
control flow between not only the real code and the watermark code, but
different parts of the original program as well. As long as you make sure
that the watermark functions have no bad side effects or cannot get into an
infinite mutual recursion, you can insert calls to them just about anywhere.
Calls to the original functions in the program will need to be protected by
false opaque predicates unless you can determine that they are side effect
free.

In Listing 8.2 514 is an example with two of the five watermark methods,
m3 and m4, one original method P, and the main method. Notice how some of
the calls to the watermark methods have been used as opaque predicates.
For example, since m3(x) is designed to always return a non-negative integer,
the expression m3(9)>=0 is opaquely true and won’t affect the while-loop in
which it occurs.

      Problem 8.9

      Algorithm WMMIMIT embeds the mark by modifying arithmetic
      instructions of a function already in the program. This may lead to
      more stealthy watermark functions than building the CFG from
      scratch, as suggested here. Is it possible to combine these two ideas?
      Can you modify a CFG or combine several CFGs already in the
      program to embed the mark?

      Problem 8.10

      Exception-handling code can result in very convoluted control flow
      graphs. Can you think of a way to encode RPG watermark graphs
      using exception handlers? Is the result more or less stealthy than using
      normal control constructs?

8.7.2.2 Recognition
To extract the watermark, you must somehow be able to detect which basic
blocks in the program belong to the watermark CFG and which belong to
the cover program. WMVVS does this by marking the basic blocks. One
way to think of this is that there’s a watermark recognizer function
isMarked(b) that works on basic blocks and that returns 0 for regular blocks
and 1 for blocks belonging to a watermark graph. Many of the algorithms in
this chapter for watermarking programs can be simplified to marking
straight-line code. For example, you could reorder the instructions so that if
they’re in lexicographic order, isMarked(b) returns 0, else 1. Or you could add
extra bogus instructions, such as int A = 0; ... A ← A + const, varying the
value of const until the last bit of a message digest (such as SHA1) of the
basic block produces the correct mark value.

Listing 8.2. Example of how WMVVS ties pieces of a program
closer together. Calls to watermark functions are in light gray,
and calls to original functions are in dark gray.
Problem 8.11

Thoroughly investigate different methods for basic-block marking. Are
some more resilient to attack than others? What about performance
overhead? Stealth? Would dynamic techniques (i.e., executing the
program or parts of it—we will look at this idea in detail in the next
chapter) be helpful at all?
Once you’ve identified which basic blocks belong to a watermark graph,
recognition becomes straightforward. You start by computing the mark
value for each basic block in the program and assume that any function that
has more than t% blocks marked (for some suitable value of t, such as 60) is
a watermark function. This provides a measure of tamper-resistance: You
will be able to recover the mark as long as the attacker is only able to
modify a small number of basic blocks. You then construct CFGs for the
watermark functions, decode each one into an integer watermark piece, and
combine the pieces into the complete watermark value.

8.7.2.3 Discussion

We just wrote, “You will be able to recover the mark as long as the attacker
is only able to modify a small number of basic blocks.” However, there
really is no compelling reason why the attacker, if he can destroy the mark
in one node, wouldn’t be able to destroy them in most every node. Basic-
block marking is the Achilles’ heel of the algorithm: We really know of no
secure method of marking blocks, particularly since we have to assume that
the adversary is aware of the marking method we’re using. If we did know
how to securely mark the straight-line code of a basic block, then surely we
would know how to mark more complex programs. And if we did, then the
watermarking problem would already be solved!

Collberg et al. [80] report that for watermarks up to 150 bits, program size
increased from 40% to 75%. For the CaffeinMark benchmarks, they
measured a slowdown from 0% to 36%. The size increase and the
performance hit will depend on a number of factors, in particular, the block-
marking algorithm used and the number of bogus edges added between
methods.

Stealth, as always, is tricky. First, the structure of the control flow graph has
to mimic that of real methods. The RPG graphs were specifically designed
to look like real control flow graphs: they’re both skinny and reducible.
Still, only 2 of 3,236 methods in the SpecJVM benchmarking suite have
CFGs that are RPGs! Furthermore, the basic blocks themselves must also,
even though artificially generated, look normal. In the implementation that
Collberg et al. report on, the basic blocks of the generated watermarking
methods consist of 20% arithmetic instructions compared to only 1% for
normal Java methods. In other words, an implementation has to be
extremely careful in how watermark methods are generated or they will be
trivial for an attacker to locate.

    Problem 8.12

    Since there’s no publicly available binary code implementation of
    WMVVS to experiment with, implement one yourself! It would be
    particularly interesting to embed the watermark code inside an already
    existing function rather than having each CFG be in its own function,
    as is the case in the implementation we described here. Does this make
    a difference for the strength of the algorithm?

8.7.3 Algorithm WMCC: Abstract Interpretation

Cousot and Cousot’s watermarking algorithm WMCC [95,96] is based on a
form of static analysis known as abstract interpretation. We explained the
basic idea of this analysis technique in Section 3.1.6 143. The
watermarking algorithm was first presented in POPL’04 [95] and
subsequently patented. The patent is assigned to the French Thales group,
the ninth-largest defense contractor in the world.

    Problem 8.13
     Acquire a Thales Starstreak Close Air Defense Missile on the black
     market, disassemble it, and examine the software for traces of
     watermarking. (Prior to attempting this, be sure to consult a lawyer and
     an explosives expert.)

The idea is to embed the watermark in such a way that you can perform a
very special static analysis to extract it. As usual, we must suppose that the
particular analysis is well known to the attacker, so there must also be a
special secret (the watermark key) that is known to us, but not to the
attacker, and without which the analysis won’t return the watermark. The
algorithm given in POPL’04 is based on a constant propagation data flow
analysis, but you can imagine using other problems as the basis for an
abstract interpretation watermarking algorithm.

Let’s start with a simple example to illustrate the basic idea. Throughout
this section, we’re going to assume that you’re embedding the watermark
value W = 21349 using the secret key key = 30001. The watermarking code
you’re going to embed in the cover program comes in two parts, an
initialization of a new integer variable (in light gray) and an update of that
variable (in dark gray), which should go inside a loop. In the simplest case,
it could look something like this:

     int f = -158657;
     for(...)
     ...
     f = 81351;
     ...

To extract the mark, you perform a constant propagation static analysis,
reducing all computations modulo the secret key. In this simple example,
for every point • in the program, you start with an empty set of possible
values for variable f:
After two rounds of data flow analysis (visiting statements in top-down
order), you find that f has the same constant value at every point in the
function, the watermark value 21349:

Without knowing the secret key, it would not be easy to extract the mark.

8.7.3.1 Embedding

To embed the watermark, you must first look through the cover program for
an appropriate function containing a loop and merge in the watermark code.
Here, we’ve found a function that computes a factorial:
Obviously, the code above is too unstealthy, so you need to obfuscate it.
Unfortunately, you can’t use all the transformations we learned about in
Chapter 4—-many of them would so mess up the code that the static
analysis would no longer be able to extract the mark! So you need to be
careful to find a set of transformations that are strong enough to make the
watermark code stealthy but subtle enough that they won’t disturb the
watermark extraction algorithm. The Cousots suggest replacing f=const
inside the loop with f=P (f), where P (x) is a polynomial. The reason is that
the abstract interpretation constant propagation analysis won’t be confused
by the additions and multiplications that make up the polynomial. Of
course, you need to pick P (x) so that P (x) (mod key) still reduces to the
watermark value. Let’s choose P (x) as a second-degree polynomial

                          P (x) = a · x2 + b · x + c
where you want to pick the coefficients such that the polynomial evaluates
to the watermark:
                     W = a · W2 + b · W + c (mod key)

Next, pick small constants for a and b, and solve for c:

     a=4
      b = 1566
      c = W – a · W2 + b · W (mod key)
      c = 21349 – (1566 * 21349 + 4 * 21349 * 21349) (mod 30001) = 21494

This gives you this obfuscated code from which, as before, the static
analysis will be able to figure out that f is constant:

Finally, computing the entire polynomial in one place is a bad idea, so it’s a
good idea to break it up into smaller pieces and spread the parts throughout
the loop. Here’s the final result:

      int n = 1;
      int f= -158657;
      for(i=2;i <=10;i++)
      int g=f*4;
      g=g+1566;
      n=n*i;
      g=g*f;
      f=g+21494;

The Cousots also suggest breaking up the initialization part f=-158657 into a
polynomial evaluation, for example, f = 1*(1-111353)-47305, but this is too
easily defeated to be a valuable obfuscation.

8.7.3.2 Recognition
To recognize the watermark, you run a constant propagation data flow
analysis, reducing all computations modulo key. Any variable that turns out
to be constant under this analysis is a candidate watermark value. Here’s the
example again, where after a few rounds of data flow analysis, you find that
f is constant in the function (and hence a candidate for a watermark)
whereas n isn’t.

  represents an unknown (non-constant) value.

The Cousots note that this algorithm is especially well suited to languages
such as Java, where programs are distributed in a typed bytecode. The
reason is that to recognize the watermark, you need to be able to reverse
engineer the program with enough precision that you can run a data flow
analysis over it. Specifically, you need to be able to build a control flow
graph for every function, and this is trivial for typed bytecodes. On the
other hand, it would be relatively easy for an adversary to thwart
recognition of a watermark embedded in a binary code—he simply has to
insert enough weird, bogus, indirect branches to prevent you from being
able to build an accurate control flow graph. You saw an example of this
kind of transformation in Algorithm OBFLDK, in Section 4.3.5 239.

8.7.3.3 Discussion

The algorithm makes a good attempt at being statically stealthy: It
introduces only fairly uncomplicated integer expressions containing only
constants, additions, and multiplications. It seems quite reasonable that
most programs will contain loops that already manipulate integers in a
similar way and in which the watermark code can be inserted.
Unfortunately, the code contains telltale signs that can give away the
location of the code. Most importantly, the constants that the algorithm
inserts are highly unusual. In a collection of Java programs we studied [82],
we found that 63% of all literal integers are 0, powers of two, or powers of
two plus/minus one, and most constants are small: 93% are less than 1,000.
To increase stealth, it would be possible to break up large constants into
combinations of smaller, more common ones. The adversary could,
unfortunately, use simple constant propagation data flow analysis to
recombine them again. An alternative strategy for increasing stealth is to
sprinkle large integer decoys all over the program to get the attacker’s
attention away from the ones used in the watermark code.

One important advantage of this algorithm is that the inserted watermark
code is actually executed. Many software watermarking algorithms suggest
inserting bogus code protected by an opaque predicate, but this leads to
obvious targets of attacks: Run the program a few times with representative
input data and examine any never-executed locations closely for potential
watermarking code. However, even if the code WMCC inserts is actually
executed, and thus not open to this type of attack, the sequence of values
that the code computes in the loop are seemingly random-looking: In the
example above, the f variable takes on the values –158657, 1657077990,
1029506174, 937449950, –1076691106, ... In other words, while the
operations the watermarking code executes are common, the values they
compute may not be. You can imagine running a program and monitoring
the values of any integer variable, flagging as suspicious any locations
within loops where a variable takes on very large values or non-
monotonically increasing/decreasing values. This presupposes that such
progressions are, in fact, unusual in real executing programs, but we’re not
aware of any study that confirms this. The closest is a study by Zhang et al.
[383], who note that for the SPEC benchmarks, “Not only do a mere ten
values occur in at least 50% of memory locations, on an average nearly
50% of accesses involve just ten distinct values.”
     Problem 8.14

     As presented here, WMCC relies on a constant propagation data flow
     analysis to extract the mark. Can you think of another static analysis
     problem that would also work? Is one analysis better than another?

     Problem 8.15

     The Cousots implemented WMCC but never released the code. Build
     your own implementation and evaluate the actual data rate, static and
     dynamic stealth, and resilience to attack.

8.8 Steganographic Embeddings

The goal of watermarking an object is to embed a (usually fairly short)
identifier that uniquely identifies the object and that is as difficult to locate
and destroy as possible. The assumption is always that an adversary knows
that the object is marked and with which algorithm it is marked; he just
doesn’t know the secret key needed to extract the mark. The adversary is
active; he can modify the marked object to try to make it impossible for you
to extract your mark. So simply speaking, when you watermark an object,
you care about the data rate of the algorithm, the stealth of the embedding,
and how resilient the mark is to modification.

While the techniques used for watermark embedding can also be used for
steganographic embedding, the goals are different. The goal of a
steganographic embedding is to covertly send a message between two
parties. The attacker is monitoring communication—at the first sign of a
possible hidden message between you and your co-conspirator, he can take
action, such as cutting off communication or alerting authorities. The
assumption is, again, that he knows about the embedding algorithm, but he
doesn’t know which objects are marked and which are not. Also, he is
passive, he doesn’t try to modify objects to destroy any embedded data.
Rather, he is satisfied if he can reliably detect which objects contain hidden
messages and which don’t. For this reason, you only care about data rate
and stealth (you want to send as large a message as possible, and you don’t
want to be found out), not resilience to modification.

Two systems have been built to steganographically embed messages in x86
binaries: Stilo [12,13] (Algorithm WMASB, available from
http://trappist.elis.ugent.be/~banckaer/stilo.html)    and     Hydan   [119]
(http://www.crazyboy.com/hydan). They are interesting because they make
a concerted effort to embed as much data as possible while at the same time
trying to ensure that the embedding is as stealthy as possible. Of course,
they don’t worry about resilience at all, and so the resulting embeddings are
easy to destroy should you want to, but that’s always the assumption in
steganography. Both algorithms are similar to Algorithm WMSHKQ, from
earlier, in this chapter, in that they embed data by selecting between
equivalent instructions. They also use instruction reordering similarly to
Algorithm WMDM. In fact, the whole idea here is to look for every
possible place in the executable where a choice can be made and to embed a
bit by choosing one of them! In this section, we will look at Algorithm
WMASB in detail, particularly its careful balance between embedding rate
and stealth.

8.8.1 Algorithm WMASB: The Compiler as Embedder

Algorithm 8.8 511 gives an overview of WMASB [12]. The basic idea is for
the message embedder to “play compiler.” Whenever it has a choice about
which code to generate or the order in which to generate it, it picks the
choice that embeds the next few bits from the message W. There are,
essentially, four sources of ambiguity that you can take advantage of: code
layout (ordering of chains of basic blocks), instruction scheduling (order of
instructions within basic blocks), register allocation (which registers to use
for each instruction), and instruction selection (which of equivalent
instructions to use to implement a particular operation). The x86 has a small
register file, with little opportunity for choice, so WMASB ignores register
allocation.

8.8.1.1 Embedding

Before embedding can start, you must put the program in a canonical form.
This will be the starting point for the recognizer. For example, to embed the
value k in function ordering, the embedder first sorts all the functions within
a module and then picks the k:th permutation. The recognizer extracts k by
first sorting the functions and then comparing the sorted order with the
actual order found in the module. Similarly, you should put all instructions
within a basic block in a standard order and pick an instruction ordering
from all possible alternatives.

Before you can embed data in the instruction selection, you need a
codebook B that, for common instruction sequences, lists all alternatives
with the same semantics. Given , you can embed the value k by selecting
the k:th alternative. We saw this already in WMSHKQ, but in that algorithm
the codebook was built manually. Algorithm WMASB, on the other hand,
builds an exhaustive codebook using super-optimization [142,184,244]. To
find an instruction sequence with the same semantics as a given sequence S,
the algorithm generates every possible sequence Q and then executes S and
Q on all possible inputs to make sure they are equivalent. Obviously, this is
time-consuming, so you have to make restrictions on Q: Only very short
sequences (on the order of four instructions) can be checked, you only
allow a small number of fixed immediate operands, and so on. Algorithm
8.8 511 gives the details.

Given the codebook, it’s now easy to consider each instruction of the
program (or short sequences of instructions) and replace it with an
equivalent. To embed the value k, you simply choose the k:th equivalent
instruction. The authors report that for the x86 they find many equivalents.
For example, for the statement EAX=(EAX/2), they found 3,078 different
encodings of three instructions. The problem, however, is that many of
these equivalents are unstealthy, in that they would not occur in normal
programs, and hence cannot be used. Also, Algorithm 8.8 511 embeds a
random bitstring, and thus you’d be likely to pick equivalent instruction
encodings from the codebook with equal probability. This would be
unstealthy, since some instruction sequences are much more common than
others. So the algorithm needs to pick instructions in a biased way, using a
statistical model M that describes the distribution of code patterns in real
programs.

Algorithm 8.9. Splitting an integer V into n pieces, and
combining P pieces back into the original value, using the
partial sums-splitting algorithm.

You can also embed data by reordering instructions within basic blocks. Of
course, you can’t swap two instructions, if one depends on the other, so you
first need to build a data dependency graph (see Section 3.1.3 132) from
which you generate all the possible schedules (instruction orderings),
picking the k:th ordering to embed the value k. Here, too, you need to be
careful about stealth. A really suboptimal schedule would be suspicious,
because no compiler would be likely to generate it. Also, it is probably
unusual for two basic blocks in a program to have identical dependency
graphs but different schedules, since it would imply that the compiler was
using a non-deterministic instruction scheduling algorithm! The model M
must include information about just how common this situation is.

You could, if you wished, reorder all the basic block chains, putting them,
essentially, in random places in the executable. The data rate would be
impressive, but it would be highly unstealthy. Compilers lay out code to
take advantage of locality. Two basic blocks will execute more efficiently if
they reside on the same cache line, two functions calling each other will be
faster if they reside on the same page, and so on. For this reason, algorithm
WMASB reorders basic block chains within procedures, then procedures
within modules, and finally modules within the program.

8.8.1.2 Recognition

For many watermarking algorithms that target binary code, recognition is
much harder than embedding. The reason is that you have much less
information available during recognition than during embedding. This
figure illustrates what a typical compile/link/watermark-chain might look
like in a Unix environment:

Here, two modules x.c and y.c are compiled with the C compiler cc, linked
together with the ld linker, and watermarked with a tool wm. The resulting
executable a1.out is stripped of all symbolic information, and the result,
a2.out, is shipped to users. Extracting the watermark (or, in our present
scenario, the steganographic message) is done on this stripped binary
executable. Whether the missing symbols will cause trouble for the
recognizer or not depends on how much structure it needs to recover in
order to be able to extract the mark.

Like many other algorithms, WMASB needs to reconstruct the program’s
control flow graph. This means being able to accurately find the beginning
and end of every basic block. Some basic blocks will be easy for the
recognizer to find by itself, but some are likely to be lost by an inadequate
static analysis. A clever contribution by WMASB is to embed whatever extra
information the recognizer will need to adequately identify basic blocks in
the first few instructions of the program. This, of course, will sacrifice some
embedding space, but it is necessary for accurate recognition.

8.8.1.3 Discussion

In their experiments, the authors of WMASB achieve an encoding rate of
before being careful to generate stealthy code. With stealthy code, the
encoding rate goes down to . In other words, for every 89 codebytes, you
can embed one byte of steganographic message.

Because of its large instruction set, on the x86 there’s plenty of opportunity
to embed data in instruction selection. Unfortunately, it turns out that little
data can be embedded stealthily in this way—real code just doesn’t use
many unusual instruction sequences. Furthermore, the WMASB
implementation only takes single instruction frequencies into account. This
would make it possible for an adversary to consider frequencies of digraphs
or trigraphs (sequences of two or three instructions) in order to find
evidence of unusual instruction sequences.

Instruction scheduling and code layout fare much better. Instruction
scheduling does well because there’s a great deal of variation of schedules
from one executable to the next. It’s therefore possible to use many
schedules for embedding without sacrificing stealth. Code layout does well
because it’s determined largely by source code, which the adversary doesn’t
have access to.
In total, roughly 58% of the encoding space comes from code layout, 25%
from instruction scheduling, and 17% from instruction selection. This is an
interesting result, since of these three techniques, code layout is the easiest
to implement, and (because of the need to build a code book) instruction
selection is the hardest! It also shows how important it is to carefully study
real code to determine what is, and what is not, stealthy in the real world.

     Problem 8.16

     We discussed some studies of real code in Section 3.4.1 191, but there
     clearly is a need for more data. Ultimately, what is needed is a model
     that would allow us to ask, “How unstealthy would it be to add code
     segment C to function F in program P written in language L?”

     Problem 8.17

     Can you use Wayner’s mimic functions [365,366] to generate random
     but real-looking source or binary code embedding a steganographic
     message?

8.9 Splitting Watermark Integers

All watermarking algorithms can benefit from splitting the mark up into
pieces. There can be several reasons:
     • Several smaller pieces may be easier to hide in a stealthy way than
       one large piece.

     • Some algorithms have a data rate that is limited by, for example, the
       size of functions. You can split up a large mark into smaller ones that
       can be more easily embedded.

     • To improve resilience to attack, you can embed a set of redundant
       pieces in such a way that it is only necessary to recover a subset to
       get the original watermark back.

In this section, we will look at two algorithms for splitting an integer
watermark. The first is a simple one based on partial sums that breaks up a
large mark into an unordered set of smaller ones. The second algorithm
makes use of the Chinese Remainder Theorem to break up the mark into a
set of redundant pieces for which you only need to recover a small subset.
Finally, we’re going to look at a simple algorithm for creating sparse codes
that helps to increase the credibility of a watermark.

8.9.1 Splitting a Large Mark into Small Pieces

The Partial Sum Splitter in Algorithm 8.9 524 splits a watermark value v
into a multiset S of k integers, k ≥ 2. Each piece is smaller than v, allowing
you to embed many small marks rather than one big one. This algorithm has
no built-in error correction: To recover the mark, you’d better find the exact
set of pieces. There is, however, no ordering between the pieces, so there’s
no need to find them in order. This is helpful for algorithms like WMVVS,
which embed the watermark in functions. Functions are trivial for an
adversary to reorder in a module, so it’s important to not have to rely on the
ordering of pieces.

This is how you can split a watermark value v into a multiset
            of k pieces:
  1. Compute the minimum exponent l such that v can be represented using
     k – 1 digits of base 2l. We’re going to use one element of , s0, to hold
     l, which gives us k – 1 pieces in which to encode the actual value.

  2. Split v into k – 1 digits                       such that 0 ≤ v j < 2l and
                 .

  3. Let s0 = l – 1 and si = si–1 + vi–1.

To illustrate, let’s split the watermark value v = 31415926 into k = 10
pieces. Since                           , the minimum radix is 8, which
gives you l = 3. This produces a list                     and finally the
multiset                                .

Recovering v from                       proceeds in the reverse:

  1. Let       . Sort so that s0≤ s1≤ ··· ≤ sk–1.

  2. Set l = s0 +1.

  3. For each 0 ≤ j ≤ k – 2, set vj = sj+1 – sj.

  4.              .

Working from the same example as before,                                      ,
we get k = 10 and l = s0 +1 = 3. v0 = s1 – s0 = 6, v1 = s2 – s1 = 6, and so on,
giving                      , as before. Finally,

       v = 20·3 · 6+21·3 · 6+22·3 · 1+23·3 · 7+24·3 · 5+25·3 · 6 +26·3 · 7+27·3 ·
                                628·3 · 1 = 31415926
8.9.2 Redundant Watermark Pieces

You would like to generate a redundant set of pieces of the watermark and
let the adversary destroy some of them. As long as you can recover enough
pieces, you should be able to reconstruct the original watermark. The
algorithm [78] we present here is based on the General Chinese Remainder
Theorem [202,276]:

     Theorem 8.1: (General Chinese Remainder)

     Let k ≥ 2, m1,...,mk ≥2, and b1, ..., bk Z. The system of equations

     has solutions in Z if and only if bi ≡ bj mod gcd(mi, mj) for all 1 ≤ i, j ≤
     k. If the system of equations has solutions in Z, then it has a unique
     solution in Zlcm(m1,...,mk).

The algorithm splits the watermark W into a large number of unordered
pieces. Each piece is an integer representation of W ≡ x mod pi pj, and
together the pieces form a system of equations whose solution is the
watermark W. Algorithm 8.10 529 shows how to split W.

This algorithm takes an extra argument key, which we use to run each
watermark piece through a block cipher. This makes every piece 64-bits in
length and “random-looking.” This prevents an adversary from guessing
one of the small prime integers p1, ..., pr that the algorithm relies on in order
to destroy the corresponding piece.
Here’s an example of how to split the watermark number 17 into 3 pieces:

  1. You start by picking three numbers that are pairwise relatively prime.
     You choose p1 = 2, p2 = 3, p3 = 5.

  2. Next, you split W = 17 into a system of three equations:

Algorithm 8.10. Splitting an integer W into a redundant set
    of pieces, and combining the pieces back into the original
    value, using Chinese remaindering.
3. The enumeration scheme turns these equations into three integers 5,
   13, 18:

       5 mod p1p2 ⇒ 5 = 5
       7 mod p1p3 ⇒ p1p2 +7 = 13
       2 mod p2p3 ⇒ p1p2 + p1p3 +2 = 18

4. To make this example manageable, let’s use E(x) = x xor 111112 as a
   very simple “block cipher.” This gets you three 5-bit bit-strings to
   embed in the program:
         w1 = E(5) = 110102
         w2 = E(13) = 100102
         w3 = E(18) = 011012

Assume for the moment that during recognition you are “magically” able to
extract exactly those k bit-strings w1, w2, ..., wk that you embedded in the
program. Then, merging them together to get the watermark back is
straightforward, as you can see in Algorithm 8.10 529.

Here’s an example showing how you combine the three watermark pieces
v1 = 110102, v2 = 100102, v3 = 011012:

  1. First, start by decrypting each piece using D(x) = x xor 111112 as your
     block-cipher decryptor. This gets you back the three integers 5, 13, and
     18:

         D(110102) = 5
         D(100102) = 13
         D(011012) = 18

  2. Then, invert the enumeration scheme and recreate the system of
     equations:

  3. Finally, solve for W. The General Chinese Remainder Theorem tells
     you a solution must exist, since

         5 ≡ 7 mod gcd(2 · 3, 2 · 5)
            5 ≡ 2 mod gcd(2 · 3, 3 · 5)
            7 ≡ 2 mod gcd(2 · 5, 3 · 5)

      This gets you the original watermark W = 17 back.

The interesting thing to notice here is that you actually don’t need all three
equations to combine the mark. In general, W can be reconstructed uniquely
from any subset of equations provided that each modulus from p1, ..., pr is
represented at least once. This means that you just need           pieces to
reconstruct the mark. So in our example, even if one of the three pieces was
lost during recognition, you’d still be able to recover W!

8.9.2.1 Filtering Out Bogus Pieces

In some algorithms, such as WMCCDKHLSpaths in Section 9.3 583, during
the recognition phase you will be faced with an enormous number of
potential watermark pieces. Most of the pieces will have nothing to do with
the mark: Some may occur randomly as a by-product of recognition, and
some may be the result of an attack that has destroyed a real watermark
piece. Algorithm 8.11 532 shows a two-phase filtering step to extract those
pieces that could make up a consistent set of congruence equations.

Here’s an example (taken from reference [78]) to make this a little bit
clearer. Say that after the first filtering step you’re left with this set of
equations:

The first two equations are recovered original equations, the third one has
been slightly damaged in transfer (the 1 used to be a 2) either maliciously or
through an error during recognition, and the fourth has nothing to do with
the watermark at all.
The idea is to build a graph G where each equation is a vertex and there’s
an edge between two vertices if the corresponding equations are
inconsistent. Here’s G for the equations above:

For example, there’s an edge between W ≡ 5 mod p1p2 and W ≡ 0 mod p1p2
because W can’t simultaneously be 5 and 0 mod 2 · 3! The algorithm
proceeds by removing nodes from the graph until a consistent set of
equations is found. In this case, you’re left with W ≡ 5 mod p1p2 and W ≡ 7
mod p1p3, which are consistent according to the Chinese Remainder
Theorem.

8.9.3 Sparse Codes for Increased Credibility

The credibility of a watermark is a measure of how believable it is. If your
recognizer finds a watermark in a program, how confident are you that it is,
in fact, your watermark and not the result of a spurious signal or an attack?
If you cannot be confident, then a watermark is not a good indicator of
ownership—a pirate will argue that your watermark ended up in his
program by chance.

Algorithm 8.11. Filtering out unwanted watermark pieces.
From reference [78].

FILTER(〈W ≡ x mod p1p2, ... 〉):
1. In the first step, take a vote on the most popular value for W mod pi,
   for each i. If the highest vote getter is twice as popular as the second
   highest, remove any congruence W ≡ xk mod pipj that contradicts this:

2. From the remaining congruences, build two graphs G and H. The
   nodes of these graphs are the congruences themselves. Given two
   congruences c1 and c2

       c1 : W ≡ x mod p1p2
       c2 : W ≡ y mod q1q2

  there’s an edge between c1 and c2 in G if they are inconsistent, i.e., if
  ((p1 = q1 ∧ p2 = q2) ∨ (p1 = q2 ∧ p2 = q1)) ∧ x ≠ y or if the pi s and qi s
  agree on exactly one prime, i.e., if ((p1 = q1 ∨ p1 = q2) ∧ (x mod p1)≠
  (y mod p1)) ∨ ((p2 = q1 ∨ p2 = q2) ∧ (x mod p2)≠ (y mod p2)). There’s
  an edge between c1 and c2 in H if they are consistent, because the pi s
  and qi s agree on exactly one prime, i.e., if ((p1 = q1 ∨ p1 = q2) ∧ (x
  mod p1) = (y mod p1)) ∨ ((p2 = q1 ∨ p2 = q2) ∧ (x mod p2) = (y mod
  p2)).
 3. Execute the following algorithm to repeatedly remove the congruence
    from H that agrees with the most number of other congruences and
    that we therefore consider a true statement, and add it to a set U of
    consistent equations

        U←Ø
        while G ≠Ø do
        v← a node in H with max degree, such that v
         U
        S← G's neighbors
        G←G–S
        H←H–S
        U←U∪{v}
        return U

Algorithm 8.12. Armoring the watermark to make it more
credible.

ARMORWATERMARK(W):

 1. Select a watermark bit string W of size N bits, where N is a multiple of
    16. A typical value would be N = 32.

 2. Select a random seed S, which is used to initialize a random number
    generator. This seed is kept secret and used during recognition.

 3. Build a random code table Kcode that maps from 16 bits to 64 bits. This
    table consists of all 216 key strings. Each key string maps to a unique
    random 64-bit value string.

 4. Divide the watermark W into blocks of 16-bit pieces and encode each
    piece, replacing it with the corresponding value in the lookup table.
     The resulting bit string Warmored is an armored bit string of length
                   .

  5. Embed Warmored into the program.

How can you improve the credibility of your watermark? One possibility is
to pick your watermark from a sparse space, for example, from a random
code table [265]. Suppose your watermark is a 32-bit number. You start by
building a table of 216 48-bit random strings. Then you encode your
watermark by looking up each 16-bit half of the watermark in this table and
embedding the corresponding 64-bit random string. Algorithm 8.12 gives
the details.

The sparseness of this code gives it a strong error-detection property, which
in turn reduces the chance of a false positive watermark: If a string is
chosen uniformly at random from the set {0, 1}64, the probability of this
string is in the code table and thus a legal codeword is only        .

8.10 Graph Codecs

Graphs are common in programs—think control flow graphs, heap graphs,
register    interference    graphs.  Some      watermarking      algorithms
(WMVVS,WMCT) take advantage of this by encoding the mark in the
structure of a graph and then embedding the graph into the program.

A graph codec [79] consists of the two functions encode and decode:

encodeC (n) → G

decodeC (G) → n
The encode function turns a number n into a graph G, and decode turns G
back into the number. A codec works on a particular graph family, C. In the
most trivial of codecs, encode(n) simply generates a singly linked list G of
length n, and decode(G) traverses the list and returns its length. This graph
family has a horrible bitrate, and in this section we’re going to show you
how you can do better.

8.10.1 Oriented Parent-Pointer Tree

The first interesting codec works on the oriented parent-pointer tree family.
The codec idea is based on a branch of graph theory known as graphical
enumerations [152], which is concerned with counting and listing all the
members of a graph family. Here’s an enumeration of the members of the
oriented parent-pointer tree family with seven nodes, ordered in “largest
subtree first” order (see Knuth [202, Section 2.3.4.4] for an algorithm):

There are 48 elements in the enumeration, which means you can embed the
numbers 1 through 48: encode(n) simply returns the nth tree G in the
enumeration, and decode(G) looks up G in the enumeration and returns its
index. This graph family is so simple that this can be done efficiently (i.e.,
in polynomial time), but for more complex graph families you run into the
graph-isomorphism problem.

8.10.2 Radix Graphs
When it comes to bitrate, the best we know of is the radix graph family.
The idea is very simple. First make a circular linked list of length k. We’ll
call this the spine of the graph. Then add an extra pointer field representing
a base-k digit to each node. The actual representation should be key-
dependent, but one example could be where a self-pointer represents the
digit 0, a pointer to the next node in the chain represents a 1, a pointer to the
node after that represents a 2, and so on. For example, the radix-6
expansion of the watermark number 4,453 is 0·65 +3·64 +2·63 +3·62 +4·61
+1·60, and the corresponding radix graph looks like this:

The spine is in black, and the extra edges representing radix-k digits are
dashed.

8.10.3 Permutation Graphs

A permutation graph uses the same basic singly linked circular structure as
the radix graphs. The difference is that the k extra pointers encode a
permutation of the integers [0, 1, ···, k – 1] rather than a radix-k expansion.
To create a permutation graph, you simply convert your watermark number
into a permutation π (as in Algorithm 8.3 486), create a circular list of the
length of the permutation, and then encode the permutation by setting node
i’s extra pointer to point to π(i). For example, from the permutation π = 〈9,
6, 5, 2, 3, 4, 0, 1, 7, 8〉, you construct this graph:
Because you have a higher degree of freedom when setting the pointers in a
radix graph than in a permutation graph, radix graphs have a slightly better
bitrate. But what’s interesting from the point of resilience to attack is that
permutation graphs have an error-detecting capability that you don’t get
from radix graphs: If an adversary changes any one of the non-spine
pointers, you’d find out! If he’s smart enough to change two pointers, well,
you’d never know. You may think that this is a very minor improvement
over radix graphs—and you’d be right—but it does show that selecting one
graph family over another can make a difference.

8.10.4 Planted Plane Cubic Trees

A particularly interesting graph family is planted plane cubic tree (PPCT)
graphs. They are binary trees where every interior node (except the root)
has two children. They derive their name from the fact that in the
underlying (undirected) version of the graph, every node (except the root
and the leaves) has exactly three incident edges. PPCTs are easy to
enumerate using a Catalan recurrence [141,152]. You can make them more
resilient to modification by a) marking each leaf with a self-pointer, and b)
creating an outer cycle from the root to itself through all the leaves:
The outer cycle is shown in black, self-pointers are dotted, and tree edges
are dashed.

PPCTs have several interesting error-correcting properties: Single edge- and
node-deletions can be detected and corrected, as can single edge- and node-
insertions, and the graphs are resilient to edge flips. Multiple simultaneous
errors can, however, neither be detected nor corrected. The added error
resistance of PPCTs, of course, comes at a cost: a lower bitrate than the
other graphs in our arsenal.

8.10.5 Reducible Permutation Graphs

Reducible permutation graphs (RPGs) [79,80] are members of a graph
family that was developed specifically for use with the WMVVS algorithm
(Section 8.7.2 506). They are resistant to edge flips. Here’s an example:

What’s particularly interesting about RPGs is that they’re reducible flow
graphs. In other words, they resemble control flow graphs constructed from
structured control constructs such as if, while, repeat, and so on. This means
that, at least in theory if not in practice, they are stealthy when encoded as
CFGs and embedded among real code.

Like CFGs, RPGs have a unique entry node (the head) and a unique exit
node (the foot). The body encodes a permutation that’s its own inverse. The
preamble contains zero or more nodes from which all later nodes can be
reached.

8.11 Discussion

By now, you should know that there are five problems you need to solve in
order to design a new software watermarking algorithm:

  1. You need a language structure into which the mark should be encoded.
     For example, WMDM and WMVVS use control flow graphs, and in the
     next chapter you will see that WMNT uses threads, WMCT uses a
     dynamically built graph structure, and WMCCDKHLSpaths embeds the
     mark in the control flow of the program by adding extra branches.

  2. You need a way to encode the watermark number into this kind of
     structure, and to decode the structure back into the number. WMDM
     turns the watermark number first into a permutation and then uses this
     permutation to reorder the basic blocks of the CFG. WMCT and
     WMVVS use the methods you saw in the previous section to encode a
     number into the topology of a graph.

  3. You need to trace out appropriate locations at which to embed the
     watermark structure. Static algorithms may use the secret key to find
     embedding locations. In function-based algorithms like WMDM, you
     may just go ahead and embed the mark in every function. The dynamic
     watermarking algorithms you’ll see in the next chapter often use a
     special run of the program to find locations that are visited for a secret
     input sequence, and then analyze this trace for good embedding
     locations. Some algorithms will use profiling to stay away from hot
     spots.

    During watermark extraction, you need a way to locate the structure in
    which the watermark was encoded among all the other structures of the
     same kind in the program. For example, to find the watermark CFG,
     Algorithm WMVVS marks its basic blocks.

  4. You need to be able to embed the watermark at the appropriate location
     and tie it to the surrounding code. This is sometimes a trivial operation,
     but for some algorithms (WMVVS and WMNT, for example) it requires
     additional work, for example, to tie the watermark code tightly to the
     rest of the program. During watermark extraction, you tease out the
     structure that was embedded from the surrounding code.

  5. Finally, you need an attack model, a description of the power, tools,
     knowledge, and methods the adversary has at his disposal. And you
     need ways to protect the watermark so that it can be extracted after
     these attacks, or at least you need to be able to show that a successful
     attack would render the program too slow or too large to be of any use
     to the attacker. For example, the different graph codecs in Section 8.10
       533 allow WMVVS to provide a trade-off between bitrate and
     resilience to attack. Also, WMVVS covers the program with a uniform
     layer of bogus branches to hide an otherwise weak cut between the
     watermark CFG and the rest of the program. WMASB builds a
     statistical model of real code in order to avoid embedding a
     steganographic message in unstealthy code.

So when you set out to design a new algorithm, you can think of it as
having to fill in the five slots of this tuple:

            〈language structure, encoder/decoder, tracer/locator,
                 embedder/extractor, attacker/protector〉

Many early descriptions of software watermarking algorithms stopped after
filling in the first two or three slots. Today we know you need to do better.
There are an infinite number of ways to introduce a number into a program,
but just inventing a new embedding method is of little use. Unless you
provide a believable attack model and means to protect the mark against
these attacks, you have accomplished little.
8.11.1 Embedding Techniques

Let’s look back at the defense model in Section 2.2 86 and see which
techniques are used in the algorithms we’ve showed you in this chapter:

    • Several of the algorithms you’ve seen make use of the reorder
     primitive to embed the mark: WMDM reorders basic blocks; WMQP
     renames registers; WMASB reorders instructions within basic blocks,
     basic block chains within functions, functions within modules, and
     modules within programs; and WMSHKQ reorders instructions.

    • WMASB and WMSHKQ embed a mark using the map primitive by
      replacing instruction sequences with equivalent ones.

    • WMSHKQ uses the duplicate primitive to make copies of instruction
      sequences in order to increase their frequency.

    • WMVVS uses the split primitive to break the watermark into smaller
      pieces. This helps avoid building huge and unstealthy functions.
      During recognition, merge puts the pieces back together again.

    • WMMC uses the detect-respond primitive to tamperproof the
     watermark.

    Problem 8.18

    Can you think of language constructs that none of the algorithms
    you’ve seen so far use for embedding? Do they lend themselves to
    making algorithms that are superior in some way? As an example,
    would it be possible to embed a watermark in a language’s exception
    handling mechanism?
8.11.2 Attack Models

The most interesting use of marking code is for fingerprinting, embedding
unique customer identifiers in each distributed copy of a program. That,
however, leaves us open to collusive attacks. Depending on the
sophistication of the marking method, something as simple as a Unix diff
on a disassembly of the program might be enough to reveal the location of
the marking code. Fukushima and Sakurai [132] discuss this in an attempt
at attacking WMMIMIT. As a countermeasure, they randomly reorder all the
functions of the fingerprinted programs. This clearly isn’t enough. An
attacker would certainly sort the functions (based on, say, a combination of
code length, arguments, instructions, stack depth, and so on) prior to doing
the diff-ing.

    Problem 8.19

    Is there some advantage to embedding several marks, each using a
    different algorithm? Assume that the attacker knows your universe of
    embedding algorithms but not the actual subset you’ve applied. Can
    you then ensure that your multiple embeddings will cause little
    overhead while at the same time forcing the attacker to apply enough
    disrupting transformations that the de-watermarked program becomes
    too slow or large to be useful? Is there a “good” order in which to
    embed and recognize the mark so that they don’t affect each other?

    Problem 8.20
