                   9. Dynamic Watermarking

In the last chapter, you saw several algorithms that introduce a unique
watermark number directly into the executable of a program. All of the
algorithms make use of one of two basic ideas: Either encode the identifier as
a permutation of the original code, or insert it in new but non-functional code.
Reordering can be applied to any list-like language construct, such as
statements, lists of declarations, function arguments, or lists of switch-
statement labels. New code can be inserted by making sure that either it is
never executed or its execution has no effect. Regardless of the embedding
method, the algorithms in Chapter 8 have one thing in common: The
watermark recognizer extracts the mark by analyzing the code itself.

Both methods suffer from the same problem, namely, that the same types of
semantics-preserving transformations that you use to insert the mark can be
used by the attacker to seriously confuse the recognizer. If you’re able to
reorder your code to embed the watermark, you have to assume that the
attacker can also reorder the code, destroying the mark or even embedding his
own mark in the process! And if you’re able to insert new code into the
program to embed the mark, you have to assume there’s nothing stopping the
adversary from disrupting your recognizer by inserting his own code!

Now, you may object that “if only we had perfect tamperproofing techniques
available, watermarking would be reduced to a trivial problem—just
watermark the code using one of the simple algorithms from Chapter 8 and
then protect it from ever being altered.” And you’re right, this does sound like
a very attractive solution. Here’s a simple example. To embed the watermark,
we simply permute data-independent statements. To tamperproof the mark,
add dependencies that prevent the statements from being reordered. In the
example below, we’ve added calls to an opaque function that, regardless of its
argument, always returns 0:
To attack this mark by reordering the statements, the adversary needs to figure
out that f is opaquely equal to 0, and that it is free of side effects. Other
difficult static analysis problems (such as data-dependence analysis; see
Section 3.1.3 132) could also be used to create fake dependencies.

Even more interesting would be to explore combining a simple watermarking
algorithm with the tamperproofing techniques you saw in Chapter 7 (Software
Tamperproofing). Surprisingly, by and large, this hasn’t been thoroughly
investigated. An exception is Algorithm TPHMST, which simply adds 32-bit
integers to the executable prior to tamperproofing it using introspective
techniques. One potential problem with tamperproofing is that the
transformations performed on the code to protect it might destroy the
watermark itself. Many types of tamperproofing techniques are also difficult to
apply to typed bytecode since they require introspection of the code.

    Problem 9.1

    Can you think of a way to combine a very simple static watermarking
    method (such as WMDM) and a tamperproofing method (such as TPCA)?
    Can you predict the overhead (or implement and empirically evaluate)?
    What are the possible attacks?

Any software protection algorithm that inserts new code may also run into
stealthiness issues. If the new code doesn’t fit in well with surrounding code,
you may leave yourself open to simple pattern-matching attacks. In practice,
this will often mean that an algorithm that inserts new code into a program can
only be used on those programs that already contain code of the appropriate
kind.
So are there any alternatives to these simple watermarking methods? Since
code is so fluid, it seems that any algorithm that manipulates code at the static
level is likely to produce marks that are easy to destroy. Several projects have
attempted to embed the mark at the semantic level. In other words, to embed
the mark, you add code to the program that changes its internal behavior, and
to recognize the mark, you examine this behavior. Another way to think about
this is to say that you introduce new code into the program that isn’t the
watermark itself but that produces the watermark as the program executes.
Typically, you will have to run the program to extract the watermark, so these
algorithms are known as dynamic watermarking algorithms. As always, you
want the watermark recognizer to use a secret key, and in the case of dynamic
watermarking, the key is a special input sequence 1,..., k to the program P:

For example, to extract the watermark embedded into a word processing
program, you would run it on a particular file with a particular sequence of
actions, such as

     〈spell check, enter text, change font. ...〉.

At the end of this sequence, the watermark will have been constructed
“somewhere in the program.” We’re deliberately vague about the exact nature
of the mark: It could be program output, it could be a user-level data structure,
it could be dynamically generated code, and so on. We’re also vague about the
nature of the recognizer. Its design will obviously depend on how the mark is
represented, but a typical recognizer will examine the state of the program
(threads, stacks, static and heap data, and registers) and extract the mark from
it. A simple implementation would run the program under a powerful
debugger, and when all the secret input has been entered, would have the
debugger dump the entire state of the program to a file that can be further
analyzed and the mark extracted.
This gives us the following definition:

     Definition 9.1 (Dynamic Watermarking)

     A watermarking algorithm is dynamic if its extractor is defined as

                                R(Pw, 〈I0,I1,. . .〉)→w,

     where P w is a program marked with w, 〈 I0, I1... 〉 is a valid input
     sequence to P w, and in order to extract w, R executes P w with I0, I1...〉
     as input.

Variations of this definition are, of course, possible, such as replacing
“extractor” with “recognizer” in the obvious way. Note that the definition says
nothing about the watermark embedder. There’s nothing stopping you from
having a static embedder with a dynamic extractor, but in practice the
embedder often also executes the program in order to find suitable locations in
which to embed the mark.

The main advantage of dynamic over static watermarking is that simple
semantics-preserving transformations are less likely to affect the mark. For
example, say that given the secret watermarking input sequence 〈 "hello",
"world"〉, your mark will be stored in a global variable called watermark:

     int watermark=0;
     ...
     if (read() == "hello")
     if (read() == "world")
     watermark=42;
     ...
An attacker might apply various transformations to the code in an attempt to
destroy the mark:

     int watermark=0;
     int x = 3;
     ...
     x = x*2;
     if (read()=="hello")
     if (read() == "world")
     watermark= x*6+6;
     ...

A static recognizer looking for “watermark=<number>” in the program might get
really confused by these changes to the code, since it’s hard to anticipate all of
the myriad variations that are possible. A dynamic recognizer, on the other
hand, would simply run the code, look at the value of the watermark variable,
and read out the mark. As long as the transformations don’t affect the
semantics of the program, at the end of the secret input sequence, watermark will
still hold the value 42.

Of course, it’s not as simple as that. You’ve already seen plenty of data-
obfuscating transformations that are semantics-preserving but that could still
destroy the mark in this example. For example, splitting the watermark variable
into several pieces that are then scattered throughout the program would make
recognition very difficult. So you still have to be careful when you choose the
kind of state in which you store the mark. There are three considerations:

  1. It should be difficult for the adversary to modify the state (because it
     would require extensive static analysis to get it right); or

  2. Modifying the state would make the program too slow or too large to be
     useful; or

  3. It should be easy to tamperproof the state.
For example, it might well be too costly for the adversary to split every integer
variable in the entire program to ensure that he has successfully destroyed the
mark. Also, if your language allows introspection, you could tamperproof the
mark by inserting code that checks that the watermark variable is, in fact, an
integer variable.

One of the main disadvantages of static watermarking is that to tamperproof
the mark you need to inspect the code segment of the program, because this is
where the mark is stored. For binary code, this is certainly possible, but it is
potentially expensive and hard to do stealthily, since few programs read their
own code segment. For typed bytecode, the situation is even worse, since you
have to use easily identified routines from the language’s standard library to
read and check the code. The nice thing about dynamic watermarking systems
is that there is no need to tamperproof the code itself: Instead, you can just
inspect the variables (or other dynamic state) that hold the mark for tampering,
and this is much easier to do stealthily than checking the code.

There are three problems with dynamic watermarking algorithms that make
them unsuitable in some applications. The first problem is that, as of yet, there
are no dynamic algorithms that can protect parts of programs. That is, you can
only watermark entire applications, not individual modules and classes. That’s
because the program needs to be executed in order to recognize the mark, and
you may not know how to execute individual classes. Second, dynamic
watermarks have to be executed to be recognized, and this can make automatic
recognition of programs (say, of programs downloaded off the Web) difficult.
With a command-line program that only reads data from a file, this is not a
problem, but automatically feeding a sequence of mouse clicks at precise
intervals to a program with a complex graphical user interface is non-trivial. It
can also be dangerous, unless the programs you are attempting to recognize are
contained well within a sandbox. Finally, to ensure correct recognition, it is
necessary to have complete control over the execution environment and to be
sure that any non-determinism in the program won’t affect the recognizer. If
the watermark is built only when the input to the program includes a particular
sequence of network packets, you have to make sure that during recognition
these packets will be delivered at exactly the right times. Alternatively, you
may choose the special input sequence to your program in such a way that
non-determinism won’t affect recognition. However, even this might be
difficult to do, because some changes to the user interface may make your
original method of user input impossible. For example, if your secret input was
the mouse click on a drop-down list, and an attacker replaced the drop-down
list with an input field, much of the functionality of the program may be
retained but it will no longer be possible to cause your dynamic watermark to
be expressed.

Dynamic watermarking systems have to be evaluated differently than static
ones. First, there’s both a dynamic and a static data rate. The static data rate
measures how much extra code you insert in the program, while the dynamic
rate measures how much extra data is generated at runtime. Similarly, you
have to consider static as well as dynamic stealth. An algorithm is statically
stealthy if the code you insert blends in with surrounding code, and it’s
dynamically stealthy if any data structures constructed at runtime fit in with
the original data in the program. In practice, dynamic data rate and dynamic
stealth are less of a problem than their static counterparts. Most programs
today build huge data structures, and it’s unlikely that any extra watermarking
data would have a noticeable impact.

In the remainder of this chapter, we are going to take an in-depth look at four
dynamic watermarking algorithms: WMCT, WMNT, WMCCDKHLSpaths, and
WMCCDKHLSbf. The WMCT algorithm encodes the watermark in a graph
structure, WMNT encodes in the threading behavior, and the remainder encode
in the branching behavior of programs. WMCT, WMNT, and WMCCDKHLSpaths
are all platform-independent, while WMCCDKHLSbf was designed specifically
for native executables.

9.1 Algorithm WMCT: Exploiting Aliasing

The first dynamic watermarking algorithm, WMCT [86,90,280], was published
in 1999. The underlying idea is similar to something you saw in Chapter 4
(Code Obfuscation): Since alias analysis is hard, construct a dynamic pointer-
based structure that’s difficult for the adversary to analyze or manipulate
safely. In Section 4.4.1 247, the graph we use to construct opaque invariants,
which are useful for control flow obfuscations: “If pointers p and q into graph
G are never aliased then ...”. In this section, you’ll see how we can use the
graph to encode a dynamic watermark.

Intuitively, this seems like a good idea, particularly for object-oriented
programs. Dynamically linked structures are ubiquitous in object-oriented
programs, so it’s likely that adding another one won’t stand out too much. You
can make the graph as big as you want (keeping in mind that bigger implies
less stealth, of course), so bitrate should be reasonable. And as long as you
don’t build the graph over and over again inside a tight loop, overhead should
be negligible. That’s the theory. In practice, you have to be very careful about
how you construct the graph, where you insert it, how you protect it from
being destroyed (accidentally during recognition or deliberately by semantics-
preserving transformations), and how you avoid leaving very simple code
signatures for the adversary to search for.

9.1.1 A Simple Example

But before delving deeper into the algorithm, let’s look at a simple example.
We’ll start with a Java program M that reads a list of numbers from the
command line and prints YES if the first number occurs in the remaining ones.
Here’s the code and two example runs:

As always, it’s never possible to hide anything in a program of this size, so
you’re going to have to suspend disbelief for a moment while you imagine that
you’re actually watermarking a million-line program, not an eleven-line one.
With that in mind, let’s see how you can embed the number “2” in this
program.

The first thing you need to do is to construct a graph that encodes the number
2. In Section 8.10 533, we described several graph encodings in detail. Here,
we’re using a radix encoding. The idea is to construct a circular linked list
(dark gray nodes) that forms the spine of the graph and then add pointers
(dashed) that encode the digits of a base-2 expansion of the number 2, 1 · 21
+0 · 20:

The next thing to do is to pick a special input sequence that triggers the
watermark graph to be built. In this artificial example, you don’t have much to
choose from, so let’s pick 〈 ''the first argument is 2'' 〉 as your secret input.
Now convert the graph to code that builds it, and finally, embed the code into
the program so that it gets executed only when the first argument is 2. Here it
is:
The code in dark gray builds the spine of the graph, the light gray code
encodes the radix-k digits, and the dashed code defines the watermark node
type. To extract the watermark, you run the program, making sure that 2 is the
first argument. When you get to the end of the input, you examine the heap for
a linked structure that could be the watermark graph, and finally, you decode
the graph back to the watermark number. Nothing could be easier!

However, you will no doubt already have discovered several problems. First,
the embedded watermark code isn’t very stealthy at all! It consists of news and
pointer assignments, while the rest of the code just works on strings. So at
least in this environment, the algorithm doesn’t produce very stealthy marks.
This tells us that WMCT won’t be useful in numerical programs or string
manipulation programs but will fit in nicely in typical object-oriented
programs that do lots of manipulation of dynamically allocated objects.
Second, the global static variable root is necessary in order to hold on to the
graph and prevent it from being garbage collected. Java programs contain few
static globals, so this is a dead giveaway to an attacker. In languages like C++
without garbage collection (or like Modula-3, where you have a choice
between a collected and a user-controlled heap), you won’t have this problem.
Third, to create the graph you need a node type with at least two outgoing
edges. Here, we had to create one from scratch, which we called “WMNode”—we
might just as well have written the attacker a note: “Look for the watermark
here!”

9.1.2 Recognition Problems

And those are just a few of the problems with this algorithm! Others are
discussed in this section. First, during watermark extraction, we said you
should “examine the heap for a linked structure that could be the watermark
graph”—how do you do that when there could be millions of objects on the
heap?! The key insight is that once you’ve finished entering the secret input
and the program is done consuming it (which in our case means it has stopped
allocating any more objects as a result of the input), one of the last objects that
was allocated ought to be the root node of the graph. The root is a special node
from which all other nodes in the graph are reachable—having such a special
node makes it easy to ensure parts of the graph aren’t garbage collected. So
there’s no need to examine the entire heap; just start looking for the root of a
potential watermark graph in reverse allocation order.

Of course, examining the heap for graph structures might be a difficult
technical problem. In C, there’s no runtime type information to tell you which
words are pointers and which are integers. In fact, in general there’s no way to
tell where one heap object ends and the next one begins. So you may need to
use a special implementation of malloc to give you more information to work
with. In type-safe languages like Java and C#, things are a bit easier. In Java,
the JVMTI framework (used to build debuggers and profilers, for example)
allows you to run a program as a subprocess and examine its state during
execution much as a debugger would. With JVMTI, you can iterate through
the active threads of the program, getting to their static variables and stack
data, and through them access all live heap objects. If you have access to your
language implementation’s runtime system, you can also modify it to time-
stamp every allocated dynamic object; finding the root then is as simple as a
linear scan over the live objects on the heap.

A second problem you must deal with is where in the program you should
embed the code that builds the watermark graph. If you have a good
understanding of your program, finding a suitable location by hand might not
be that hard. Obviously, the location you choose had better depend on user
input—it’s no good if it gets executed every time the program executes
independent of the input (for example, at the beginning of the program run
before any input has been consumed). Ideally, it should be executed only for
your one specific, secret, unlikely-to-occur-in-normal-use input. You do have
to be careful that the location is executed deterministically for your chosen
input. In other words, regardless of what else is going on during watermark
recognition (what other programs are running, what the network traffic is like,
what seed the random number generator has been initialized with, what time of
day it is, and so on), your chosen secret input must always cause the
watermark code to be executed. So avoid threads with race conditions or code
like this:

     int now = java.lang.System.currentTimeMillis();
     java.util.Random rnd = new java.util.Random(now);
     if (rnd.nextFloat() < 0.5) {
     ...
     root = new WMNode ();
     ...
     }

To make the embedding stealthy, you should also prefer locations that already
manipulate objects over those that do numerical or string processing. Finally,
it’s prudent to stay away from hot spots. The watermark-building code may not
be particularly slow (and, ideally, it should only execute for the special input),
but you’ll want to be extra careful that the code doesn’t execute “by chance”
and start to fill up the heap with watermark graphs.

Of course, you would like a tool that automatically embeds the marking code
for you, rather than having to do it by hand yourself. We know of two
implementations of WMCT, one in the SandMark tool [81] from the University
of Arizona, and JavaWiz by Palsberg’s group [280] at Purdue. JavaWiz is an
unkeyed variant of the algorithm (i.e., it’s not dependent on user input). It’s
therefore sufficient to embed the watermark on a path that will always be
reached from the program entry point. In SandMark, the user has to annotate
locations in the source that are suitable for watermark code, i.e., locations that
are input dependent but deterministic for the special input. A tracing run
produces the sequence of those locations that are hit on the special input
sequence, and among those locations, the “best” (with respect to stealth, for
example) subset is chosen. If you’re not sure whether your code is
deterministic or not—you may have some undetected race conditions, for
example!—you can run the trace “enough” times to make sure that you get the
same trace points for every run.

We’ll spend the remainder of this section describing how to increase the
bitrate, resilience to attack, and stealth of WMCT. Algorithm 9.1 551 gives an
overview of the embedding and recognition procedures. WMCT is interesting
because it’s the first watermarking algorithm based on the hardness of a static
analysis problem (alias analysis), and the first one whose implementation is
described in detail in the literature. We will spend significant time describing
this algorithm because we think you’ll find it interesting to see just how hard it
is to get an implementation that is reasonably robust and leaves no room for
very simple attacks.

Algorithm 9.1. Overview of algorithm WMCT.
9.1.3 Increasing Bitrate

Let’s look at three basic ideas for increasing the amount of data you can embed
using WMCT:

  1. You can choose an efficient graph encoding from Section 8.10 533,

  2. You can be efficient in the kind of code you generate to build the graphs,
     or

  3. You can spread the graph over the entire program, embedding small
     pieces in different places.

By itself, splitting a watermark graph into smaller pieces doesn’t increase the
bitrate. Instead, it increases stealth, smaller graphs being harder to find than
larger ones, and this allows you to embed larger graphs without raising
suspicion. There is, in fact, a strong correlation between bitrate and stealth. In
one sense, WMCT has infinite embedding capability: There’s nothing stopping
you from embedding an arbitrarily large graph! But, of course, such a graph
would stick out like a sore thumb in any but the largest of programs. So the
real question you have to ask yourself is, “In a program of a particular size
with a particular mix of instructions written in a particular programming style,
what amount of graph-building code can we add without raising the suspicion
of a human reader and without changing the local and global instruction mix to
alert an automatic de-watermarking tool?” Since we don’t have good models
for either human or machine stealth, we can’t answer this question
conclusively.

There are actually two types of bitrate, one dynamic and one static. In most
cases, you will just care about the static rate, which is the amount of graph-
building code you have to insert in the program. The dynamic bitrate measures
how much dynamic data is added to the heap. Usually this will be irrelevant,
since you expect the watermark graph to be built only during recognition, and
the heap typically has lots of data in it to begin with.
9.1.3.1 Choosing an Efficient Graph Encoding

A good start to increasing the bitrate is to choose a graph family from Section
8.10 533 that generates the smallest graphs possible, for the largest possible
watermarks. But this isn’t enough. What you really want is a family of graphs
from which you can generate as little graph-building code as possible for as
large watermark numbers as possible.

To see this, consider the graph family of oriented parent-pointer trees. In these
graphs, every node has only one pointer, which points to its parent. This is
quite efficient! However, if you’re in a garbage-collected environment like
Java, you’ll run into serious problems when implementing this family. Since
there’s nothing pointing to the leaves, the entire structure consists of non-live
objects that will be recycled by the garbage collector! So you will also have to
be sure to include extra pointers to all the leaf nodes. The extra leaf pointers
will, of course, reduce the overall bitrate. You’ll see an example of this shortly.

The radix graph family has a higher static bitrate than any other class we
know of. You can see in Figure 9.1 553 that the size of the Java bytecode
needed to build the graph grows very modestly with the size of the watermark.

    Figure 9.1. Sizes of the graph-building Java bytecode as a
  function of the size of the fingerprint. This figure is taken from
                            reference [90].
9.1.3.2 Generating Minimal Code

Once the graph codec from Section 8.10 533 has constructed a watermark
graph from your watermark integer, you have to generate code that builds this
graph. You do a depth-first traversal of the graph starting at its root, and emit a
nk = new() for every node in reverse topological order. When you’ve generated
code for nodes ni and nj, you can generate code for any edge between them,
such as ni .edge1 = nj. Unlike graphs that you find in most math textbooks, the
graphs we talk about in this chapter are directed multigraphs (you can have
more than one edge between two nodes) with an ordering on a node’s outgoing
edges. In other words, you can have both edges                and              and
there’s a definite difference between them.

Depending on the graph family and your target language, you might be able to
do better than such a straightforward code generation. If the same subgraph
occurs many times in the graph, it might make sense to factor out that code
into a subroutine. Some approaches to code compaction [112] have used
similar ideas.

To see that code generation strategies matter, have a look at the light gray code
segment below that builds the 48th tree in the parent-pointer tree encoding. To
make sure that the graph is not garbage collected, we’ve had to add static
pointers to every leaf:
The generated Java bytecode is 99 bytes, but if you’re a bit more clever you
can use an array instead and build the entire graph in a single loop, using only
48 codebytes:

      Problem 9.2

      Define a minimalist language made up of, say, news, pointer assignments,
      arrays, and while-loops. Construct an algorithm that takes a graph as
      input and generates minimal code that builds the graph in your language.
      To simplify, limit the problem to certain families of graphs.

9.1.3.3 Increasing Stealth and Bitrate by Graph Splitting

Small watermark numbers will be encoded into small graphs, and assuming
that you can find a place in the code that already does some allocation and
pointer manipulation, you can probably embed the entire graph there without
having to worry too much about stealth. But for large graphs, stealth is a
concern. The watermark 232 in a radix graph encoding has eleven nodes,
resulting in a total of 113 bytecode instructions. This doesn’t sound too bad for
a 32-bit watermark, but what’s troubling is that only nine different kinds of
instructions are emitted (those corresponding to Java’s new() and p.field = q
statements), and this leaves a telltale signature that will be easy for an attacker
to spot.

It makes sense to split up large watermark graphs into smaller pieces and
spread them over the program. Here’s an example where a four-node graph is
built in two pieces of two nodes each:

The first component of the graph is in light gray and the second is in dark gray.
Here’s a program that first builds the light gray part, then the dark gray part,
and then combines the two using the dashed code:

The more pieces you break a graph into, the more code you have to generate to
merge the pieces back together! So it’s important that you choose a graph-
splitting algorithm that minimizes the number of edges that cross the cut
between components [216]. In Figure 9.2 556, you can see how the size of the
Java bytecode generated for a radix graph grows as you split it into two to five
components.
 Figure 9.2. Size of Java bytecode for building a radix graph split
into two or more components. This figure is taken from reference
                                [90].

For the watermark 232, a single graph requires 236 codebytes, two components
require 327, three require 348, four require 433, and five require 423 bytes.

When you split the graph, you have to keep the garbage-collection issue in
mind. Each component should be a connected graph, and there should be a
root node from which all nodes in a component are reachable. This is the case
with the light gray component in the example above: n2 holds onto its root
node, ensuring that it doesn’t get collected prematurely. The final issue you
need to consider is that on non-recognition runs, you may try to merge two
graph components together even though one of them hasn’t been built! This is
the case, for example, if the light gray code hasn’t executed by the time you
reach the dark gray code: n2 will be null and without the dotted guard, you
would get a null-pointer exception.

    Problem 9.3
      One problem with breaking the graph into small pieces is that you have to
      somehow connect them again. In the example above, we do this through
      the global variable n2. A different idea is to break the watermark number
      into smaller pieces, convert each piece into a graph, and then embed all
      the graphs in different parts of the program. During recognition, you have
      to extract each graph individually, convert it to a number, and merge these
      numbers back into the watermark. You could run several recognition runs,
      one for each subgraph, each with different secret input sequences, or you
      could produce all graphs on the same run. Which is the better strategy,
      breaking the watermark number or the watermark graph? Compare and
      contrast!

9.1.4 Increasing Resilience to Attack

Typical dynamic structures in real programs are simple: Lists are more
common than trees, trees are more common than DAGs, sparse graphs with
low out-degree are more common than dense graphs, and so on. To be stealthy,
therefore, your watermark graph G should be as simple as possible. Also, you
want G to be small (the graph encoding should have a high bitrate), and if
you’re in a garbage-collected environment, you want all nodes to be reachable
through a single root node that you can hold onto in order to make sure that the
entire structure won’t be collected prematurely. Finally, you want G to be
resilient to small perturbations. If the adversary is able to destroy a small piece
of the graph (or there’s a small error during watermark extraction), you still
want to be able to extract the mark. In other words, you want the graph to have
error-correcting properties.

9.1.4.1 Protecting against Edge Flips

With the exception of oriented parent-pointer trees, the graphs in Section 8.10
533 are all multigraphs with an ordering on the outgoing edges. This makes
them vulnerable to a very simple attack: Simply reorder the edges! We call this
attack an edge flip. In a typed language like Java bytecode, this is ridiculously
simple: Just rename the fields representing the graph edges. If there are only
two fields in the node object, this won’t present too much of a problem for the
watermark recognizer: Just try both orderings. But the number of orders to try
grows exponentially with the number of pointer fields in the nodes, so an
adversary can (at some additional space cost) add bogus fields to slow down
the recognizer.

Some languages have introspective capabilities. Java’s reflection mechanism,
for example, allows a running program to examine itself, including its classes,
the fields those classes have, the types of those fields, and so on. You can use
this to tamperproof your watermark node class to make sure that a class’ fields
have not been reordered and that additional fields have not been added to
confuse you:

     class Node {public Node spine, digit;}
     Node n1 = new Node();
     · · ·
     java.lang.reflect.Field[]           F                                    =
     Node.class.getFields();
     if (!((F.length == 2) &&
     (F[0].getName().equals("spine")) &&
     (F[1].getName().equals("digit")) &&
     (F[0].getType() == Node.class) &&
     (F[1].getType() == Node.class)))
     java.lang.System.exit(42);

Unfortunately, reflection is rarely used in real programs, so this type of
tamperproofing is highly unstealthy.

     Problem 9.4

     C doesn’t have reflection capabilities, but can you think of a similar way
     to protect a graph in a weakly typed language?
Instead, what you really want is a graph family where edge flips don’t matter.
The oriented parent-pointer tree is such a family, since they only have one
outgoing edge in the first place! Unfortunately, they don’t have any other good
error-correcting properties, as any other minor change to the graph will make
the recognizer return a completely different watermark number, and there’s no
way for you to even detect that an attack has occurred. A more interesting
graph family is planted plane cubic tree (Section 8.10.4 536) graphs, which
are resilient to edge flips and some other small perturbations.

The reducible permutation graphs that we presented in Section 8.10.5 536
can, of course, be used to build dynamic graphs as well as the CFG
watermarks they were used for in the WMVVS algorithm. They maintain the
same strong properties, including resistance to edge flips.

9.1.4.2 Protecting Against Node Splitting

A particularly nasty attack is node splitting. The idea is very simple: The
attacker replaces every dynamic object you allocate with two, where the first
one points to the second. The attacker will have to add extra code everywhere
in the code where the split object is referenced to ensure that the
transformation is semantics-preserving. In a typed code, this transformation is
easy and requires no expensive analysis. Here’s an example attack:
You should keep in mind that we’re assuming the attacker doesn’t know where
your watermark code is embedded. If he did, you’ve already lost! So under
that assumption, the best he can do is to apply the distortive transformation
uniformly over all the code in the program, splitting every object type and
adding an extra level of indirection to every pointer de-reference. In many
programs, this would lead to significant slowdown and extra memory
consumption.

To protect yourself from the node-splitting attack, you can replace each node
in the watermark graphs with a k-cycle, and each edge with an m-path. Any
node split will fall on a cycle or path and will disappear during watermark
extraction as you shrink cycles and paths back into nodes and edges.
Unfortunately, as can be expected, you get a huge decrease in bitrate and
stealthiness. The Java bytecode for this example is 408 bytes compared to 54
bytes for the uncycled graph:

In Figure 9.3 560, you can see that twice as much dynamic memory gets
allocated as for an uncycled radix graph.
Figure 9.3. Bytecode sizes and runtime heap sizes for cycled radix
         graphs. This figure is taken from reference [90].

9.1.4.3 Protecting Against Alias Analysis

In a pattern-matching attack on your watermarked program, the attacker would
analyze all the code in the program that builds some sort of linked structure,
looking for any location that builds a structure from your graph library. In
general, this requires him to do a shape analysis [137,311], which in turn
requires a smart alias analysis. We talked about this in Section 3.1.4 134.

How do you thwart such an attack? Well, you can look at what types of code
current alias analysis algorithms find most difficult to analyze: They typically
break down for code that builds very deeply recursive structures (no problem
there, with your convoluted graphs!) and for code with destructive updates.
That is, alias analysis algorithms do very well for constructive code, which just
builds a linked structure, but poorly for code that both builds and changes
structures. So to throw off your attacker, you can insert exactly this type of
code along the path the program takes on the secret input. Here’s an example
where the watermark graph gets built in two steps:
First, the dark gray code builds an erroneous watermark graph, and then in the
second step, it gets fixed up by the light gray code into the correct graph. Of
course, there are endless opportunities for creating, destroying, modifying, and
fixing up the graph. The more changes to the graph you make on the way, the
harder it will be for the attacker to analyze the code, but the bitrate will go
down (you’re adding more code!) and the overall stealth may also suffer.

9.1.5 Increasing Stealth

When deciding how to go about attacking a system, an adversary will always
choose the path of least resistance. You may think that “the right” way to
attack WMCT is to build a state-of-the-art pointer analyzer, but since this would
amount to actual hard work, a smart hacker will look for a cheaper way in.
This is why the stealth of the introduced code is so important. If the attacker
can find the root of the graph stored in a global variable, or realize that your
graph is made up of nodes called WMNode, or note that a section of code that
builds a linked structure is not attached to the rest of the program, his work is
more than halfway done. Our stealthiness goal has to be to force the attacker to
analyze, by hand or by advanced static analysis, every line of the program. If a
very quick and simple scan of the code allows him to conclude that the
watermark cannot possibly be in, say, 90% of the code, then you have lost.
With this in mind, let’s consider a few of the obvious stealth problems with the
code we’ve generated so far.
9.1.5.1 Avoiding Global Variables

First, you’ve seen that having to store the root of the graph in a global variable
is a dead giveaway. Object-oriented programs, in particular, have few globals,
and it’s easy to scan the code for where they are being assigned to. Two
solutions come to mind to alleviate this problem: You can litter the program
with bogus global variables, or you can pass the root of the graph in formal
method parameters. Here’s an example where we’ve split the graph into two
components. Normally, you’d have to store a pointer to node n2 in a global
variable so that the light gray component will be accessible when it’s merged
with the dark gray component, but instead you can pass n2 in a formal
parameter:

In practice, of course, this is only possible if there’s a direct runtime path
between the two graph-building sites. If, on the other hand, the two
components are built by two different threads, some other means of
communication has to be used. The SandMark [81] tool uses a tracing run to
determine suitable locations for embedding. During the trace, they also build
an accurate call graph that allows them to pick locations between which there
are direct communication paths using only formal parameters.

9.1.5.2 Avoiding Unstealthy Node Classes

One serious problem of WMCT is that it requires a Java class (or C struct, or
Pascal record, and so on) to represent the nodes of the graph. If there are only a
few such data structures in the program, it will be an easy task for the attacker
to examine them to see which ones are being used to create suspicious linked
structures.

In the Java library, there are a few (on the order of twenty) classes that you can
reuse for graph nodes. If none of these classes is used in the original program,
their presence may raise suspicion, of course. Also, you should try to reuse any
classes that are already in your program, extending them as necessary to get
the right number of pointers:

One nice aspect of the parent-pointer family of graphs (Section 8.10.1 534) is
that each node only requires one pointer. So you could hijack any type of data
structure with one pointer in each node, such as a person object pointing to its
parent, a singly linked list node object, and so on. All the other graph families
you’ve seen require two pointers out of each node, and these types of nodes
are much less likely to occur naturally in real programs.

9.1.5.3 Avoiding Weak Cuts

An important contribution of algorithm WMVVS (Section 8.7.2 506) is the
insistence on the importance of avoiding weak cuts. The intuition is that if a
piece of code is not strongly connected to the rest of the program, it is
suspicious. So far, the graph-building code you’ve generated hasn’t been
connected at all to the host program, which is suspicious indeed! In WMVVS,
the authors solve the problem by adding a large number of bogus branches
between every part of the program. If you do this with a high degree of
uniformity, then the watermark code will be as tightly bound to the rest of the
program as every other piece of code. The disadvantage is that you need to
introduce many opaque predicates. It is also difficult to apply to typed
bytecode, since you cannot directly jump from one method into the middle of
another method, and the type system may prevent you from certain complex
control flow within a method. This is true in Java, for example, where you
have to be careful not to introduce control flow that violates the verifier rules.

A simpler idea [345,346] is to give the appearance that some value computed
from your graph is actually used by the surrounding code. Here’s an example
where we compute an opaque value k=1 (k is always equal to 1) from the graph
(in light gray) and use that to “modify” the value of n (dark gray). We’ve also
introduced a more direct check on the graph that both ties it closer to the
original code and adds some trivial tamperproofing (dashed):

     Problem 9.5

     How common are weak cuts in real programs? Write a tool to do the
     necessary analysis and apply it to a randomly chosen set of programs
     downloaded from the Web. Start with a rigorous definition of weak cut.
9.1.6 Discussion

Using WMCT to embed a 20-bit watermark with the radix graph encoding only
requires 141 bytes of Java bytecode. But as you’ve seen, this is only a part of
the story. Once you’ve cycled the graph, added code to tie it to the rest of the
program, added tamperproofing code, and so on, the increase in code size will
be much more substantial. As a result, of course, the authors’ claim for the
stealth of the algorithm (“Real OO programs have lots of news and pointer
assignments in them, so if you add more of that, how bad can it get?”) is no
longer so obviously valid.

Any performance overhead due to this algorithm should be minimal. The
graphbuilding code is executed only for the special input, and so the only
source of overhead is executing the guards that determine if you’re on the
special path or not.

The chief advantage of the algorithm is that the watermark resides in the data-
space of the program rather than in the code space, as you saw for the static
algorithms in the last chapter. This gives you a much higher degree of freedom
in designing stealthy tamperproofing techniques. Checking that a variable has
a particular value is much more common in real programs than checking that a
piece of code hasn’t been modified!

Unless you have a very careful implementation of this algorithm, it’s
reasonable to believe that the most simple and therefore serious attacks will
look for telltale code signatures. If you can’t hide that a particular node type
has multiple outgoing pointers, the first thing an attacker will do is scan the
code for allocations of such nodes. And unless your graph is very small or
you’re able to spread the graph-building code over a large area, the attacker
will certainly scan for multiple news within the same method.

This algorithm, and its implementation, gives valuable insight into the
difficulty of software watermarking in general. As this section has shown, it is
difficult to get high stealth, resilience, and bitrate all at the same time. Also,
you’ve seen that not all watermarking algorithms will be appropriate for all
programs—WMCT should work well for object oriented programs that do
much dynamic allocation. It should be much less appropriate for mostly
numeric programs.

     Problem 9.6

     Implement WMCT in a weakly typed language such as C or C++. What
     makes embedding and recognition easier and harder than in a typed
     language implementation? Which attacks become easier and harder?
     What tricks can you play with the type system to improve resilience to
     attack?

9.2 Algorithm WMNT: Exploiting Parallelism

The adversary’s goal is to analyze and understand enough of your program to
be able to apply a transformation that makes your watermark unrecognizable,
while otherwise maintaining semantics. Your goal is to make this analysis as
hard as possible. In the previous section, you learned how to make de-
watermarking difficult by basing the algorithm on a known hard static analysis
problem, pointer analysis.

In Algorithm WMNT [264,265], watermark resilience is instead based on the
difficulty of analyzing multi-threaded programs. The idea is to embed new
threads into single-threaded portions of your program so that when given the
right input, the dynamic behavior of the threads is distinctive and encodes the
watermark.

How can you control the dynamic behavior of threads and make them
distinctive? You could introduce code that explicitly starts and stops threads to
exhibit a distinctive pattern, but such code would be very unstealthy. Most
programs do not often attempt to start and stop threads explicitly. Even in
languages like Java where multi-threading is an integral part of the language,
starting and stopping threads is rare and even discouraged. We can do better
using locks, a device commonly used in multi-threaded programs.

Locks control access to variables and sections of code. In an unsynchronized
multi-threaded program, two or more threads may try to read or write to the
same area of memory or try to use resources simultaneously. This results in a
race condition, a situation in which two or more threads or processes are
reading or writing some shared data and where the final result depends on the
timing and scheduling of the threads.

A mutual exclusion object (usually called a mutex) is a type of lock typically
used by different threads to share resources in a controlled manner and get
around the problem of race conditions. It allows only one thread to execute a
piece of code at a time. A mutex has two states, locked and unlocked. Threads
adopt a convention where before a thread uses a shared resource, it locks the
corresponding mutex. Other threads attempting to lock a locked mutex will
block and wait until the original thread unlocks it. Once the mutex is unlocked,
the queued threads contend to acquire the lock on the mutex. Which thread
gets to run is decided by priority, order of execution, or by some other
algorithm. The nature of multi-threaded execution, and the number of factors
that can affect the timing of thread execution, means that which thread
acquires the lock is difficult to predict and appears to be largely random [277].

How does WMNT use locks to embed a watermark? Let’s start by trying to
influence which threads execute which blocks merely by manipulating the
nesting of locks.

Suppose you have the trivial run method shown in Listing 9.1 567 (a). This
method simply calls two methods, blockA and blockB. To build a watermark that
relies on threading behavior, you need more threads of execution. Let’s
introduce two threads to execute these blocks. You can see this in Listing 9.1
567 (b). You have to introduce additional monitors and predicates to ensure
that the program remains semantically equivalent to the original. You also
have to introduce a call to join(), which forces the main thread to block until
the child threads t1 and t2 have completed executing.
Listing 9.1. Three semantically equivalent programs illustrating
how Algorithm WMNT controls thread behavior. In (a), a single
thread executes blockA and blockB sequentially. In (b), blockA and blockB
get executed sequentially by either thread t0 or t1. In (d), blockA and
blockB get executed sequentially, but the same thread executes both

blocks. Can you fill in the missing block with a program that
causes different threads to execute blockA and blockB sequentially?
Notice that this new program has four possible combinations in which threads
t1 and t2 can execute the functions blockA and blockB. First, either thread t1 or t2
will win the contention for mutex1, and the winning thread executes the function
blockA. Second, once mutex1 has been released, both threads will contend for
mutex2, and the winning thread gets to execute blockB. So you get the following
four possible execution orders:

This is the way in which monitors are usually used, but it turns out that this
isn’t particularly useful to us.

Now have a look at the light gray code in Listing 9.1 567 (d), where we’ve
switched the order in which you lock and release the monitors. This code is
almost identical to (b) and is in fact semantically equivalent—they both
execute blockA and blockB sequentially. Now, however, whichever thread wins
the first contention and then locks on mutex1 is the only thread that tries to lock
     . The losing thread is still waiting on mutex1, so the winning thread is
mutex2
guaranteed to win again! This means that whichever thread executes blockA also
executes blockB. Since there are only two threads, there are now only two
possible paths:

The two snippets are very similar, differing only in the order of lock
operations. If you had a snippet of code (c) that caused different threads to
execute different blocks, you would be able to distinguish the behavior of (b)
from (d) at runtime solely by watching their execution. You could use this
distinction in behavior to dynamically decode a bit of the watermark. Of
course, you would still have the problem that the snippets are statically
different, but later you’ll will see how to overcome this problem.

     Problem 9.7

     Write the missing code snippet in Listing 9.1 567 (c) that uses only lock
     and unlock calls to guarantee two different threads will execute blockA and
     blockB. Are two threads sufficient to encode a bit in this way? What
     problems arise when using only two threads?

To make Algorithm WMNT useful, there are several hurdles to overcome. First,
it turns out that using two threads as in the examples above is not enough to
robustly recognize a watermark—how can you tell which thread is which? In
the next section, we’ll show you the widget that WMNT uses to encode a single
bit of the watermark using three blocks. The idea is that if all three blocks are
run by different threads, a 0-bit is encoded, but if two blocks are run by the
same thread, a 1-bit is encoded.
The second problem is how to find suitable embedding locations. We solve
this, as in WMCT, by running the program with the special key input sequence
under tracing. From the trace we pick out blocks that can be run in separate
threads, thereby embedding the mark.

The third problem is stealth. In a simple implementation of WMNT, the
watermark widgets that embed a 0-bit are, unfortunately, statically different
from those that embed a 1! In Section 9.2.4 579, you’ll see how to overcome
these problems using opaque predicates.

9.2.1 Embedding Watermarking Widgets

To embed a thread-based watermark, you need a widget that uses locking to
encode a single watermark bit. The widget executes an existing block in the
program using three threads. Locks will ensure that the original semantics of
the program are maintained. Let’s adopt the convention that if the same thread
executes the three blocks of the widget, it encodes a 0-bit and if the same
thread executes the first and third blocks, and a different thread executes the
second block, it encodes a 1-bit. We’ve illustrated this in Figure 9.4 570.

Figure 9.4. Overview of how different threads execute each of the
   pieces in a 0-bit and 1-bit watermarking widget in WMNT.
There are several features that you would like these widgets to have. They
must be difficult to distinguish from each other, and they should incorporate
some part of the original program. This way, even if the adversary identifies
the watermarking code, he cannot simply rip it out of the program. Listing 9.2
 571 shows the two widgets that encode a 0-bit and a 1-bit, respectively. To
embed a watermarking bit w into a basic block B, you do the following:

  1. Divide B into three sequential pieces: A, B, and C;

  2. Replace B with the appropriate widget;

  3. Replace pieceA, pieceB, and pieceC (in dotted) in the widget with A, B, and
     C, respectively.

The widgets will execute the pieces sequentially. Figures 9.5 572 and 9.6 573
show the runtime behavior of the widgets for a 0-bit widget and a 1-bit widget,
respectively.

  Figure 9.5. The dynamic behavior of watermarking code that
  embeds a 0 bit. Different threads execute pieceA, pieceB, and
pieceC. Note that all lock acquisitions and releases are well paired
                      and no dead locks occur.
  Figure 9.6. The dynamic behavior of watermarking code that
embeds a 1 bit. The same threads execute pieceA and pieceC, and
a different thread executes pieceB. Note that all lock acquisitions
       and releases are well paired and no deadlocks occur.
Have a look at the code for the 0-bit widget in Listing 9.2 571 (a). Notice how
the three new threads contend for mutex0 and how the winner proceeds to
execute the first predicate. This causes pieceA to be executed by the winner,
while the other threads wait. The winning thread then executes pieceA and sets
doneA to be true. It can do this confident that none of the other threads will
attempt to read the value of doneA until it releases mutex0. Similarly, the winning
thread is guaranteed to acquire a lock on mutex1.

As you follow the rest of the execution of the program, notice that the two
widgets differ from each other only on the three monitor instructions,
highlighted in dark gray, and the predicate, highlighted in light gray. These
differences are responsible for the different thread behavior that encodes the
watermark bit. While any thread can win the contention for mutex0, the order of
the remaining lock and unlock calls are forced. The two static differences
between our widgets are responsible for the different thread behavior. You can
dynamically detect and decode these differences as a watermark.

Now that you can embed a single bit watermark, we can give an algorithm for
embedding your watermark bit string using these widgets (see Algorithm 9.2
574). For the watermark bit string to be recognized correctly, the widgets that
correspond to bits in the watermark must be executed in the correct order. To
ensure this, you collect a trace of your program run using the secret key input
and select a subsequence of blocks from the trace in which to embed your
widgets.

Listing 9.2. Watermarking widgets for Algorithm WMNT. Snippet
(a) encodes a 0-bit and (b) a 1-bit watermark. The pieces
highlighted in dotted are replaced with code from the original
program. The differences between the two widgets are highlighted
in light gray and dark gray.
The trace of the program P with the key input I selects a path through the
program. From this trace you choose r blocks, where r is the number of bits in
your watermark bit-string, and for every chosen block you embed the
watermarking widget that corresponds to each bit. When you attempt to do
this, you will find that if you select blocks that occur more than once in a trace,
watermark bits that you embed early may conflict with watermark bits that you
try to embed later. To avoid this situation, you should simply avoid selecting
basic blocks that occur multiple times in a trace.

Algorithm 9.2. Overview of Algorithm WMNT.
    Problem 9.8

    If you had a choice of programming language in which to implement
    WMNT, which language features would you look for that would make it
    especially suitable? What aspects of the language would make the
    technique harder to implement? What language features would make an
    implementation less stealthy?

9.2.2 Embedding Example
To illustrate the embedding process, let’s watermark the program N shown in
Listing 9.3 575. We want to embed the number 2, which we’ll represent as the
bit string 102 in this program. Let’s pick 〈1, 3, 1, 4, 1〉 as our secret key input,
which will cause the watermark to be expressed.

Listing 9.3. A single-threaded example program                       N   used to
illustrate Algorithm WMNT.

     public class N {

     public static String nth ( int i ) {
     String nth = "";
     if ( i == 2 )
     nth_B1: nth = "nd";
     else if ( i == 3 )
     nth_B2: nth = "rd";
     else
     nth_B3: nth = "th";
     nth_B4: return i + nth;
     }

     public static void main (String args[]) {
     for (int i=1; i<args.length; i++) {
     if (args[0].equals(args[i])) {
     String nth;
     main_B1: nth = nth ( i );
     System.out.println("YES");
     System.out.println( args[0] + "is "+ nth );
     return;
     }
     }
     main_B2: System.out.println("NO");
     }
     }
Now you can start the process of watermarking. The first thing you will need
to know is which basic blocks get executed when we run the program with the
secret input. So you collect a trace in which you record the basic blocks as
they get executed, and the ID of the thread that executes it. Keep in mind that
in a single-threaded program, basic blocks may not always be executed in the
same order even when given the same input. For example, a program may
depend on the current time, random numbers, or the timing of the network or
hard-disk, or other unpredictable values. In a multi-threaded program, this
problem is greatly exaggerated. Any two threads in a program may interleave
in an exponentially large number of ways. You can minimize the effect by
recording the ID of the thread that is executing a block. In many well-written
programs free of race conditions, the order of basic blocks that are executed by
a single thread is, in fact, deterministic. In a typical real-life program, there
will be a large number of basic blocks in the trace. From this trace, you will
select n basic blocks in which to embed the n-bit watermark.

In our example program N in Listing 9.3 575, there is only a single thread of
execution. Before you can start the embedding, you need to perform a control
flow analysis and determine the basic blocks in the program. In Listing 9.3
575, we’ve identified the blocks with labels. You then execute the program
with the secret input 〈1, 3, 1, 4, 1〉, which gets you the following trace:

On a non-watermark-expressing input sequence, you would get a different
basic block trace:

From the trace, you choose blocks in which to embed your watermark bit
string 102. Let’s choose blocks main_B1 and nth_B3. Block main_B1 consists of three
statements, and you can divide it easily into three pieces, each consisting of a
single statement. Block nth_B3 has only a single statement. To break it into three
pieces, you can either leave two of them empty or you can first add two bogus
statements. For simplicity, let’s keep two of the pieces of nth_B3 empty.

You now remove from the program the block that occurs first in the trace,
main_B1, and replace it with a 1-bit widget. Within this widget, you replace
occurrences of pieceA, pieceB, and pieceC with the three statements from main_B1,
respectively:

     pieceA ⇒ nth = nth(i)
     pieceB ⇒ System.out.println(''YES'')
     pieceC ⇒ System.out.println(args[0]+'' is ''+nth)

Similarly, you replace the second block in the trace, nth_B3, with a 0-bit widget.
Within the widget you replace pieceA with nth=''th'' and leave pieceB and pieceC
empty.

Now, when the program is run it will execute and produce output identical to
the original. In addition, when it is run with your secret input, the 1-bit widget
will be executed followed by the 0-bit widget. In the next section, you will see
how to recognize the watermark that is expressed as a result of the embedding.

9.2.3 Recognition

To recognize the mark, you start by collecting a trace of the threading behavior
of the program when executing with the secret key input. The presence of the
watermark should be evident in the threading behavior of the program, but
how do you extract this from the trace? You could search through the trace and
find those instances where the same thread executed consecutive basic blocks.
Each instance would be decoded as a 0-bit of the watermark. However, you
have to keep in mind that such sequences may occur very often in a program
irrespective of whether it carries your watermark. Also, an attacker could
easily split basic blocks using dummy if-statements, and this would lead to
spurious bits being inserted into the watermark.
One way of working around this problem is to try to recognize and filter out
the spurious signals. We will show an example of how to do this when we
discuss WMCCDKHLSpaths, later in this chapter. In this section, we will use an
alternate solution. Have a look at Table 9.1 578, which gives the lock and
unlock calls produced by our watermarking widgets. Notice that the patterns of
these calls are different from each other. To identify our watermark bits, you
can scan through our trace, searching for these patterns of lock and unlock
calls.

Table 9.1. The dynamic pattern of lock and unlock calls made by
      0-bit and 1-bit encoding widgets in Algorithm WMNT.

You need the trace to include information about the threading behavior of the
program. You annotate every occurrence of the lock and unlock instructions so
that it records the object being locked or unlocked and the thread ID, Ti, which
executes the call. You then execute the program with your secret input I and
collect the resulting trace.
Some of these lock and unlock calls are from the embedding of the encoded
watermark, while others are from the original program. However, you cannot
guarantee that the thread IDs you see will be the same as they were when you
watermarked the program. An attacker may have renamed some of these
threads. Indeed, even the operating system may choose to allocate thread IDs
differently. What you can search for, however, is the pattern of calls that have
to be preserved. For this reason, we do not explicitly name the threads we are
searching for in Table 9.1 578, calling them TW - TZ instead.

There are different ways you could search through the trace for these patterns.
For example, you could use a regular expression to search for the start of a
watermark widget by searching for three lock calls on three different monitors.
The full regular expression would find the complete pattern shown in Table 9.1
 578. A regular expression is built for each set of four thread IDs that are
found in the trace. If one of these regular expressions successfully recognizes a
substring in the trace, that substring is decoded as the corresponding bit. You
continue to decode consecutive bits in the trace until all watermark bits have
been identified.

At this point, you may wonder how to deal with the situation where more than
one watermark string is found. Certainly the watermarker may know the string
that she embedded in the program and check that it occurs in the set of
watermarks that are found. However, the credibility of a recognizer that
outputs a large set of “potential” watermarks may be called into question.
Using the sparse code tables we showed you in Section 8.9.3 531 to encode
the mark can solve this problem.

There is an additional benefit of using the sparse code tables—it helps prevent
an attacker from inserting random bits into the watermark using his own lock
and unlock calls. At first glance, it may seem that an attacker can introduce as
many lock and unlock calls as needed until your recognition fails. However,
this is not really the case. The attacker has to lock and unlock some monitor
that he knows is not being used—otherwise he runs the risk of causing
deadlock! For example, if he tries to introduce a new lock on mutexorig
anywhere inside a widget, the widget will no longer function correctly.
Alternatively, he can attempt to lock a newly created mutex, which he can
guarantee is unlocked in the hope of obscuring the recognition. However, in
order for the recognizer to report some decoding of an armored watermark as
correct, it must also occur in your random code table. This is highly unlikely to
occur by chance and is difficult for an attacker to force.

9.2.4 Avoiding Pattern-Matching Attacks

If you compare the two widgets in Listing 9.2 571 closely, you can see that
there are detectable differences between the widgets that embed a 0 bit and a 1
bit. An attacker can use these differences to statically distinguish between
them. In this section, we will show how to use opaque predicates to eliminate
these apparent differences between the two watermarking widgets. If your
library of opaque predicates is such that the opaquely true and opaquely false
predicates resemble each other, then an attacker would not be able to use
pattern-matching attacks to statically read, eliminate, or modify the
watermarks. Also, for reasons of stealth, it must not be obvious to the attacker
which predicates are opaque (and need to be attacked) and which predicates
are real (and must be maintained for program correctness). In other words, you
need the predicates to appear similar to predicates that already appear in your
program. If the original program contains some pointer manipulation, it makes
sense to use the algorithm from Section 4.4.3 251, which creates opaque
predicates from a combination of threading and aliasing effects.

You can use the opaque predicates to eliminate the static differences between
the 0-bit and 1-bit watermark widgets. In Listing 9.2 571, we’ve marked the
differences between the widgets in dark gray and light gray. They occur in the
predicate and in the choice of monitors that are unlocked.

Let’s eliminate the statically analyzable difference between the monitors first.
To do this, replace the monitorexit calls using the following construction:
The attacker can’t distinguish between these constructions without deciphering
the opaque predicates. Similarly, you can take advantage of opaque predicates
to erase the differences between the two predicates, as follows:

With these changes, the watermarking widgets are now statically
indistinguishable from each other and more resistant to pattern-matching
attacks.

9.2.5 Tamperproofing Widgets

Now that we have addressed the problem of distinguishing 0-bit widgets from
1-bit widgets, let us put ourselves back in the place of an attacker. How would
he likely attempt to remove a WMNT watermark? One obvious way is to locate
all the thread-based watermarking widgets in a program and just remove them.
After all, the widgets are quite distinctive, and you could pattern match on
them, identifying the three original pieces of executable code within them, and
replace the widget with a concatenation of these three pieces.

To defend against such an attack, you have to make the widgets harder to
locate. With WMCT watermarks, we did this by making the watermarking code
look like the rest of the program. We chose to use linked graph data structures
to encode the watermark in a program that already contains linked graph data
structures. For Algorithm WMNT, we will use a different technique. Instead of
making the watermark look like the rest of the program, we will add a large
amount of tamperproofing code that looks like the watermark! While the
tamperproofing widgets will look like watermarking widgets, the pieces of
executable code they will contain will be incorrect. We will further design the
locks such that the incorrect code never gets executed. This means that if an
attacker tries to turn everything that looks like a watermark widget into
straight code, he will also turn these tamperproofing widgets into straight
code. However, now the semantic errors contained in the program will get
executed.

Algorithm 9.3 581 shows how to embed these widgets in a program. The
tamperproofing widgets themselves, shown in Listing 9.4 582, are statically
similar to a watermarking widget. The number of tamperproofing blocks is
chosen by the user.

Algorithm 9.3. Embedding tamperproofing widgets in Algorithm
WMNT.

EMBEDTAMPERPROOFWIDGETS(t,Ntamper):

  1. Select Ntamper blocks from the trace t. Ntamper is a user-configured number
     of tamperproofing widgets that will be inserted into the trace. The
     tamperproofing widgets will be inserted following each selected block.

  2. For every selected basic block:

         • Generate three new basic blocks of stealthy but incorrect code
          called pieceA, pieceB, and pieceC.

         • Create a new copy of the code shown in Listing 9.4 582 with the
           newly generated pieceA, pieceB, and pieceC.

         • Append the new widget following the selected basic block.

A large number of tamperproofing blocks makes it harder for an attacker to
find the true watermark widgets. However, they also slow down the program
considerably.
Finally, you need to generate incorrect code to embed in the tamperproofing
widgets. For example, you could assign random values to live variables, use an
appropriate basic block from elsewhere in the method, or execute code that has
user observable side effects.

Notice how similar the tamperproofing widget is to the watermarking widgets.
We have used the opaque predicate trick from the previous section to ensure
that there are no statically detectable differences between watermarking and
tamper-proofing widgets that would make it possible for an attacker to
distinguish between them.

9.2.6 Discussion

As you saw in Listing 9.2 571, embedding a WMNT watermark entails the
addition of a large amount of code. Every 16 bits of watermark requires 18
kilobytes of Java bytecode. In addition, WMNT needs to add a large number of
tamperproofing widgets to distract an attacker. Each of these tamperproofing
widgets is also 18 kilobytes in size. They further require the use of opaque
predicates. The implementation of opaque predicate that the authors use has an
overhead of an additional class of 884 bytes. This class can be instantiated and
reused by all opaque predicates in a program. Each use of an opaque
predicates requires 108 bytes. All in all, this algorithm considerably bloats the
size of an application.

Listing 9.4. Tamperproofing code for Algorithm WMNT that
embeds neither a 0 bit nor a 1 bit. The pieceA, pieceB, and pieceC slots
will be replaced by never-executed incorrect code.
The large number of threads in each of these widgets has another unfortunate
effect: It can significantly increase the performance cost of creating new
threads. WMNT also relies heavily on increasing the potential thread-contention
in a program. In older versions of Sun’s JVM, prior to version 1.5, this
introduces a significant and measurable slowdown in a program. This makes
WMNT a poor choice for applications where speed is critical.
The key advantage of WMNT is that the analysis required by multi-threaded
applications is significant, minimizing the number of tools available to an
attacker. What is more, the algorithm addresses the stealth problem we
identified in WMCT. Instead of trying to make the watermark stealthy, WMNT
increases the number of other components in the program that appear similar
to the watermark but behave differently. This shifts the security of the scheme
from the inability to distinguish the watermark from the rest of the program to
the inability to distinguish the watermark from tamperproofing code.

The major disadvantage of this scheme is that it aims to be secure only against
static analysis. Against an attacker who has the ability to execute the program,
WMNT may fail very easily. In particular, the tamperproofing and
watermarking widgets can easily be distinguished from the rest of the
program. On a given input that results in the execution of these widgets, it’s
easy for an attacker to tell whether the pieces embedded within the program
are executed or not, and thus he can distinguish tamperproofing widgets and
watermarking widgets quickly.

     Problem 9.9

     Implement WMNT in a language (such as Erlang) designed to handle
     thousands of simultaneous threads. Is the overhead different than for a
     Java-based implementation?

9.3 Algorithm WMCCDKHLSpaths: Expanding Execution Paths

The language structure in which WMCCDKHLSpaths [78] encodes the
watermark is forward branches. The thinking is that there are lots of if-
statements in a program, so adding a few more couldn’t hurt. Encoding can be
relatively straightforward. For example, to embed a bit, you could just add an
extra bogus branch to the program. On the special input, the branch should be
taken for a 1 bit and fall through for a 0 bit (however, see below why this
simple scheme is a bad idea!). The attack model is that the adversary can
disrupt the watermark by adding branches to the program himself, since if you
can, you have to assume that so can he! Algorithm 9.4 uses the error-correcting
watermark-splitting algorithm of Section 8.9.2 528 to protect the watermark.
The idea is to split the mark into many redundant pieces that are spread
throughout the program, and during recognition, to use the error-correcting
code to ensure that only a subset of the pieces is necessary to recover the mark.

Algorithm 9.4. Overview of algorithm WMCCDKHLSpaths. P is the
original program, Pw is the watermarked program, W is the
watermark, and I is the secret input sequence.

9.3.1 Encoding and Embedding
As usual, let’s start by looking at an example. The following program counts
the number of times its first command-line argument occurs among the
remaining arguments:

We’ve added labels (in light gray) in order to be able to refer to locations
within the code. In Table 9.2, you can see what happens when you trace the
program with this input sequence. We’ve listed the basic blocks in the order
they get executed, and the changing values of variables i and b. We will use
traces like this during embedding (to find places where we can insert new
branches to encode the mark) and during recognition (to extract the branching
patterns that encode the mark).

       Table 9.2. Trace of the original program for algorithm
  WMCCDKHLSpaths. The input is 4 3 1 2 4 6 4 5. A ⇒ indicates that

 this is the first time a branch is taken. We’ve omitted variables a
    (which doesn’t change) and R (which we don’t care about).
An important step of the algorithm is to extract a bit string from the
conditional forward branches that get executed for the special input. We ignore
all backwards branches, since these indicate loops, and the adversary could
easily confuse us by loop unrolling and other loop transformations. There are
numerous ways of extracting a bit sequence from the executing branches, but
you have to be careful not to leave yourself open to trivial attacks. Say, for
example, that you do the obvious thing and write down a 0 every time a branch
is taken and a 1 when it’s not. To destroy your mark, the adversary can simply
invert the branch condition, changing some of your if (P) T else E into if (!P)
E else T! There is an alternative encoding that gets around this attack: Record
the outcome of the branch the first time it was executed and compute a bit
from subsequent executions, a 0 bit if it goes the same way as the first time, a
1 bit otherwise. For example, consider the trace in Table 9.2 585. When you
take the branch from B1 (trace point #0) the first time, you don’t generate a bit
but simply record that you jumped to block B2. For the subsequent six times
that you do the test at B1 (trace points #4,8,12,17,21,26), you also jump to B2,
which generates six 0 bits. The seventh time, at trace point 30, you instead
jump to B6, which therefore generates a 1 bit. The full trace generates the bit
sequence 0000010001001.

To embed a watermark simply requires you to add new branches to the
program that don’t change its behavior but add the watermark bits to the trace
when the program is run with the special input. WMCCDKHLSpaths has two
ways of encoding the watermark bits, as a sequence of if-statements (one per
bit of watermark) and as a loop.

Let’s say you want to embed the watermark 100102 at location B4 in the
example program. At B4, there are the three available interesting user variables
a, b, and i that you can potentially reuse to encode your bits. You look at the
trace in Table 9.2 585 and notice that the first time execution passes B4 (trace
point #15), a=b=i=4, and the second time (trace point #24), a=b=4,i=6. Perfect!
Now all you have to do to embed 100102 is to insert these branches:

     int u = 0;
     if (A0:i==b) A1:u++;
     if (A2:a==b) A3:u++;
     if (A4:a==b) A5:u++;
     if (A6:i==b) A7:u++;
     if (A8:a==b) A9:u++;
     if (PF) live_var += u;

How does this work? The first time you reach A0, i==b and you branch to A1.
You don’t generate a watermark bit at this point but instead record the fact that
A0 was followed by A1. You record the same information for the remainder of
the if-statements: A2 is followed by A3, A4 by A5, and so on. The next time you
execute these statements, you write down a 0 bit if the branch goes to the same
location as the first time, and write down a 1 bit otherwise. At A0, the branch
fails (since i=6,b=4) and you branch to A2. Since the first time you branched to
A1, you write down a 1 bit. At A2, you generate a 0 bit, since a=b and you branch
to A3, just as the first time.

To make sure that a simple static analysis won’t decide that these statements
are dead code, it’s a good idea to bind the generated code to the rest of the
program. In this example, we simply added the statement if (PF) live-var += u
where an opaque statement makes it appear as if the variable u is actually being
used.
Since the trace gives you exact knowledge of variable values at every point
during the recognition run, it’s easy to generate arbitrarily complex conditions
to confuse a pattern-matching attack. If you need to generate a true statement
and the trace tells you that a=4, then you could generate a>0, a&1==0, a!=3, and so
on. And once you have several true statements available, you can join them
together with a conjunction (&&) to make other true statements. Note that this is
different (and easier) than generating opaque predicates that have to be true for
a range of input conditions.

     Problem 9.10

     Depending on the behavior of the original trace, it might be possible to
     hijack bit strings generated by the unwatermarked program. If, for
     example, you want to insert 0110110 and the original trace already has
     011011, you just have to add one extra branch. How feasible is this?
     Assuming that your watermark pieces are 64-bit blocks with random
     distribution of bits, do a preliminary study of the behavior of some real
     programs to see if they exhibit the required behavior.

You can also encode the watermark as a loop. Let’s say you want to insert the
five watermark bits 110102. During the loop, it will be most convenient to shift
out the bits from the right, so first reorder the bits so that the least significant
bit becomes the most significant, i.e., 010112. Then add a priming 0 bit to the
least significant position, which gets you 0101102 = 1616. You insert this value
into a loop like this:

     int u = 0;
     long bits = 0x16;
     for(int k=0; k<6; k++,bits>>=1)
     if ((bitsA&1)==1) A1:u++; else A2:;
     if (PF) live_var+=u;
The loop will consider the bits in the order 〈 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0 〉 . The first time
around the loop, the priming 0 bit is tested; the test fails; and you branch to
block A2. The next iteration, you shift out a 1 from the bits variable, and the
branch goes to block A1. Since this is different from the priming block, you
write down a 1 bit. The next iteration also goes to A1, and so you write down
another 1 bit. During the next iteration, however, the test fails, and you branch
to A2, the same block as the priming block, and so you write down a 0 bit.

     Problem 9.11

     Can you think of additional code-generation strategies? If there are only a
     small number of possible ways to generate the branching sequences, what
     will the consequences be for the stealthiness of the algorithm?

Now that you have these two embedding techniques available, let’s return to
our example. Here’s what it looks like after it’s been watermarked with the
three watermark pieces 110102 (code in light gray), 100102 (dark gray), and
011012 (dashed).
During watermark recognition, you run the program with the special input, and
you get a new, longer trace (Table 9.3 589). The result is a new, longer,
generated bit sequence where the new watermark pieces have been inserted
among the original bits:

   Table 9.3. Trace of the watermarked program for algorithm
                        WMCCDKHLSpaths.
The question now, of course, is how do you find these pieces? They certainly
won’t be shaded for you! One possibility is to insert “framing bits” at the
beginning and end of each piece. Similar techniques are used in digital signal
processing to indicate the beginning and end of transmission frames.
Algorithm WMCCDKHLSpaths uses a different technique: Each watermark
piece is expanded to a 64-bit block with randomness properties that lets you,
with a high degree of probability, tell a watermark piece from a naturally
occurring bit pattern. You can read more about this idea in Section 8.9.2 528.

Before turning to recognition, there is one more issue to consider in the
example above, one that you have probably already noticed—the dark gray
code got inserted inside a loop! To avoid potential hot spots, you can profile
the program prior to embedding. In the authors’ SandMark implementation
[78] of WMCCDKHLSpaths, they simply use the trace itself to approximate a
more accurate profile.

9.3.2 Recognition

In the WMCCDKHLSpaths attack model, the adversary can add branches to the
program to disrupt the recognizer. Under this model, the advantage you have
over the attacker is that you only need to add watermark branches in a few
spots, but the attacker needs to add them uniformly over the entire program to
be sure he’s destroyed your mark. This is assuming, of course, that the mark is
stealthy enough that he can’t pinpoint its location—an assumption that may
not hold for this algorithm. But more about that later.

So we’re assuming that the adversary can lightly sprinkle bogus branches over
the program to disrupt our mark, but he can’t insert them en masse in every
possible location. It’s because of this assumption that we generate a large
number of redundant watermark pieces and let the adversary destroy some of
them. As long as you can recover enough pieces, you can reconstruct the
original watermark.

To start the recognition process, you run the program with the special input
and collect a trace, much as you did during the embedding phase. The result is
a long string of bits, one bit per branch encountered during the run. Next, you
slide a window over the string and extract every contiguous 64-bit substring.
Obviously, this can be an enormous set of pieces! Most of the pieces will have
nothing to do with the mark. WMCCDKHLSpaths uses the algorithm in Section
8.9.2 528 to split and recombine the mark. It is designed for exactly this
situation, having a filtering step (Algorithm 8.11 532) that disposes of pieces
that could not contribute to the mark.

9.3.3 Discussion

Earlier in this chapter, we discussed one of the main drawbacks of dynamic
watermarking methods, namely, the risk that the recognizer will be affected by
small changes to the execution environment such as packet delivery times in
the network and the initialization of random number generators. For example,
one of the variables in our trace might hold the process ID or the current time,
and if we use that variable to build a watermark piece, that piece may never be
recognized. One of the advantages this algorithm has over other dynamic
algorithms is that, because of the redundancy of the inserted watermark pieces,
we’re potentially more resilient against these types of events. You can think of
these decoding failures as simply another type of attack, except the adversary
isn’t evil, just non-deterministic!

A real Achilles’ heel of the algorithm seems to be stealth, which is rather
surprising. After all, the algorithm just inserts if-statements—and programs
have plenty of those!—and it even reuses the program’s original variables in
the branch condition. The problem is that we only have two kinds of
watermark structures: a loop construction, which is unusual in its bit
manipulation, and a linear sequence of 64(!) if-statements, again highly
unusual in real programs. For the algorithm to be truly useful, stealth must be
improved. Ideally, to prevent pattern-matching attacks, you need to be able to
generate an “infinite” number of different watermark code patterns, and it
seems unlikely that for this algorithm doing so will be possible. Alternatively,
some obfuscation method might be developed that would confuse a pattern-
matching attack.

The cost of watermark embedding (in terms of added code) depends on the
number of watermark pieces you insert, which is dependent of course, on the
level of resilience to attack you want. In the authors’ Java implementation,
there’s a fixed 5% program-size increase plus 25 bytes of Java bytecode for
each watermark piece. How this affects performance depends entirely on how
successful the watermark embedder is at staying away from hot spots. The cost
to the attacker is the number of branches he has to insert in order to be sure he
destroys enough watermark pieces, and how much these slow down the
program. This, again, depends on the ability of the attacker to stay away from
inner loops, and how cheaply he can make the opaque predicates he needs in
his branch conditions. He can’t make the conditions too simple or we will
simply ignore them during watermark recognition! In the authors’ experiment,
a 512-bit watermark could be destroyed by increasing the number of branches
in the program by 150%, and this resulted in a 50% slowdown. Obviously, this
will be different from one program to the next, depending on the program’s
performance characteristics.

     Problem 9.12

     Can you come up with an informed version of WMCCDKHLSpaths? Would
     it make sense to run the original and watermarked programs in parallel on
     the same input, and extract the watermark from the differences in their
     branch sequences?

9.4 Algorithm WMCCDKHLSbf: Tamperproofing Execution
Paths

Have a look back at the control flow obfuscation Algorithm OBFLDK that we
presented in Section 4.3.5 239. The idea is to route unconditional branches
through a special function, called a branch function, so that it’s difficult for an
observer to figure out their actual target. In this example, an unconditional
jump to b is converted into a call to the branch function bf:

When bf is entered, it will have its return address a on the stack. At
obfuscation time, a was inserted into a minimal perfect hash table T and
mapped to b – a. To effect a jump to b, all that that branch function has to do is
to add b – a to its return address, issue the return instruction, and control will
continue at address b!

The branch function implements a mapping {a1 → b1, a2 → b2, ..., an → bn}
of unconditional branches from address ai to address bi. The idea of Algorithm
WMCCDKHLSbf [78] is to extend this mapping to also encode a watermark.
Specifically, to add the i:th bit wi of the watermark, you extend the mapping
with one ai → bi, representing a branch from ai to bi. If wi = 1, then ai → bi
represents a forward jump (ai < bi), and if wi = 0, ai → bi represents a
backwards jump (ai > bi).

Unlike other algorithms you’ve seen, WMCCDKHLSbf doesn’t try to protect
the watermark by making it stealthy or error-correcting. It instead relies on the
tamperproofing features inherent in the branch function to stop the adversary
from making any changes to the binary. By definition, if the adversary can’t
modify the binary, he can’t impede the recognizer’s ability to find the
watermark! Thus, this algorithm’s resilience to attack is directly tied to
Algorithm OBFLDK’s resilience to attack. And as you saw in Algorithm
REMASB (Section 4.3.6 242), there are attacks against branch functions.

9.4.1 Embedding
Algorithm 9.5 594 gives a sketch of the embedding and recognition
procedures. The embedding starts by finding some location begin at which
there’s an unconditional jump to a location end. Then, to embed a k-bit
watermark, you split this jump into a sequence of k + 1 unconditional jumps:

                                     〈begin
     → a1, a1 → a2, a2 → a3, ... ak → end

     〉

The forward or backward direction of each jump embeds one bit of the
watermark.

Here’s an example to illustrate the embedding procedure. Below left is a
region of code with an unconditional jump from begin to end. We’ve also found
three locations a1, a2, a3 that directly follow an unconditional jump. These
“holes” in the instruction sequence (shown in light gray) are ideal locations in
which to insert our bogus branches—control can never fall through to them!
To the right is the transformed code after we’ve inserted a 3-bit watermark:
The watermark is embedded by replacing the holes with bogus calls to the
branch function. Here, the call bf() → α notation means a call to the branch
function bf that actually effects an unconditional jump to location α. The first
call is inserted at location begin, also called a0 here, and jumps forward to
location a1. From a1 we jump forward again to a3, then backward to a2, and
finally, forward again to location end. This means that the transformation is
semantics-preserving—the code may be jumping around a lot at runtime, but
actually all you’re doing is branching unconditionally from begin to end!

Algorithm 9.5. Overview of algorithm WMCCDKHLSbf. P is the
original program, P w is the watermarked program, and W =
〈w0, w1, ..., wk–1〉 is a k-bit watermark.
At runtime, the sequence of addresses that the branch function actually will
jump to is 〈a0, a1, a3, a2, end 〉. By looking at whether branches go forward
or backward it’s easy to see from the sequence that the 3-bit watermark w that
you embedded is 〈 1, 1, 0〉:
9.4.2 Recognition

Watermark recognition is straightforward, as always, as long as the program
hasn’t been attacked! In that case, you can supply the begin and end locations
directly to the recognizer and trace all branches from begin to end. In the case of
the example above, you’d get a trace that looks like this:

Here, a1 : call bf means that at address a1, a call was made to the function at
address bf, and bf : ret a2 means that at address bf, a return jump was made to
address a2. Looking at the trace, you can easily identify the branch function:
It’s the function that gets called multiple times but never returns to the
instruction immediately following the call! Once you’ve identified the branch
function, you can again analyze the trace and extract the pairs of addresses
(from, to), where from is the location of the call to the branch function and to is
the address to which it returns. From our example, you’d get the list of pairs
〈(begin, a1), (a1, a3), (a3, a2), (a2, end)〉, and by looking at the direction of the
branches it’s easy to extract the mark.

The problem occurs when there’s been an attack on P w. There will be many
calls to the branch function from all over the program, and unless you know
where begin and end are, how are you going to know which calls to the branch
function represent the watermark? This is why it’s so important for Algorithm
WMCCDKHLSbf that Pw is thoroughly tamperproofed: Any minuscule change
to the binary can throw off the recognizer.

9.4.3 Tamperproofing the Branches

Any attack on the executable that moves code around or inserts new code will
cause addresses to change. Unless the attacker is clever enough to update the
branch function table accordingly, as soon as the branch function is called,
control will continue at the wrong address, causing the program to crash.

This simple form of tamperproofing doesn’t help if the adversary completely
removes the branch function from the executable! As you saw in Section 4.3.6
 242, branch functions are very dynamically unstealthy. This makes it easy to
recover the branch function table and replace each call bf() → α with an
unconditional jump to α.

One way around this attack is to extend the branch function to have side
effects. In this example, we start out with a situation where the branch function
call at address begin dominates an unconditional branch (shown in dark gray):
In the original code, the dark gray branch goes directly to some address α, but
in the transformed dashed branch, we instead jump indirectly via a memory
location M. Originally, M contains a bogus address, but once bf has been called, M
gets updated to α. If an attacker replaces the calls to bf at a0 and a1 with
unconditional branches that he has extracted from the branch function table, M
never gets updated with the right address and the dashed branch will go to the
wrong location.

For more thorough tamperproofing, M can be updated much more cleverly than
this, of course. Rather than giving M its correct value as soon as bf gets called
the first time, it could be updated incrementally over several calls to bf. In the
example above, there are two calls being made to bf before control reaches the
dashed jump. Each of these calls could update some subset of M’s bits, ensuring
that all the calls to bf in the code must be left intact.

9.4.4 Discussion
In Section 7.2.3 423, you saw for the first time a watermarking algorithm that
uses tamperproofing to protect the mark. The watermarking algorithm that
Algorithm TPHMST uses is completely trivial: It just inserts 32-bit
watermarking words in random places in the executable! By itself, that is
neither a resilient nor a stealthy marking algorithm. But given the
tamperproofing of TPHMST, you might not care! As long as the adversary is
unable to modify the executable, the watermarks will remain intact. Algorithm
WMCCDKHLSbf uses a similar strategy. The main feature isn’t so much how
the mark is embedded but how the branch function makes the executable
harder to tamper with.

The main attack against WMCCDKHLSbf is an attack against its stealth.
Branch functions are highly dynamically unstealthy, which for this algorithm
is both an advantage and a disadvantage. It’s an advantage because the
watermark recognition procedure needs to find the branch function in order to
extract the watermark! On the other hand, it’s also a disadvantage because the
unstealthiness makes it easy for an adversary to find the function. You saw
examples of such an attack in Algorithm REMASB (Section 4.3.6 242).

A nice aspect of WMCCDKHLSbf is that it has a very modest effect on
performance. The authors [78] report an increase in program size ranging from
5% to 16% when watermarking programs from the SPEC benchmark suite
with 128-, 256-, and 512-bit watermarks. The algorithm seems to be
insensitive to the watermark size: The average increase in program size was
10.8% for 128-bit marks and 11.4% for 512-bit marks. The runtime slowdown
was negligible, partially because the implementation is careful to stay away
from hot spots.

    Problem 9.13

    Unlike the other algorithms in this chapter, WMCCDKHLSbf doesn’t use
    any special input to derive the location of the watermark. In fact, the
     authors’ implementation requires the user to supply the addresses begin
     and end manually. They state: “We expect to augment the implementation
     in the near future to use a framing scheme that would allow these
     addresses to be identified automatically.” Can you help the authors to
     work out the details?

9.5 Discussion

You’ve encountered several new ideas in this chapter. Most obviously,
embedding the watermark in the dynamic state of the program rather than in
the static text of the program is interesting. You’ll see the same idea reappear
when we discuss birthmarking algorithms in Chapter 10 (Software Similarity
Analysis).

Compared to static watermarks, dynamic marks are easier to tamperproof and
harder for the attacker to destroy. But as you’ve seen, the idea is not without its
complications:

     • Dynamic watermarking algorithms make it difficult to watermark
      individual modules and classes, since these don’t execute independently;

     • Non-determinism can cause watermark recognition to fail;

     • Programs with little input will be hard to mark, since you need many
       input-dependent places in the program in which to insert a mark;

     • It is harder to automate the recognition of dynamic watermarks than
      static watermarks;

     • It can be hard to ensure that a watermark is truly dynamic and cannot be
       easily detected or decoded statically.

Let’s look again at the defense model in Section 2.2 86 and see which
techniques are used in the algorithms you saw in this chapter. Obviously, by
their nature, all the algorithms use the dynamic primitive, but in addition they
combine several other defense ideas:

     • WMCT exploits the difficulty of alias analysis (the indirect primitive) by
       encoding the watermark as a graph structure. WMNT exploits the
       difficulty of analyzing multi-threaded programs by encoding the
       watermark in the order in which threads get executed (the reorder
       primitive).

     • WMCT relies heavily on stealth (i.e., the mimic primitive) to protect the
       mark: By building dynamic structures, it mimics the behavior of many
       object-oriented programs. Similarly, WMCCDKHLSpaths adds branches
       that are ubiquitous in real programs.

     • WMCT and WMCCDKHLSpaths both split the watermark into pieces and
       merge them back together again during recognition. In the case of
       WMCT, each piece is smaller than the original mark, increasing stealth
       and bitrate. All of the pieces need to be found during recognition.
       WMCCDKHLSpaths, on the other hand, increases resilience to attack by
       splitting the watermark into a redundant set of pieces (the duplicate
       primitive), only some of which must be recovered.

     • The WMCT algorithm increases resilience to attack by continuously
      modifying the watermark graph structures at runtime. This is another
      use of the dynamic primitive.

     • WMNT protects the watermark by adding a large number of watermark
       decoys, looking very similar to real watermark pieces (the mimic and
       duplicate primitives). If the attacker tries to manipulate any code that
       looks like a watermark, he may inadvertently cause the incorrect code
       contained in the decoys to execute, an instance of the detect-respond
       primitive.

It should come as no surprise that these ideas can be combined. For example,
the credibility of the watermarks in algorithms WMCT and WMVVS could be
improved by picking the watermark number from a sparse table (as suggested
in WMNT) and then encoding this number as a graph. Algorithm
WMCCDKHLSpaths splits the watermark into a set of redundant pieces, and, of
course, this idea can be applied in the other algorithms as well.

None of the algorithms presented here explicitly considers collusive attacks. It
could well be that dynamically fingerprinted programs are easier to attack than
statically fingerprinted ones. Two programs that have been differently
fingerprinted using a dynamic algorithm differ in two ways: statically (since
they embed different marks, the code that builds these marks must be
different) and dynamically (for the special input sequences, the two programs
will execute differently).

In the previous chapter, we mentioned that if we had perfect tamperproofing
available, watermarking would be a solved problem: Simply mark using the
most trivial algorithm and then protect the resulting program from being
manipulated in any way. Of course, tamperproofing the code requires us to
read it, and this, as we’ve noted, is hard to do stealthily for binary code and
impossible to do stealthily for typed bytecode. Dynamic watermarking
bypasses this problem by embedding the mark in runtime data structures rather
than in static code. This is an improvement over static algorithms, since it
means that the tamperproofing code just needs to read data (which the program
does anyway), not instructions.

WMNT and WMCCDKHLSpaths can both have a significant negative effect on
performance: WMNT adds many threads to the program, and
WMCCDKHLSpaths adds many extra branches. Generally speaking, the other
algorithms in this chapter can be implemented with little extra overhead.

     Problem 9.14

     Leaving all other considerations aside, what’s the least amount of code
     you can imagine inserting into a program to embed a dynamic
     watermark? Can you hijack the code that’s already in the program to do
     some of the work? What type of program would be best suited to this?
Problem 9.15

Look at the list of protection mechanisms we described in Section 2.2 86
that have not been used to build watermarks. Can you think of ways that
they can be used to watermark software?

Problem 9.16

Can you think of a way to use a dynamic technique to protect individual
modules or classes of a program?

Problem 9.17

In modern multi-core processors, there may be many spare cycles
available. Would any of the algorithms in this chapter be able to make use
of these to reduce overhead? Can you think of other algorithms that
could?
