                10. Software Similarity Analysis

So far, the algorithms you’ve seen, whether for obfuscation, tamperproofing,
or watermarking, have had one thing in common: They’ve all been based on
code transformations. That is, they take an unprotected program as input,
apply one or more transformations on the code, and produce a more protected
program as output. You can see this view of intellectual property protection
reflected in the defense model in Section 2.2 86: Each of the protection
primitives takes an unprotected universe as input and produces as output one
in which a precious object is better protected than before.

In this chapter, you’ll see a very different view of intellectual property
protection. Rather than hardening your program to make it more resistant to
attack, we’re going to assume that it’s been released into the wild completely
unprotected. There could be many reasons for this. Maybe your program was
performance-critical and you couldn’t afford the additional overhead that
obfuscation, tamperproofing, and watermarking incur. Maybe the program is
legacy code and has been in the field long before the techniques in this book
were invented. Or maybe the adversary was able to strip out the protection
code you did add, but you’d still like to assert your intellectual property rights.

The techniques in this chapter are property-based rather than transformation-
based. That is, the fundamental question we’re interested in is: Do programs A
and B share some property that would indicate that they also share a common
origin? A prototypical attack scenario is code lifting, i.e., where the adversary
copies an important library from your program and incorporates it into his own
code. This is a serious threat in the computer gaming industry, where libraries
for graphics, physics, scripting, and so on are commonly supplied by third-
party vendors, and these vendors’ revenue is entirely tied to the licensing fees
they can extract from the manufacturers of the games.

In this chapter, we’ll examine four intellectual property protection scenarios:
software birthmarking, software forensics, plagiarism detection, and clone
detection. In all four, the essential operation is determining how similar two
programs (or pieces of programs) are to each other or whether one program is
contained (partially or in full) within another. In software forensics, you want
to determine who wrote a particular program. The idea is to compare it against
a corpus of programs by possible authors and see whose programming style is
most similar. In plagiarism detection, you want to determine if a student has
copied a program (in whole or in part) by comparing it to programs from other
students in the class. Software birthmarking is similar to plagiarism detection
in that you want to determine if two programs share the same origin. The
difference is that birthmark detection algorithms typically compare programs
at the binary rather than the source-code level and usually assume there is a
much more active and potent adversary. Clone detection is a branch of
software engineering that locates similar pieces of code that are the result of
copy-paste-modify programming. This isn’t an intellectual property protection
problem, per se, but we discuss it here since the algorithms developed for
clone detection could be adapted for the other scenarios.

Some algorithms for identifying similarities in two programs work directly on
the source or binary code. More common, however, is to first convert to a
more convenient representation, such as trees or graphs, and then compare
them. For this reason, we’ve divided this chapter into sections for k-gram-
based analysis (Section 10.3 616), API-based analysis (Section 10.4 625),
tree-based analysis (Section 10.5 631), graph-based analysis (Section 10.6
635), and metrics-based analysis (Section 10.7 644). However, we’ll start by
examining the different applications of software similarity analysis (Section
10.1) and different possible definitions of similarity (Section 10.2 611). We’ll
conclude with a discussion in Section 10.8 652.

10.1 Applications

Let’s start by looking at a few different intellectual property protection
scenarios that are all based on being able to compare two or more programs for
similarity or containment. To give you a general idea of how tools for clone
detection, forensic analysis, plagiarism detection, and birthmarking work,
we’ll give very high-level algorithm sketches. In subsequent sections, you’ll
see more detailed algorithms based on different program representations.
10.1.1 Clone Detection

After a program has gone through several development cycles, it tends to
contain many instances of duplicated code. Often the duplicates are the result
of a copy-paste-modify-style of programming: A programmer finds an existing
code segment that’s almost, but not quite, what he’s looking for, simply makes
a copy of it, specializes the code as necessary, and adds the copy to the
program. A better strategy would be to abstract the code segment into its own
function and replace both the original and the copy with appropriately
parameterized calls, but this requires both time and a deeper understanding of
the original code. Copy-paste-modify is both simpler and faster, at least in the
short run. In the long run, however, it becomes a maintenance headache, since
a bug in the original code will need to be fixed in all the clones.

Clone detection is the process of locating similar pieces of code in a program.
The detection phase is followed by an abstraction phase, where clones are
extracted out into functions and replaced with calls to these functions. Here,
the clone detector found that function f3 is a clone of f1:

In the abstraction phase, the clone detection tool created a new version P′ of P
with f1 and f3 removed and replaced by f(r). f(r) is a version of f1 where the
parameter r represents the differences to f3. For such replacement to make
sense, f1 and f3 have to be similar enough that creating f(r) is easy and that this
parameterized version appears “natural” to programmers who have to continue
maintaining the code. Algorithm 10.1 604 shows a high-level sketch of a
clone detector.

Clone detectors are a software maintenance tool, and as such work on
improving the program’s source code. Some work on the source directly, but
most first transform it into a higher-level representation (rep in Algorithm 10.1
 604), such as a token sequence, an abstract syntax tree, or a program
dependence graph.

Unlike the scenarios you’ll see next, in the clone detection scenario you don’t
expect programmers to be malicious. They don’t deliberately try to hide that
they’ve copied a piece of code; it just becomes naturally “obfuscated” as the
result of the specialization process. To make the copied code fit in with its new
environment, it’s common for the programmer to rename variables and to
replace literals with new values. More unusual are major structural changes
such as removing or adding statements.

Algorithm 10.1. Sketch of algorithm for clone detection and
abstraction. P is a program, threshold is the minimum similarity
between two segments of code to consider them clones, and
minsize is the minimum size of a code segment to warrant
abstraction.

DETECT(P, threshold, minsize):

  1. Build a representation rep of P from which it is convenient to find clone
     pairs. Collect code pairs that are sufficiently similar and sufficiently large
     to warrant their own abstraction:

  2. Break out the code pairs found in the previous step into their own
     function and replace them with parameterized calls to this function:
  3. Return res, P.

This book is about protecting the intellectual property contained in programs.
We therefore don’t have any particular interest in clone detection per se, since
cloning code is a case of the programmer “stealing” from himself or from his
teammates, not from another party! However, as you will see, the techniques
developed for clone detection are similar to those used to detect malicious
copying of code, and it’s reasonable to believe that the two communities could
learn from each other.

Also, in Section 7.2.4 431 you saw how the Skype binary was protected by
adding several hundred hash functions. This protection was ultimately
defeated through the realization that all the hash functions were similar, and
once one had been found, locating the others was easy. This attack was done
by hand, but it would be interesting to investigate whether a clone detector
would have been able to find the functions by looking for self-similarity within
the binary.

10.1.2 Software Forensics

Software forensics is concerned with determining who wrote a particular piece
of code. One useful application is to trace a piece of malware back to its
author. For example, after you realize an intrusion has taken place, you look
through your system and find the remnants of the intruder’s attack code. If you
could determine who wrote the code, you would not only help in tracking
down the culprit but also aid by providing evidence useful in future
prosecution.
This use of software authorship analysis is similar to how handwriting analysis
is already used in law enforcement to trace the author of a document. It is also
similar to authorship analysis of literary works. There are well-known disputes
of authorship that go back hundreds of years, such as those involving The
Federalist Papers and the works commonly attributed to Shakespeare that
have been been studied with modern statistical techniques [121,256].

Handwriting analysis extracts features such as how the writer dots his i’s and
compresses or expands his text. Literary analysis extracts features such as
word usage, punctuation, and sentence length that may be unique to an
author’s style. In software forensics, you similarly extract features from a
program that you believe will be unique to a programmer’s coding style. More
specifically, in order to determine the likely author of a program P, you need to
start out with a universe U of possible authors and samples of their writing. The
result of the analysis is a list of the authors in decreasing likelihood that they
are the programmer who wrote the code:

In this example, you start out with a universe of three programmers, Bob, Jen,
and Cal, and two samples each of code they’ve written. You extract features
from each of those samples and from the program P whose authorship is under
dispute. After comparing the features, you determine with a medium degree of
probability that Bob is the author of P, and with a high degree of probability
that Jen and Cal are not.

If software authorship analysis is to be truly useful, two propositions must be
true. First, there must be aspects of a programmer’s coding style that set him
apart from other programmers. Second, this style must be consistent between
programs written by the same author, even when those programs come from
different domains. The first proposition is still debated; we have yet to
converge on a “right” set of characteristics that distinguish programmers from
each other. The second proposition is easier to accept. Over time, we collect
programming habits: how we indent our code, how we choose variable names,
how large we allow our functions and modules to grow, and which algorithms
and data structures we prefer for common tasks (quicksort vs. mergesort for
sorting, hash tables vs. binary search trees for dictionaries, and so on). While
an author’s style may change over time as he becomes familiar with more
programming paradigms, programming languages, and algorithms, it’s not
entirely unlikely that some of these characteristics will remain unchanged.

Algorithm 10.2 607 shows a sketch of the three steps to authorship
classification: Determine which coding features are good indicators of
authorship, collect those features from sample code of suspected authors and
from the program under dispute, and compare the feature sets for similarity.

Not all characteristics that you could possibly collect from a program will be
useful in determining authorship. An important preprocessing step is therefore
to examine a large corpus of programs to determine those features of
programming style that are programmer-specific, i.e., that vary little from one
program to another written by the same programmer but that show large
variations between code written by different programmers.

The next step is to collect the set of characteristics (the author profile), for
each author from the sample programs and from the one for which you want to
determine authorship. For the identification result to be accurate, you need a
significant sample set from each author. Depending on your particular
situation, this may or may not be available.

Most of the work on software forensics has been on the analysis of source
code. The reason is that many programmer-specific features (such as code
layout and variable naming) are stripped away by the compilation process.
This is unfortunate, since in some settings such as when analyzing a virus for
hints on who might have written it, source code is not available.1 This means
that only those features of the program that remain intact after compilation can
be used for analysis. They include choice of data structures, choice of compiler
(different compilers will have different code-generation patterns), choice of
programming language (a program using the object-oriented features of C++
will leave telltale signs in the binary code that will distinguish it from a pure C
program, Modula-2 programs will have array bound checks, while C programs
won’t, and so on), and preference for certain library and system calls when
there are more than one possible choice.

Algorithm 10.2. Sketch of software forensics algorithm for author
identification. A is a set of authors who might have written an
unknown program P. For all authors a A, U[a] is a set of sample
programs written by a.

DETECT(A, U, P, threshold):

  1. Using a large corpus of programs from different authors, determine the
     set of characteristics C that show a high degree of variability between
     authors but a low degree of variability within programs by the same
     author.

  2. Collect sets of characteristics from the sample programs of each author,
     and from P:

  3. Determine which authors’ profiles share the most characteristics with P:
In software forensics research, the attack model is typically a very weak one,
namely, that the author of the code does not try to actively disguise its origins.
It’s reasonable to assume, however, that a prolific virus author would try his
best to somehow vary his style enough that once he’s been identified as the
author of one virus, he cannot automatically be linked to others.2 Manually
altering one’s programming style probably isn’t practical, since programming
is hard enough without having to consciously do things in a way that’s
unnatural. More convenient would be running the code through an obfuscator
before releasing it into the wild.

In addition to authorship analysis, there are two other problems studied in
software forensics [130]. Software characterization tries to draw conclusions,
Sherlock Holmes style, about the psychological makeup and educational and
cultural background of the author of a program based on aspects of his coding
style:

For example, in the analysis of the famous Internet worm, it appeared that its
author (who turned out to be Robert T. Morris) had a penchant for linked lists.
The reason, it’s been conjectured, was that his first programming courses were
taught in LISP [332]. Software discrimination, finally, tries to identify which
pieces of a program were written by different authors (and, possibly, to
identify who those authors are), again based on samples of their coding:
10.1.3 Plagiarism Detection

Plagiarism of programming assignments appears to be common in computer
science classes. The copying of assignments can take many forms. At one
extreme end, a student just hands in a verbatim copy of his friend’s program,
merely changing the author line of the header comment.3 At the other end of
the spectrum, the student makes radical changes to the program to hide the
origin of the code. Common operations include renaming of identifiers,
reordering of functions, and rewriting of comments. There are intermediate
forms of plagiarism between these two extremes, such as “borrowing” one or
more difficult functions from a friend (or fishing them out of the trash can or
nabbing them off the printer) while writing the bread-and-butter code from
scratch.

In a plagiarism-detection scenario, you make pair-wise comparisons between
all of the programs handed in by the students and order them from most to
least similar:

Many systems give more comprehensive outputs, such as side-by-side
comparisons of pairs of highly suspect programs, color-coded so that the
instructor can confront the students with graphic “evidence” of their cheating.

While there are many kinds of rewrites the student could attempt in order to
fool the plagiarism detector, he is still limited by the need for the code to look
“reasonable.” For this reason, running the code through a general-purpose
obfuscator (such as you saw in Chapter 4) probably isn’t a good idea,
particularly if the instructor examines the code manually to grade on style. For
example, the student may get away with renaming a variable windowSize to
sizeOfWindow but would likely lose points if he named it x93. Similarly, replacing
a while-loop with a for-loop is probably OK, but completely unrolling the loop
would look too suspicious. Thus, for plagiarism detection, you can assume a
weaker attacker than for software forensics but probably a stronger attacker
than for clone detection.

Algorithm 10.3 shows a sketch of a typical plagiarism-detection algorithm.
Elenbogen and Seliya [120] point out that this algorithm won’t work if the
student is outsourcing his assignments to an unscrupulous third party. Such
“programming mills” can be found on the Internet or simply by posting a note
for “help with CS101” on a university bulletin board. Elenbogen and Seliya
instead suggest to use a form of style analysis like you saw in the section on
software forensics. The idea is to track the style of the student as it changes
throughout the course of the semester. Presumably, the style will improve as he
gets feedback from the instructor, but this can be controlled for by comparing
his changing style with the similarly changing style of the rest of the students
in the class. Assuming everyone gets the same feedback, their style should
change at the same pace. There are a lot of assumptions here, and it’s unclear
whether it’s possible to collect data that’s believable enough that a student will
fess up when confronted with it, let alone convince a plagiarism review board
that the student needs to be reprimanded.

Algorithm 10.3. Overview of plagiarism-detection algorithm. U is
the collection of programs submitted by students.

Algorithm 10.4. Overview of birthmarking algorithm.
10.1.4 Birthmark Detection

Our primary interest in this chapter is in birthmark detection. Although
birthmarking is also concerned with detecting similarities between programs, it
differs in some respects from clone detection, software forensics, and
plagiarism detection. First, birthmarks are primarily extracted from executable
code, such as x86 binaries or Java bytecode, rather than from source code.
Clone detection and plagiarism detection by definition work on source code,
and most algorithms proposed for authorship analysis do too, although there’s
a real need for analysis of malware binaries. Second, birthmark detection
assumes a much more active and competent adversary than what you’ve
previously seen. Unlike clone detection and plagiarism detection, there’s no
need to keep the code pretty enough to remain fit for further human
consumption. Therefore, the adversary is free to mangle the code in any way
he can think of in order to thwart the birthmark detector.

In the birthmarking scenario, the assumption is that the adversary goes through
the following steps to lift code from some program P into his own program Q:

  1. Copy one or more sections of code from P into Q.

  2. Compile Q, as necessary, into binary code or bytecode.

  3. Apply semantics-preserving transformations, such as obfuscation and
     optimization, to Q and distribute the resulting program.
Birthmark detection, then, becomes the process of extracting properties of
code that are invariant to common semantics-preserving transformations:

Here, we’ve extracted birthmarks from programs P and Q and determined that a
large part of P has been included in Q.

Some birthmark detection algorithms assume that all of of P’s code has been
lifted into Q. That is, Q is simply a version of P that has been sufficiently
obfuscated to make it possible for the adversary to argue that Q is an
independently developed program whose behavior is identical to that of P. In a
more common scenario, some central part of P is lifted into Q, maybe no more
than a few functions or a few modules.

10.2 Definitions

The definition of birthmarking and attacks on birthmarks mirror those you saw
for watermarking in Section 8.3 480. The major difference is that unlike
watermarking, birthmarking has no embed function. Also, all the functions in a
birthmarking system are unkeyed. As a result, in a birthmarking system, the
extract function extracts the birthmark b directly from a program p:

                                  extract(p) → b
A birthmarking system also needs a function contains:

                           contains(bq, bp) → [0.0, 1.0]

It compares two birthmarks bq and bp extracted from programs q and p to
determine if p is contained in q. Typically, we’ll combine embed and contains
into a function detect:

                   detect(q, p) = contains(extract(q), extract(p))

Finally, a function attack models the adversary’s ability to transform a
program, for example, using obfuscation, to prevent us from recognizing it:

                                  attack(p) → p′

A prototypical attack involves first cropping out a piece of our program p and
then embedding it into another program. In a successful attack, the detect
function is unable to determine that our original program has been
incorporated, in part or in full, into the attacker’s program:

                             detect(attack(p), p) < 0.5

Like watermarking algorithms, birthmarking algorithms can be static or
dynamic. In the dynamic case, the extract function takes an extra argument, a
specific input I:

                                 extract(p, I) → b
The birthmark is extracted from the dynamic state of the program as it is
executed on input I, rather than from the code itself. Dynamic birthmarking
algorithms detect the theft of an entire program, while a static algorithm can
detect the lifting of individual modules.

A credible birthmarking algorithm has a low false positive rate. That is, there’s
a low probability that detect(q, p) > 0.5if p and q are independently developed.

10.2.1 Similarity Measures

What does it mean for two pieces of code to be “similar”? Clearly, many
definitions are possible. We could ask for semantic similarity, we could ask for
textual source-code similarity, or we could ask for similarity under a particular
set of code transformations.

The algorithms in this chapter extract “signals” from two or more programs
and compare these signals for similarity. These signals take different forms.
They can be sequences or sets of features that have been extracted, or they can
be trees or graphs representing the structure of the programs. Regardless of
what form these signals take, there must be some way to compare two of them
to see how similar they are.

10.2.1.1 Sequence Similarity

Since sequences are common structures in many areas (such as
bioinformatics), the literature is rife with proposals for sequence-similarity
measures. We’ll just mention two of the most common ones here.

The similarity between two sequences of equal length can be defined as the
fraction of elements that are the same. This is used in the birthmarking
algorithms by Tamada et al. that you’ll see in Section 10.4.1 626. This
similarity measure is based on the definition of Hamming distance:

      Definition 10.1 (Hamming distance and similarity)
    Let f be a function that computes a feature vector f (d) = 〈d1, ..., dn 〉
    from a document d. Let p and q be documents with feature vectors f (p) =
    〈p1, ..., pn〉 and f (q) = 〈q1, ..., qn〉, respectively. Then the Hamming
    distance between p and q is defined as
                      distance(p, q) = |{∀1 ≤ i ≤ n • pi ≠ qi}|

    and the similarity between p and q is defined as

Another common metric is Levenshtein distance, also known as edit distance.
This is a more suitable metric than Hamming distance when the two sequences
are of unequal length. The idea is that the number of operations necessary to
turn one string into another is a measure of how different they are:

    Definition 10.2 (Levenshtein [Edit] distance and similarity)

    The edit distance distance(p, q) between two sequences p and q is the
    minimum number of operations needed to transform p into q, using
    insertions, deletions, and substitutions. The similarity between p and q is
    defined as:

For example, the Levenshtein distance between “whiten” and “kitten” is 3,
since three operations are necessary and sufficient to turn one word into the
other:
(Three substitutions are also possible.) The two words have a similarity of 0.5:

10.2.1.2 Set Similarity

Broder [49] defines the containment and similarity4 of two documents. You
can use this similarity measure on the sets of k-grams that you’ll see in Section
10.3 616, for example. Here are the definitions:

      Definition 10.3 (Similarity and containment)

      The similarity similarity(p, q) between two documents p and q is defined
      as

where f (d) is a function that computes a set of features from a document d.
Similarly, the containment(p, q) of p within q is defined as

To illustrate, consider these two sets:
      p = {1, 3, 7, 8, 9, 11}
      q = {2, 7, 9, 11}

Their similarity is given by

The fraction of p that’s contained within q is given by

and the fraction of q that’s contained within p is given by

10.2.1.3 Graph Similarity

A variety of graph similarity measures are possible. For example, you can
adapt the edit distance metric for sequences to work on graphs: The distance
between two graphs is the number of operations (insertions, deletions, and
substitutions of nodes and edges) necessary to turn one graph into the other.
Here, we’re instead going to use a metric based on the size of the maximal
common subgraph of the two graphs [50]:

      Definition 10.4 (Common subgraphs)

      Let G, G1, and G2 be graphs. G is a common subgraph of G1 and G2 if
      there exists subgraph isomorphisms from G to G1 and from G to G2.
    G is the maximal common subgraph of two graphs G1 and G2 (G =
    mcs(G1, G2)) if G is a common subgraph of G1 and G2 and there exists no
    other common subgraph G′ of G1 and G2 that has more nodes than G.

In this example, the shaded nodes induce a maximal common subgraph of G1
and G2 of four nodes:

The similarity and containment of two graphs is defined similarly to the other
measures you’ve seen:

    Definition 10.5 (Graph similarity and containment)

    Let |G| be the number of nodes in G. The similarity(G1, G2)of G1 and G2
    is defined as

    The containment(G1, G2)of G1 within G2 is defined as

We say that G1 is γ-isomorphic to G2 if
                     containment(G1, G2) ≥ γ, γ    (0, 1].

For the graphs G1 and G2 above, you get

10.3 k-gram-Based Analysis

With definitions out of the way, let’s now look at actual algorithms! The
remainder of the chapter is organized around different program
representations. Some will be simpler than others, some will allow more
powerful comparisons between programs, and some support more advanced
attack scenarios. First we’ll look a k-gram hashes.

Comparing sets of k-grams of two documents is a popular method of
computing their similarity. This idea has been used for plagiarism detection of
text documents and source code, for authorship analysis of code, and for
birthmark detection of executable code. In this section, you’ll see Algorithm
SSSWAwinnow [6,7,316], which is used in the MOSS source-code plagiarism
detection system. MOSS is used extensively to catch cheating in programming
assignments in computer science courses. Algorithm SSMCkgram also uses k-
gram-based analyses, but for computing Java bytecode birthmarks.

10.3.1 SSSWAWINNOW: Selecting k-gram Hashes

A k-gram is a contiguous length k substring of the original document. To
illustrate the idea, consider the short document A consisting of the string
yabbadabbadoo:
By sweeping a window of size 3 over A, you get the set of 3-grams for A:

We’ll also call these shingles. Here’s a second document C consisting of the
string doobeedoobeedoo:

Algorithm 10.5. Compute a set of k-gram hashes for a document
P. k is the length of each shingle and W the size of the winnowing
window.

KGRAM(P, k, W):

  1. Let N be the length of P. Construct a list shingles consisting of N – k +1
     substrings of P by sweeping a size k window over P.

  2. Construct a length N – k + 1 list hashes by computing a hash over each
     string in shingles.

  3. Construct a length |hashes|– W + 1 list windows by sweeping a size W
     window over hashes.

  4. Construct a set selected of hashes:
  5. Return selected.

The shingles for this document are:

What are the similarities between A and C? Well, that’s easy to see; just
compare the sets of shingles! In this case, the only shingle that appears both in
A and C is doo:It occurs once in A and three times in C. This could be a fluke, of
course, but it could also be that we’ve just uncovered a case of plagiarism
where doo was copied three times from A into C.

How well this will work in practice depends on if you can choose a good value
for k. If, in the previous example, you’d have set k = 4, you wouldn’t have
seen any similarity between A and C:

How you choose k depends on the type of document you’re working on. In
general, you need to choose k so that common idioms of the document type
have lengths less than k. This will filter out incidental similarities such as the
word the in English or if in source code.

The most interesting property of k-grams is that they’re somewhat insensitive
to permutations. Say that, in an effort to thwart you from detecting his attempts
at plagiarism, the adversary reorders yabbadabbadoo into bbadooyabbada. From this
obfuscated document, you now get this set of shingles:

Notice how the doo 3-gram still remains intact. This means that you’ll compute
the same rate of similarity with document C as before!
In practice, it will be too inefficient to compute and store all the shingles of a
large document, or in the case of plagiarism detection, a large set of
documents. Instead, the shingles are first hashed and then a small subset of
them is kept for further analysis. If k is large, computing a hash from scratch
for each shingle will be too expensive, so instead you use a “rolling hash
function” that computes the hash of a shingle by extending the previous one
[192]. For ease of exposition, in the examples in the remainder of this section
we’ll use the following function to compute hashes from shingles:

Using this function, you can create a hash for each of the shingles in document
A above:

The notation we use here is DP : V, where D is the name of the document from
whence the shingle came, P is the shingle’s position within D, and V is its
value.

There will be approximately the same number of hashes as there are tokens in
the original document. It therefore becomes impractical to keep more than a
small number of them. A common approach is to only keep those that are 0
mod p, for some p. This has the disadvantage of possible long gaps in a
document from which no hash is selected. A better approach is to use a
technique known as winnowing. The idea is to sweep a window of size W over
the sequence of hashes and choose the smallest one from each window (in case
of ties, choose the rightmost smallest). This ensures that there’s no gap longer
than W+k–1 between two selected hashes. Here are the windows of size 4 for
document A above, where we’ve marked the selected hashes in dark gray:
The final set of hashes chosen from A then becomes {A1:2, A2:3, A6:2, A10:1}.
Algorithm 10.5 617 shows a sketch of how to construct the k-grams.

10.3.2 SSSWAMOSS: Software Plagiarism Detection

In software plagiarism detection, you need to do pairwise comparison of n
programs. For this reason, for large n and large programs, performance can be
a problem. Algorithm SSSWAMOSS handles this by postponing the quadratic
step for as long as possible. To see how this works, let’s continue with our
example. In addition to the A document yabbadabbadoo, which has the hashes
{A1:2, A2:3, A6:2, A10:1}, let’s add a B document scoobydoobydoo

with the hashes

and a C document doobeedoobeedoo
with the hashes

The second step in Algorithm 10.6 621 is to build an index over all hashes of
all the documents. The index maps each hash value to the set of document
locations where they occur:

The third step is to hash the documents again, this time using the index to
construct, for every document, a list of matching hashes in the other
documents:

Note that until now we’ve been able to avoid any quadratic behavior! The final
step is, for each pair of documents, to traverse their lists of hashes and extract
those they have in common. Here’s the final result:
The document pairs with the longest lists of hashes are most likely to be
instances of plagiarism. It’s common to present the results graphically, with
similarities color-coded to help convince the culprits of their guilt. In this side-
by-side comparison between documents B and C, light gray represents hash
value 1 and dark gray hash value 11:

Algorithm 10.6. Overview of the MOSS algorithm for plagiarism
detection. docs is a list of documents. k is the shingle size, long
enough for common idioms to have lengths shorter than k. W is
the window size used in the winnowing algorithm.

DETECT(docs, k, W):

  1. Canonicalize the documents by removing incidental differences.

  2. Fingerprint all documents using Algorithm 10.5 617. Build index, a map
     from hash values to the set of document positions at which they occur:

  3. Again, fingerprint all documents. Look up each fingerprint in the index
     and construct a list matches[d] for each document d of all matching
     fingerprints:
  4. For each pair of documents (d1, d2) construct pairwise[(d1, d2)], the set of
     k-grams shared by d1 and d2:

  5. Sort the sets in pairwise by size and return the document pairs (d1, d2)
     with the most hashes in common.

10.3.2.1 Example—Source Code

To try to thwart detection, a software plagiarist might use simple
transformations such as reordering functions, renaming variables, and
reformatting the code. k-gram analysis itself takes care of coarse-grained
reordering, but some preprocessing is necessary to handle variable renaming
and reformatting. Algorithm 10.6 621 takes care of this by a preprocessing
step that canonicalizes the code. The details will depend on the nature of the
input language, but for typical source code you might rename all variables to V,
replace all integer literals with 9, and remove all unnecessary whitespace.

Let’s look at an example with three different versions of the Fibonacci
function. Document A is the original one. Document B was copied from A and
obfuscated by reformatting, reordering expressions, and renaming identifiers.
Document C was copied from B by replacing the if-statement with a conditional
expression:

     A: int fib(int n) {
     if (n <= 1)
     return n;
     else
     return fib(n-1) + fib(n-2);
     }
     B: int fibonacci(int a) {
     if(1<a) return fibonacci(-2+a)+fibonacci(-1+a);
     else return a;
     }

     C: int fibonacci(int a) {
     return (1<a)?fibonacci(-2+a)+fibonacci(-1+a):a;
     }

After canonicalization, the documents look like this:

     A: int V(int V){if(V<=9)return V;else return V(V-
     9)+V(V-9);}

     B:        int        V(int                         V){if(9<V)return
     V(-9+V)+V(-9+V);else return V;}
    C:      C:     int                  V(int           V){return(9<V)?
    V(-9+V)+V(-9+V):V;}

With k = 6 and W = 6, you get a resemblance between A and B of 47%, between
B and C of 46%, and A and C of 25%.

10.3.3 SSMCkgram: k-gram Java Bytecode Birthmarks

Birthmark detection is different from plagiarism detection in several respects:
You’re working on executable code (binaries or bytecode) rather than source
code, you assume a powerful obfuscating adversary rather than one concerned
about keeping the code relatively pretty, and you want to compare two
programs against each other rather than making pairwise comparisons between
n programs.

SSMCkgram is a k-gram-based birthmarking algorithm that computes a mark
over Java bytecode opcodes. The birthmark for a class is the set of all the
opcode k-grams for the methods in the class. Order and frequency of the
shingles are ignored. Ignoring the frequency means that common obfuscations
such as duplicating blocks won’t affect the birthmark.

Here’s our Fibonacci example again, this time written in Java:

    class Fib1 {
    static int fib1(int n) {
    if (n <= 1)
    return n;
    else
    return fib1(n-1)+fib1(n-2);
    }
    }

    class Fibonacci3 {
     static int fibonacci3(int a) {
     if(1<a) return fibonacci3(-2+a)+fibonacci3(-1+a);
     else return a;
     }
     }

     class Fibonacci4 {
     static int fibonacci4(int a) {
     return (1<a)?fibonacci4(-2+a)+fibonacci4(-1+a):a;
     }
     }

For performance reasons, many instruction set architectures will have several
instructions with close to identical semantics. Java bytecode, for example, has
ten instructions that all push an integer constant: iconst_1, ..., iconst_5, bipush,
sipush, ldc, ldc_2, and iconst_m1. An almost trivial obfuscation that would disrupt
k-gram-based birthmarking algorithms is to replace instructions with similar
ones. To counter that, a preprocessing step should canonicalize the opcodes by
renaming them to generic ones. In the bytecode below, for example, all the
integer push instructions are renamed iPUSH, all the integer load instructions
iLOAD, and so on. Compiling the Fib1 class above and canonicalizing the
bytecodes yields this code:
The first three instructions come from the default constructor, and the
remaining come from the fib1 function itself. The bytecodes in mostly capital
letters represent equivalence classes of canonicalized instructions.

Here’s the hash table for the 3-gram shingles:

Given this hash function, the three classes hash into these sets:
Notice how 1 occurs in all sets; it corresponds to the shingle from the default
constructor. The containment measure is 17% for [Fib1,Fibonacci3],8%for [Fib1,
Fibonacci4], and 75% for [Fibonacci3,Fibonacci4].

10.4 API-Based Analysis

Application programs don’t exist in a vacuum. Rather, they interact with the
system on which they run through a set of standard library types and calls. On
Unix, these are the system calls defined by the operating system (such as open,
read, and write) or the standard libraries that provide higher-level abstractions
on top of these (such as stdio and math).

What’s interesting is that some of these library functions can be replaced by
the programmer. For example, in Java, you don’t have to use the standard
java.util.Hashtable; you could replace it with your own implementation.
Similarly, on Unix, you could replace all the functions in the math library with
your own. You saw this in Algorithm OBFDMRVSL (Section 4.6.3 281), which
replaces common Java libraries with its own versions. This can be a useful
obfuscation not only because it obscures the interface between the application
code and the library, but because it makes the library code amenable to
obfuscation as well.

What’s even more interesting is that some standard library functions cannot be
replaced. If you want to write something to a file (or a socket, a pipe, and so
on) on Unix, you have to use the write system call or one of the library
functions that call write. Similarly, in Java, if you want to open a window, you
had better create an instance of java.awt.Frame or one of its subclasses.

There are several birthmarking algorithms that are based on this observation.
The idea is that the way a program uses the standard libraries or system calls
(we’ll collectively call them APIs from now on) is not only unique to that
program but also difficult for an adversary to forge.

As we already mentioned, not all APIs are created equal. To be really useful
for birthmarking purposes, the use of an API needs to be difficult to obfuscate.
That is, it needs to be

     • atomic (i.e., a call can’t be obfuscated by splitting it up in pieces),

     • state-full (i.e., calls can’t easily be added or removed, since this would
       affect the state of the system),

     • non-forgeable (i.e., its use can’t be replaced by the use of another API),
       and

     • common in real code.

For example, on Unix, the read system call isn’t a good candidate for an API
birthmark, since it isn’t atomic; a single call can be obfuscated by splitting it
into two or more calls. The Unix gettimeofday() and getpid() system calls also
aren’t good candidates, since they are state-less; an adversary can disrupt the
birthmark by sprinkling calls to these functions willy-nilly all over the
program. The use of the standard malloc library can easily be forged by
replacing it with another one. Finally, the ioctl (i-o-control) system call is
atomic, non-forgeable, and state-full, but basing a birthmarking algorithm on
the use of this call would not be very useful, since it occurs sparingly or not at
all in most application programs.

10.4.1 SSTNMM: Object-Oriented Birthmarks

Tamada and co-authors have presented a collection of algorithms for collecting
birthmarks from Java API types and method calls. SSTNMMSMC [343]
computes the birthmark from the sequence of method calls within a class,
SSTNMMIS computes the birthmark of a class from the inheritance path from
the root class to the class, and SSTNMMUC computes the birthmark of a class
from the types (other defined classes) it uses.
To illustrate these marks, we’re going to use this simple Java program:

     class Feline extends javax.swing.JFrame {
     public Feline (String title) {
     setTitle(title);
     setDefaultCloseOperation(javax.swing.JFrame.EXIT_
     ON_CLOSE);
     getContentPane().add(new
     javax.swing.JLabel(getLabel()),
     java.awt.BorderLayout.CENTER);
     pack();
     }
     String getLabel() {
     return "k1773n".replaceAll("1","i").
     replaceAll("7","t").replaceAll("3","e");
     }
     public static void main(String[] args) {
     new Feline("Tudou").setVisible(true);
     }
     }

All the birthmarks rely on the concept of a “well-known class.” Well-known
classes include those from the standard Java library and any class from
projects that have become standard in the open-source community. Other,
unknown classes are ignored.

The SSTNMMIS birthmark for a class C is the sequence of its super-classes,
except for any that are not well known. For the Feline class above, you get the
sequence of classes in light gray:

     java.lang.Object
     extended by java.awt.Component
     extended by java.awt.Container
     extended by java.awt.Window
     extended by java.awt.Frame
     extended by javax.swing.JFrame
     extended by Feline

In this particular example, all the super-classes of Feline are well known. If,
say, java.awt.Window would have been an unknown type, it would have been
replaced by a wildcard * to indicate that it could be matched against any type.
This handles the situation where an attacker replaces java.awt.Window with their
own class.

The SSTNMMSMC birthmark for a class is computed by scanning top to bottom
in the class file, and top to bottom over the bytecode for every method found,
extracting those calls that go to methods in well-known classes. For Feline
above, you get the methods in light gray:

     javax.swing.JFrame
     setTitle
     setDefaultCloseOperation
     getContentPane
     getLabel
     javax.swing.JLabel
     java.awt.Container.add
     pack
     java.lang.String.replaceAll
     java.lang.String.replaceAll
     java.lang.String.replaceAll
     Feline
     setVisible

The intuition here is that replacing a method call from the standard library is
hard for the attacker, because it may require rewriting a large chunk of code.
This is sometimes, but certainly not always, true. For example, replacing the
java.lang.Integer constructor with something else would be hard, since many
other classes in the standard library rely on it and would also have to be
rewritten. On the other hand, replacing java.lang.String.replaceAll with a
different implementation is close to trivial, since that method is simple to
implement and is known to have no side effects. This birthmark can also be
disrupted by reordering method calls. Reordering calls within a method is non-
trivial, since it requires you to know their data dependencies. Reordering all
the methods within a class (and thereby reordering the calls they make) is
trivial, however.

The SSTNMMUC birthmark of a class is the sorted sequence of well-known
classes that occur as super-classes, interfaces, and in declarations of methods
and variables. For the Feline class, you get the types in light gray:

Disrupting this birthmark by removing a well-known class may be hard, but
adding new types to the list is clearly trivial: Just create instances of well-
known classes that have no dangerous side effects.

All the SSTNMM are sequences, so you can use any of the sequence similarity
measures you saw in Section 10.2.1 612. In their experiments, Tamada et al.
used the measure in Definition 10.1 613, which computes the similarity based
on the number of identical element pairs.

10.4.2 SSTONMM: Dynamic Function Call Birthmarks

In Sections 6.3 383 and 7.2.4 431, you saw how programs can protect
themselves by encrypting the executable and not decrypting themselves until
they are run. This presents a problem for static birthmarking algorithms; two
identical programs that have been encrypted with different keys will appear
completely different! One way to deal with this is to capture the program once
it’s been decrypted and run the static birthmark over the cleartext code.
Another way is to use a dynamic birthmark that computes a signal over the
execution trace rather than the code itself.
The SSTONMM [341,342] algorithm computes the birthmark from a trace of
the well-known library calls that are executed from a run of the program on a
particular input. On Unix, the ltrace utility can be used to trace system and
dynamic library calls. Have a look at this trivial C program:

     #include <stdio.h>
     #include <time.h>
     int main() {
     printf("%i\n%i\n",getpid(),clock());
     }

For this program, the Unix command ltrace -S main generates this output (light
gray are system calls and dark gray are dynamic library calls):

     〈execve, brk, access, open, fstat64,
     mmap2, close, open, read, fstat64,
     mmap2, mmap2, mmap2, mmap2, close,
     mmap2, set_thread_area,mprotect,mprotect,munmap,
     __libc_start_main,clock, times, getpid, getpid,
     printf, fstat64, mmap2, write, exit_group〉

The first 21 calls are responsible for setting up the executable in memory and
will be the same for all applications. You can see how the dynamic library
function getpid calls the corresponding system call getpid and how the library
function clock calls the system call times.

To compare two programs p and q, you run them on the same input, collect the
traces of relevant API calls, and then compare the traces for similarity. You can
compare the traces directly, of course, but that can be problematic if the
attacker has reordered calls or inserted bogus ones. Another strategy is to
compare the frequency of the different calls rather than their strict order. Here’s
a histogram of call frequencies we’ve constructed from the sequence of Unix
system and dynamic library calls you just saw:
To compare two traces, you’d construct the histograms for both of them and
compute their similarity by subtracting the frequencies. You’ll see the same
idea in Algorithm SSLM later in this chapter.

10.4.3 SSSDL: Dynamic k-gram API Birthmarks

SSSDL   [317,318] combines several ideas you’ve seen already into one
birthmarking algorithm:

  1. Collect sequences of well-known API calls executed for a particular
     input,

  2. Ignore calls that are so common they are unlikely to serve as good
     similarity indicators (for example, any calls to methods in Java’s
     java.lang.String class), and

  3. Construct the birthmark as a set of k-grams from the API call sequence.

The advantage of this algorithm is that the birthmark becomes substantially
smaller than if you were to keep the entire trace. The actual size of the trace
will depend on the value of k. For k = 1, for example, the birthmark will be just
the set of API functions executed! For k = 2, the set will be larger (the pairs of
executed API calls, and so on). The sets of k-grams from two programs p and q
can be compared for similarity using Definition 10.3 614, as before.
Schuler et al. [318] evaluated both the false positive rate of the algorithm and
its resilience to attack. Comparing the traces of a set of six individually
developed programs, all performing the same task, the similarity ranged from
9% to 26%. In other words, the algorithm showed a low false positive rate. In
a second experiment, 11 differently obfuscated versions of 12 programs were
constructed using two Java obfuscators (SandMark [2] and Zelix KlassMaster
[3]). They had no effect on the extracted birthmarks. Neither of these
obfuscators was specifically designed to destroy API-based algorithms,
however, so it’s debatable just how much this test says about the resilience of
SSSDL.

SSSDL seems like an attractive dynamic API-based algorithm, since the size of
the birthmark can be easily adjusted by setting the shingle and winnowing
window size (K and W in Algorithm 10.5 617).

10.5 Tree-Based Analysis

Programs in source form are naturally hierarchical, i.e., tree-structured. Nested
statements in structured programming languages form trees, in languages
without multiple inheritance classes form a tree, operators and operands in an
expression form a tree, and so on. An abstract syntax tree (AST) is a
convenient program representation when you want to manipulate code in a
form that’s very close to source. It maintains all the information that’s in the
source in a tree form, usually omitting formatting and comments. Note that an
AST is different from a parse tree, which contains artifacts left over from the
parsing process. The AST, on the other hand, as the name implies, abstracts
away from any parsing process and only maintains the information that’s in the
original program. You saw an example of an AST in Section 3.3.2 180, in
Chapter 3, when you read about decompilation.

There aren’t that many software similarity algorithms that use trees as their
program representation. Here, you’ll see only one algorithm, SSEFM, which
finds clones in ASTs.

10.5.1 SSEFM: AST-Based Clone Detection
Let’s assume you want to look for clones in this program:

                    (5 + (a + b)) * (7 + (c + 9))

You start by parsing it and building a corresponding AST S:

Let’s first examine a very simple (and inefficient) approach to finding clones
in an AST. After building the tree, you construct from it all possible tree
patterns. A tree pattern is a subtree of S where one or more subtrees have been
replaced with a wildcard. We’ll call these wildcards holes and represent them
using a question mark character (?). Here are some of the patterns for the AST
above:

For clarity, in this section we’ll shade the ASTs themselves in dark gray and
the tree patterns in light gray.
So what’s a clone in the context of an abstract syntax tree? It’s simply a tree
pattern for which there’s more than one match in the AST! Look through the
patterns above and compare them to S—which patterns would make a good
clone?

In general, a tree pattern has the potential to be a good clone if it

  1. Has a large number of nodes (you want clones that are as large as
     possible),

  2. Occurs a large number of times in the AST (you want patterns that occur
     at least twice), and

  3. Has few holes (a pattern with many holes will result in a clone with many
     parameters).

This pattern seems like it might make a good choice

since it matches two large subtrees of S:

Once you have identified this pattern as a good clone, you extract it into its
own function (or, in this case, macro) and replace all occurrences with a call:

     #define CLONE(x,y,z) ((x)+((y)+(z)))
     CLONE(5,a,b) * CLONE(7,c,9)
As long are you’re willing to ignore performance, it’s not hard to turn this
basic idea into an algorithm. Start by building up a clone table, a mapping
from each pattern to the location (or multiple locations) in S where it occurs.
Here are a few of the entries in this table:

Now, all you have to do is sort the table so that the entries with the largest
patterns, most number of occurrences, and the fewest number of holes appear
first, and you’re almost done! A human programmer can then scour the list
from most likely to least likely clones and manually, or with some automatic
help, choose the best candidates for clone extraction.

Unfortunately, this algorithm won’t scale to large programs, since the AST will
produce an exponential number of tree patterns. Algorithm SSEFM therefore
resorts to heuristics, which iteratively grow larger tree patterns from smaller
ones. The details are complicated, and we’ll omit them here, and instead we’ll
leave you with an example to illustrate the basic idea behind the heuristic.
Have a look at this entry in the clone table:
How would it be possible to grow the pattern larger so that it still matches as
many of the occurrences as possible? One possibility is to specialize the
pattern by filling in the left branch with var(?), forming a new pattern +
(var(?),?), which would match two of the occurrences. Another possibility
would be to specialize the pattern by filling in its right branch by +(?,?),
forming +(?,+(?,?)). It’s natural to settle on this pattern since it is larger,
although it only matches two occurrences rather than four:

After two more steps of specialization, we arrive at the final pattern, which
matches two occurrences in S:

Using their Asta tool, Will Evans et al. [125a] report finding this clone 10
times across a set of Java classes:

In one of the occurrences, the third hole (?3) was filled with a variable x, and in
another occurrence with a field reference x.y. This shows that the strength of
the algorithm is that it allows structural matching: Holes can accept any
subtree, not just simple literals or variables, as in simpler algorithms.
10.6 Graph-Based Analysis

Programs are graph-like structures. Functions are naturally represented as
control flow graphs, dependencies between statements within a function as
dependence graphs, possible calls between functions as call graphs, inheritance
relationships between classes as acyclic graphs, and so on. Given this, it makes
sense to ask whether program similarity can be computed over graph
representations of programs.

An unfortunate complication is that subgraph isomorphism is NP-complete, so
straightforward graph comparisons are going to be too expensive. Fortunately,
graphs computed from programs are not general graphs. Control flow graphs
will not be arbitrarily large, for example, since they correspond to functions
written by humans. They’re also much closer in structure to a very restricted
class of graphs known as series-parallel graphs [188] than to general graphs.
Similarly, call graphs tend to be very sparse, since a function will call at most a
handful of other functions. For such reasons, heuristics can be very effective in
approximating subgraph isomorphism on graphs generated from programs.

Here, you’ll see three similarity algorithms based on graphs. Algorithms SSKH
and SSLCHY both compute similarity over program dependence graphs
(PDGs), and do so for clone and plagiarism detection, respectively. SSMCwpp,
on the other hand, is a dynamic birthmarking algorithm and computes the
similarity of two programs based on graphs constructed from their runtime
traces.

10.6.1 SSKH: PDG-Based Clone Detection

In Section 3.1.3 132, you learned about program dependence graphs, PDGs.
The nodes of the graph are the statements of a function, and there’s an edge m
→ n between two nodes m and n if n is data-dependent on m (m computes a
value and n uses it) or n is control-dependent on m (m represents a predicate
that determines whether n gets executed or not). PDGs have the nice property
that semantics-preserving reordering of the statements of a function won’t
affect the graph. This makes them useful for clone detection, which we’ll
discuss here, and plagiarism detection, which you’ll see in the next section.

The basic idea of algorithm SSKH [208] is to build a PDG for each function of
the program and to compute two isomorphic subgraphs by slicing backward
along dependency edges starting with every pair of matching nodes. Two
nodes are matching if they have the same syntactic structure. Every reachable
pair of matching nodes are added to the two slices until no more nodes can be
added. You can see the details in Algorithm 10.7 637.

Have a look at the (rather contrived) example below, where two very similar
pieces of code have been intertwined within the same function:

Algorithm 10.7. Overview of Algorithm SSKH.

DETECTCLONES(P):

  1. For each function fi P construct its program dependence graph Gi.

  2. Assign nodes to equivalence classes based on their syntactic structure,
     ignoring variable names and literal values.

  3. For each pair of nodes m Gi and n Gj that belong to the same
     equivalence class, find two subgraphs Si ⊂ Gi and S j ⊂ Gj such that m is
     a node in Si, n is a node in S j, and Si and S j are isomorphic:

         a. Slice backward from m and n in lock-step, adding m’s predecessor
           node to Si and n’s predecessor node to S j only if they are in the
           same equivalence class;
         b. If nodes m and n correspond to a predicate p in a statement if (p)...
           or while (p) ... slice forward one step from m and n and add their
           control-dependence successors to Si and S j, respectively.

    (Si, S j) form a clone pair.
4. If one clone pair ( ,    ) is contained in another clone pair (Si, j), i.e.,
          and        , remove ( ,    ).

5. Transitively combine related clone pairs into larger clone groups.

6. Return the set of clone groups.

  a1: a = g(8);
  b1: b = z*3;
  a2: while(a<10)
  a3: a = f(a);
  b2: while(b<20)
  b3: b = f(b);
  a4: if (a==10){
  a5: printf("foo\n");
  a6: x=x+2;
  }
  b4: if (b==20) {
  b5: printf("bar\n");
  b6: y=y+2;
  b7: printf("baz\n");
  }
The algorithm starts by considering the two nodes a4 and b4. It finds that
they’re matching (they have the same syntactic structure), so the algorithm
continues by considering their predecessors in the graph, a3 and b3. These
match too, and so are added to the slice. Nodes a1 and b1 are also predecessors
of a4 and b4, respectively, but they don’t match and are not added to the slice.
Next, the algorithm adds nodes a2 and b2 to the slice, since they match and are
predecessors of a3 and b3, respectively. At this stage, the algorithm has
identified the light gray and dark gray node sets as potential clones:
A human programmer who examined this code would probably identify a5/b5
and a6/b6 as also belonging to the clone. Unfortunately, slicing backward from
a5/b5, for example, would never include a6/b6 in the clone, and slicing
backward from a6/b6 would never include a5/b5! The reason is that there are no
dependencies between these nodes. They are, however, control-dependent on
the predicate in the if-statement a4/b4 that contains them. For this reason,
whenever you see a predicate in an if-statement or while-statement, you slice
forward one step from that node and add any matching nodes to the slice. This
leads you to the final clone pair from which you can extract the clone code into
a macro or function:
    #define CLONE(x,c,d,s,p,y)\
    while(x<c) x = f(x);\
    if (x==d){\
    printf(s);\
    y=y+2;\
    p=1;}\
    else p=0;

    a = g(8);
    b = z*3;
    CLONE(a,10,10,"foo\n" ,p,x)
    CLONE(b,20,20,"bar\n" ,p,y)
    if (p) printf("baz\n");

Notice that the clone returns a value 0 or 1 in the p variable. This is used to
make sure that node b7, which is not part of the clone, will be executed only
for the second use of the clone.
What’s particularly nice about this algorithm is that it handles clones where
statements have been reordered, clones that are non-contiguous, and clones
that have been intertwined with each other. Cases where variables have been
renamed or literal constants have been given new values are also easily
handled, since nodes are said to match only if they have the same syntactic
structure.

Unfortunately, Komondoor and Horwitz [208] report depressing performance
numbers. A 11,540-line C program takes 1 hour and 34 minutes to process. A
further problem with the algorithm is that it produces many variants of the
same clone (250 clone groups were found in a program of 11,060 lines of
code) and these have to be examined manually to find the clones that are truly
useful to extract.

    Problem 10.1

    Would it be possible to use non-graph-based analyses and still reap many
    of the same benefits of PDG-based analysis, but at a lower cost? For
    example, could a prepass over the code to canonicalize it followed by,
    say, a k-gram-based analysis work just as well in finding reordered or
    intertwined clones? The prepass could reorder independent statements in
    lexicographic order, rename variables by first use, turn all for-loops into
    while-loops, break complex statements into 3-address statements, and so
    on.

10.6.2 SSLCHY: PDG-Based Plagiarism Detection

Like Algorithm SSKH, Algorithm SSLCHY [232] uses PDGs, but does so for
plagiarism detection rather than clone detection. The major differences
between the two algorithms are that SSLCHY employs a general-purpose
subgraph isomorphism algorithm rather than slicing, and in order to speed up
processing, uses a preprocessing step to weed out unlikely plagiarism
candidates.

Algorithm 10.8 640 gives an overview of the method. The first problem you
need to solve is what it should mean for one PDG to be considered a
plagiarized version of another. Since you expect some manner of obfuscation
of the code on part of the plagiarist, you can’t require the two PDGs to be
completely identical. You instead need to relax the requirement to say that the
two PDGs should be γ-isomorphic in accordance with Definition 10.5 615.
Liu et al. set γ = 0.9, argue that “overhauling (without errors) 10% of a PDG of
reasonable size is almost equivalent to rewriting the code.”

Algorithm 10.8. Overview of Algorithm SSLCHY. P is the original
program and Q the plagiarism suspect. K is the minimum number
of nodes a PDG should have to be considered.γ is a relaxation
parameter for the subgraph isomorphism test.

DETECT(P, Q, K,γ):

  1. For each function pi P (qi Q) construct its program dependence graph
     Gi (Hj).

  2. Let R be the set of all pairs of graphs (Gi, Hj).

  3. Filter out unlikely plagiarism candidates from R:

          a. Remove from R any pair (Gi, Hj) such that Gi or Hj have fewer
            than K nodes.
          b. Remove from R any pair (Gi, Hj) such that |Hj|<γ |Gi |.
          c. Let (g) = (u1,..., uk) be the frequencies of the k different node
            kinds in PDG g. Remove from R any pair (Gi, Hj) where (Gi)
            (Hj).

  4. Do a pairwise comparison of the remaining pairs in R:
  5. Return R, the set of plagiarism candidates.

The algorithm handles the second problem, performance, by using three
filtering steps that together typically prune out    of all program pairs from
consideration. The first filter ignores any graph that has too few nodes to be
interesting. The second filter removes (g, g′) from consideration if |g′ | <γ |g|,
since this pair would never pass a γ-isomorphism test anyway. The final filter
removes (g, g′) from consideration if the frequency of their different node
types is too different. For example, if g consists solely of function call nodes
and g′ consists solely of nodes representing arithmetic operations, it’s unlikely
they’re related.

Algorithm SSLCHY was designed to be robust against common techniques
plagiarists use to thwart detection. A PDG is not affected by transformations
such as statement reordering, variable renaming, replacing while-loops with
for-loops, or flipping the order of branches in if-statements. This doesn’t mean,
of course, that there aren’t other transformations that affect the PDG! Since
each PDG is built from a function, a plagiarist could use inter-procedural
transformations such as inlining and outlining to alter the graph significantly.
He could also add bogus dependencies between variables to introduce spurious
edges in the PDGs. You saw an example of this obfuscation in Section 4.4.4
253, where we added bogus variable dependencies in order to confuse a slicing
tool.

Of course, in an academic setting, using such powerful transformations could
well prove counterproductive: While they may prevent a student’s plagiaristic
activities from being detected, in the end they may make his program so ugly
that he will no longer receive a passing grade!

10.6.3 SSMCwpp: Dynamic Whole Program Birthmarks
To compare two programs for similarity, you could just run them in parallel
and compare their execution traces. Not only is this inconvenient if the traces
are long, but you might also get easily thrown off track if your adversary has
made modifications to the program he has copied. What you’d like is to
compress the two very long traces into more compact representations that
capture the salient aspects of the traces, and then compare these
representations. Algorithm SSMCwpp [260,262] uses Algorithm RELJ, which
you saw in Section 3.2.4 168, to compress traces into context-free grammars.
These grammars can then be represented as directed acyclic graphs that form
the actual birthmark.

Consider once more the modular exponentiation routine. Below is its control
flow graph (the body of the main loop has been outlined into a function foo()),
and the DAG grammar that results from executing the basic blocks in the order

          A, BCDF, BCDF, BCEF, BCEF, BCEF, BCEF, BCEF, BCEF, G:

Algorithm SSMCwpp throws away all terminal symbols and keeps the
remainder of the DAG as the whole program birthmark. This is the rightmost
graph above. The birthmark captures, in a reasonably compact representation,
the program’s repetitive execution pattern.

To compare an original program P and a suspected derivative Q, you run them
both on the same input, collect their traces, construct context-free grammars
from each trace, throw away the terminal symbols, build the DAGs, and use
Definition 10.5 615 to compute containment(P, Q). This gives you a measure
of how much of P can be found within Q. In practice, Definition 10.5 615
would be too expensive to compute exactly, since it relies on subgraph
isomorphism, which is NP-hard even for directed acyclic graphs. Heuristics
can be used to approximate the metric, however, since the DAGs produced
from Algorithm RELJ are highly stylized: They are sparse, they have a unique
start node with a very high out-degree, and the remaining nodes have a very
low in- and out-degree. Ginger Myles describes a heuristic based on these
properties in her Ph.D. thesis [260].

The attack model here is similar to what you’ve seen before, namely, the
adversary applying semantics-preserving transformations to the code to try to
thwart birthmark detection. In a sense, he’s wrapping the original program P
inside a layer of obfuscation to form a new program Q. At runtime, Q performs
all the same actions as P, possibly in a different way from P, along with
additional, bogus actions that P does not.

To evaluate the robustness of Algorithm SSMCwpp, we must ask ourselves how
different kinds of obfuscations affect the birthmark DAG. Let’s have a look at
a few examples. First, let’s insert an opaque predicate protecting a completely
bogus if-then-else construct comprising basic blocks G, H, I, and J:

The pruned birthmarking graph is above right. In this section, we’re
identifying graphs by their root node labels, so this is graph T. The light gray
nodes are those that are part of the maximal common subgraph of the original
graph S and T, mcs(S, T). Labels next to the nodes indicate the subgraph
mapping to the nodes in S. Using the formulas for containment and similarity
of graphs in Definition 10.5 615, we get that
and

Adding a few bogus branches is a pretty benign control flow obfuscation. Let’s
instead see what happens when we chenxify the code:

Even though this obfuscation makes substantial changes to the static layout of
the code, maybe surprisingly, the runtime execution pattern is left pretty much
intact:                  and

The grammars generated by Algorithm RELJ capture the repetitive pattern of
an executing program. This means that any transformation that hides looping
can be an effective attack. Splitting a loop in two is one such transformation,
as is loop unrolling. Here’s what happens when you perform a single unrolling
of the loop in the example program:
The nodes C′, D′, E′, and F′′ are specialized copies of C, D, E, and F,
respectively. Since this is a while-loop, you need to insert an extra test between
each copy of the loop body. This is node H in the CFG above. Since there is
much less repetition now, the resulting graph becomes smaller, and
containment and similarity are significantly reduced:                          and

It’s unclear how this algorithm would perform on substantial traces of real
programs. In [221], Jim Larus reports that in one of his test cases, an original
1598MB trace was compressed into a 6.6MB grammar. This may be
impressive, but comparing two graphs with millions of nodes for similarity
may still prove prohibitively expensive!

10.7 Metrics-Based Analysis

In Section 3.4.2 193, in Chapter 3 (Program Analysis), we gave you a very
brief overview of software metrics. You also saw them in Chapter 4 (Code
Obfuscation), where it was suggested that they could be used to measure how
poorly structured a program is after obfuscation. Conte et al. [92] define the
concept like this: “Software metrics are used to characterize the essential
features for software quantitatively, so that classification, comparison, and
mathematical analysis can be applied.” Here, we’re going to revisit software
metrics in the context of comparing code for similarity.

We’ll show you two metrics-based algorithms. SSKK does clone detection by
looking for pieces of code with similar metrics values. This is less precise than
the algorithms you’ve seen previously, but it also has the potential for being a
whole lot faster. SSLM does authorship analysis by comparing the metric
values of samples of authors’ code.

10.7.1 SSKK: Metrics-Based Clone Detection

The basic assumption behind software complexity metrics is that you can learn
something about a program by counting various aspects of it. Algorithm SSKK
[209] takes this one step further and makes the assumption that two pieces of a
program that are similar (are potential clones) will also have similar metrics,
and furthermore, that two pieces of code that are not clones will have different
metrics.

The basic idea is simple. First, build the abstract syntax tree for the program.
Second, in a bottom-up pass over the tree, compute a set of complexity metrics
for each subtree. Finally, do a pairwise comparison of the metrics for each
subtree. Constructs with similar metrics values are more likely to be clones.

To illustrate this, let’s have a look at these two functions and their
corresponding abstract syntax trees:
Attached to each node is a 4-tuple of metrics values:

Fanout is the number of function calls made by the construct, free vars is the
number of variables referenced in the construct but not declared in it, bound
vars is the number of variables that are declared and referenced in the
construct, and control points is the number of predicates used in control
constructs. The counts are cumulative, meaning the metrics for a node n is the
sum of those of n’s children.

To see if foo and bar are potential clones, you simply compare their metrics’
tuples for similarity, for example, using the Euclidean distance,
                               . In our case, foo and bar are very close; they have
a Euclidean distance of only 1 unit. Still, looking at the source, it seems pretty
unlikely for them to be clones! The reason for this discrepancy is that the
metrics we chose are not precise enough to distinguish between even pretty
distinct pieces of code. There are hundreds of software metrics proposed in the
literature, and it’s possible that adding more of them into the mix could
improve precision.
Regardless of the metrics chosen, it’s likely that SSKK will be much less
precise than the other algorithms you’ve seen that are based on more direct
code comparisons. However, it’s also likely to be much more efficient, since it
requires a single pass over the code to compute the metrics, followed by
simple pairwise comparisons of the metrics tuples. In spite of its imprecision it
could, therefore, be useful as a quick-and-dirty preprocessing step to other
algorithms to weed out parts of the program that can’t possibly be clones.

10.7.2 SSLM: Metrics-Based Authorship Analysis

Authorship analysis is mostly done at the source-code level. Since as
programmers we adopt certain formatting habits (how we indent our code,
how we choose identifiers, how we format our comments, and so on), it’s
reasonable to believe that there might be enough clues in source code to tell
the programs of different authors apart. Of course, it’s not clear which features
in source code are useful in order to discriminate between authors! It could
well be that so many students have been steeped in the same programming
style (for example, K&R [196] C) that many formatting features are no longer
distinctive enough to successfully tell one author from another.

Krsul and Spafford [211] classify source-code metrics into three categories.
Programming layout metrics include measures related to indentation, where
brackets are placed, how comments are formatted, and so on. These metrics
are not very robust—tools like pretty printers and structure editors will easily
destroy them. Programming style metrics include metrics such as average
variable length and internal structure of identifiers (Hungarian vs. camel-back
notation, for example). Finally, programming structure metrics are related to
the maturity, ability, and training of the programmer. They include average
number of lines of code per function, preference for particular algorithms and
data structures, and so on. We’ve listed the metrics that Krsul and Spafford
used in their experiments in Tables 10.1 649, 10.2 650, and 10.3 650.

Table 10.1. Programming layout metrics. Adapted from reference
                            [211].
Table 10.2. Programming style metrics. Adapted from reference
                           [211].
     Table 10.3. Programming structure metrics. Adapted from
                         reference [211].

10.7.2.1 Classification Using Histograms

Algorithm 10.9 648 gives the four routines that SSLM [220] uses to map a
program to the most likely author. HISTOGRAM (P, m) uses metric m to
extract numeric data from program P, from which it then builds a normalized
histogram. Table 10.4 651 gives some examples where we’ve built histograms
over metrics PRO1, PSM5, and STY1bg using training programs from three
programmers, Alice, Bob, and Charlie. For example, Alice’s histogram for the
PRO1 metric was built from the values 〈20, 30, 30, 40, 40, 50〉. Because of
the normalization, each histogram shows the “shape” of a particular
programmer’s behavior on a particular metric. The DISTANCE(M, P1, P2)
routine in Algorithm 10.9 648 compares two programs P1 and P2 for
similarity over a set of metrics M by subtracting their corresponding
histograms.
    Table 10.4. Three metrics PRO1, PSM5, and STY1bg were
 extracted from training programs written by three programmers
 Alice, Bob, and Charlie. The histograms are normalized between
   0.0 and 1.0. The histogram for the STY1bg metric shows the
frequency of the different possible placements of brackets, i.e., the
  labels on the x-axis refer to metrics STY1b, STY1c, ..., STY1g.

CLASSIFY(Q, A, M′, Pt) finds the most likely author for an unknown program
Q. It starts by computing the histograms over the metrics in M′ for the training
programs in Pt. It then computes the histograms for Q and returns the author
whose histograms match the best.

10.7.2.2 Selecting the Right Metrics

Tables 10.1 649, 10.2 650, and 10.3 650 list a total of fifty metrics. There are
also many possible variants, such as computing the standard deviation of the
average program line length metric PRO1. Some of these metrics will be
relevant to distinguishing one programmer from another, and others will not
be. How do you find the combination that gives the most precise results?

A simple strategy is to exhaustively enumerate all combinations of metrics and
see which ones perform best on the evaluation data. This is what
BESTMETRICS(A, M,Pt, Pe) in Algorithm 10.9 648 does. It first trains
histograms using the training programs Pt and then evaluates these histograms
using the evaluation programs Pe. This is what we’ve done here:

Algorithm 10.9. Overview of the SSLM algorithm. A is a set of
authors,     is training data (programs) for author a A        is
evaluation data (programs different from those in ) for a, M is a
set of metrics, and Q is a program of unknown authorship.
We started with the training data turned into histograms in Table 10.4 651.
Then, for each combination of metrics and for each potential author, we
classified the evaluation programs written by that author and noted the result.
For example, the entry marked in dark gray is the result of classifying an
evaluation program written by Alice using a combination of the PRO1 and
STY1bg metrics. The result ranked Charlie as the most likely author, followed
by Alice, and then Bob. In other words, PRO1 and STY1bg is probably not a
good combination of metrics. We’ve marked all the tests that were successful,
i.e., they ranked the actual author highest, in light gray. PRO1 and STY1bg is
not a good combination, but STY1bg by itself is even worse, since it
misclassifies every author’s test data. The best combination seems to be PRO1
with PSM5, since it correctly classifies all test programs with the fewest
number of metrics. You can get an intuition for the reason why by looking at
Table 10.4. Notice how Bob’s PRO1 is markedly different from those of Alice
and Charlie. PRO1 isn’t enough by itself to tell Alice’s and Charlie’s programs
apart, though, since their profiles are very similar. PSM5, on the other hand,
doesn’t distinguish Alice from Bob but does distinguish the two of them from
Charlie. Thus, it makes sense that PRO1 and PSM5 together would form a
good combination.

In practice, exhaustively enumerating and testing all combinations of metrics
won’t scale. There are many well-known techniques that can be used to
heuristically eliminate those metrics that don’t contribute much to the
classification. Krsul and Spafford [211] tried a number of techniques,
including a statistical method known as discriminant analysis, a neural
network-based classifier, and a Gaussian classifier. SSLM used a genetic
algorithm-based classification method. Krsul and Spafford found that Gaussian
likelihood classifiers and neural network classifiers gave very low error rates.
The Gaussian classifier was able to correctly classify 100% of the programs
used in the experiments. It identified the metrics PRO1 (mean program line
length), PRO2a (mean local variable name length), PRO2c (mean function
name length), PRO1S (standard deviation for program line length), PRO2bS
(standard deviation for global variable name length), and STY1c (percentage
of open curly brackets ({) that are the first character in a line) as the most
significant.

     Problem 10.2

     Can you think of a way to use software metrics for birthmarking? For
     plagiarism detection?

10.8 Discussion
Many of the algorithms in this chapter fit into this general pattern, where P
and Q are programs and is a program representation:

The algorithms differ in the problems they tackle (clone analysis, software
forensics, birthmarking, and plagiarism analysis), of course, but they’re similar
in the kinds of trade-offs they have to make:

  1. Should we use a simple or more powerful program representation?

  2. Should we do similarity testing on a fine- or coarse-grained granularity?

  3. Should we use a small but lossy or large but precise representation?

  4. Should we use a precise but expensive or a heuristic but fast similarity
     testing algorithm?

  5. Should we assume a powerful adversary who can make wholesale
     modifications to the program or one with limited abilities?

For example, on one extreme, you’ve seen algorithms that use program
representations that are nothing more than lists or sets of extracted numerical
metrics. These are simple to build and manipulate but more difficult to extract
useful information from. On the other extreme, you’ve seen algorithms that
work on complete program dependence graphs. PDGs are powerful
representations, since they naturally abstract away from the order between two
independent statements. Of course, PDGs are more difficult to build and
require more memory to store than simple sets of metrics.
In the future, it would be nice to see a more comprehensive approach to
software similarity analysis. As you’ve seen in this chapter, clone analysis,
software forensics, birthmarking, and plagiarism analysis have many points in
common, and future research would certainly benefit from cross-fertilization.
The summary in Table 10.5 might serve as inspiration for such future work.

      Table 10.5. Summary of similarity analysis algorithms.

    Problem 10.3 Have a look at 10.5

    Can you identify interesting holes in the available research that might
    serve as a starting point for interesting future work? For example, it
    seems like dynamic techniques haven’t been tried on clone detection,
    authorship analysis, or plagiarism detection! Could there be a thesis topic
    lurking in there? And might there be some benefit to basing a plagiarism
    detector on sampling AST subtrees?
