          11. Hardware for Protecting Software

The focus of this book is on software-based techniques for software
protection. The advantage of software-only approaches is exactly that—
they require no special hardware to run. This means that your protected
program should run everywhere, regardless of the capabilities your
customer’s hardware happens to have. The disadvantage is that the code is
always available to the attacker to examine and modify. You can make it
more difficult for him to do so, using the obfuscation and tamperproofing
techniques from previous chapters, but the code is there ready to be
attacked, and with the current state of the art, given an adversary with
enough tenacity, defenses will eventually be breached.

There have been many attempts at enhancing software protection by adding
some sort of hardware support. The basic idea is to add a physical module
that you assume will resist observation, tampering, and copying by a
malicious user. The module contains a secret—such as a serial number, a
piece of code, or a cryptographic key—and the security of the program rests
on keeping this secret. We call the secret and the hardware it’s wrapped in
the root of trust, and the fact that you’re allowed to trust that it won’t be
subverted is what sets hardware approaches apart from software-only
approaches.

Another way of looking at the difference between software-based and
hardware-based systems is that hardware-based protection often has an
easily identifiable point of failure: There’s a single strongly guarded root of
trust that, if subverted, will compromise your system, and everyone knows
what that is. For example, in a TPM-based system (Section 11.2 670), the
root of trust is a secret key stored inside an integrated circuit. Everyone
knows that the key is there and that shaving off the top of the packaging
would likely reveal it. Software-based protection systems, on the other
hand, tend to rely on several layers of weaker protection, all of which have
to be penetrated to get at a secret, and it’s much less clear where exactly the
secret is, and how to get to it. This isn’t exactly security-by-obscurity, or at
least doesn’t have to be. A company might well publish which obfuscation
and tamperproofing transformations it’s using, but not the subset they’ve
applied to a particular program, the order in which they’ve applied them, or
where in the code they’ve applied them. This is equivalent to revealing
which crypto-system you use but keeping the key secret.

There’s of course no reason why software- and hardware-based techniques
can’t co-exist, and in practice they often do. You might, for example,
obfuscate and tamperproof your program before encrypting it for execution
on a secure processor. If an adversary is able to somehow extract the secret
key and decrypt the program, he still has to get past the software-based
protection to get at the real secret. Similarly, you could fingerprint your
program before writing it to a CD and protecting the CD from copying. If
the disk copy protection fails and the program escapes into the wild, you
might still be able to use the fingerprint to trace it back to the original
customer.

In this chapter, we’ll start by talking about disk and dongle protection
(Section 11.1 657) against software and media piracy. By disk protection
we mean distributing a program on a physical medium such as a CD or a
floppy disk, and applying techniques that make copying the disk difficult.
This idea has been applied both to software distributions (especially games)
and media (audio CDs and video DVDs). Dongles are also used to protect a
program from piracy. A dongle is a hardware token that you distribute along
with your program that the customer attaches to an I/O port of their
computer. The program occasionally calls a function on the dongle, and if it
receives the wrong response, refuses to run. The premise is that it is much
harder to clone the dongle than it is to make a copy of the program, so
anyone in possession of the dongle is likely a legal purchaser of the
program. Here, the root of trust is the function hidden inside the dongle. An
adversary who can extract this function can completely bypass the
protection by emulating the dongle in software.

In Section 11.2 670, we will show how a trusted platform module (TPM)
can be used to boot a trusted environment in which your program can run
without fear of being pirated, observed, or tampered with. A TPM is a small
chip attached to the motherboard of a PC. Everyone who wants to
communicate safely with that PC must trust the TPM not to be
compromised. The TPM (or, more specifically, a secret key stored in it) and
the BIOS stored in ROM on the motherboard together form the root of trust
in this case. During the boot sequence, the TPM and the BIOS collaborate
to measure the various software and firmware that together make up the PC.
To measure, in this case, simply means to compute a cryptographically
secure hash of a piece of code. To make sure that you’re talking to a
trustworthy computer (one that promises not to steal the secrets in your
software or leak encrypted media content), you ask it to give you a list of all
the software running on it, along with their hashes. This includes hashes of
the bootloader, the OS kernel, any kernel modules, start-up scripts, and so
on, and any piece of code on that computer that could possibly violate your
trust in it. If those hashes correspond to well-known trusted software, you
can allow the computer to run your software without fear of it being
compromised. The IBM/Lenovo ThinkPad laptops have been shipping with
a TPM chip for several years now, although there are no fully deployed
systems that allow you to use them to measure trustworthiness.

In Section 11.3 683, the root of trust is a processor that can execute
encrypted programs. More precisely, it’s the private half of a public key
key-pair stored inside it. To distribute a program to a customer, you first
encrypt it with his processor’s public key. That way, the program is
completely tied to his computer, no one else can execute it, and you’ve
solved the piracy problem. This assumes, of course, that the key remains
hidden, and that there are no side-channel attacks, i.e., clever ways to
extract the cleartext of the program through means the designers didn’t
think of. In Section 11.4 695, we’ll show you some attacks like that. They
include watching the bus between the CPU and memory, guessing and
injecting encrypted instructions and watching how the CPU reacts, and
causing faults in the CPU that will coax it to give up its secrets.

11.1 Anti-Piracy by Physical Distribution

In this section, we cover ways to protect software by means of physical
distribution. There are two basic ideas: Either you protect the medium (CD,
floppy disk, and so on) on which the software is distributed so that it’s
difficult to copy, or along with the software you also distribute a piece of
hardware (a token, a dongle) without which the program cannot run.

These copy protection schemes have a long history, filled with lots of easily
broken schemes! One of the problems is that users have expectations of
what they should be allowed to do with software or media that they legally
bought and own, and often the copy protection scheme gets in the way of
letting them do that. The frustration they experience from an overly
cumbersome copy protection scheme easily subverts any qualms they might
have about the ethics of breaking it. For example, users get upset if they
can’t easily make backup copies of software or media they bought and to
play/run it both on their laptop and their desktop computers. Similarly, they
can’t see why a DVD they legally bought on vacation in a foreign country
won’t play on their DVD player at home because of the region code
protection. Also, they get annoyed when a program demands that the
original distribution disk has to occupy the CD drive, or the dongle has to
take up a port on their computer, preventing other uses. Finally, many disk
protection schemes work by subverting format standards. This often means
that disks won’t play/run on all devices; you may find that the copy-
protected CD you just bought will play on your home stereo but not in your
car. There’s an important lesson here: If you’re going to use a copy
protection scheme at all, you must not make it so inconvenient to users that
they feel they have the right to break it.

11.1.1 Distribution Disk Protection

Back before online content distribution became ubiquitous, people actually
bought software, music, and movies on hard media such as tape, floppy
disks, CDs, and DVDs. Since it’s easy to make copies of such media, piracy
quickly became a problem. In response, music and software producers
devised methods to prevent legally purchased products from being copied
over to blank media. Many of these protection methods are based on one of
these four ideas [144]:
   1. Record using a format that doesn’t conform to the medium
      specification in the hopes that this will confuse the reading hardware
      and copying software;

   2. Insert errors in unimportant parts of the disk so that disk copying will
      fail;

   3. Have the disk reader test some aspect of the original disk that will not
      carry over to a copy;

   4. Encrypt the content.

11.1.1.1 Audio CD Protection

To illustrate, let’s start by looking at how copy-protected audio CDs work.
The principle is simple. You want a consumer to be able to play his legally
purchased CD in any “normal” audio CD player, including the player in his
car, his Walkman, and so on. You don’t want him to be able to play it on his
computer, however, since if a software player can read the music off the
disk to play it, the player can also store the music to a file, allowing the
consumer to later burn it onto a CD-R or upload it to a file-sharing site.

There are many standardized formats for writing data onto the silvery 12cm
optical disks we think of as CDs or DVDs [19,144,148]. Have a look at this
(highly simplified) picture:
The data and audio on the CD are written in sessions. In the picture above,
there are two sessions, in light gray and dark gray, respectively. Each
session is made up of tracks. On an audio CD, each track corresponds to
one song. Session 2 above has two tracks and hence two songs. Each track
is made up of 2,352 byte frames, consisting of 2,048 bytes of data and
various header and error correction information. Additionally, each session
starts with a lead-in that contains the table of contents (TOC) and ends with
a lead-out (not shown) that terminates the session. The sessions are linked
together so that the lead-in of session n points to the beginning of session n
– 1. Audio CDs typically only contain one session. If a CD player
encounters a multi-session CD, it will simply ignore any session after the
first one.

Audio CD protection methods work by abusing the CD standard. The trick
is staying close enough to it so that hardware audio CD players will still be
able to play the music but far away enough from it that computer CD drives
will reject the CD. For example, the TOC entries can mismark the audio
tracks as data or give the wrong track start times. Many audio CD players
ignore the track types in the TOC. Also popular is adding extra sessions
with missing or erroneous TOCs [148–150]. A widely publicized
countermeasure [304] is to cover the extra sessions by writing on the CD
surface with a felt-tip pen. This way computer CD drives will ignore the
extra sessions and go straight for session 1 that contains the audio tracks.
11.1.1.2 CD-ROM Protection

Software distributed on CDs uses a different standard, ISO9660 [175].
Many protection techniques that have been invented are still based on the
same idea: Abuse the standard so that disk-copying software or CD burners
will have problems with it [56, Chapter 4]. For example, ISO9660 restricts
the name of the disk to be made up of the characters [A-Z0-9_], and a simple
trick to trip up CD burners is to insert a blank in the name. Similarly, the
TOCs could report the wrong sizes of files, or the total amount of data
stored could appear to be larger than the physical media supports.

You can also insert frame errors on the disk in areas that don’t contain real
data. These areas won’t be read when a program is executed off the disk,
but disk-to-disk copiers will fail when trying to read them. For example,
you can change the error correcting code in a frame so that hardware won’t
be able to correct for the error and give up on copying the disk.

In contrast to audio CDs, software distributions consist of executable
content. This allows the program to check that the original CD is in the CD
drive, refusing to run if it’s not. This presupposes that it’s possible to
produce original CDs with birthmarks, traits that are unique to original CDs
but that will not be reproduced by copying software and CD burners. The
CD-COPS [56,304] (http://www.linkdata.com) system measures and
verifies the angle between two sectors of the CD, something that will not be
maintained in a burned copy. The algorithm goes something like this:

  1. Add the following code to your program:

     int expected = prompt the user for the verification code written on the
     CD; verify that a CD is in the drive;
     Sector first = read the first sector on the CD;
     Sector last = read the last sector on the CD;
     int angle = compute the angle between first and last;
     if (angle != expected) abort();
   2. Produce the gold master for your CD and send it to the plant to be
      manufactured.

   3. Receive a shipment of CDs. They’ve all been produced from the same
      glass master and hence they’re all identical.

   4. Measure the angle between the first and the last sectors on one of the
      CDs and print it as the verification code on the cover of all CDs.

Each CD production run will produce different birthmarks and all are likely
to be different from those of burned copies. To defeat the protection, the
adversary needs to bypass the checks in the software.

11.1.1.3 Floppy Disk Protection

Preventing floppy discs from being copied was among the first software
protection techniques. This is now just of historical interest. Many
techniques were similar to the ones you saw above in that they abuse the
published disk format specification or introduce defective sectors that
would cause errors during reading. However, since floppies are writable,
this lends itself to some specific techniques. For example, you could use a
laser to burn off the magnetic layer at a very specific point on the floppy.
The program would then try to write a byte to that spot and then read it
back; if the same byte was read as was written, the floppy must be a copy
[124].

In early microcomputer systems, the floppy would contain a copy of the
operating system itself. In other words, the first thing the computer would
do when a floppy was inserted would be to boot from the first few sections
of the disk. Next, it would load and run the actual application. This would
allow the software producer to replace the disk read routine with one that
would use a nonstandard disk format (such as having different size sectors,
different number of sectors, different sector numbering, and so on), making
the disk unreadable with an unmodified OS [315].
11.1.1.4 DVD Movie Protection

No content protection scheme has caused as much controversy as the DVD
Content Scrambling System (CSS). The encryption scheme used was a
closely guarded secret only released to licensed player manufacturers. This
made it impossible to build software players for open-source operating
systems such as Linux. The system was eventually cracked [337], leading to
lawsuits [348] and heated debate as to whether source code is covered
under freedom of speech statutes [349].

The goal of the DVD decryption process is of course to unlock the
encrypted media stored on the disk. To do this, you first need to derive a
disk key Kd, which is the main secret needed to unlock the disk contents.
The only (legal) way to get the disk key is to have one of the player keys
licensed from the DVD Copy Control Association hidden within every DVD
player. Once you have the disk key, you can derive a title key Kt, which is
used to unlock a particular work on the disk. Finally, given Kt you can read
a sector i on the disk, and along with a sector key ski, decode the media.

Stevenson [337] gives a complete cryptanalysis of the entire content
scrambling system. Here, we’ll restrict ourselves to discuss the salient
aspects.

Each DVD movie disk contains a block of keys in a hidden area, and each
licensed player likewise contains a set of keys hidden inside a chip (if it’s a
hardware player) or inside an obfuscated region of memory (if it’s a
software player):
The player contains:

    • A small set of secret player keys pk = {pki, pkj,...} that were assigned
      to it as part of the DVD CSS licensing process;

    • A region code region used to restrict which region DVDs the player
      is allowed to play; and

    • Three decryption functions        ,     , and       .
    The DVD disk’s hidden key-block consists of:
    • 409 keys dk1, dk2, ..., dk409, which are the result of encrypting the
      disk key Kd with each of the 409 possible player keys:

        is the encryption function corresponding to the           decryption
    function;
     • A title key tk (there’s actually one title key per work on the disk, but
       we show only one here);

     • A region code rc that must match the player’s region; and

     • A value hash that is the disk key Kd encrypted with itself as key:

     • One sector key sk1, sk2, ... per sector.

Suppose that the player has been assigned the 2nd key, pk2. Then to play a
particular DVD, it starts by deriving a disk key Kd by decrypting dk2 using
pk2 as the key:

The player next checks that Kd is actually a valid key using the hash value
stored on the disk:

If the test fails and there is more than one player key, you can continue and
try the next one.

Given the disk key Kd and the title key tk of the work on the disk you want
to watch, the player can derive a title key Kt:
Finally, the player decrypts the data using the Kt key and the sector key ski
stored with each sector sectori:

The encrypted player keys stored on a DVD (the dki:s) serve as a white list
of trusted players. If, at some point, a player becomes compromised, future
DVD releases can omit that player’s key. As a result, that player will not be
able to play any future content.

It’s clear that the security of the entire system relies on the player keys
remaining secret. The way that CSS was first cracked was, in fact, by
reverse engineering a badly protected software player, Xing [348], and
extracting its player keys.

As it turns out, due to cryptographic design flaws, there are other ways to
attack CSS. First, the key-size is too small, 40 bits, due to export
restrictions at the time. Second, only 25 of those bits are put to good use,
making brute-force attacks trivial [337]. In fact, all player keys have since
been recovered (http://www.free-dvd.org.lu/random-numbers.txt). David
Touretzky, in a feline metaphor we totally approve of, states in a declaration
to the Superior Court of California [348]:

     At this point, there is nothing secret about DVD encryption. The cat
     has been long out of the bag. In fact, she’s produced several litters of
     kittens.

     Problem 11.1

     We’ve left out several parts of the CSS system, for example, how the
     decryption functions work (they use linear feedback shift registers)
     and how a DVD drive and player authenticate each other. Although
     there are many public domain implementations available, none of them
      is particularly informative. Implement an algorithm animation of the
      entire process suitable for use in an educational setting.

11.1.1.5 High-Definition Movie Protection

Blu-ray discs use an upgradable form of copy protection. The idea is to
include in disk players a virtual machine that runs a program read from the
Blu-ray disc. This program, rather than a program hardwired into the player,
is responsible for implementing the rights protection. The program can ask
the player what software and firmware versions it’s running, what output
devices are connected to it, and so on, and then decide what rights the user
has to consume the media [203]. For example, a particular disc might
contain a program that will let a user play the content if a compliant TV is
connected to the player, but not if a media recorder is. Similarly, it can
refuse to play the content on any known compromised players. There is
always the possibility that the protection will be cracked and the content
released in the wild, but since the security code resides on the disc itself, the
idea is that it can be upgraded when the next title is released. Some security
will always reside in the player, however. For example, it may be
impossible to upgrade the security policies contained on the media disks to
make up for a vulnerability in the virtual machine.

11.1.2 Dongles and Tokens

Dongles are hardware devices distributed with a program to prevent piracy.
The idea is that while a program is only a bag of bits and hence easy to
copy, copying a physical device is much harder and costlier. In order for the
program to run, the dongle must be connected to the user’s computer, and
this allows the program to periodically query it to make sure that it’s present
and genuine.

Dongles have a long history [285]. The first devices were passive, nothing
more than RS232 connectors with certain pins connected to each other, and
filled with epoxy to hide the internals and protect them from tampering. The
program would send an output signal on one pin and check that the same
signal would appear at another pin. As adversaries became more adept at
bypassing these simple schemes, the devices became more complex. Today,
dongles are active devices with built-in processors, powered by the port to
which they were connected, and sometimes backed up by a battery:

The program continually sends challenges to the dongle and stops running
(or punishes the user in other ways, as we discussed in Section 7.3 440) if
it doesn’t receive the expected response.

11.1.2.1 A Typical Dongle API

Listing 11.1 666 shows a typical API for a dongle, based loosely on
Aladdin’s HASP technology [8,185]. The dongle has a small amount of
internal memory that the application can access, a battery-backed internal
real-time clock, an identifier unique to every dongle, a counter, a password,
a pseudo-random number generator, and an encryption engine with a
hardcoded key. The system time and the counter are used to set a bound on
the number of times, or the length of time, the user can run the application.
They are both initialized by the manufacturer. Every time the dongle is
accessed the counter is decremented and when it reaches zero the dongle
ceases to function. The API consists of a single function whose first
argument determines the operation.

When the user starts up a protected program, the program connects with the
dongle and passes it the pseudo-random number seed:
    public class Main {
    static String password = "heyahaya";
    static final long timeout = 1281964454908L;
    static final long seed = 260124545;
    static java.util.Random rnd;

Listing 11.1. An API for a typical dongle.

class Dongle {
private static long count = 3;
private static long memory[]=new long[127];
private static String password = "heyahaya";
private static final long ID = 2376423;
private static final long KEY = 0xab0ab012;
private static java.util.Random rnd;

public static final byte LOGIN = 0;
public static final byte ISPRESENT = 1;
public static final byte ENCODE = 2;
public static final byte DECODE = 3;
public static final byte READ = 4;
public static final byte WRITE = 5;
public static final byte GETID = 6;
public static final byte GETTIME = 7;

public static final long PRESENT = 0xca75ca75;

static long call(byte operation, String pw, long
arg1, long arg2) {
if (!pw.equals(password) || (count<0)) return -1;
switch (operation) {
case      LOGIN       :      count--;       rnd=new
java.util.Random(arg1); return 0;
case ISPRESENT : return PRESENT;
case ENCODE : return arg1^KEY;
case DECODE : return arg1^KEY;
case READ : return memory[(int)arg1];
case WRITE : memory[(int)arg1]=arg2; return 0;
case GETID : return ID;
case GETTIME : return System.currentTimeMillis();
default : return -1;
}
}
}

    public static void main (String args[]) {
    Dongle.call(Dongle.LOGIN,password,seed,0);
    rnd = new java.util.Random(seed);
    if
    (Dongle.call(Dongle.GETTIME,password,0,0)>timeo
    ut)
    System.exit(-1);
    ...
    }
    }

Both the dongle and the program have the same random number generator.
They may be implemented differently (in the dongle perhaps as a linear
feedback shift register [133], in the program as a software function), but
given the same seed, they compute the same sequence of numbers. If the
program is distributed as a trial version, the program can also query the
dongle’s internal real-time clock to see if the trial period has expired.

The ISPRESENT call of the API is the most fundamental—it simply lets the
program check that the dongle is plugged in. To exhaust the resources of the
attacker, you must add a large number of calls to the program, possibly in
the thousands:
Ideally, you should obfuscate the challenge calls such that automatic
removal becomes difficult. Just as you saw in Chapter 7 (Software
Tamperproofing), it’s essential to separate the code that detects tampering
(in this case, the call in light gray that checks if the dongle is present) from
the code (dark gray) that checks the result, and from the code (dashed) that
takes action if tampering is detected.

You can also use the NEXT API call to get the next pseudo-random number
from the dongle and compare it to the next one generated from the
program’s own generator:

     if
     (rnd.nextLong()!=Dongle.call(Dongle.NEXT,passwo
     rd,0,0))
     System.exit(-1);

It’s important to tie the dongle and the program as tightly together as
possible. You can do this using the small amount of memory contained on
the dongle, which you access using the READ and WRITE calls. For example,
you can jump to a particular piece of code, depending on the value stored in
the dongle memory, or even store a (small but essential) piece of code
directly in the memory, decoding and jumping to it when needed. In either
case, if the dongle isn’t present, the program will cease to function:
In this example, the light gray code stores the value 100 at address 23 in the
dongle memory. The dark gray code reads that memory address, and if it
still holds the value 100, will next jump to the correct (dashed) code. If the
dongle is no longer plugged in or has been tampered with, the program will
instead jump to tamper-responding code.

The ENCODE and DECODE functions encrypt and decrypt a value using an
internally stored key. You can encrypt an important piece of data and
decrypt it only when needed.

     static          long          secret           =
     Dongle.call(Dongle.ENCODE,password,77,0);
     ...
     secret                                         =
     Dongle.call(Dongle.DECODE,password,secret,0);
     secret                                         =
     Dongle.call(Dongle.ENCODE,password,secret+1,0);
     ...

It used to be popular for dongles to contain proprietary encryption
algorithms, but now standard ones, such as AES, are often used.

The GETID function returns an identifier unique to every dongle. It, too, can
be used to encode data:

     static      long     secret      =      99                             ^
     Dongle.call(Dongle.GETID,password,0,0);
     ...
      secret                                                             ^=
      Dongle.call(Dongle.GETID,password,0,0);
      secret++;
      secret                                                             ^=
      Dongle.call(Dongle.GETID,password,0,0);
      ...

To further confuse the attacker, you can sprinkle bogus calls to the dongle
all over your code:

      Dongle.call((byte)42,password,secret1,secret2);

Unfortunately, since the interface is well defined and likely well known to
the attacker, it’s probably not too difficult to mechanically remove such
calls.

There is nothing stopping you from combining the tamperproofing
techniques you read about in Chapter 7 with a hardware dongle. For
example, you could hash the code and store the expected hash values in the
dongle’s memory.

11.1.2.2 Attacking Dongles

There are many problems with dongles. Since they are physical devices—
these days, often implemented as a USB token or a smartcard—they
contribute to the cost of distribution. If they contain a battery, it will
eventually have to be replaced. If they are lost, the owner will have to
request a new copy and, while waiting for one to arrive in the mail, won’t
be able to use a legally purchased program. For these reasons, dongles
today are used only to protect very expensive programs.

On top of these logistic issues associated with protecting your program with
a dongle, they also appear easy to attack [99]. A major reason is that it’s
difficult to obfuscate the interface to the dongle. As an application
programmer, you need to have a well-defined API to work against, or else it
will be onerous to add protection to your program. But if the interface is
well documented for you as a defender, we have to assume it’s well
documented for the adversary as well! There are three basic methods of
attack [99,286] against a dongle-protected program:

  1. Reverse engineer the dongle itself, either duplicating it or disabling it
     by modifying the hardware.

  2. Remove or disable the API calls in the application program.

  3. Modify the dongle driver to call a software emulator that behaves just
     like the dongle rather than calling the dongle itself.

Direct attacks on the hardware are never done. The most popular attack
instead targets the layer between the application program and the dongle
itself. If the adversary can manage to build a software emulator of a
particular dongle, then attacking any protected program becomes trivial:
Just link in the emulator! The Web is full of freeware emulators [99] for
various dongles, and there are companies that promise to make emulators
on demand (http://www.nodongle.com):

              We can make Emulators for any protection type, Hasp4,
              HaspHL, Sentinel Super Pro, Aladdin Hardlock, ..., any
              protection.
              Our emulators are 100% perfect, 100% guaranteed. 100%
              private,...
              Dongle Emulator is a software to allow your program to run
              without any key attached
              We dont have fixed prices, our prices depends [sic] on
              protection, not program price dependent, this will be very
              cheap if compared with program price...
              Send a email with some infos about your program, like name
              and protection, so we can give you a personalized answer.
The same kind of attacks that are used to disable protection in a
tamperproofed program can be used to remove calls to the dongle API. If
the response code (such as putting up a box saying “please insert the key”)
is in close proximity to the code that checks if the key is indeed present,
then simple debugging techniques can be used to locate and bypass the
check. Since the API is well known, it’s also easy to search through the
code, even at the binary level, for telltale call signatures. For this reason, it’s
often suggested that application programmers should refrain from using the
standard library calls provided by the dongle manufacturer and instead
interact with the dongle directly. That is, there’s a need to obfuscate and
tamperproof the application’s interaction with the dongle.

11.2 Authenticated Boot Using a Trusted Platform Module

This book, of course, is all about how a program protects itself in the
untrusted host scenario. In other words, we’re looking at situations where a
program executes in an environment you don’t trust, an environment that
can potentially examine (reverse engineer), modify (tamper), and copy
(pirate) your program. The techniques we’ve shown you have been entirely
software-based, relying on obfuscation (to make a program harder to
examine), tamperproofing (to make modification harder), and watermarking
(to trace copying). What if, instead, you could trust the execution
environment? What if you could convince yourself that a remote host runs
hardware, operating system, and applications that are all benign and won’t
violate your intellectual property rights? This is the purpose of
authenticated (or trusted) boot: Before you agree to communicate with a
system (to allow it to buy a program from you, for example), you ask it to
prove that it won’t do anything bad. This scenario is the same as in Section
7.5.4 459, where the TPSLSPDK algorithm measured the trustworthiness of
remote hardware. That protocol, however, is software-only; now we’re
going to throw trusted hardware into the mix.

Specifically, in this section, we’re going to show you a system that makes
use       of        a       trusted      platform      module        (TPM)
[30,47,47,123,143,243,339,340,372]. Some PCs (such as IBM laptops)
already have a TPM soldered onto the motherboard, and there are research
systems built on top of them to provide trust. However, at present, we’re
aware of no actual deployed systems. The AEGIS [21,22] system from a
group at the University of Pennsylvania seems to be the first published
account of a trusted boot architecture. In this section, we’re going to
roughly follow the implementation put forth by a group at IBM [312,313].

So how does a system convince you that it’s benign? Well, it uses a
combination of social trust (“You should trust P because everyone else
does”), hardware trust (“You should trust that the secrets stored in P are
safe because we’ve wrapped them in plastic”), and transitive trust (“If you
trust P and P trusts R, you really should trust R”). Let’s start by looking at
hardware and transitive trust, and leave social trust for later.

11.2.1 Trusted Boot

Let’s consider a scenario where you want your program to run on Bob’s
computer. Your program contains a secret, however, so you encrypt it, and
you tell Bob to boot a special operating system eOS that handles encrypted
executables. But you don’t want to hand over the program to eOS until Bob
has convinced you that nothing could possibly go wrong—that there’s no
way he’ll be able to extract the secret. So what could go wrong? Well, first,
Bob could tell you he booted into the version of eOS you gave him, when in
fact he first hacked it to leak the encryption keys. So you ask him to
compute a cryptographic hash over the kernel and send it to you. If the hash
matches that of the eOS you trust, you should be fine, assuming for a
moment that Bob can’t lie about the hash. Of course, the kernel was started
by a bootloader, and Bob could have hacked it to modify the eOS image
before loading it. So you ask Bob to send you a hash of the bootloader. Of
course, the bootloader was started by the BIOS, and it could have been
hacked! So Bob sends you a hash of it, but.... You see where this is going.

Anything that’s running on Bob’s computer could affect whether you should
trust it or not. We mentioned the OS, the BIOS, and the bootloader, but
other application programs, firmware [159] in connected devices, kernel
modules, OS configuration files, and scripts could also do damage. The idea
of a trusted boot is to measure every potentially hostile piece of code
running on a computer and compare it against a library of known good
measurements. When we say “measure” we really mean “compute a
cryptographic hash of” and a “known good measurement” is just a hash of a
program you trust. If Bob can convince you that his computer, from the
ground up, only runs code you trust, then you should have no problem
handing him (or selling him) a program to run.

Here’s how trusted boot works, in a turtle-shell [246]:

At the very bottom of the stack of turtles, are two things you need to trust
implicitly: the core root of trust for measurement (CRTM) and the
tamperproof module. The CRTM is a piece of code contained in the BIOS
that measures itself and the BIOS before letting the BIOS execute. You
have to trust the TPM, too, because this is where the measurements are
stored.1 The BIOS measures the bootloader, stores away the measurement
(remember, this is nothing more complicated than a hash, such as a SHA-1,
of the code), and then lets the bootloader execute. The bootloader measures
the OS kernel, saves the result, and loads the OS. The OS needs to measure
any kernel modules, configuration files, and so on, that it relies on, and
store them in the TPM before it can let any applications run.
Notice how the turtles at the bottom are smaller than those on top. This is
not accidental (although awfully cute)—we drew them this way to indicate
two things. First, the size of the turtle is proportional to the size of the code:
The CRTM is a part of the BIOS boot block and might need to fit in 512
bytes or so. The programs get bigger as we go up the stack. The TPM is
also “small”: It’s not part of the CPU (at least not yet) but typically soldered
onto the motherboard, and it’s supposed to be cheap so that manufacturers
won’t hesitate to include it on their platforms. Second, the whole stack will
easily topple over if either the CRTM or the TPM is compromised. The
CRTM contains measurement code that can’t be modified, and the TPM
contains cryptographic keys (and a summary of the measurements
themselves!) that must not be allowed to leak. So the CRTM contains the
most critical code of the system and is also the smallest piece of code. It
seems reasonable to believe that small programs that contain secrets are
easier to attack than larger ones. Also, the TPM is supposed to be cheap but
needs to be heavily tamperproofed in order not to leak any secrets. You
already see we have some problems here, but more about that later.

There’s a big difference between the secure boot of an operating system and
an authenticated boot. During a secure booting process, you check that code
is unadulterated before loading and activating it. This ensures that you only
ever boot a system consisting of code that you trust. With an authenticated
boot, there are no such guarantees. Bob can run whatever malicious code he
wants on his system; the only thing he cannot do is lie about it! When you
ask him, he will provide a list of software and hardware that comprise his
system—it’s then up to you to decide whether you trust such a system
enough to want to continue communicating with it. It’s the job of the TPM
and the CRTM (and, as you’ll see shortly, a trusted third party) to convince
you that, indeed, you can assume that the measurements are real. But it’s up
to you to decide whether you think that the corresponding software is
benign or not.

     Problem 11.2
     Redraw the figure above as a stack of kittens.

11.2.2 Taking Measurements

To make the authentication protocols concrete, we’re going to model a
computer system as a Java program. Have a look at the code in Listing 11.2
 675, which shows the measurement process in more detail. Each
component of the computer system is represented as a static Java class. The
computer is made up of a BIOS,a BootLoader, an OSKernel, and the TPM. When the
user presses the power button, the Computer.POST() (power on and self test)
function gets called, which immediately loads and runs the BIOS. The BIOS, in
turn, initializes the TPM by calling its POST() function and then invokes the CRTM
(contained inside the BIOS itself). The only thing the CRTM does is compute a
SHA-1 hash over the BIOS. The BIOS next runs the BootLoader, but not before
having computed a hash over its code. The BootLoader, in turn, measures and
calls the OSKernel, which measures and calls, in our simple model, one
particular Application.

We’re deliberately ignoring important parts of a real system, such as option
ROMs on the motherboard and firmware in connected devices, but these
would be treated no differently than other software. Any code that can
compromise the trustworthiness of the system needs to be measured, and
you need to measure it before it starts running and has a chance to corrupt
the system.

Listing 11.2. Java model of a computer with a TPM chip.

     class Computer {
     public static void POST() {BIOS.run();}
     static class BIOS {
     static byte[] code = {...};
     public static byte[] savedBIOSHash;
public static byte[] savedBootLoaderHash;
public static byte[] savedOSKernelHash;
static class CRTM {
public static void run() {
BIOS.savedBIOSHash = TPM.SHA1(BIOS.code);
TPM.extend(0,BIOS.savedBIOSHash);
}
}
public static void run() {
TPM.POST();
BIOS.CRTM.run();
savedBootLoaderHash                         =
TPM.SHA1(BootLoader.code);
TPM.extend(1,savedBootLoaderHash);
BootLoader.run();
}
}
static class BootLoader {
public static byte[] code = {...};
public static void run() {
BIOS.savedOSKernelHash                      =
TPM.SHA1(OSKernel.code);
TPM.extend(2,BIOS.savedOSKernelHash);
OSKernel.run();
}
}
static class OSKernel {
public static byte[] code = {...};
public static LinkedList[] SML;
public static void run() {
SML = new LinkedList[TPM.NumberOfPCRs];
for (int i=0; i<TPM.NumberOfPCRs; i++)
SML[i] = new LinkedList();
SML[0].addLast(BIOS.savedBIOSHash);
SML[1].addLast(BIOS.savedBootLoaderHash);
SML[2].addLast(BIOS.savedOSKernelHash);
     TPM.extend(10,TPM.SHA1(Application.code));
     SML[10].addLast(TPM.SHA1(Application.code));
     TPM.extend(10,TPM.SHA1(Application.input));
     SML[10].addLast(TPM.SHA1(Application.input));
     Application.run();
     }
     }

     static class Application {
     public static byte[] code = {...};
     public static byte[] input = {...};
     public static void run() {}
     }
     static class TPM { ... }
     }

Notice how each measurement is stored in two places: on the TPM (using
the TPM.extend() call) and in the kernel in an array of lists, stored
measurement list (SML). When you challenge the computer to prove that it’s
benign, it will return this list so that you can check that all the
measurements correspond to programs you trust.

The reason that the SML is stored in the kernel and not on the TPM itself is that
it could potentially get very large; there might be several hundred pieces of
code that need to get measured, and their hashes couldn’t all fit on the TPM.
However, just storing the hashes in the kernel isn’t enough, since the kernel
could be malicious and lie about them! The TPM therefore stores a
“summary” of the hashes—a “digest of the digests”—in on-chip registers.
There are 24 of these platform configuration registers (PCR), and they’re 20
bytes long, the size of a SHA-1 hash. To save a measurement into the TPM,
you call its extend() function:

     static class TPM {
     ...
     public static final int NumberOfPCRs = 24;
     private static byte[][] PCR;
     ...
     public static void extend (int i, byte[] add) {
     ubyte[]   res   =   new   byte[PCR[i].length   +
     add.length];
     System.arraycopy(PCR[i],      0,     res,     0,
     PCR[i].length);
     System.arraycopy(add, 0, res, PCR[i].length,
     add.length);
     return SHA1(res);
     }
     }

The extend(i,add) function doesn’t just assign a new value to a PCR[i], but
rather extends it by computing PCR[i] = SHA1(PCR[i] || b). This way, each PCR[i]
register becomes a combination of all hashes ever assigned to it.
Furthermore, the construction preserves the order in which the
measurements were added.

11.2.3 The TPM

Let’s turn our attention to the TPM itself, since it’s clearly at the heart of the
system. For right now, you can think of it as having the following data and
functions:

     static class TPM {
     private static KeyPair EK;
     private static byte[][] PCR;
     private static byte[] ownerSecret;

     public static void extend (int i, byte[] b)
     public static Object[] quote(byte[] nonce)

     public static byte[] SHA1 (byte[] b)
     public   static  byte[]   signRSA(Object   data,
     PrivateKey key)
     public static KeyPair generateRSAKeyPair()
     public static byte[] RND(int size)

     public static void atManufacture()
     public    static    void    takeOwnership(byte[]
     password)
     public static void POST()
     }

A TPM goes through three important life events, which we represent by the
three functions atManufacture(), takeOwnership(), and POST(). At manufacturing
time, the TPM gets a unique identity, an RSA key pair called the endorsement
key (EK). Once the TPM has been given an EK, no one can ever give it another
one. When the owner takes possession of the computer, he invokes the
takeOwnership function to initialize the TPM with a secret password. This
prevents others from issuing sensitive commands to it. Finally, at start-up
time, the POST function clears internal data to get ready for a new round of
measurements. In particular, it zeros out the PCR registers. Here are the three
life-event routines:

     public static void atManufacture() {
     EK = generateRSAKeyPair();
     }
     public    static    void    takeOwnership(byte[]
     password) {
     ownerSecret = password;
     }
     public static void POST() {
    PCR = new byte[NumberOfPCRs][];
    for(int i=0; i<NumberOfPCRs; i++) PCR[i] = new
    byte[20];
    }

The TPM isn’t built for bulk encryption but contains functionality for
generating RSA keys, signing and encrypting with RSA, a (true) random-
number generator, and a SHA-1 cryptographic hash function.

Some of the information in the TPM is volatile and some is stored in non-
volatile memory. The EK, for example, will survive a power-off, but the PCRs
will be reset.

11.2.4 The Challenge

OK, Axel’s computer has successfully booted, and as a result, its TPM and
the OS kernel are full of measurements—now what? Have a look at Listing
11.3 678, which shows the Challenger, the code that you will run to query
Axel’s computer to determine if it’s trustworthy enough for you to talk to
him.

Here’s an overview of the challenge protocol:
Listing 11.3. Challenging a remote system.

    class Challenger {
    static byte[] BIOSHash = SHA1(BIOSCode);
    static       byte[]       bootLoaderHash       =
    SHA1(bootLoaderCode);
    static        byte[]       OSKernelHash        =
    SHA1(OSKernelCode);
    static       byte[]      ApplicationHash       =
    SHA1(ApplicationCode);
    static     byte[]     ApplicationInputHash     =
    SHA1(ApplicationInput);
    static   byte[][]    whiteList   =    {BIOSHash,
    bootLoaderHash, ...};

    static boolean untamperedSML(LinkedList[] SML,
    byte[][] PCR) {
    for (int i=0; i<PCR.length; i++) {
    byte[] res = new byte[20];
    ListIterator iter = SML[i].listIterator();
    while (iter.hasNext()) {
    byte[] b = (byte[]) iter.next();
res = extend(i, res, b);

}
if        (!java.util.Arrays.equals(PCR[i],res))
return false;
}
return true;
}
static boolean onWhitelist(byte[] b) {
for(int i=0; i<whiteList.length; i++)
if     (java.util.Arrays.equals(whiteList[i],b))
return true;
return false;
}
static boolean trustedCode(LinkedList[] SML) {
for (int i=0; i<SML.length; i++) {
ListIterator iter = SML[i].listIterator();
while (iter.hasNext()) {
byte[] b = (byte[]) iter.next();
if (!onWhitelist(b)) return false;
}
}
return true;
}
public static boolean challenge() {
byte[] nonce = RND(20);
Object[] response = Computer.report(nonce);
byte[] nonce2 = ... // Unpack the response
byte[][] PCR = ...
byte[] sig = ...
LinkedList[] SML = ...
boolean                    OK                  =
java.util.Arrays.equals(nonce,nonce2);
OK     &=     verifyRSAsignature(new    Object[]
{nonce,PCR},
AIK.getEKPublicKey(), sig);
     OK &= untamperedSML(SML,PCR);
     OK &= trustedCode(SML);
     return OK;
     }
     }

To avoid a replay attack, start by creating a random value, a nonce, and
send it in a challenge to Axel’s computer. These are steps 1 and 2. His
computer asks the TPM for a quote, i.e., the values of the PCRs, signed with a
new key called the attestation identity key (AIK):

     public static Object[] quote(byte[] nonce){
     AIK = generateRSAKeyPair();
     Object[] data = {nonce,PCR};
     byte[] sig = signRSA(data, AIK.getPrivate());
     return new Object[]{nonce,PCR,sig};
     }

It then collects the stored measurement list SML from the kernel, packages it
all up, and returns the package to you. These are steps 3 and 4. In step 5,
you look up a certificate corresponding to the TPM’s public key EKpub and
verify that the TPM belongs to a trusted computer. This could involve asking
the certification authority that issued the certificate if it’s on the revocation
list, i.e., the list of known compromised TPMs. In step 6, you validate the
signature on the package you received from Axel’s computer. Since only the
TPM knows the private key AIKpriv that the package was signed with—not

even Axel knows it—only the TPM could have signed the package.

Then you have to check that the SML hasn’t been tampered with. This is done
by the untamperedSML() function in Listing 11.3 678. It walks through the
stored measurement lists, and just like the TPM did during the boot sequence,
merges the values together by simulating the TPM’s extend() function. If the
aggregate measurements match those of the PCRs, you can be sure that the
stored measurement list wasn’t tampered with.
The final step is to check if the measurements actually correspond to code
you trust. This is done using the trustedCode() function in Listing 11.3 678.
You can either check the measurements in the SML against a whitelist of code
you trust or against a blacklist of code you don’t. In either case, you (or
some authority you trust) must keep a list of all trustworthy software, and as
soon as a vulnerability is found, update this list.

11.2.5 Social Trust and Privacy Issues

In the challenge protocol, the remote computer’s TPM manufactures a special
RSA keypair, the attestation identity key (AIK), before engaging in the
challenge protocol. For privacy reasons you don’t want anyone to be able
link multiple transactions together. Therefore, no one must be able to find
out that the AIK and the EK actually represent the same computer—no one,
that is, except a a trusted third party called the Privacy Certification
Authority, PrivacyCA. The PrivacyCA knows all the public keys EKpub of all
manufactured TPMs. The computer and the PrivacyCA engage in a protocol to
manufacture an identity credential that the computer can use to prove that
it’s a compliant tamperproof platform without revealing exactly who it is.

  Figure 11.1. Protocol to manufacture an identity credential.
Have a look at the protocol in Figure 11.1. The computer holds three
credentials, the endorsement credential, the platform credential, and the
conformance credential. The endorsement credential states that the TPM is
genuine and that the EKpub is the public part of the endorsement keypair
that was squirted into it during manufacture. The endorsement credential is
signed by the TPM manufacturer. The platform credential states that the TPM
and the motherboard it’s been soldered onto make up a trusted system. The
manufacturer of the platform signs the credential. Finally, the conformance
credential is signed by a testing lab and certifies that the platform has been
tested by a third party and conforms to certain security properties.

To obtain an identity credential, the computer first asks the TPM to
manufacture a new AIK key-pair. It then bundles up AIKpub together with all
the credentials and sends them off to the PrivacyCA. The PrivacyCA looks at the
credentials and convinces itself that they belong to a genuine tamperproof
platform. If so, it issues the identity credential and returns it to the
computer. The protocol is highly technical and we omit the details [31]
here.

The endorsement, platform, and conformance credentials are published in
the form of digital certificates signed by companies willing to put their
good name behind a guarantee that a particular computer can be trusted.
This is a form of social trust—you don’t trust the particular piece of
hardware, per se, you trust that the companies that manufactured and tested
it are trustworthy. In other words, you assume that they took great care in
ensuring that no security flaws were allowed to creep in during the
manufacturing process because, if they didn’t, their brand name could be
irreparably damaged.

Having to rely on a trusted third party such as the PrivacyCA is certainly
limiting. First, the PrivacyCA will be involved in every transaction and hence
needs to be highly available. Second, if its security is ever compromised
and its transaction records made public, the identity of every TPM will be
revealed. To avoid potential privacy breaches and the PrivacyCA becoming a
performance bottleneck, a second verification protocol, direct anonymous
attestation (DAA) [48,53], has been developed. This protocol avoids a trusted
third party altogether.

     Problem 11.3

     Extend our Java model (you can get the code from our Web site) to
     implement the complete make-identity protocol. Add a simple
     algorithm animation to illustrate the protocol.

11.2.6 Applications and Controversies
Much has been written about the TPM chip and its potential applications,
good and bad [15,310]. Some of the controversy stems from the distaste
many have for digital rights management (and the chilling effect it might
have on fair use of copyrighted material), some stems from privacy issues,
and some simply arises because of technical doubts that authenticated boot
has any hope of succeeding in the real world.

From a technical perspective, authenticated boot would seem to present an
administrative nightmare. One problem is that you, as a challenger, must
have a policy in place to decide what to do when you encounter an
unknown hash value. It could be the result of a new version of a program
you know, an entirely new program you’ve never heard of, or a known
program whose security has been compromised. If you encounter a single
unknown measurement value, do you completely distrust the remote system
and refuse to talk to it further? On the one hand, if you’re amazon.com and
your policy is to not accept a purchase from any system that hasn’t installed
all the latest security patches, you might quickly find yourself out of
business. On the other hand, if the remote computer has even a single
altered file, its security could have been completely compromised.

In IBM’s implementation of authenticated boot, their database of
measurements for Redhat Fedora contains about 25,000 measurements. A
typical SML contains 700 to 1,000 measurements. It would seem a herculean
task to manually determine which measurements to trust and which not to.
Instead, a typical strategy is to boot a “trusted system,” i.e., one where all
known security patches have been applied, and measure all modules,
configuration files, and scripts, and store their hashes in a whitelist.
Additionally, you can boot a system with known root-kits and trojans and
store the hashes of infected files in a blacklist. Given all the different
operating systems available, all of which come in myriad versions and
configurations, even with a semi-automated system to collect
measurements, keeping up-to-date white-and blacklists available would
seem close to impossible. Add to that having to measure the firmware of
every device that could potentially be plugged in, every application that
could possibly run, and having to determine which combinations could
possibly constitute a security threat, and it’s hard to imagine that TPM-based
security will ever become widespread.
Still, there has been much speculation about potential uses and abuses of
the technology. The most obvious application is to help digital rights
management media players to run untampered on PCs. Before you’re
allowed to buy and download a movie, the movie distributor would verify
that only approved software and hardware is installed on your computer. So
if you happen to have a copy of the SoftICE debugger (a mainstay in the
hacker arsenal of tools) on your hard disk, are running a slightly out-of-date
kernel, or your media player has been blacklisted, you’re out of luck.

If your OS happens to be localized to a part of the world where the movie
has yet to appear in theaters, the distributor may decide to refuse the
download. Since the OS can’t lie about any of the files on the hard disk,
including any configuration files (the TPM guarantees that), it can’t lie about
where in the world it’s running.

In other words, without having to use the tamperproofing techniques in
Chapter 7 (Software Tamperproofing), you can build a media player that
can’t be tampered with. That is, you’re guaranteed that the untampered
player executable will be loaded properly—the TPM makes no guarantees
as to what happens post load time. The player could, for example, contain a
vulnerability that makes it behave improperly, and then all bets are off.

Software and media can be protected from piracy in similar ways.
Microsoft would encrypt Office (or Disney would encrypt Finding Nemo)
with a special sealing key Seal. When Seal is created by the TPM, it will be
made to depend on the current values in the PCRs. That way, should you
reboot with slightly different systems software (maybe you’ve hacked the
OS to leak the decrypted Office binary), the PCRs will have changed, the Seal
will be different, and hence you’ll be unable to decrypt and run/view your
legally purchased copy—until, of course, you reboot with the old OS
version or are able to convince Microsoft/Disney that the new version
you’re running is actually benign and that they should issue you a new
copy. Seal also depends on the TPM itself. This means that your friend who
has a computer identical to yours (down to the last PCR value) will not be
able to watch the copy of Finding Nemo issued to you.
Of course, the trust could extend both ways. Maybe you won’t be willing to
upload your credit card information to microsoft.com to buy the latest
version of Office until you can verify that Microsoft’s servers are running
the latest versions of software you trust (Linux kernel 2.6.25-rc3, Apache
Tomcat version 6.0.16, and so on) and there are proper safeguards in place
not to leak your personal information. Somehow we doubt this scenario is
likely to materialize.

11.3 Encrypted Execution

The academic literature and the patent databases are teeming with proposals
for processors that execute encrypted programs. A patent [40] and paper
[39] by Robert Best seem to have been the first, followed by Markus
Kuhn’s TrustNo 1 processor [213], and more recently, Stanford’s XOM
project [45,228–230]. There are many others. The details differ among the
different designs, of course, but the underlying principles remain the same.
A typical design has these features:

  1. The CPU is trusted and can neither be tampered with nor examined.
     Everything else is open to attack: An adversary is free to examine and
     tamper with off-chip memory, bus traffic, the operating system,
     connected devices, and so on.

  2. Since RAM is too large to be manufactured on the same die as the
     CPU, data and code are stored encrypted off-chip. They’re fetched and
     decrypted by the CPU as needed and kept in cleartext for as long as
     they’re inside the CPU. Data is re-encrypted before being stored back
     to RAM.

  3. The CPU is augmented with algorithms for (fast) symmetric and
     (slow) asymmetric encryption.

  4. Each CPU contains the private part of a unique asymmetric key-pair.
The goal is to provide privacy (no one can examine the code and extract
any secrets it contains), integrity (no one can execute tampered code), and
copy protection (only code destined for a particular CPU is allowed to run).

To get an idea of how code encryption will provide all this, have a look at
this figure:

To buy a program P from the server, you start by handing it your public
RSA key Kpub. The private part Kpriv is stored safely inside your CPU—not
even you can get to it. The server generates a symmetric key Ksym (a DES
key, say), and encrypts P with it. We call Ksym the session key. It then
encrypts the session key with Kpub. The server now creates a new
executable file consisting of the encrypted code and a file header containing
the encrypted session key, i.e., [EKpub(Ksym)||EKsym(P)]. You download this
file and give it to the operating system to execute. The operating system
gives the CPU the encrypted session key, and the CPU decrypts it with its
private key. With the session key in the clear, the CPU can now read the
encrypted code, decrypt it, and execute it. The DES engine sits between
external RAM and the cache so that every piece of code or data that gets
read or written will first pass through it. In other words, external RAM is
always encrypted, internal data and code is always in the clear, and the
private key Kpriv and the decrypted symmetric key Ksym never leave the
CPU.

This design solves the privacy problem, since no code or data ever leaves
the CPU unencrypted. It also solves the copy-protection problem, since
each program is directly tied to the one CPU that’s allowed to execute it
through encryption with the CPU’s private key. It doesn’t yet solve the
integrity problem, since there’s nothing stopping an adversary from
modifying or moving encrypted code around, but we’ll get to that later. In
Section 11.3.3 690, you’ll also see that privacy is, in fact, not guaranteed
by this system, since memory bus traffic can leak revealing patterns of
computation.

11.3.1 The XOM Architecture

As a representative example of this type of processor design, let’s have a
look at Stanford’s XOM architecture. Although never implemented in
silicon, the design is complete enough to have been simulated in software,
and an operating system, XOMOS, was built to run on top of it.

In a multi-tasking operating system, several programs can execute at the
same time, and each one may have different security requirements. In fact,
since encrypted programs are slower than cleartext programs, a single
program may want to switch between running in unencrypted mode for
bread-and-butter code and encrypted mode for security-sensitive code. For
this reason, the CPU supports compartments, which are logical containers
that protect one process’ code and data from being observed or modified by
another process. Keep in mind that in the scenario we’re working in here,
the operating system is untrusted, which means that it must run in its own
compartment. Even a severely subverted operating system won’t be allowed
to examine or manipulate another protected process!

A CPU will only support a small number of compartments. Let’s assume 4,
numbered 0 ... 3. Compartment 0 (the null compartment) is special—that’s
the insecure compartment where code runs unencrypted. There’s a special
ACTIVE register that holds the number of the currently executing
compartment. Each compartment is associated with a session key, and a
session-key table maintains the mapping between compartment ID and the
corresponding session key.

Every cache line and every register is tagged with a compartment ID to
mark which compartment code and data it belongs to. For efficiency
reasons, code and data that’s on-chip is kept in cleartext, but the tags ensure
that only the owner of a datum can access it. Only on a cache flush do you
have to encrypt data and write it out to RAM.

To illustrate, let’s consider a very concrete situation where two programs A
and B are running:

There are two compartments, 1 and 2, for programs A and B, respectively.
Compartment 2 is the currently active one. The session-key table maps the
compartment IDs to their corresponding session keys, Asym and Bsym,
respectively. You can see from their tags that registers r1 and r2 belong to
compartment 2, register r3 to compartment 1. Register r0 is unprotected,
which means that compartments 1 and 2 could use r0 for insecure
communication. We’ve made the simplifying assumption here that a cache
line can hold only one word, either code or data. The cache line
corresponding to address 1 holds an instruction belonging to compartment
2, and address 3 holds a data value also belonging to 2. At address 2, there’s
an instruction that belongs to compartment 1.

All instructions and data values are in the clear on the CPU. You don’t have
to worry about outside forces, since we’re assuming that the CPU can’t be
probed or tampered with, and inside the CPU, the tags will ensure that no
information can be leaked between compartments. Specifically, the
operating system (which runs in its own compartment) can’t be manipulated
to reveal any secrets of an encrypted application.
Off-chip, code and data are stored encrypted with the appropriate session
key. Encryption is at the cache-line level, which means that compilers must
arrange it so that code and data belonging to different compartments aren’t
stored on the same cache line. Let’s continue with the example above:

What happens when the CPU tries to load data value D1 at address 3 into
register r0? Well, it first looks in the cache but finds the cache line empty, so
a cache miss is generated and Bsym(D1||CRC(D1)) is read from address 3.
The CPU looks up the key for the active compartment in the session-key
table, finds Bsym, and uses it to decrypt the cache line. Because of the
encryption, you can be pretty sure that the adversary hasn’t been able to
examine D1, but you can’t be sure that he hasn’t modified it. He could have,
for example, swapped it for another encrypted value from some other part
of the code. For this reason, every cache line is hashed, and the hash is
stored with the cache line. Now you can check that the hash matches, and if
so, load D1 into register r0 and set r0’s tag to 2. If it doesn’t match, you
know the data has been tampered with and you throw an exception. Since
the hash is stored encrypted, you can assume that the adversary can’t
modify it, and so there’s no need to use a cryptographically secure hash
function. A faster check, such as a cyclic redundancy check (CRC), will do.

11.3.1.1 ISA Modifications

XOM requires us to make some changes to the instruction set architecture.
First, you need secure load and store instructions:
    secure_load  reg, addr: On a cache miss, load the cache line at address
           addr and decrypt using the session key of the currently active
           process. If the hash doesn’t validate, throw an exception. Store the
           decrypted value in reg and tag reg with the tag of the active
           process.
    secure_store  reg, addr: If reg’s tag is different from the active tag, throw
           an exception. Otherwise, store reg’s contents to the cache line
           corresponding to addr and set its tag to the tag of the currently
           active process. On a cache flush, compute a hash of the cache line
           and its virtual memory address, encrypt the cache line and the
           hash with the session key, and write to memory.

The reason for including the virtual address in the hash is so that an
adversary can’t copy encrypted code from one region of memory into
another region.

You also need insecure load and store instructions, which function pretty
much like loads and stores on a normal machine, except that they work on
data in the null compartment:

    load   reg, addr: Load the value at address addr into register reg and set
           its tag to 0.
    store   reg, addr: If reg isn’t tagged with 0, throw an exception.
           Otherwise, write it to address addr.

It’s necessary to have some way of moving data between compartments.
For example, you need to be able to move data owned by the operating
system (that it has read from a device, say) into a user process. Two
instructions take care of changing ownership tags:

    move_to_null  reg: If reg’s tag is different from the active tag, throw an
           exception. Otherwise, set reg’s tag to 0.
    move_from_null   reg: If reg’s tag is isn’t 0, throw an exception. Otherwise,
           set reg’s tag to the tag of the currently active process.

Two processes executing in different compartments can now (insecurely)
exchange data: The first process loads the data into a register and changes
its tag to 0, and the second changes the tag from 0 to its own tag value.

The hardware needs special instructions to support interrupt handling. The
problem is that on an interrupt, the operating system must be allowed to
save away the registers of the executing process in order to be able to
service the interrupt. But at the same time, the OS isn’t trusted and so can’t
be allowed to examine the values in the registers! To solve this conundrum,
you need to create three special registers (let’s call them $0,$1,$2) in which
the compartment can package up and encrypt a register value owned by
another compartment without ever examining its value. You need two new
instructions, save and restore:

     save   reg addr: Assume reg’s tag is T. Encrypt reg with the session key
            corresponding to T and store the result in register $0. Compute a
            hash CRC (reg||reg_number) of the register’s value and the
            register’s number and store it in register $1. Finally, store T in
            register $2 and write ($0,$1,$2)to addr.
     restore   reg addr : Read ($0,$1,$2) from addr. Use the tag in $2 to look
            up the session key and decrypt the data in register $0. If the hash in
            register $1 doesn’t match the register contents and register number,
            throw an exception. Otherwise, store the decrypted value in reg
            and set the tag to that in $2.
     Finally, you need two instructions to enter and exit protected mode:
     enter   addr: The encrypted session key is stored at address addr. If it’s
            already been loaded into a slot in the session-key table, just set the
            ACTIVE register to the slot tag. Otherwise, load the key, decrypt it
            with the CPU’s private key, store into an empty slot in the session-
            key table, and set the ACTIVE register. Start fetching and decrypting
            instructions.
     exit:   Set ACTIVE to 0. Stop decrypting instructions.

The exit instruction can be generated directly by user code or implicitly on
an interrupt.

11.3.2 Preventing Replay Attacks
The restore instruction can be abused to launch a replay attack. The trick the
adversary can play is to make the operating system reload the same
registers several times. With some extra circuitry, we can prevent this. The
idea is to use an extra key to encrypt the registers and on every interrupt
invalidate the old key and generate a new one.

However, this doesn’t help against an attack where the adversary replays
old values from memory! Because the address of a memory location is
included in the hash value stored with the datum, the adversary can’t move
memory around, but there’s nothing stopping him from saving a value from
a particular location and then later writing it back into the same location.
Crafting a successful attack in this way requires considerable care and good
fortune, but it’s not impossible.

To protect against replay attacks, you must somehow check that a value you
write into memory hasn’t been changed the next time you read from the
same location. A relatively efficient way of doing that is to keep a tree of
cryptographically secure hashes (such as SHA-1) known as a Merkle tree
[249]:
The leaves of the tree are chunks of memory (light gray) that you want to
protect. Internal nodes are hashes of child nodes. The root of the tree is a
hash stored protected on the CPU that hence can’t be manipulated. When
you write a value to memory, you have to update the hashes all the way up
to the root. Similarly, when you read a value from memory, you have to
read and verify the hashes, again from the leaf all the way up to the root.
The root itself doesn’t have to be checked, since it never leaves the CPU.

A reply attack won’t work here. Even if the adversary changes a word in
memory to its previous value, and to hide the attack changes the hash in the
parent node with its previous value, and so on recursively up the tree, he
still won’t be able to change the root of the hash tree.

The problem with this approach is performance. The extra space cost is
considerable: With a 4-way tree, th of memory is taken up by hashes. The
extra cost in memory bandwidth is even more disturbing. A perfectly
balanced m-ary tree of memory of size N will require logm(N) hash checks
per read, which could equate to tens of reads of hashes whenever you read a
value from memory. This is obviously unacceptable.

The solution [134] is to cache parts of the tree on chip in the L2 cache. Any
value stored in the cache you can trust and read directly without having to
walk up the tree and verify hash values. A write to a cached value likewise
doesn’t incur any hashing activity. Not until a cache line is evicted do you
have to update its parent hash node.

With these and other optimizations, Gassend et al. [134] report a less than
20% performance hit across a set of nine benchmarks. This, of course,
would be on top of the performance degradation of XOM itself.

11.3.3 Fixing a Leaky Address Bus

An adversary who’s unable to directly examine an executable, perhaps
because it’s been encrypted, may still be able to extract information from it
by examining its control flow execution pattern. Consider this example,
which computes R = yx mod n [205]:

     s[0] = 1;
     for(k=0; k<w; k++) {
     if (x[k] == 1)
     R[k] = (s[k]*y) mod n;
     else
     R[k] = s[k];
     s[k+1] = R[k]*R[k] mod n
     }
     return R[w-1];
This modular exponentiation routine is commonly used in RSA and Diffie-
Hellman public key algorithms, where x is the private key, w bits long. In the
XOM architecture, code and data don’t move, i.e., while every block of
code is encrypted, it resides in the same location in memory throughout
execution. So if your encrypted blocks are laid out like this in memory

an adversary who is able to monitor the address bus while a secret message
is being decrypted might see something like this:
From this address trace, he can draw several conclusions. First, there’s an
obvious loop involving B1 and B5. Second, from B2, control either goes to
B3 or B4, and from B3 and B4 we always proceed to B5. This is the telltale
signature of an if-then-else statement. Given this information, the adversary
can now completely reconstruct the control flow graph. He still has no clue
what should go inside each block, of course, since each individual block is
encrypted. However, if he’s able to figure out that this is, in fact, the
modular exponentiation routine of a public key crypto-system, he can
deduce the key simply by examining the trace! A branch B2 → B3 indicates
a 0 and a branch B2 → B4 indicates a 1 (or possibly the opposite). Finding
out that this routine is the modular exponentiation routine might not be that
hard—the structure of the control flow graph makes for a pretty accurate
fingerprint.

This is a form of a side-channel attack. Some variants use execution time
[205] to distinguish between B3 and B4, while others use energy
consumption. In both cases, the measurements can be rather noisy, but this
can be offset by running multiple experiments. You’ll see more of this in
Section 11.4.4 705.

Watching addresses go by on the address bus can also give the adversary
noisy data. For example, if a routine is small enough to at least partially fit
in on-chip caches, then some branches will not be exposed on the bus, and
an adversary will not learn everything just by observing the address bus.
The easiest way around this is for him to turn off caching altogether, for
architectures that allow this.2 If this attack isn’t available, others are. He
can, for example, interrupt the process frequently and coax the operating
system to flush caches on a context switch.

So let’s assume that all branches are exposed, i.e., if a branch is taken, it
results in the target block being fetched from memory. As you saw from the
example above, not only does this information leakage allow an observer to
reconstruct the control flow graph, it can also allow him to learn about data
values.
Several schemes [140,385,386] have been devised for preventing the
address bus from leaking information. They share the same basic idea—
blocks must be constantly permuted in memory—but differ in how they
make this efficient. We’ll show you a technique proposed by Zhuang et al.
[385]. The idea is to include a shuffle buffer within the CPU that keeps a
subset of the memory blocks. A block is simply a cache line. Whenever a
block is needed from memory, it’s swapped with a random block from the
shuffle buffer. In other words, a block M is read from memory, a block S is
selected randomly from the shuffle buffer, M replaces S in the buffer, and S
is written back to M’s location.

Here’s an example. You start with the 7 blocks from our example program,
all residing in memory. The CPU has a 3-slot shuffle buffer. First, three
blocks are selected from memory and brought in to populate the shuffle
buffer:

Next, B4 is needed, so it’s brought in from memory, replacing block B1,
which was selected randomly from the shuffle buffer, and B1 is written back
to memory, in B4’s place:

Next, B0 is swapped with B6, B4 with B5, and, finally, as the program
finishes executing, the blocks in the buffer are written back to memory:
Here’s a sketch of the architecture of the system, shown right after step 5 in
the example trace you just saw:

The block address table (BAT) keeps track of where blocks currently reside,
either at an address in memory or at an index in the shuffle buffer. On a
cache miss, the controller queries the BAT for the current location of the
block. If the block is in the shuffle buffer already, it’s returned to the cache.
If, on the other hand, it’s in memory, it’s loaded and stored in both the cache
and the shuffle buffer. Whatever block was evicted from the buffer gets
written back to the location of the loaded block. An on-chip BAT cache
reduces the latency of checking the BAT. This is essential, since every
access request from the cache has to go through the BAT.

11.3.4 Fixing a Leaky Data Bus

Let’s assume that your encrypted code blocks are laid out linearly in
memory and that their encrypted values are 0000, 1000, and so on:

Then an adversary who has tired of watching the address bus (because he’s
noticed that blocks are being continuously relocated and he can learn
nothing from their addresses) can take to watching the data bus instead:

As long as blocks have unique ciphertexts, watching the blocks go by on
the data bus reveals as much as watching addresses go by on the address
bus! Fortunately, it’s not hard to defend against this attack: Whenever a
block is written back at a new location, you have to make sure that it has a
different ciphertext than when it was last read. This can be done by xoring
the cleartext block with its new address prior to encrypting it. This
technique is used, for example, by the Arc3D architecture [140].
11.3.5 Discussion

We don’t hold out much hope that encrypted execution will become
mainstream anytime soon. From the discussion above it should be clear that
if you really want to protect your program, you have to make sure that you
hide everything that’s going on inside the CPU, and you have to protect
every piece of code and data that gets stored off-chip. You cannot leak any
information in the address stream or any information on the data bus, and
you can’t let the adversary change or replay a single bit in memory without
your detecting it. An architecture that fulfills all these requirements is likely
to be both complex and slow.

The original XOM architecture was evaluated under simulation. An
operating system (XOMOS) was built (by modifying a standard operating
system) to take advantage of the hardware. On top of XOMOS, two
applications were run to evaluate performance. The actual performance
numbers depend heavily on the coarseness of the protection: How much of
the application runs in protected mode, and how frequently does it have to
make a XOM transition? In the author’s experiments [228], they saw mostly
small performance hits (≤ 6% increase in processor cycles), but for one
experiment, they saw a 129% hit. The other protection techniques you saw
in this section for fixing replay attacks and leaks to the address and data bus
will incur additional overhead on top of that for XOM itself.

System-on-a-chip designs would avoid many of the problems you saw in
this section. If the CPU and RAM both reside in the same physical capsule,
then there’s no need to worry about anyone snooping on the bus—unless, of
course, they decide to break the capsule open to peek inside ... . This will be
the topic of our next section!

11.4 Attacks on Tamperproof Devices

The very basic idea of the hardware designs we showed you in Section 11.2
 670 and Section 11.3 683 is to provide a physical layer of protection
between an attacker and secret code (often, cryptographic algorithms and
protocols) and data (key material). The assumption is that this barrier won’t
be broken and that wrapping code and data inside silicon, plastic, or metal
will make them impervious to observation and manipulation. If the
assumption is violated, all bets are off.

In this section, we’re going to show you how this physical barrier is
implemented and how it can be bypassed. We’re first going to look at a
board-level attack against Microsoft’s XBOX gaming console (Section
11.4.1 696). Here, Microsoft’s engineers assumed that “probing the high-
speed busses would be too hard,” and hence left them unencrypted. MIT
grad student Andrew Huang was undeterred by this, and ... tapped the
busses! As a result, he recovered the cryptographic key that was the root of
all security on the machine and opened the door to playing copied games,
booting Linux, and running unapproved software on the XBOX. In Section
11.4.2 697, we’ll show you the popular Dallas Semiconductor DS50002FB
microcontroller that encrypts all memory and bus traffic. Undeterred by
this, then-German undergraduate student Markus Kuhn crafted a clever
attack that tricks the processor into dumping all its encrypted memory (in
cleartext!) on an output port. The idea is to feed guessed encrypted
instructions to the chip and see how it reacts. Finally, we’re going to show
you a broad range of attacks against smartcards (Section 11.4.3 701).
Because of the economic incentive to break smartcard security (it can allow
you free public transport, mobile phone calls, and pay-TV pornography),
well-funded attackers have gone to great lengths to coax secrets out of
cards, and card manufacturers have gone to great lengths to develop
defenses against these attacks. Some attacks are invasive (they open up the
card in order to probe or manipulate its internals) and some are non-
invasive (they examine the card’s behavior, such as its power consumption
or execution time to deduce the stored key material).

11.4.1 Tapping the Bus—The Microsoft XBOX Hack

In 2001, then-MIT Ph.D. student Andrew “Bunnie” Huang got an XBOX
game console from his fiancée for Christmas. He immediately decided to
take it apart. He eventually cracked the security scheme and published what
he’d learned in a paper and a book [51,172]. He also keeps a Web site
devoted to XBOX hacking (http://hackingthexbox.com).

The XBOX is essentially a low-cost PC running a version of Windows.
Like a PC, it contains an x86 CPU, 64 MB of cheap RAM, northbridge and
southbridge chips, IDE controllers, and so on. Here is a sketch of the
system (adapted from reference [51]), where we’ve left out any
uninteresting (to us) subsystems:

(The “TAP” and MOD chip we’ll get to later—they’re part of the attack, not
the defense.) Hardcoded in the ASIC southbridge chip is an RC/4 decryptor,
a 128-bit key, and a secret boot block. On system start-up, the boot block
executes and then decrypts, verifies, and jumps to the bootloader, which is
contained in FLASH ROM. The bootloader, in turn, decrypts, verifies, and
jumps to the OS kernel, which is also in FLASH. This is reminiscent of the
TPM-enabled trusted boot process you saw in Section 11.2 670.

The designers put a fake boot block in the FLASH ROM. Whether this was
done intentionally to throw off potential attackers, or was the result of a
faulty build process as claimed by Michael Steil [335], is hard to know.
Bunnie made two crucial observations. First, the decryption is done by the
CPU, and this means that the key will have to travel over at least two
busses. Second, the busses between the FLASH and the CPU are high-
speed, so the designers thought they’d be safe from prying and decided to
keep them unencrypted. As a result, the key will be traveling in cleartext
across the open busses.

So the question was which bus to tap. The busses between the CPU and
between the northbridge and between the northbridge and the RAM are
both prohibitively wide, 64 and 128 bits, respectively. The bus between the
south- and northbridge, on the other hand—is just 8 bits wide! BINGO!
Bunnie soldered a tap board onto the bus and sniffed it as the plaintext
secret boot block, including the RC/4 decryptor and key, which he came
across on their way to the CPU. Having access to the fake boot block gave
him some help in resolving ambiguities, as did pattern matching on the
decryption algorithm. Once he’d figured out that RC/4 was being used, he
wrote his own version and fed every 16 bytes of the boot block into it in
order to find which worked as a key.

Once the key was found and let loose on the Internet, a cottage industry of
“XBOX mod-chip” [335] manufacturers sprung up. One design had to be
soldered across the 31 pins of the FLASH ROM and contained a complete
replacement of the FLASH. Over time, simpler designs emerged that
needed less hardware expertise to install. With the access to the key, it
became possible to patch the kernel to allow non-authorized software to be
loaded, particularly pirated copies of games. It also allowed competing
operating systems, such as Linux, to be booted.

11.4.2 Injecting Ciphertext—Dallas Semiconductor DS5002FP

The DS5002FP is a popular microprocessor for use in ATMs, pay-TV
decoders, and the like. It does bus encryption, which means that it stores
code and data in an external SRAM chip and encrypts addresses and data so
that neither ever appears in cleartext on the bus. The manufacturer describes
it like this [321]:
    ... the secure microprocessor chip incorporates the most sophisticated
    security features available in any processor. The security features of
    the DS5002FP include an array of mechanisms that are designed to
    resist all levels of threat, including observation, analysis, and physical
    attack. As a result, a massive effort is required to obtain any
    information about memory contents.

In spite of this, Markus Kuhn [16,17,215] in his diploma thesis [214]
describes an attack that is able to completely extract the cleartext of the
protected program.

The processor contains a 64-bit key K, a true random-number generator RND,
and three cryptographic functions    (for address permutation),           (for
data encryption), and        (for data decryption):

The processor is connected to an SRAM memory chip through a 16-bit-
wide address bus and an 8-bit-wide data bus. The SRAM chip is powered
by the processor. An external backup battery can keep data alive for more
than 10 years.

In terms of defenses, the DS5002FP has a self-destruct input (SDI) pin that
can be connected to an external tamper-detection sensor. When it triggers
(due to changes in light, temperature, pressure, and so on), the processor
wipes K and turns off power to the memory chip, effectively erasing all
secret code and data. To prevent micro-probing attacks, the DS5002FPM (a
variant of the DS5002FP) has an additional top coating layer [321]:
     This additional layer is not a simple sheet of metal, but rather a
     complex layout that is interwoven with power and ground, which are
     in turn connected to logic for the encryption key and the security lock.
     As a result, any attempt to remove the layer or probe through it results
     in the erasure of the security lock and/or the loss of encryption key
     bits.

When you initialize the processor, it generates a new value for K using the
internal random-number generator. You then toggle the PROG pin, which
makes the processor read the cleartext program P, encrypt it with           ,
and store the result to the external SRAM chip.

The function           encrypts (and          decrypts) one byte at a time.
Encryption is dependent on the key K as well as on the address addr where
the byte is stored. This prevents an attacker from manipulating the
encrypted program by moving instructions around. Addresses are permuted
by the    function. In other words, to encrypt and store byte b at address z,
the CPU computes

and to load and decrypt the byte again, it computes

When the CPU isn’t accessing memory, it generates random bus traffic to
confuse an observer.
Markus Kuhn’s attack is intended to exhaustively feed guessed encrypted
instructions to the processor and then examine how it reacts to them. Step
by step, this allows the attacker to deduce the encryption functions for each
memory address. Once he has a few decryption functions figured out, he
can craft a small program that dumps the cleartext contents of memory to an
output port.

It’s a good idea to start by trying to decipher the instruction

                           75 a0 XX MOV 0xa0 XX

that writes the byte XX to the parallel port P2 (located in memory at address
0xa0). This is a clever instruction for the attacker to start looking for, since
it’s easy to detect when he might have found it: It should make something
appear on the parallel port! Moreover, every unique byte XX he tries to write
with the MOV instruction should result in a unique byte appearing on the
output port. So the search is very simple:

     for(x=0; x<256; x++)
     nexty:
     for(y=0; y<256; y++)
     E2 ← 0
     for(z=0; z<256; z++)
     reset CPU and feed it the code
     a0+0: x
     a0+1: y
     a0+2: z
     p←value read from port P2
     if (E2(p) is not empty) goto nexty
     E2←E2 ∪ {p→z}
     return (x,y,E2)
This code tries every possible value (x,y) for the first two bytes of the
instruction and tabulates all the values that appear on the P2 port in a set E2
when varying the third byte through all values 0 ... 255. If all 256 bytes
appear, then (x,y) is probably the MOV 0xa0 instruction. At the end of this test,
the attacker has collected the following information:

He’s certainly off to a good start, since he has complete knowledge of the
encryption function for the byte at address a0 +2!

In the next step, he’ll want to similarly deduce the encryption functions for
address a0 + 3, a0 + 4, and so on, which we call E3, E4, ... . He can do this
by searching for a NOP-like instruction, which he can insert right before MOV
0xa0 XX, effectively moving it forward by one byte in the instruction stream.
Once he has tabulated a few encryption functions, seven is enough for the
DS5002FP, he knows enough to generate a small program that traverses
memory and writes the contents of each decrypted byte to an output port.

Markus Kuhn’s attack is possible because of the small ciphertext
granularity. An upgraded version of the DS5002FP, the DS5240/DS5250,
encrypts 8 bytes of data at a time rather than one byte at a time. This makes
it much more costly to tabulate the encryption functions.

11.4.3 Hacking Smartcards

Smartcards have become ubiquitous as secure storage devices. They are
used on mass transit systems, as prepaid phone cards (stored value cards),
as identification cards, in cellular phones (SIM cards), in pay-TV set-top
boxes, and in credit cards. Their main strength is that they contain protected
memory in which a secret such as a private key can be stored. They also
have cryptographic capabilities: They can generate and store public-key
key-pairs, perform RSA encryption, compute SHA-1 hashing, and so on.
Smartcard manufacturers employ various techniques to protect the cards
against tampering, but since they’re typically deployed in mass quantities,
there’s a trade-off between security features and cost.

Smartcards have neither internal power nor a clock. They are entirely
passive devices and only work when they are inserted into a card reader, a
card acceptance device (CAD). As you see from the picture here, the CAD
provides power (Vcc) and a clock signal (CLK) to the card and
communicates with it over a 1-bit serial link (I/O):

The CAD has no direct access to the internals of the card, including its
memory; the only way to access it is through a protocol executed over the
serial link. The fact that smartcards are completely dependent on the CAD
for power and clock signal makes them particularly easy to attack. For
example, as you will see, varying the supply voltage or the clock signal can
induce exploitable faults.

As an example, Gemalto’s TOP DM GX4 has a JavaCard virtual machine
interpreter, 68KB of persistent RAM, 78KB EEPROM, and supports
3DES/AES/RSA encryption, SHA-1 cryptographic hash, and asymmetric
key pair generation. Java Card is a standard that specifies a subset of the
Java language and standard libraries designed specifically for smartcard
programming, along with a virtual machine instruction set optimized for
size. When it comes to security, the manufacturer vaguely states [136]:
the platform implements most advance[d] security countermeasures
enforcing protection of all sensitive data and function in the card. ...
includes multiple hardware and software countermeasure[s] against various
attacks:
     • Side channel attacks

     • Invasive attacks

     • Advanced fault attacks

     • Other types of attack.

In this section, we’re going to describe attacks against smartcards, simply
because these have been described extensively in the open literature.
There’s no reason why the same techniques can’t be used against other
types of chips that contain secrets, such as the TPM we discussed in Section
11.2 670. The TPM, in fact, has been described as a “smartcard soldered to
the motherboard of a computer.” The packaging is different, but the
functionality is similar: Both the TPM and the smartcard contain a secret
private key and various cryptographic functions.

Attacks against smartcards are either invasive or non-invasive. The
adversary starts an invasive attack by physically exposing the bare chip, and
then either probes the surface to extract information or manipulates the chip
to make it perform an unintended function. An invasive attack, by
definition, destroys the card, but the adversary can use the secret code and
data that he’s collected to clone a new one. In a non-invasive attack, the
adversary doesn’t destroy the card but rather extracts information by
monitoring its execution characteristics, such as its power usage,
electromagnetic radiation, execution time, and so on. He can either do this
during normal operating conditions or he can deliberately induce faults to
coax the chip to give up its secrets.

Invasive attacks are useful when an attacker knows very little about the
card, its physical characteristics, or the software it contains. These attacks
can take a long time to perform and may require sophisticated and
expensive equipment. However, once the attacker has gathered enough
information about the card, he may be able to use it to devise a non-invasive
attack that’s easier, cheaper, and faster to deploy.

Much of the published literature on attacks against smartcards comes out of
Ross Anderson’s group at Cambridge. Several of Anderson and Kuhn’s
papers have become must-read classics [14,16,17,207], and Sergei
Skorobogatov’s Ph.D. thesis [328] gives a particularly thorough treatment
of attack techniques. This presentation is based in large part on their work.

11.4.3.1 Invasive Attacks

An attacker can find plenty of information in the literature that describes
how to launch a physical attack against a smartcard. Other than having
different packaging techniques, smartcards and micro-controllers are very
similar, and both have been subjected to the same kinds of attacks. The
semiconductor industry also uses these techniques to analyze failures in
their own chips and to reverse engineer competitors’ chips [226,306]. For
attackers with insufficient knowledge but sufficient funding, there are
companies such as Chipworks that will provide reverse engineering services
for a fee (http://www.chipworks.com):

                   Chipworks can extract analog or digital circuits from
                   semiconductor devices and deliver detailed easy-to-
                   understand schematics that document a single functional
                   block or all the circuits. ... We decapsulate the chip and
                   analyze the die to locate the circuit blocks of interest. Then,
                   using our Image Capture and Imaging System (ICIS) we
                   generate mosiacs for each level of interconnect. Finally,
                   advanced software and expertise is used to extract the
                   circuits for analysis.

We won’t go into details here but rather give a brief overview of the steps
that a typical attack will go through. The first step an attacker needs to take
is to depackage the chip and glue it to a test package so that he can connect
it to a circuit board and examine it further [225,301]:3
     1. Remove the chip from the card itself by heating and bending it.

     2. Remove the epoxy resin around the chip by dipping it in 60°C
       fuming nitric acid.

     3. Clean the chip by washing it with acetone in an ultrasonic bath.

     4. Mount the exposed chip in a test package and connect its pads to the
       pins of the package.

For ordinary chip packaging techniques, steps 1 through 4 are known as
decapsulation.

     Next, he’ll want to create a high-level map of the chip layout:
     5. Use an optical microscope to take large, high-resolution pictures of
       the chip surface.

     6. Identify major architectural features (ROM, ALU, EEPROM, and so
       on) and/or lower-level features such as busses and gates.

     7. Remove the top metal track layer by dipping the chip in
       hydrofluoric acid in an ultrasonic bath.

     8. Repeat from 5, for each layer.

Breaking a chip down by stripping away one layer at a time and analyzing
each layer is known as deprocessing.

The next step is reverse engineering the chip, analyzing the information
collected during the deprocessing stage to gain an understanding of the
behavior of the different functional units of the chip. For complex chips, the
attacker may have to revert to automatic techniques that use image
processing [44] to reverse engineer the layout, but with some experience he
may be able to reconstruct enough of the design directly from the
photographs to know where to launch an attack.
The final steps use microprobing to read out contents of the smartcard
memory. A microprobing workstation has an optical microscope and a “cat
whisker” probe that can make connection with any part of the chip with
great accuracy. The probe can either read out a signal from the chip or
induce a signal to the chip. Here are the steps of a passive attack:

     9. To allow the probe contact with the chip, use a laser cutter mounted
       on the microscope to remove (patches of) the passivation layer that
       covers the top-layer aluminum interconnect lines.

     10. Record the activity on a few of the bus lines (as many as there are
        probes) while going through transactions with the card.

     11. Repeat from 10 until the bus activity trace from all of the bus lines
        has been collected.

If the attacker is lucky, just passively watching the busses while the
smartcard is going through a critical transaction will force it to reveal all the
secrets in its memory—all the code, all the stored keys, and so on. If not, he
needs to launch an active attack:

     12. To force the chip to cycle through all instruction addresses, use the
        laser cutter to disable the chip area that implements branching
        instructions.

Since the program counter is updated automatically as long as no branches
are taken, the chip will produce each instruction on the bus for the
adversary to examine.

The steps above are sufficient for older chip designs with large feature
sizes. If the feature size of the chip is below that of visible light, the attacker
will be forced to turn to more expensive technology. A Focused Ion Beam
(FIB) workstation can not only produce detailed images of the chip surface
but can also etch away connections, drill holes in the chip to access deeper
layers, and deposit material on the chip surface to make new connections.
Over time, these invasive attacks will become more complex, more
expensive, and less accessible to hobbyist hackers. Smaller feature sizes,
wider internal busses, more interconnect layers, and more built-in defenses
will require increasingly sophisticated tools. For example, many smartcards
now use ASIC (Application-Specific Integrated Circuit) technology. In such
glue logic, there are no obvious building blocks to search for so it becomes
close to impossible to manually locate the place to probe or manipulate.

On the other hand, the tools that are necessary to attack such designs will be
necessary for chip designers too, in order for them to be able to analyze
chip failures. Thus, there will always be a second-hand market of cheaper
instruments sufficient for analyzing last generation’s chips. An attacker with
some funding, but not enough to purchase his own equipment, can, for a
few hundred dollars per hour, rent time in a state-of-the-art laboratory. And
if, like Bunnie Huang and Markus Kuhn, he’s a university student, his
school may already have access to all the tools he needs.

11.4.4 Non-Invasive Attacks

Non-invasive attacks have many advantages over invasive ones: The
attacker doesn’t have to expose himself to dangerous chemicals, he doesn’t
need expensive equipment, and once he has an effective attack against one
particular card, he can easily reuse it on another of the same model. Also,
since he doesn’t destroy the card in the process, he can keep on using it
after the attack, with the added benefit that he now knows the secrets it
contains.

Non-invasive attacks can be both active and passive. In a passive attack, the
attacker just examines what comes out of the chip, such as electromagnetic
radiation, power consumption, or execution time. In an active attack, he
feeds carefully (or not so carefully) constructed data, power, or clock
signals to the chip and then measures the chip’s behavior. In Section 11.4.2
697, you saw how Markus Kuhn fed random encrypted instruction bytes to
the DS5002FP chip until he found some with the behavior he was looking
for. This was an active non-invasive attack. Bunnie Huang’s attack on the
XBOX in Section 11.4.1 696 was a passive non-invasive attack, however,
since he just watched a bus until the key he was looking for came across.

11.4.4.1 Fault Induction Attacks

In a fault induction attack (also known as a glitch attack), the attacker
generates a sharp voltage spike, increases the clock frequency, or subjects
the chip to an electric field, all in an attempt to cause an error in the
computation. The goal is to force the processor to execute the wrong
instruction. Obviously, not every wrong instruction will cause an
exploitable fault, so he will have to resort to judicious use of trial and error.
As an example, consider this routine that’s supposed to write a region of
memory to the I/O port:

      void write(char* result , int length) {
      while (length > 0) {
      printf(*result);
      result++;
      length--;
      }
      }

If he could force a fault in the light gray code, replacing it with any
instruction that doesn’t affect the length variable, then the loop will cycle
through all of memory, dumping it on the port!

11.4.4.2 Timing Attacks

The idea of a timing attack was first presented by Paul Kocher [205] in
1996. In 1998, Dhem et al. [113] gave a practical attack. The idea is for the
attacker to generate a large number of messages (such as, “Please encrypt
this file with your secret key”), send them to the smartcard, and then
measure the time the operations take. From the timings, he can deduce the
key. Assume that the attacker knows that the encryption routine uses this
modular exponentiation function:

      s[0] = 1;
      for(k=0; k<w; k++) {
      if (x[k] == 1)
      R[k] = (s[k]*y) mod n;
      else
      R[k] = s[k];
      s[k+1] = R[k]*R[k] mod n
      }
      return R[w-1];

Here, x is the w-bits-long private key he wants to recover. The attack
deduces one bit at a time. Let’s say that he wants to recover bit x0. He
constructs two sets of messages, M1 and M2, so that the messages in M1
should cause the light gray code to execute, while the messages in M2
should take the dark gray branch. He now asks the smartcard to encrypt all
the messages and records their time. Since the light gray code does a
multiply but the dark gray code doesn’t, the messages in M1 should take
longer to encrypt than those in M2. If (on average) they do, he can deduce
that x0 = 1, otherwise x0 = 0. The smaller the difference in time between the
two branches, the more samples he will have to generate. Knowing x0, he
can continue to deduce x1 in the same manner.

11.4.4.3 Power Analysis Attacks

In a power analysis attack, the attacker draws conclusions about the internal
behavior of the chip from measurements of the power that it consumes.
Different instructions consume different amounts of power, and monitoring
the power usage as the chip goes through a transaction can reveal which
instructions it’s executing. Busses also draw power as bus lines change
between 0 and 1, which means that it may be possible to estimate the
number of bits that changed on the bus by measuring the amount of power
consumed.

Power analysis is probably the easiest attack to implement. All the attacker
needs is a resistor on the chip’s power supply line, a high-resolution, high-
sampling-frequency volt meter over the resistor, and a computer to store
and analyze the current traces. As with timing attacks, there can be
significant noise in the measurements, but he can counter this by averaging
over a large number of transactions.

There are two kinds of power analyses, simple power analysis (SPA) and
differential power analysis (DPA). SPA looks directly at a trace of the
power consumption and deduces the instructions executed. For example, if
he can distinguish the power signature of the multiplication operation in the
modular exponentiation routine we showed earlier, the attacker could
extract the key material. DPA is a more powerful technique that uses
statistical methods to analyze the power consumption over many
cryptographic operations. Paul Kocher et al. report that DPA allowed them
to “extract keys from almost 50 different products in a variety of physical
form factors” [204].

11.4.4.4 Countermeasures

There are a variety of ways to protect against these attacks. Judicious use of
randomization is probably necessary, for example, generating an internal
clock signal by inserting random delays in the external one. Interleaving
multiple threads of control is another possibility, but it’s difficult to achieve
on smartcards with limited computational resources. Environmental sensors
are already implemented on most smartcards. It’s essential, for example, to
detect if an attacker lowers the clock signal in order to more easily monitor
the computations.

David Maher of AT&T Labs writes a scathing review [239] against what he
considers the scaremongering attack scenarios that you’ve seen here. He
points out, and rightly so, that cryptographic processors don’t exist in a
vacuum, but rather are one integral part of a complete security architecture.
If one minute you’re buying groceries in Tucson and the next a Porsche in
Beijing, alarms are going to be raised at the credit card company that your
card probably has been cloned. Similarly, pay-TV companies know their
smartcards will be under heavy attack and architect their systems to detect
anomalies and to minimize losses when attacks are discovered. It’s
important to anticipate attacks (and know that you must anticipate attacks
that you can’t anticipate!) and to design your system with upgradable
security to counter such attacks.

11.4.5 Board-Level Protection

The IBM 4758 cryptographic coprocessor is interesting because, as far as
we know, its physical protection hasn’t been broken! Also, its design is well
described in the open literature [173,370,371]. The 4758 is validated at
“FIPS 140 level 4” [174], the U.S. government’s highest security standard
for cryptographic modules, which states:

     • The cryptographic module components shall be covered by potting
       material or contained within an enclosure encapsulated by a tamper
       detection envelope (e.g., a flexible mylar printed circuit with a
       serpentine geometric pattern of conductors or a wire-wound package
       or a non-flexible, brittle circuit or a strong enclosure) that shall detect
       tampering by means such as cutting, drilling, milling, grinding, or
       dissolving of the potting material or enclosure to an extent sufficient
       for accessing plaintext secret and private keys cryptographic keys or
       CSPs.

     • The cryptographic module shall contain tamper response and
      zeroization circuitry that shall continuously monitor the tamper
      detection envelope and, upon the detection of tampering, shall
      immediately zeroize all plaintext secret and private cryptographic
      keys and CSPs. The tamper response and zeroization circuitry shall
      remain operational when plaintext secret and private cryptographic
      keys or CSPs are contained within the cryptographic module.
In contrast to the rest of this section, where we’ve shown you how easily
hardware can be compromised, the 4758 serves as an illustrative example of
what is actually necessary to provide adequate security against both
invasive and non-invasive attacks.

The 4758 costs about $4,000, which is quite affordable for its target
audience. There are many potential applications. A variety of vending
machines now “sell money,” for example, by topping off mobile phones,
adding money to smartcards used in electricity meters, or printing postage
stamps. Since such machines are installed in potentially hostile
environments, it’s important that they be physically secure. These
processors are also used by banks to protect electronic transfers from
insider attacks.

The 4758 is delivered as a PCI card that you plug in to a host computer. It
consists of a 486-type processor, 4MB of RAM, 4MB of FLASH, 32KB of
battery backed RAM, cryptographic facilities (DES, 3DES, and RSA
encryption, true random-number generation, SHA-1 cryptographic hash),
and a date and time unit:

The battery and the PCI bus controller are outside the secure perimeter, and
everything else is physically secured.

What’s interesting about the 4758 are its tamper-detection and protection
facilities. It has both a physical layer of protection to make invasive attacks
difficult, and a collection of sensors that detect that tampering is under way.
When a tamper-detection sensor triggers, the 4758 turns off power to the
battery-backed RAM, zeroing any secret code and data. It then resets the
CPU, which stops it from refreshing the RAM, destroying its contents.

To protect against invasive attacks, the PCI board is surrounded by a
“polyurethane mixture and a film with an imprinted circuit pattern to detect
minute penetration and erosion attacks” [173]. Earlier versions used several
layers of 40-gauge nichrome wire wound around the device and connected
to power and ground. The device would then be embedded in epoxy.
Regardless, if an attacker tries to chemically eat through the potting
material or drill down to the processor, the wires will either short out and
destroy the device or alert the processor that an attack is under way. Earlier
versions of the coprocessor were also covered in a metal enclosure with
switches that would trigger if the case was opened.

Memory remanence presents a potentially serious attack. The problem is
that RAM can hold values even after its power has been turned off. This
could allow an attacker to remove the unit from the host computer (thereby
powering down any active defenses), drill down to RAM, and extract the
secrets. The length of time that the data remains readable can be extended
by freezing the memory or subjecting it to X-ray radiation. To protect
against such memory imprinting attacks, the 4758 has temperature and
radiation sensors.

The card is powered from the host computer. This leaves it open to fault-
induction attacks, where the voltage is brought abnormally high or low. As
you saw in the previous section, this could be enough to make the processor
execute random unintended instructions, possibly causing it to leak its
secrets. For this reason, the 4758 has low- and high-voltage sensors.

Finally, to prevent power analysis attacks, the power supply is filtered, and
to prevent electromagnetic analysis attacks, the board is shielded inside a
metal enclosure, forming a Faraday Cage.
There are no known attacks against the physical protection of the 4758. A
group at Cambridge has shown that it’s possible to extract the DES keys
(http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~rnc1/descrack), but this requires an accomplice
on the inside. The type of locations where this coprocessor is installed are
also likely to have additional security procedures in place to make it
difficult for a single individual to have enough time alone with the device to
successfully launch an attack.

Performance for heavily armored processors like the 4758 is a problem. The
reason is that the more layers of physical protection you add, the more of
the heat generated by the processor will get trapped within the enclosure. In
practice, this means that you will have to lower the clock rate to reduce the
amount of heat that gets generated.4 This, in turn, could mean that you need
to separate your application into two parts, one security-sensitive part that
runs slowly on the armored co-processor, and the remaining part, which
runs fast on a standard CPU.

The lesson we can learn from the attacks in the previous sections and the
successful design of the 4758 you’ve seen here is that it’s essential to
protect against every possible attack scenario. Any kind of leakage of
information, any possible way to physically abuse the processor, any way to
inject it with faulty or unexpected code or data, any way to subject it to
adverse environmental conditions—unless every hole is plugged, an
adversary will find it and exploit it. The 4758 shows that it’s possible to
build a reasonably secure device (although, since it’s not deployed in vast
numbers in situations where any hacker can get a whack at it, it’s really
hard to say for sure), but so far we haven’t seen one that’s efficient, secure,
and cheap.

11.5 Discussion

There are many disadvantages of hardware-only or hardware-assisted
software protection techniques. First, there are deployment issues. If you
were to invent a perfectly secure and non-intrusive system today, it might
take a decade before it was shipped on every new PC, and longer before
older, nonprotected, PCs had been phased out. In the meantime, you’re
stuck in a situation where some hardware is protected and some is not. Of
course, in special-purpose systems such as game consoles, set-top pay-TV
boxes, or military systems, the time from invention to deployment can be
much shorter. And some hardware techniques (such as dongles) don’t
require wholesale modifications to PC internals.

Some hardware-based software protection techniques are more expensive
for the software producer. This is true of dongles, for example. Dongles are
also cumbersome to use for the customer. What happens if they lose the
dongle? They will have to call up the software producer, convince them that
they have a legal copy of the software, and wait for the new device to arrive
in the mail. In the meantime, they can’t use the software they bought
legally!

Similar problems occur when a program is tied to a piece of hardware, such
as being encrypted for a particular secure CPU. What happens when the
user upgrades to a faster CPU? Again, they must prove they own a legal
copy of the software and get a new copy tailored for the new CPU. What
happens if the software vendor has gone out of business? Any data files
produced by the software suddenly become irrevocably unreadable!

What do you need in a cryptographic processor design for it to be
completely trustworthy? Well, as you saw in Section 11.4 695 and Section
11.4 695, no information of any kind can be allowed to leak off the chip,
and not a single bit of code or data must ever be allowed to be modified or
replayed. This means that electromagnetic radiation, power usage, and
instruction timings cannot carry any information useful to an attacker. It
means that all bus communication must be encrypted, and furthermore, no
data or address patterns can reveal any information. It means that no
adverse environmental conditions (low power, high power, power spikes,
clock spikes, high temperature, X-ray radiation,...) can go undetected or
cause the processor to get off the intended execution path. It means that
freezing or radiating memory won’t burn in the data long enough for an
attacker to extract it. And it means that the processor chip itself cannot be
decapsulated and then probed or modified.
From an engineering perspective, you have to balance these security
requirements against processor performance, design complexity, ease of
testing, and manufacturing costs. For example, since the yield of
microprocessor manufacturing is never 100%, each chip has to be tested
prior to shipping. Any on-chip facilities that make such testing easier will
also make it easier for an adversary to probe it! It’s also likely that the cost
of the processor will go up with the number and complexity of its security
features. Here’s a table with prices we found during a quick Web search of
the processors you’ve seen in this chapter.

Actual costs will vary with quantity, discounts, and so on, but this should
give you a general idea. The TPM has (as far as we know) no anti-
tampering features that would explain why its so much cheaper than a
smartcard. It’s also interesting to note that there is a two-orders-of-
magnitude difference in price between the smartcard (for which we know
many effective attacks) and IBM’s 4758 (for which there are no known
attacks).
