6. Supervisor Domain Interrupt Assignment
Interrupts that occur during the execution of a supervisor domain cause a trap to the RDSM in M-
mode by default.

To increase performance, the RDSM can delegate the handling of certain interrupts, like the timer
interrupt or the local performance counter overflow interrupt (LCOFI), to the supervisor domain by
setting the appropriate mideleg bits. This delegation could require the RDSM to context switch
additional state related to such delegated interrupts, including stimecmp and the HPM CSRs.

Additionally, the RDSM may assert a virtual interrupt to a supervisor domain. Such virtual
interrupts might be asserted as part of handling a real interrupt, such as a RAS interrupt, or they
may have no direct connection to any actual interrupt event.

Some supervisor domains may have devices assigned to them for I/O operations. Devices designed
to carry out I/O operations typically signal the completion of an I/O task or an associated error via
an external interrupt. These external interrupts might be aggregated and indicated by an interrupt
controller linked to the RDSM. The RDSM, in the course of handling an external interrupt, should
forward the interrupt to the relevant supervisor domain. The efficiency of handling external
interrupts by a supervisor domain can be enhanced if the external interrupts could be directly
assigned to the supervisor domain.

To accommodate such supervisor domains, this specification extends the IMSIC and APLIC specified
by the RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture (AIA) specification [1] to support multiple supervisor
interrupt domains, enabling a supervisor domain to be allocated an individual supervisor interrupt
domain.

In some systems, a supervisor interrupt domain in both an APLIC and an IMSIC may be associated
with a supervisor domain, with the supervisor interrupt domain of the APLIC configured to route
interrupts as MSIs to the corresponding supervisor interrupt domain of the IMSIC.

Existing interrupt controllers not aware of supervisor domains can be associated with a single
supervisor domain.

If there are N implemented supervisor interrupt domains, they are numbered from 0 to N − 1, and
the maximum implemented supervisor interrupt domain number is N − 1.

              Not every supervisor domain may require an individual supervisor interrupt
             domain, and the specification supports flexible allocation of fewer supervisor
              interrupt domains among a larger number of supervisor domains.

6.1. IMSIC Extension for Supervisor Domains
The IMSIC is extended to support multiple supervisor interrupt domains, where each supervisor
interrupt domain may be associated with a supervisor domain. A supervisor interrupt domain in an
IMSIC consists of:

 • A supervisor-level interrupt file.

 • Optionally, one or more guest interrupt files.

Each supervisor interrupt domain in an IMSIC is identified by a supervisor interrupt domain
number (SIDN).

When all harts are within a single hart group as defined by [1], the memory-mapped address of the
supervisor-level interrupt file for SIDN n and hart h, is:

Constants B, C, and D in this and later formulas are specified by [1], while I is a new constant for
supervisor interrupt domains. Constant I must be >= k + D, where k is the number of bits needed to
represent any hart number h.

If the largest supervisor interrupt domain number is         , then q — the number of bits needed to
represent any supervisor interrupt domain number — is defined as:

Address B must be aligned to a        address boundary. (This automatically makes B also aligned to a
     address boundary as required by the existing [1].)

When there are hart groups, the memory-mapped address of the supervisor-level interrupt file for
group g, SIDN n, and hart h within the group, is:

Constant E must be >= max(k + C, q + I), but will usually be much larger.

The Smsdia extension (Section 6.3) provides the mechanism to select a supervisor interrupt domain
in an IMSIC as a source of supervisor-level and guest external interrupts for a hart. The interrupt
signal from the selected supervisor interrupt domain’s supervisor-level interrupt file appears as bit
SEIP in mip and sip. The interrupt signals from any guest interrupt files of the selected supervisor
interrupt domain appear as active bits in the hypervisor CSR hgeip.

The siselect and sireg CSRs access the registers of the supervisor-level interrupt file in the selected
supervisor interrupt domain. If the selected supervisor interrupt domain implements guest interrupt
files then the vsiselect and vsireg CSRs access the registers of a guest interrupt file, of that
supervisor interrupt domain, as determined by hstatus.VGEIN.

6.2. APLIC Extension for Supervisor Domains
The APLIC supports the concept of multiple interrupt domains where each interrupt domain may
be associated with a subset of RISC-V harts at one privilege level. To support the Supervisor Domain
use cases, the APLIC must support multiple supervisor-level interrupt domains. A supervisor-level
interrupt domain in the APLIC may be then associated with a Supervisor Domain by configuring it
in direct delivery mode or when the hart uses an IMSIC by configuring it in MSI delivery mode.

To support supervisor domains in MSI delivery mode, the smsiaddrcfgh register is extended with
two new parameters called DXS (Domain Index Shift) and DXW (Domain Index Width) to help
determine the addresses to write outgoing MSIs. The extended smsiaddrcfgh has the following

format:

         bits 28:24     DXS (WARL)
         bits 22:20     LHXS (WARL)
         bits 18:16     DXW (WARL)
         bits 11:0      High Base PPN (WARL)

Let CI be the Child Index from the sourcecfg[i] corresponding to an interrupt source i. The MSI
target address for this interrupt source is then computed as follows:

The parameter DXS relates to the constant I specified in section Section 6.1 as: DXS = (I - 12).

Refer to [1] for the detailed definitions of constants HHXS, g, h, LHXS, and Guest Index.

6.3. "Smsdia" : Standard Extension for Supervisor
Domain Interrupt Assignment
The Smsdia extension adds supports to select a supervisor interrupt domain in an interrupt
controller as a source of supervisor-level and guest external interrupts for a hart using the msdcfg
CSR.

The RDSM needs a method to be alerted if an external interrupt, whether a supervisor-level
external interrupt or guest external interrupt, is pending for any supervisor domains not currently
active on a hart. The RDSM could leverage this notification to inform its scheduling decisions. To
facilitate this functionality, the Smsdia extension introduces the msideip and msideie CSRs, along with
a machine supervisor domain external interrupt (MSDEI).

6.3.1. Supervisor Interrupt Domain Number

The Smsdia extension introduces the supervisor interrupt domain number (SIDN) field of the msdcfg
Register 3 register.

The SIDN field selects an supervisor interrupt domain among the plurality of supervisor interrupt
domains associated with a hart as the active supervisor interrupt domain for supervisor-level
external interrupt and guest external interrupts.

The SIDN field is a WLRL field where the only legal values are between 0 and the maximum
implemented supervisor interrupt domain number, inclusive. SIDN is a 6-bit field and hence
supports up to 64 supervisor interrupt domains. If there is only a single supervisor interrupt domain
connected to the hart, then SIDN may be read-only zero.

When the supervisor interrupt domain selected by msdcfg.SIDN is an IMSIC, the following rules
apply:

 • The supervisor-level external interrupt pending signal of the supervisor-level interrupt file is

   indicated in mip.SEIP.

 • The siselect and stopei CSRs operate on the registers of the supervisor-level interrupt file.

 • The guest external interrupt pending signals of the guest interrupt files are indicated in the
   hgeip CSR.

 • The hstatus.VGEIN selects a guest interrupt file and vsiselect and vstopei CSRs operate on the
   registers of the corresponding guest interrupt file.

When the harts’s interrupt controller is an APLIC, the following rules apply for the supervisor
interrupt domain selected by SIDN:

 • The supervisor-level external interrupt pending signal is indicated in mip.SEIP.

                If the number of implemented supervisor interrupt domains is fewer than the
                number of supervisor domains that need interrupt controllers, the RDSM may
                emulate interrupt controllers for the additional supervisor domains. An APLIC can
               be emulated by trapping memory accesses. To emulate an IMSIC supervisor
                interrupt domain, the RDSM may use the illegal instruction trap facilitated by AIA-
                added state-enable bits to mstateen0/mstateen0h for emulation purposes.

6.3.2. Hypervisor Guest External Interrupt Registers (hgeip and hgeie)

When the H extension is also implemented, the implementation must internally maintain an array
of registers that hold the state of the hgeip and hgeie CSRs, with one pair of registers per
implemented supervisor interrupt domain number. The hgeip and hgeie CSRs access the element of
this array corresponding to the value of msdcfg.SIDN.

6.3.3. Machine supervisor interrupt domain external interrupt pending
(msideip/msideiph)

The msideip is a 64-bit read-only machine-mode register, formatted as shown in Figure 12. The CSR
number for msideip is 0xF4F.

When MXLEN=32, msideiph is a 32-bit read-only register which aliases bits 63:32 of msideip. When
MXLEN=64, msideiph does not exist. The CSR number for msideiph is 0xF5F.

Figure 12. msideip register

Each bit i in the register summarizes the external interrupts pending in the supervisor interrupt
domain numbered i.

When the supervisor interrupt domain identified by i is implemented by an APLIC, the bit i indicates
the state of the supervisor-level external interrupt pending signal provided by the supervisor
interrupt domain in that APLIC.

When the supervisor interrupt domain identified by i is implemented by an IMSIC, bit i must be set
to one if and only if either of the following conditions holds:

 • the SEIP signal for supervisor interrupt domain i is asserted; or

 • the bitwise logical AND of the internal hgeip and hgeie registers for supervisor interrupt domain
     i is nonzero (i.e., the value that SGEIP would have for that domain).

6.3.4. Machine supervisor interrupt domain external interrupt enable
(msideie/msideieh)

The msideie is a 64-bit read-write machine-mode register, formatted as shown in Figure 13. The CSR
number for msideie is 0x74F.

When MXLEN=32, msideieh is a 32-bit read-write machine-mode register which aliases bits 63:32 of
msideie. When MXLEN=64, msideieh does not exist. The CSR number for msideieh is 0x75F.

Figure 13. msideie register

The msideie CSR selects the subset of supervisor interrupt domains that cause a machine supervisor
domain external interrupt (MSDEI). The enable bits in msideie do not affect the supervisor-level
external interrupt and guest external interrupt pending signals from the supervisor interrupt
domain selected by msdcfg.SIDN.

6.3.5. Machine and Supervisor Interrupt registers (mip/mie and sip/sie)

The Smsdia extension introduces the machine supervisor-domain external interrupt (MSDEI). This
interrupt is assigned to bit 14 in the mip, mie, sip, and sie registers. The bit 14 in mip and sip is called
MSDEIP and the same bit in mie and sie is called MSDEIE. The mideleg register controls the delegation
of MSDEI to S-mode. This interrupt cannot be delegated to VS-mode and bit 14 of hideleg is read-only
zero.

The mip.MSDEIP bit read-only and is set to 1 if the bitwise logical AND of CSRs msideip and msideie is
nonzero in any bit. The mie.MSDEIE bit is writable.

When bit 14 of mideleg is zero, sip.MSDEIP and sie.MSDEIE are read-only zeros. Else, sip.MSDEIP and
sie.MSDEIE are aliases of mip.MSDEIP and mie.MSDEIE.

Multiple simultaneous interrupts destined for different privilege modes are handled in decreasing
order of destined privilege mode. For the base Privileged ISA’s major interrupts (numbers 0-15),
multiple simultaneous interrupts destined for the same privilege mode are handled in the following
decreasing default priority order: MEI, MSI, MTI, MSDEI, SEI, SSI, STI, SGEI, VSEI, VSSI, VSTI, LCOFI.

                The RDSM may use the machine supervisor-domain external interrupt (MSDEI) to
                determine if a supervisor domain has become ready to run since it was last
                descheduled. When a supervisor domain that has a supervisor domain interrupt
                controller directly assigned to it is scheduled, the RDSM updates the msdcfg.SIDN to
               select that supervisor interrupt domain and may clear the bit corresponding to
                that supervisor interrupt domain in msideie prior to resuming execution of the
                supervisor domain.

               The RDSM may delegate MSDEI to a supervisor domain to be notified about
               supervisor domain external interrupts pending for one or more other supervisor
               domains. Typically, this use case involves a single supervisor domain that is
               trusted by the RDSM to receive such notifications. The delegation supports
               optimizing the exit sequence from such a supervisor domain by enabling such
               supervisor domains to voluntarily yield execution in response to pending
               interrupts for the other supervisor domains.

6.4. "Smgeien/Ssgeien" : Standard Extension for
Machine Guest External Interrupt Enables
The Smgeien extension enables access by a supervisor domain to a subset of the guest interrupt files
within a supervisor interrupt domain in an IMSIC. The Smgeien extension depends on the Smsdia
extension.

The Smgeien extension depends on the Smaia and the H extension. When Smgeien is implemented, the
bit 9 of mvien must be writable.

This extension introduces an MXLEN read-write WARL register named mgeien, formatted as shown
in Figure 14 for RV64 and in Figure 15 for RV32. The CSR number is 0x74D.

Figure 14. mgeien register for RV64

Figure 15. mgeien register for RV32

               The RDSM may use bit 9 of mvien to control access to the supervisor-level interrupt
              file in the supervisor interrupt domain selected by msdcfg.SIDN.

Each bit of the GIF field when set to 1 enables access to corresponding guest interrupt file in the
supervisor interrupt domain selected by msdcfg.SIDN.

The number of writable bits in mgeien is determined by the maximum GEILEN value across all
supervisor interrupt domains, and this maximum is referred to as MGEILEN. If MGEILEN is nonzero,
bits MGEILEN:1 shall be writable in mgeien. All other bit positions in the GIF field shall be read-only
zeros.

For a supervisor-level environment, extension Ssgeien is essentially the same as Smgeien except
excluding the machine-level CSRs and behavior not directly visible to supervisor level.

The following rules apply:

 • Bits GEILEN:1 of hgeip are read-only aliases of the same bits in the internal hgeip register selected
   by msdcfg.SIDN if the bit at the same position in mgeien is 1. All other bits of hgeip are zero.

 • Bits GEILEN:1 of hgeie are writable aliases of the same bits in the internal hgeie register selected

     by msdcfg.SIDN if the bit at the same position in mgeien is 1. All other bits of hgeie are read-only
     zero.

 • If hstatus.VGEIN is not 0 and the bit selected by VGEIN in mgeien is 1 then the vsiselect, vsireg,
     and vstopei CSRs operate on the registers of the guest interrupt file selected by VGEIN. If VGEIN is 0
     or the the bit selected by VGEIN in mgeien is 0 then the vsiselect, vsireg, and vstopei CSRs operate
     as-if the VGEIN is the number of an unimplemented guest external interrupt.

The mgeien.A bit, when set to 1, enables msideip to reflect the OR of all external interrupts for the
supervisor interrupt domain; otherwise, msideip reflects only the subset of guest external interrupts
determined by mgeien.GIF. When mgeien.A is 0, the SEIP for the supervisor interrupt domain is
reflected in msideip if it is not delegated to the supervisor domain.

Each bit i of msideip, corresponding to an implemented supervisor interrupt domain, must be set to
one if and only if the relevant interrupt source is active.

Specifically:

 • If i equals msdcfg.SIDN, the bit is set to one if and only if either:

      ◦ mip.SEIP is 1 and bit 9 (for SEI) of mideleg is zero; or

      ◦ mip.SEIP is 1 and mgeien.A is 1; or

      ◦ The bitwise logical AND of the following three components of the supervisor interrupt
        domain is nonzero:

             ▪ the internal hgeip,

             ▪ the internal hgeie, and

             ▪ the logical complement of mgeien if mgeien.A is 0; otherwise, a value of all 1s.

The number of bits implemented in hgeip and hgeie is referred to as GEILEN. When GEILEN is
nonzero, the H extension requires that the least significant bits, excluding bit 0, be implemented
first. Hence, if GEILEN is nonzero, bits GEILEN:1 shall be writable in hgeie, and all other bit positions
shall be read-only zeros in both hgeip and hgeie. When the Ssgeien extension is implemented, this
rule does not apply, and:

 • The implemented guest external interrupts and their enables might not be contiguous in hgeip
     and hgeie, respectively.

 • The supervisor-level and guest interrupt files might not be laid out contiguously in memory.

 • The supervisor-level interrupt file might not be available to a supervisor domain even when
     guest interrupt files are available.

                  The Smgeien extension is intended for use cases involving supervisor domains that
                  share the guest interrupt files in a supervisor interrupt domain.

                  Typically, one of the supervisor domains participating in the scheme acts as a
                 donor domain that initially has access to all the interrupt files. Such a donor
                  supervisor domain may then donate one or more interrupt files—usually _guest
                  interrupt files—to a recipient supervisor domain, either temporarily or
                  permanently, by invoking SBI functions provided by the RDSM. Once the interrupt

files have been made accessible to the recipient domain by the RDSM, the donor
domain is not expected to access them.

The memory locations of the accessible guest interrupt files, along with their guest
external interrupt numbers, are communicated to recipient supervisor domains
by the RDSM through software mechanisms such as SBI.

