2 Out-of-order execution (All processors except P1,
   PMMX)
The sixth generation of Intel microprocessors, beginning with the PPro, provided an
important improvement in microarchitecture design, namely out-of-order execution. The idea
is that if the execution of a particular instruction is delayed because the input data for the
instruction are not available yet, then the microprocessor will try to find later instructions that
it can do first, if the input data for the later instructions are ready. Obviously, the
microprocessor has to check if the later instructions need the outputs from the earlier
instruction. If each instruction depends on the result of the preceding instruction, then we
have no opportunities for out-of-order execution. This is called a dependency chain. Manual
2: "Optimizing subroutines in assembly language" gives examples of how to avoid long
dependency chains.

The logic for determining input dependences and the mechanisms for doing instructions as
soon as the necessary inputs are ready, gives us the further advantage that the
microprocessor can do several things at the same time. If we need to do an addition and a
multiplication, and neither instruction depends on the output of the other, then we can do
both at the same time, because they are using two different execution units. But we cannot
do two multiplications at the same time if we have only one multiplication unit.

Typically, everything in these microprocessors is highly pipelined in order to improve the
throughput. If, for example, a floating point addition takes 4 clock cycles, and the execution
unit is fully pipelined, then we can start one addition at time T, which will be finished at time
T+4, and start another addition at time T+1, which will be finished at time T+5. The
advantage of this technology is therefore highest if the code can be organized so that there
are as few dependences as possible between successive instructions.

 2.1 Instructions are split into µops
The microprocessors with out-of-order execution are translating all instructions into micro-
operations - abbreviated µops or uops. A simple instruction such as ADD EAX,EBX
generates only one µop, while an instruction like ADD EAX,[MEM1] may generate two: one
for reading from memory into a temporary (unnamed) register, and one for adding the
contents of the temporary register to EAX. The instruction ADD [MEM1],EAX may
generate three µops: one for reading from memory, one for adding, and one for writing the
result back to memory. The advantage of this is that the µops can be executed out of order.
Example:
     ; Example 2.1. Out of order processing
     mov eax, [mem1]
     imul eax, 5
     add eax, [mem2]
     mov [mem3], eax

Here, the ADD EAX,[MEM2] instruction is split into two µops. The advantage of this is that
the microprocessor can fetch the value of [MEM2] at the same time as it is doing the
multiplication. If none of the data are in the cache, then the microprocessor will start to fetch
[MEM2] immediately after starting to fetch [MEM1], and long before the multiplication can
start. The splitting into µops also makes the stack work more efficiently. Consider the
sequence:

     ; Example 2.2. Instructions split into µops
     push eax
     call func

The PUSH EAX instruction may be split into two µops which can be represented as SUB
ESP,4 and MOV [ESP],EAX. The advantage of this is that the SUB ESP,4 µop can be
executed even if the value of EAX is not ready yet. The CALL operation needs the new value
of ESP, so the CALL would have to wait for the value of EAX if the PUSH instruction was not
split into µops. Thanks to the use of µops, the value of the stack pointer almost never
causes delays in normal programs.

 2.2 Register renaming
Consider the example:

    ; Example 2.3. Register renaming
    mov eax, [mem1]
    imul eax, 6
    mov [mem2], eax
    mov eax, [mem3]
    add eax, 2
    mov [mem4], eax

This piece of code is doing two things that have nothing to do with each other: multiplying
[MEM1] by 6 and adding 2 to [MEM3]. If we were using a different register in the last three
instructions, then the independence would be obvious. And, in fact, the microprocessor is
actually smart enough to do just that. It is using different temporary registers in the last three
instructions so that it can do the multiplication and the addition in parallel. The IA32
instruction set gives us only seven general-purpose 32-bit registers, and often we are using
them all. So we cannot afford the luxury of using a new register for every calculation. But
the microprocessor has plenty of temporal registers to use. The microprocessor can rename
any of these temporary registers to represent a logical register such as EAX.

Register renaming works fully automatically and in a very simple way. Every time an
instruction writes to or modifies a logical register, the microprocessor assigns a new
temporary register to that logical register. The first instruction in the above example will
assign one temporary register to EAX. The second instruction is putting a new value into
EAX, so a new temporary register will be assigned here. In other words, the multiplication
instruction will use two different registers, one for input and another one for output. The next
example illustrates the advantage of this:

    ; Example 2.4. Register renaming
    mov eax, [mem1]
    mov ebx, [mem2]
    add ebx, eax
    imul eax, 6
    mov [mem3], eax
    mov [mem4], ebx

Assume, now, that [MEM1] is in the cache, while [MEM2] is not. This means that the
multiplication can start before the addition. The advantage of using a new temporary
register for the result of the multiplication is that we still have the old value of EAX, which
has to be kept until EBX is ready for the addition. If we had used the same register for the
input and output of the multiplication, then the multiplication would have to wait until the
loading of EBX and the addition was finished.

After all the operations are finished, the value in the temporary register that represents the
last value of EAX in the code sequence is written to a permanent EAX register. This process
is called retirement (see e.g. page 84).

All general purpose registers, stack pointer, flags, floating point registers, vector registers,
and possibly segment registers can be renamed. Many processors do not allow the control
words, and the floating point status word to be renamed, and this is the reason why code
that modifies these registers is slow.

