3 Branch prediction (all processors)
The pipeline in a modern microprocessor contains many stages, including instruction fetch,
decoding, register allocation and renaming, µop reordering, execution, and retirement.
Handling instructions in a pipelined manner allows the microprocessor to do many things at
the same time. While one instruction is being executed, the next instructions are being
fetched and decoded. The biggest problem with pipelining is branches in the code. For
example, a conditional jump allows the instruction flow to go in any of two directions. If there
is only one pipeline, then the microprocessor does not know which of the two branches to
feed into the pipeline until the branch instruction has been executed. The longer the
pipeline, the more time does the microprocessor waste if it does not know which branch to
feed into the pipeline.

The microarchitecture tries to overcome this problem by feeding the most probable branch
into the pipeline and execute it speculatively. Speculative execution means that the
instructions are decoded and executed, but the results are not retired into the permanent
register file, and memory writes are pending until the branch instruction is finally resolved. If
it turns out that the guess was wrong and the wrong branch was executed speculatively,
then the pipeline is flushed, the results of the speculative execution are discarded and the
other branch is fed into the pipeline. This is called a branch misprediction, and the result is
that several clock cycles are wasted. The number of wasted clock cycles is approximately
equal to the length of the pipeline.

The designers are inventing more and more sophisticated mechanisms for predicting which
way a branch will go, in order to minimize the frequency of branch mispredictions. The
history of branch behavior is stored in order to use past history for predicting future
behavior. This prediction has two aspects: predicting whether a conditional jump will be
taken or not, and predicting the target address that a conditional or unconditional jump goes
to. A cache called Branch Target Buffer (BTB) stores the target address of all jumps. The
target address is stored in the BTB the first time an unconditional jump is executed and the
first time a conditional jump is taken. The second time the same jump is executed, the target
address in the BTB is used for fetching the predicted target into the pipeline, even though
the true target is not calculated until the jump reaches the execution stage. The predicted
target is very likely to be correct for unconditional jumps, but not certain, because the BTB
may not be big enough to contain all jumps in a program, so different jumps may replace
each other's entries in the BTB. The risk of misprediction is much higher for conditional
jumps.

 3.1 Prediction methods for conditional jumps
When a conditional jump is encountered, the microprocessor has to predict not only the
target address, but also whether the conditional jump is taken or not taken. If the guess is
right and the right target is loaded, then the flow in the pipeline goes smoothly and fast. But
if the prediction is wrong and the microprocessor has loaded the wrong target into the
pipeline, then the pipeline has to be flushed, and the time that was been spent on fetching,
decoding and perhaps speculatively executing instructions in the wrong branch is wasted.

Saturating counter
A relatively simple method is to store information in the BTB about what the branch has
done most in the past. This can be done with a saturating counter, as shown in the state
diagram in figure 3.1.

Figure 3.1. Saturating 2-bit counter

This counter has four states. Every time the branch is taken, the counter goes up to the next
state, unless it already is in the highest state. Every time the branch is not taken, the
counter goes down one step, unless it already is in the lowest state. When the counter is in
one of the highest two states, it predicts that the branch will be taken the next time. When
the counter is in one of the lowest two states, it predicts that the branch will not be taken the
next time. If the branch has been not taken several times in a row, then the counter will be
in the lowest state, called "strongly not taken". The branch then has to be taken twice for the
prediction to change to taken. Likewise, if the branch has been taken several times in a row,
it will be in state "Strongly taken". It has to be not taken twice before the prediction changes
to not taken. In other words, the branch has to deviate twice from what it has done most in
the past before the prediction changes.

This method is good for a branch that does the same most of the time, but not good for a
branch that changes often. The P1 uses this method, though with a flaw, as explained on
page 20.

Two-level adaptive predictor with local history tables
Consider the behavior of the counter in figure 3.1 for a branch that is taken every second
time. If it starts in state "strongly not taken", then the counter will alternate between state
"strongly not taken" and "weakly not taken". The prediction will always be "not taken", which
will be right only 50% of the time. Likewise, if it starts in state "strongly taken" then it will
predict "taken" all the time. The worst case is if it happens to start in state "weakly taken"
and alternates between "weakly not taken" and "weakly taken". In this case, the branch will
be mispredicted all the time.

A method of improving the prediction rate for branches with such a regularly recurring
pattern is to remember the history of the last n occurrences of the branch and use one
saturating counter for each of the possible 2n history patterns. This method, which was
invented by T.-Y. Yeh and Y. N. Patt, is illustrated in figure 3.2.

Figure 3.2. Adaptive two-level predictor

Consider the example of n = 2. This means that the last two occurrences of the branch are
stored in a 2-bit shift register. This branch history register can have 4 different values: 00,
01, 10, and 11; where 0 means "not taken" and 1 means "taken". Now, we make a pattern
history table with four entries, one for each of the possible branch histories. Each entry in
the pattern history table contains a 2-bit saturating counter of the same type as in figure 3.1.
The branch history register is used for choosing which of the four saturating counters to use.
If the history is 00 then the first counter is used. If the history is 11 then the last of the four
counters is used.

In the case of a branch that is alternately taken and not taken, the branch history register
will always contain either 01 or 10. When the history is 01 we will use the counter with the
binary number 01B in the pattern history table. This counter will soon learn that after 01
comes a 0. Likewise, counter number 10B will learn that after 10 comes a 1. After a short
learning period, the predictor will make 100% correct predictions. Counters number 00B and
11B will not be used in this case.

A branch that is alternately taken twice and not taken twice will also be predicted 100% by
this predictor. The repetitive pattern is 0011-0011-0011. Counter number 00B in the pattern
history table will learn that after 00 comes a 1. Counter number 01B will learn that after a 01
comes a 1. Counter number 10B will learn that after 10 comes a 0. And counter number
11B will learn that after 11 comes a 0. But the repetitive pattern 0001-0001-0001 will not be
predicted correctly all the time because 00 can be followed by either a 0 or a 1.

The mechanism in figure 3.2 is called a two-level adaptive predictor. The general rule for a
two-level adaptive predictor with an n-bit branch history register is as follows:

      Any repetitive pattern with a period of n+1 or less can be predicted perfectly
      after a warm-up time no longer than three periods. A repetitive pattern with a
      period p higher than n+1 and less than or equal to 2n can be predicted perfectly
      if all the p n-bit subsequences are different.

To illustrate this rule, consider the repetitive pattern 0011-0011-0011 in the above example.
The 2-bit subsequences are 00, 01, 11, 10. Since these are all different, they will use
different counters in the pattern history table of a two-level predictor with n = 2. With n = 4,
we can predict the repetitive pattern 000011-000011-000011 with period 6, because the six
4-bit subsequences: 0000, 0001, 0011, 0110, 1100, 1000, are all different. But the pattern
000001-000001-000001, which also has period 6, cannot be predicted perfectly, because
the subsequence 0000 can be followed by either a 0 or a 1.

The PMMX, PPro, P2 and P3 all use a two-level adaptive predictor with n = 4. This requires
36 bits of storage for each branch: two bits for each of the 16 counters in the pattern history
table, and 4 bits for the branch history register.

The powerful capability of pattern recognition has a minor drawback in the case of
completely random sequences with no regularities. The following table lists the experimental
fraction of mispredictions for a completely random sequence of taken and not taken:

             fraction of taken/not taken             fraction of mispredictions
                    0.001/0.999                              0.001001
                      0.01/0.99                                0.0101
                      0.05/0.95                                0.0525
                      0.10/0.90                                 0.110
                      0.15/0.85                                 0.171
                      0.20/0.80                                 0.235
                      0.25/0.75                                 0.300
                      0.30/0.70                                 0.362

                      0.35/0.65                                 0.417
                      0.40/0.60                                 0.462
                      0.45/0.55                                 0.490
                      0.50/0.50                                 0.500
        Table 3.1. Probability of mispredicting random branch

The fraction of mispredictions is slightly higher than it would be without pattern recognition
because the processor keeps trying to find repeated patterns in a sequence that has no
regularities. The values in table 3.1 also apply to a predictor with a global history table as
well as an agree predictor, described below.

Two-level adaptive predictor with global history table
Since the storage requirement for the two-level predictor grows exponentially with the
number of history bits n, there is a practical limit to how big we can make n. One way of
overcoming this limitation is to share the branch history register and the pattern history table
among all the branches rather than having one set for each branch.

Imagine a two-level predictor with a global branch history register, storing the history of the
last n branches, and a shared pattern history table. The prediction of a branch is made on
the basis of the last n branch events. Some or all of these events may be occurrences of the
same branch. If the innermost loop in a program contains m conditional jumps, then the
prediction of a branch within this loop can rely on floor(n/m) occurrences of the same
branch in the branch history register, while the rest of the entries come from other branches.
If this is enough for defining the pattern of this branch, or if it is highly correlated with the
other branches, then we can expect the prediction rate to be good. Many modern
processors use variants of this method with values of n from 8 to 16.

The agree predictor
The disadvantage of using global tables is that branches that behave differently may share
the same entry in the global pattern history table. This problem can be reduced by storing a
biasing bit for each branch. The biasing bit indicates whether the branch is mostly taken or
not taken. The predictors in the pattern history table now no longer indicate whether the
branch is predicted to be taken or not, but whether it is predicted to go the same way or the
opposite way of the biasing bit. Since the prediction is more likely to agree than to disagree
with the biasing bit, the probability of negative interference between branches that happen
to use the same entry in the pattern history table is reduced, but not eliminated. My
research indicates that the P4 is using one version of this method, as shown in figure 3.3.

Figure 3.3. Agree predictor

Each branch has a local predictor, which is simply a saturating counter of the same type as
shown in figure 3.1. The global pattern history table, which is indexed by the global branch
history register, indicates whether the branch is predicted to agree or disagree with the
output of the local predictor.

The global branch history register has 16 bits in the P4. Since, obviously, some of the 216
different history patterns are more common than others, we have the problem that some
entries in the pattern history table will be used by several branches, while many other
entries will never be used at all, if the pattern history table is indexed by the branch history
alone. In order to make the use of these entries more evenly distributed, and thus reduce
the probability that two branches use the same entry, the pattern history table may be
indexed by a combination of the global history and the branch address. The literature
recommends that the index into the pattern history table is generated by an XOR
combination of the history bits and the branch address. However, my experimental results
do not confirm such a design. The indexing function in figure 3.3 may be a more complex
hashing function of the history and the branch address, or it may involve the branch target
address, BTB entry address or trace cache address.

Since the indexing function is not known, it is impossible to predict whether two branches
will use the same entry in the pattern history table. For the same reason, I have not been
able to measure the size of the pattern history table, but must rely on rumors in the
literature.

(Literature: E. Sprangle, et. al.: The Agree Predictor: A Mechanism for Reducing Negative
Branch History Interference. Proceedings of the 24th International Symposium on Computer
Architecture, Denver, June 1997. J. Stokes: The Pentium 4 and the G4e: an Architectural
Comparison: Part I. arstechnica.com, Mar. 2001).

Loop counter
The branch that controls a loop will typically go n-1 times one way and then one time the
other way, where n is the period. For example the loop for (i=0; i<6; i++) will
produce the branch pattern 000001-000001 or 111110-111110, depending on whether the
branch instruction is at the top or the bottom of the loop code. A loop with a high period and
several branches inside the loop body would require a very long history table and many
entries in the pattern history table for making good predictions in a two-level predictor. The
best solution to this problem is to use a different prediction method for loops, called a loop
counter or switch counter. A counter counts the period n the first time the loop is executed.
On subsequent executions, the repetition count is compared with n and the loop is predicted
to exit when the count equals the period. The information that must be stored in the BTB for
a loop counter includes: whether the branch has loop behavior or not, whether the branch is
taken or not taken at loop exit, the period, the current repetition count, and the branch
target.

The PM and Core2 have a loop counter with 6 bits, allowing loops with a maximum period of
64 to be predicted perfectly.

(Literature: US Patent 5909573).

Indirect jump prediction
An indirect jump or call is a control transfer instruction that has more than two possible
targets. A C++ program can generate an indirect jump or indirect call with a switch
statement, a function pointer, or a virtual function. An indirect jump or call is generated in
assembly by specifying a register or a memory variable or an indexed array as the
destination of a jump or call instruction. Older processors make only one BTB entry for an
indirect jump or call. This means that it will always be predicted to go to the same target as
it did last time.

As object oriented programming with polymorphous classes has become more common,
there is a growing need for predicting indirect calls with multiple targets. This can be done
by assigning a new BTB entry for every new jump target that is encountered. The history
buffer and pattern history table must have space for more than one bit of information for
each jump incident in order to distinguish more than two possible targets.

The PM is the first x86 processor to implement this method. The prediction rule on p. 16 still
applies with the modification that the theoretical maximum period that can be predicted
perfectly is mn, where m is the number of different targets per indirect jump, because there
are mn different possible n-length subsequences. However, this theoretical maximum cannot
be reached if it exceeds the size of the BTB or the pattern history table.

(Literature: Karel Driesen and Urs Hölzle: Accurate Indirect Branch Prediction. Technical
Report TRCS97-19, 1998. Department of Computer Science, University of California).

Subroutine return prediction
A subroutine return is an indirect jump that goes to wherever the subroutine was called
from. The prediction of subroutine returns is described on page 38.

Hybrid predictors
A hybrid predictor is an implementation of more than one branch prediction mechanism. A
meta-predictor predicts which of the prediction mechanisms is likely to give the best
predictions. The meta-predictor can be as simple as a two-bit saturating counter which
remembers which of two prediction schemes has worked best in the past for a particular
branch instruction.

The PM uses a hybrid predictor consisting of a two level adaptive predictor with a global
history table of length eight, combined with a loop counter.

Future branch prediction methods
It is likely that branch prediction methods will be further improved in the future as pipelines
get longer. According to the technical literature and the patent literature, the following
developments are likely:

   •   Hybrid predictor. A hybrid predictor with a loop counter and a two-level predictor will
       probably be implemented in more processors in the future.

   •   Alloyed predictor. The two-level predictor can be improved by using a combination of
       local and global history bits as index into the pattern history table. This eliminates the
       need for the agree predictor and improves the prediction of branches that are not
       correlated with any preceding branch.

   •   Keeping unimportant branches out of global history register. In typical programs, a
       large proportion of the branches always go the same way. Such branches may be
       kept out of the global history register in order to increase its information contents.

   •   Decoding both branches. Part or all of the pipeline may be duplicated so that both
       branches can be decoded and speculatively executed simultaneously. It may
       decode both branches whenever possible, or only if the prediction is uncertain.

   •   Neural networks. The storage requirement for the two-level predictor grows
       exponentially with n, and the warm-up time may also grow exponentially with n. This
       limits the performance that can be achieved with the two-level predictor. Other
       methods with less storage requirements are likely to be implemented. Such new
       methods may use the principles of neural networks.

   •   Reducing the effect of context switches. The information that the predictors have
       collected is often lost due to task switches and other context switches. As more
       advanced prediction methods require longer warm-up time, it is likely that new
       methods will be implemented to reduce the loss during context switches.

 3.2 Branch prediction in P1
The branch prediction mechanism for the P1 is very different from the other processors.
Information found in Intel documents and elsewhere on this subject is misleading, and
following the advices given in such documents is likely to lead to sub-optimal code.

The P1 has a branch target buffer (BTB), which can hold information for up to 256 jump
instructions. The BTB is organized as a 4-way set-associative cache with 64 entries per
way. This means that the BTB can hold no more than 4 entries with the same set value.
Unlike the data cache, the BTB uses a pseudo random replacement algorithm, which
means that a new entry will not necessarily displace the least recently used entry of the
same set-value.

Each entry contains a saturation counter of the type shown in figure 3.1. Apparently, the
designers couldn't afford to use an extra bit for indicating whether the BTB entry is used or
not. Instead, they have equated state "strongly not taken" with "entry unused". This makes
sense because a branch with no BTB entry is predicted to be not taken anyway, in the P1. A
branch doesn't get a BTB entry until the first time it is taken. Unfortunately, the designers
have decided that a branch that is taken the first time it is seen should go to state "strongly
taken". This makes the state diagram for the predictor look like this:

Figure 3.4. Branch predictor in P1.

This is of course a sub-optimal design, and I have strong indications that it is a design flaw.
In a tight loop with no more than four instruction pairs, where the loop control branch is seen
again before the BTB has had the time to update, the output of the saturation counter is
forwarded directly to the prefetcher. In this case the state can go from "strongly not taken" to
"weakly not taken". This indicates that the originally intended behavior is as in figure 3.1.
Intel engineers have been unaware of this flaw until I published my findings in an earlier
version of this manual.

The consequence of this flaw is that a branch instruction which falls through most of the
time will have up to three times as many mispredictions as a branch instruction which is
taken most of the time. You may take this asymmetry into account by organizing branches
so that they are taken more often than not.

BTB is looking ahead (P1)
The BTB mechanism in the P1 is counting instruction pairs, rather than single instructions,
so you have to know how instructions are pairing (see page 42) in order to analyze where a
BTB entry is stored. The BTB entry for any control transfer instruction is attached to the
address of the U-pipe instruction in the preceding instruction pair. (An unpaired instruction
counts as one pair). Example:

    ; Example 3.1. Pentium 1 BTB mechanism
    shr eax,1
    mov ebx,[esi]
    cmp eax,ebx
    jb L

Here SHR pairs with MOV, and CMP pairs with JB. The BTB entry for JB L is thus attached to
the address of the SHR EAX,1 instruction. When this BTB entry is met, and if it predicts the
branch to be taken, then the P1 will read the target address from the BTB entry, and load
the instructions following L into the pipeline. This happens before the branch instruction has
been decoded, so the Pentium relies solely on the information in the BTB when doing this.

Instructions are seldom pairing the first time they are executed (see page 42). If the
instructions above are not pairing, then the BTB entry should be attached to the address of
the CMP instruction, and this entry would be wrong on the next execution, when instructions
are pairing. However, in most cases the P1 is smart enough to not make a BTB entry when
there is an unused pairing opportunity, so you don't get a BTB entry until the second
execution, and hence you won't get a prediction until the third execution. (In the rare case,
where every second instruction is a single-byte instruction, you may get a BTB entry on the
first execution which becomes invalid in the second execution, but since the instruction it is
attached to will then go to the V-pipe, it is ignored and gives no penalty. A BTB entry is only
read if it is attached to the address of a U-pipe instruction).

A BTB entry is identified by its set-value which is equal to bits 0-5 of the address it is
attached to. Bits 6-31 are then stored in the BTB as a tag. Addresses which are spaced a
multiple of 64 bytes apart will have the same set-value. You can have no more than four
BTB entries with the same set-value.

Consecutive branches
When a jump is mispredicted, then the pipeline gets flushed. If the next instruction pair
executed also contains a control transfer instruction, then the P1 will not load its target
because it cannot load a new target while the pipeline is being flushed. The result is that the
second jump instruction is predicted to fall through regardless of the state of its BTB entry.
Therefore, if the second jump is also taken, then you will get another penalty. The state of
the BTB entry for the second jump instruction does get correctly updated, though. If you
have a long chain of control transfer instructions, and the first jump in the chain is
mispredicted, then the pipeline will get flushed all the time, and you will get nothing but
mispredictions until you meet an instruction pair which does not jump. The most extreme
case of this is a loop which jumps to itself: It will get a misprediction penalty for each
iteration.

This is not the only problem with consecutive control transfer instructions. Another problem
is that you can have another branch instruction between a BTB entry and the control
transfer instruction it belongs to. If the first branch instruction jumps to somewhere else,
then strange things may happen. Consider this example:

               ; Example 3.2. P1 consecutive branches
               shr eax,1
               mov ebx,[esi]
               cmp eax,ebx
               jb L1
               jmp L2
    L1:        mov eax,ebx
               inc ebx

When JB L1 falls through, then we will get a BTB entry for JMP L2 attached to the address
of CMP EAX,EBX. But what will happen when JB L1 later is taken? At the time when the
BTB entry for JMP L2 is read, the processor doesn't know that the next instruction pair does
not contain a jump instruction, so it will actually predict the instruction pair MOV EAX,EBX /
INC EBX to jump to L2. The penalty for predicting non-jump instructions to jump is 3 clock
cycles. The BTB entry for JMP L2 will get its state decremented, because it is applied to
something that doesn't jump. If we keep going to L1, then the BTB entry for JMP L2 will be
decremented to state 1 and 0, so that the problem will disappear until next time JMP L2 is
executed.

The penalty for predicting the non-jumping instructions to jump only occurs when the jump
to L1 is predicted. In the case that JB L1 is mispredictedly jumping, then the pipeline gets
flushed and we won't get the false L2 target loaded, so in this case we will not see the
penalty of predicting the non-jumping instructions to jump, but we do get the BTB entry for
JMP L2 decremented.

Suppose, now, that we replace the INC EBX instruction above with another jump
instruction. This third jump instruction will then use the same BTB entry as JMP L2 with the
possible penalty of predicting a wrong target.

To summarize, consecutive jumps can lead to the following problems in the P1:

   •   Failure to load a jump target when the pipeline is being flushed by a preceding
       mispredicted jump.

   •   A BTB entry being misapplied to non-jumping instructions and predicting them to
       jump.

   •   A second consequence of the above is that a misapplied BTB entry will get its state
       decremented, possibly leading to a later misprediction of the jump it belongs to.
       Even unconditional jumps can be predicted to fall through for this reason.

   •   Two jump instructions may share the same BTB entry, leading to the prediction of a
       wrong target.

All this mess may give you a lot of penalties, so you should definitely avoid having an
instruction pair containing a jump immediately after another poorly predictable control
transfer instruction or its target in the P1. It is time for another illustrative example:

               ; Example 3.3a. P1 consecutive branches
               call P
               test eax,eax
               jz   L2
    L1:        mov [edi],ebx
               add edi,4
               dec eax
               jnz L1
    L2:        call P

First, we may note that the function P is called alternately from two different locations. This
means that the target for the return from P will be changing all the time. Consequently, the
return from P will always be mispredicted.

Assume, now, that EAX is zero. The jump to L2 will not have its target loaded because the
mispredicted return caused a pipeline flush. Next, the second CALL P will also fail to have
its target loaded because JZ L2 caused a pipeline flush. Here we have the situation where
a chain of consecutive jumps makes the pipeline flush repeatedly because the first jump
was mispredicted. The BTB entry for JZ L2 is stored at the address of P's return
instruction. This BTB entry will now be misapplied to whatever comes after the second CALL
P, but that doesn't give a penalty because the pipeline is flushed by the mispredicted
second return.

Now, let's see what happens if EAX has a nonzero value the next time: JZ L2 is always
predicted to fall through because of the flush. The second CALL P has a BTB entry at the
address of TEST EAX,EAX. This entry will be misapplied to the MOV/ADD pair, predicting it
to jump to P. This causes a flush which prevents JNZ L1 from loading its target. If we have
been here before, then the second CALL P will have another BTB entry at the address of
DEC EAX. On the second and third iteration of the loop, this entry will also be misapplied to
the MOV/ADD pair, until it has had its state decremented to 1 or 0. This will not cause a
penalty on the second iteration because the flush from JNZ L1 prevents it from loading its
false target, but on the third iteration it will. The subsequent iterations of the loop have no
penalties, but when it exits, JNZ L1 is mispredicted. The flush would now prevent CALL P
from loading its target, were it not for the fact that the BTB entry for CALL P has already
been destroyed by being misapplied several times. We can improve this code by putting in
some NOP's to separate all consecutive jumps:

               ; Example 3.3b. P1 consecutive branches
               call P
               test eax,eax
               nop
               jz   L2
     L1:       mov [edi],ebx
               add edi,4
               dec eax
               jnz L1
     L2:       nop
               nop
               call P

The extra NOP's cost 2 clock cycles, but they save much more. Furthermore, JZ L2 is now
moved to the U-pipe which reduces its penalty from 4 to 3 when mispredicted. The only
problem that remains is that the returns from P are always mispredicted. This problem can
only be solved by replacing the call to P by an inline macro.

 3.3 Branch prediction in PMMX, PPro, P2, and P3

BTB organization
The branch target buffer (BTB) of the PMMX has 256 entries organized as 16 ways * 16
sets. Each entry is identified by bits 2-31 of the address of the last byte of the control
transfer instruction it belongs to. Bits 2-5 define the set, and bits 6-31 are stored in the BTB
as a tag. Control transfer instructions which are spaced 64 bytes apart have the same set-
value and may therefore occasionally push each other out of the BTB. Since there are 16
ways per set, this won't happen too often.

The branch target buffer (BTB) of the PPro, P2 and P3 has 512 entries organized as 16
ways * 32 sets. Each entry is identified by bits 4-31 of the address of the last byte of the
control transfer instruction it belongs to. Bits 4-8 define the set, and all bits are stored in the
BTB as a tag. Control transfer instructions which are spaced 512 bytes apart have the same
set-value and may therefore occasionally push each other out of the BTB. Since there are
16 ways per set, this won't happen too often.

The PPro, P2 and P3 allocate a BTB entry to any control transfer instruction the first time it
is executed. The PMMX allocates it the first time it jumps. A branch instruction that never
jumps will stay out of the BTB on the PMMX. As soon as it has jumped once, it will stay in
the BTB, even if it never jumps again. An entry may be pushed out of the BTB when another
control transfer instruction with the same set-value needs a BTB entry.

Misprediction penalty
In the PMMX, the penalty for misprediction of a conditional jump is 4 clocks in the U-pipe,
and 5 clocks if it is executed in the V-pipe. For all other control transfer instructions it is 4
clocks.

In the PPro, P2 and P3, the misprediction penalty is higher due to the long pipeline. A
misprediction usually costs between 10 and 20 clock cycles.

Pattern recognition for conditional jumps
The PMMX, PPro, P2 and P3 all use a two-level adaptive branch predictor with a local 4-bit
history, as explained on page 15. Simple repetitive patterns are predicted well by this
mechanism. For example, a branch which is alternately taken twice and not taken twice, will
be predicted all the time after a short learning period. The rule on page 16 tells which
repetitive branch patterns can be predicted perfectly. All patterns with a period of five or less
are predicted perfectly. This means that a loop which always repeats five times will have no
mispredictions, but a loop that repeats six or more times will not be predicted.

The branch prediction mechanism is also good at handling 'almost regular' patterns, or
deviations from the regular pattern. Not only does it learn what the regular pattern looks like.
It also learns what deviations from the regular pattern look like. If deviations are always of
the same type, then it will remember what comes after the irregular event, and the deviation
will cost only one misprediction. Likewise, a branch which switches back and forth between
two different regular patterns is predicted well.

Tight loops (PMMX)
Branch prediction in the PMMX is not reliable in tiny loops where the pattern recognition
mechanism doesn't have time to update its data before the next branch is met. This means
that simple patterns, which would normally be predicted perfectly, are not recognized.
Incidentally, some patterns which normally would not be recognized, are predicted perfectly
in tight loops. For example, a loop which always repeats 6 times would have the branch
pattern 111110 for the branch instruction at the bottom of the loop. This pattern would
normally have one or two mispredictions per iteration, but in a tight loop it has none. The
same applies to a loop which repeats 7 times. Most other repeat counts are predicted
poorer in tight loops than normally.

To find out whether a loop will behave as 'tight' on the PMMX you may follow the following
rule of thumb: Count the number of instructions in the loop. If the number is 6 or less, then
the loop will behave as tight. If you have more than 7 instructions, then you can be
reasonably sure that the pattern recognition functions normally. Strangely enough, it doesn't
matter how many clock cycles each instruction takes, whether it has stalls, or whether it is
paired or not. Complex integer instructions do not count. A loop can have lots of complex
integer instructions and still behave as a tight loop. A complex integer instruction is a non-
pairable integer instruction that always takes more than one clock cycle. Complex floating
point instructions and MMX instructions still count as one. Note, that this rule of thumb is
heuristic and not completely reliable.

Tight loops on PPro, P2 and P3 are predicted normally, and take minimum two clock cycles
per iteration.

Indirect jumps and calls (PMMX, PPro, P2 and P3)
There is no pattern recognition for indirect jumps and calls, and the BTB can remember no
more than one target for an indirect jump. It is simply predicted to go to the same target as it
did last time.
JECXZ and LOOP (PMMX)
There is no pattern recognition for these two instructions in the PMMX. They are simply
predicted to go the same way as last time they were executed. These two instructions
should be avoided in time-critical code for PMMX. In PPro, P2 and P3 they are predicted
using pattern recognition, but the LOOP instruction is still inferior to DEC ECX / JNZ.

 3.4 Branch prediction in P4 and P4E
The organization of the branch target buffer (BTB) in the P4 and P4E is not known in detail.
It has 4096 entries, probably organized as 8 ways * 512 sets. It is indexed by addresses in
the trace cache which do not necessarily have a simple correspondence to addresses in the
original code. Consequently, it is difficult for the programmer to predict or avoid BTB
contentions. Far jumps, calls and returns are not predicted in the P4 and P4E.

The processor allocates a BTB entry to any near control transfer instruction the first time it
jumps. A branch instruction which never jumps will stay out of the BTB, but not out of the
branch history register. As soon as it has jumped once, it will stay in the BTB, even if it
never jumps again. An entry may be pushed out of the BTB when another control transfer
instruction with the same set-value needs a BTB entry. All conditional jumps, including
JECXZ and LOOP, contribute to the branch history register. Unconditional and indirect
jumps, calls and returns do not contribute to the branch history.

Branch mispredictions are much more expensive on the P4 and P4E than on previous
generations of microprocessors. The time it takes to recover from a misprediction is rarely
less than 24 clock cycles, and typically around 45 µops. Apparently, the microprocessor
cannot cancel a bogus µop before it has reached the retirement stage. This means that if
you have a lot of µops with long latency or poor throughput, then the penalty for a
misprediction may be as high as 100 clock cycles or more. It is therefore very important to
organize code so that the number of mispredictions is minimized.

Pattern recognition for conditional jumps in P4
The P4 uses an "agree" predictor with a 16-bit global history, as explained on page 17. The
branch history table has 4096 entries, according to an article in Ars Technica (J. Stokes:
The Pentium 4 and the G4e: an Architectural Comparison: Part I. arstechnica.com, Mar.
2001). The prediction rule on page 16 tells us that the P4 can predict any repetitive pattern
with a period of 17 or less, as well as some patterns with higher history. However, this
applies to the global history, not the local history. You therefore have to look at the
preceding branches in order to determine whether a branch is likely to be well predicted. I
will explain this with the following example:

        ; Example 3.4. P4 loops and branches
        mov eax, 100
    A: ...
        ...
        mov ebx, 16
    B: ...
        sub ebx, 1
        jnz B
        test eax, 1
        jnz X1
        call EAX_IS_EVEN
        jmp X2
    X1: call EAX_IS_ODD
    X2: ...
        mov ecx, 0
    C1: cmp ecx, 10
        jnb C2
        ...
        add ecx, 1
        jmp     C1
    C2: ...
        sub     eax, 1
        jnz     A

The A loop repeats 100 times. The JNZ A instruction is taken 99 times and falls through 1
time. It will be mispredicted when it falls through. The B and C loops are inside the A loop.
The B loop repeats 16 times, so without considering the prehistory, we would expect it to be
predictable. But we have to consider the prehistory. With the exception of the first time, the
prehistory for JNZ B will look like this: JNB C2: not taken 10 times, taken 1 time (JMP C1
does not count because it is unconditional); JNZ A taken; JNZ B taken 15 times, not taken
1 time. This totals 17 consecutive taken branches in the global history before JNZ B is not
taken. It will therefore be mispredicted once or twice for each cycle. There is a way to avoid
this misprediction. If you insert a dummy branch that always falls through anywhere
between the A: and B: labels, then JNZ B is likely to be predicted perfectly, because the
prehistory now has a not taken before the 15 times taken. The time saved by predicting JNZ
B well is far more than the cost of an extra dummy branch. The dummy branch may, for
example, be TEST ESP,ESP / JC B.

JNZ X1 is taken every second time and is not correlated with any of the preceding 16
conditional jump events, so it will not be predicted well.

Assuming that the called procedures do not contain any conditional jumps, the prehistory for
JNB C2 is the following: JNZ B taken 15 times, not taken 1 time; JNZ X1 taken or not
taken; JNB C2: not taken 10 times, taken 1 time. The prehistory of JNB C2 is thus always
unique. In fact, it has 22 different and unique prehistories, and it will be predicted well. If
there was another conditional jump inside the C loop, for example if the JMP C1 instruction
was conditional, then the JNB C2 loop would not be predicted well, because there would
be 20 instances between each time JNB C2 is taken.

In general, a loop cannot be predicted well on the P4 if the repeat count multiplied by the
number of conditional jumps inside the loop exceeds 17.

Alternating branches
While the C loop in the above example is predictable, and the B loop can be made
predictable by inserting a dummy branch, we still have a big problem with the JNZ X1
branch. This branch is alternately taken and not taken, and it is not correlated with any of
the preceding 16 branch events. Let's study the behavior of the predictors in this case. If the
local predictor starts in state "weakly not taken", then it will alternate between "weakly not
taken" and "strongly not taken" (see figure 3.1). If the entry in the global pattern history table
starts in an agree state, then the branch will be predicted to fall through every time, and we
will have 50% mispredictions (see figure 3.3). If the global predictor happens to start in state
"strongly disagree", then it will be predicted to be taken every time, and we still have 50%
mispredictions. The worst case is if the global predictor starts in state "weakly disagree". It
will then alternate between "weakly agree" and "weakly disagree", and we will have 100%
mispredictions. There is no way to control the starting state of the global predictor, but we
can control the starting state of the local predictor. The local predictor starts in state "weakly
not taken" or "weakly taken", according to the rules of static prediction, explained on page
39 below. If we swap the two branches and replace JNZ with JZ, so that the branch is taken
the first time, then the local predictor will alternate between state "weakly not taken" and
"weakly taken". The global predictor will soon go to state "strongly disagree", and the branch
will be predicted correctly all the time. A backward branch that alternates would have to be
organized so that it is not taken the first time, to obtain the same effect. Instead of swapping
the two branches, we may insert a 3EH prediction hint prefix immediately before the JNZ
X1 to change the static prediction to "taken" (see p. 39). This will have the same effect.

While this method of controlling the initial state of the local predictor solves the problem in
most cases, it is not completely reliable. It may not work if the first time the branch is seen is
after a mispredicted preceding branch. Furthermore, the sequence may be broken by a task
switch or other event that pushes the branch out of the BTB. We have no way of predicting
whether the branch will be taken or not taken the first time it is seen after such an event.
Fortunately, it appears that the designers have been aware of this problem and
implemented a way to solve it. While researching these mechanisms, I discovered an
undocumented prefix, 64H, which does the trick on the P4. This prefix doesn't change the
static prediction, but it controls the state of the local predictor after the first event so that it
will toggle between state "weakly not taken" and "weakly taken", regardless of whether the
branch is taken or not taken the first time. This trick can be summarized in the following rule:

A branch which is taken exactly every second time, and which doesn't correlate with any of
the preceding 16 branch events, can be predicted well on the P4 if it is preceded by a 64H
prefix. This prefix is coded in the following way:

     ; Example 3.5. P4 alternating branch hint
     DB   64H         ; Hint prefix for alternating branch
     jnz X1           ; Branch instruction

No prefix is needed if the branch can see a previous instance of itself in the 16-bit
prehistory.

The 64H prefix has no effect and causes no harm on any previous microprocessor. It is an
FS segment prefix. The 64H prefix cannot be used together with the 2EH and 3EH static
prediction prefixes.

Pattern recognition for conditional jumps in P4E
Branch prediction in the P4E is simpler than in the P4. There is no agree predictor, but only
a 16-bit global history and a global pattern history table. This means that a loop can be
predicted well on the P4E if the repeat count multiplied by the number of conditional jumps
inside the loop does not exceed 17.

Apparently, the designers have decided that the improvement in prediction rate of the agree
predictor is too small to justify the considerable complexity. However, it appears that the
P4E has inherited a little peculiarity from the agree predictor of the P4. The 64H prefix
influences the first few predictions of a branch in a way that might have been optimal for an
alternating branch if there was an agree predictor. This has no useful purpose, but causes
no serious harm either.

 3.5 Branch prediction in PM and Core2
The branch prediction mechanism is the same in PM and Core2.

Misprediction penalty
The misprediction penalty is approximately 13 clock cycles in the PM and 15 clock cycles in
the Core2, corresponding to the length of the pipeline. Far jumps, far calls and far returns
are not predicted.

Pattern recognition for conditional jumps
The branch prediction mechanism is more advanced than on previous processors.
Conditional jumps are handled by a hybrid predictor combining a two-level predictor and a
loop counter. In addition, there is a mechanism for predicting indirect jumps and indirect
calls.

A branch instruction is recognized as having loop behavior if it goes one way n-1 times and
then goes the other way one time. A loop counter makes it possible to predict branches with
loop behavior perfectly if the period n is no longer than 64. The loop counters are stored for
each branch without using the global history table. Instead, the loop counters have their own
buffer with 128 entries. Therefore, the prediction of a loop does not depend on the number
of other branches inside the loop. Nested loops are predicted perfectly.

Branches that do not have loop behavior are predicted using a two-level predictor with an 8-
bit global history buffer and a history pattern table of unknown size. The ability to predict a
repetitive branch pattern, other than a simple loop pattern, depends on the number of
branches in a loop according to the rules for a predictor with a global history table,
explained on p. 17.

A meta-predictor determines whether a branch has loop behavior or not and chooses the
prediction mechanism accordingly. The mechanism of the meta predictor is not known.

Pattern recognition for indirect jumps and calls
Indirect jumps and indirect calls (but not returns) are predicted using the same two-level
predictor principle as branch instructions. Branches without loop behavior and indirect
jumps/calls share the same history buffer and history pattern table, but apparently not the
same BTB. An indirect jump/call gets a new BTB entry every time it jumps to a new target. It
can have more then four BTB entries even though the BTB has only four ways. The history
buffer stores more than one bit for each entry, probably 6 or 7, in order to distinguish
between more than two targets of an indirect jump/call. This makes it possible to predict a
periodic jump pattern that switches between several different targets. The maximum number
of different targets that I have seen predicted perfectly is 36, but such impressive
predictions are rare for reasons explained below. A periodic pattern can be predicted if all 8-
length history sub-patterns are different. This also improves the prediction of subsequent
conditional jumps because they share the same history buffer. A conditional jump can make
a prediction based on the distinction between different jump targets of a preceding indirect
jump.

The above observations indicate that the history buffer must have at least 8*6 = 48 bits, but
a history pattern table of 248 entries is physically impossible. The 48 or more bits must be
compressed by some hashing algorithm into a key of x bits to index the 2x entries of the
history pattern table. The value of x is not known, but it is probably between 10 and 16. The
hashing algorithm may be a simple XOR combination of bits from the history buffer and the
address or the BTB index of the branch instruction. A more complex hashing function is also
possible.

My experiments show that the PM and Core2 make more mispredictions than expected in
programs where there are more than a few branches with non-loop behavior or indirect
jumps/calls in the innermost loop. Test results were not always the same for identical
experiments. There is evidently a dependence on the state of the BTB and the history
pattern table prior to the experiment.

The design gives three probable causes for poor predictions: The first cause is contention
for entries in the BTB. The second cause is aliasing of keys generated by the hashing
algorithm causing contention between history pattern table entries. It appears that this
aliasing phenomenon occurs not only for indirect jumps/calls but also for conditional jumps
predicted by the two-level predictor. The third possible cause is poor performance of the
meta predictor. My guess is that an insufficient size of the history pattern table is the main
reason for lower-than-expected prediction rates.

BTB organization
There appears to be different branch target buffers for different types of branches in the PM
and Core2. My measurements on a Core2 indicate the following BTB organizations:

For unconditional jumps and branches without loop behavior:
4 ways by 512 sets = 2048 entries. Each entry is identified by bits 0 - 21 of the address of
the last byte of the control transfer instruction it belongs to. Bits 4 - 12 define the set, and
the remaining bits are stored in the BTB as a tag. Entries that differ only by bits 22 - 31 will
clash into the same BTB entry. A BTB entry is allocated the first time a control transfer
instruction is met.

For branches with loop behavior:
2 ways by 64 sets = 128 entries. Each entry is identified by bits 0 - 13 of the address of the
last byte of the control transfer instruction it belongs to. Bits 4 - 9 define the set. Entries that
differ only by bits 14 - 31 will clash into the same BTB entry.

For indirect jumps and indirect calls:
4 ways by 2048 sets = 8192 entries. Each entry is identified by bits 0 - 21 of the address of
the last byte of the control transfer instruction it belongs to. Bits 0 - 10 define the set, and
the remaining bits are stored in the BTB as a tag. Entries that differ only by bits 22 - 31 will
clash into the same BTB entry.

For near returns:
The return stack buffer has 16 entries.

It should be noted that these figures are somewhat uncertain because my measurements
on branches without loop behavior are inconsistent. The inconsistency is probably due to
the fact that the hashing function for the history pattern table is not known.

(Literature: S. Gochman, et al.: The Intel Pentium M Processor: Microarchitecture and
Performance. Intel Technology Journal, vol. 7, no. 2, 2003).

 3.6 Branch prediction in Intel Nehalem
Little has been published about the branch prediction mechanism in the Nehalem, and the
test results have not been fully interpreted.

Misprediction penalty
The misprediction penalty is longer than on Core2 due to a longer pipeline. The measured
misprediction penalty is at least 17 clock cycles.

Pattern recognition for conditional jumps
The branch prediction mechanism has been improved to compensate for the longer
misprediction delay. Conditional jumps are handled by a hybrid predictor combining one or
more two-level predictor mechanisms and a loop counter. In addition, there is a mechanism
for predicting indirect jumps and indirect calls.

A branch with loop behavior is predicted for loop counts up to 64. The loop counters are
stored for each branch without using the global history table. Instead, the loop counters
have their own buffer with 32 entries. The prediction of a loop does not depend on the
number of other branches inside the loop. Nested loops are predicted perfectly.

Branches that do not have loop behavior are predicted using a two-level predictor with an
18-bit global history buffer and a history pattern table of unknown size. The ability to predict
a repetitive branch pattern, other than a simple loop pattern, depends on the number of
jumps in a loop according to the rules for a predictor with a global history table, explained on
p. 17. Apparently, there are two 18-bit global history buffers. The first history buffer includes
all jumps and branches including unconditional jumps but not including never-taken
branches. The second history buffer includes only some branches, presumably the most
important ones. This improves the prediction of some branches inside loops that contain up
to nine jumps. I have not been able to fully interpret the test results. The criteria for which
history buffer to use have not been found. The algorithm is asymmetric, so that the
maximum number of consecutive not-taken events is higher than the maximum number of
consecutive taken events. Both numbers depend on the number of jumps inside the loop.

Pattern recognition for indirect jumps and calls
Indirect jumps and indirect calls (but not returns) are predicted using the same two-level
predictor as branch instructions. Branches without loop behavior and indirect jumps/calls
share the same history buffer, but perhaps not the same BTB.

BTB organization
The branch target buffer has two levels, like a two-level cache system.

There may be different branch target buffers for different types of branches. I have not been
able to measure the sizes of the branch target buffers.

Prediction of function returns
The return stack buffer has 16 entries for near returns.

Literature: "A Method and apparatus for branch prediction using a second level branch
prediction table". WO Patent 2000/014628.

 3.7 Branch prediction in Intel Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge
The Sandy Bridge reverses the trend of ever more complicated branch prediction algorithms
by not having a separate predictor for loops. The redesign of the branch prediction
mechanism has probably been necessary in order to handle the new µop cache (see page
125 below). A further reason for the simplification may be a desire to reduce the pipeline
length and thereby the misprediction penalty. The Ivy Bridge appears to be very similar to
the Sandy Bridge.

Misprediction penalty
The misprediction penalty is often shorter than on the Nehalem thanks to the µop cache
(see page 125 below). The misprediction penalty was measured to 15 clock cycles or more
for branches inside the µop cache and slightly more for branches in the level-1 code cache.

Pattern recognition for conditional jumps
There appears to be a two-level predictor with a 32-bit global history buffer and a history
pattern table of unknown size. There is no specialized loop predictor. Nested loops and
loops with branches inside are not predicted particularly well, though sometimes better than
what follows from the rules on page 16.

Pattern recognition for indirect jumps and calls
Indirect jumps and indirect calls (but not returns) are predicted using the same two-level
predictor as branch instructions.

BTB organization
The branch target buffer in Sandy Bridge is bigger than in Nehalem according to unofficial
rumors. It is unknown whether it has one level, as in Core 2 and earlier processors, or two
levels as in Nehalem. It can handle a maximum of four call instructions per 16 bytes of
code. Conditional jumps are less efficient if there are more than 3 branch instructions per 16
bytes of code.

Prediction of function returns
The return stack buffer has 16 entries for near returns.

 3.8 Branch prediction in Intel Haswell, Broadwell, Skylake, and other Lakes
The branch predictor appears to have been redesigned in the Haswell and later Intel
processors, but the design is undocumented.

Reverse engineering has revealed that the branch prediction is using several tables of local
and global histories of taken branches [Yavarzadeh, 2023].

The measured throughput for jumps and branches varies between one branch per clock
cycle and one branch per two clock cycles for jumps and predicted taken branches.
Predicted not taken branches have an even higher throughput of up to two branches per
clock cycle.

The high throughput for taken branches of one per clock was observed for up to 128
branches with no more than one branch per 16 bytes of code.

The throughput is reduced to one jump per two clock cycles if there is more than one branch
instruction per 16 bytes of code. If there are more than 128 branches in the critical part of
the code, and if they are spaced by at least 16 bytes, then apparently the first 128 branches
have the high throughput and the remaining have the low throughput.

These observations may indicate that there are two branch prediction methods: a fast
method tied to the µop cache and the instruction cache, and a slower method using a
branch target buffer.

Misprediction penalty
The branch misprediction penalty varies a lot. It was measured to 15 - 20 clock cycles.

Pattern recognition for conditional jumps
The processor is able to predict very long repetitive jump patterns with few or no
mispredictions. I found no specific limit to the length of jump patterns that could be
predicted. One study found that it stores a history of at least 29 branches. Loops are
successfully predicted up to a count of 32 or a little more. Nested loops and branches inside
loops are predicted reasonably well.

Pattern recognition for indirect jumps and calls
Indirect jumps and indirect calls are predicted well.

BTB organization
The organization of the branch target buffer is unknown. It appears to be reasonably big.

Prediction of function returns
The return stack buffer has 16 entries for near returns in Haswell, Broadwell, and Skylake,
and 22 in Ice Lake and Tiger Lake.

Literature:
Jann Horn: "News and updates from the Project Zero team at Google. Reading privileged
memory with a side-channel". https://googleprojectzero.blogspot.dk/2018/01/reading-
privileged-memory-with-side.html Jan. 3, 2018.

Hosein Yavarzadeh, et al.: Half&Half: Demystifying Intel’s Directional Branch Predictors
for Fast, Secure Partitioned Execution. 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy.
https://doi.org/10.1109/SP46215.2023.10179415

 3.9 Branch prediction in Intel Atom, Silvermont, Goldmont, and Knights
      Landing
The branch prediction mechanism in the Intel Atom and Silvermont processors is a two-level
adaptive predictor with a global history table, following the principles described on page 17.
The branch history register has 12 bits. The pattern history table on the Atom has 4096
entries and is shared between threads. The branch target buffer has 128 entries, organized
as 4 ways by 32 sets. The size of these buffers on the Silvermont and Goldmont is
unknown, but probably bigger, and not shared between threads.

Unconditional jumps make no entry in the global history table, but always-taken and never-
taken branches do.

The Silvermont and Goldmont have branch prediction both at the fetch stage and at the
later decode stage in the pipeline, where the latter can correct errors in the former,
according to the article by David Kanter: "Silvermont, Intel’s Low Power Architecture", May
6, 2013, Realworldtech.

Contrary to what some documents say, there is no special predictor for loops according to
my tests. Loops are predicted in the same way as other branches, following the rules as
described on page 17.

Misprediction penalty
The penalty for mispredicting a branch is 11-13 clock cycles.

It often occurs that a branch has a correct entry in the pattern history table, but no entry in
the branch target buffer, which is much smaller. If a branch is correctly predicted as taken,
but no target can be predicted because of a missing BTB entry, then the penalty will be
approximately 7 clock cycles.

Prediction of indirect branches
Some documents say that the Silvermont has a history predictor for indirect branches, but
this is not confirmed in my tests. I have found pattern prediction for indirect branches on
Knights Landing and Goldmont, but not on Silvermont. Indirect branches are predicted to go
to the same target as last time on Silvermont.

Return stack buffer
There is a return stack buffer with 8 entries on the Atom and 16 entries on Silvermont,
Goldmont and Knights Landing.

 3.10 Branch prediction in VIA Nano
The VIA Nano processor has a hybrid prediction mechanism with several different branch
predictors, a majority vote mechanism, and a meta predictor, according to G. Glenn Henry:
"The VIA Isaiah Architecture", Centaur Technology, 2008 (www.via.com.tw).

The branch target buffer has 4096 entries, 4-way set associative, according to the
abovementioned document.

The branch target buffer is connected to the code cache with two entries for each 16 bytes
of code. If a 16-bytes block of code contains more than two branches then the excessive
branches use a simpler, and slower, mechanism. This was confirmed by my tests. Branch
prediction is slower if a 16-bytes block of code contains more than two jumps, branches,
calls or returns.

In my tests, the mechanism behaved almost like an alloyed two-level adaptive predictor with
a history table that combines 12 bits of local history and 2 bits of global history. The local

history information is stored in connection with the code cache with a certain amount of
storage provided for each 16-bytes block of code.

The goodness of the prediction depends on the number of jumps in the same 16-bytes
block of code. The prediction is best if there is no more than one branch or jump in each 16-
bytes block of code. If there are two branches or jumps in one 16-bytes block of code then
each branch has fewer bits for storing local history, even if one of the jumps is
unconditional. The prediction is particularly bad if there are two jumps or branches, one of
which is always taken. If there are more than two jumps or branches in the same 16-bytes
block of code then the excessive jumps or branches will use a slower and inferior prediction
method.

Loop branches behave slightly differently. A loop with no jumps inside can be predicted up
to a loop count of 15 - 20. A loop with one or more jumps inside can be predicted up to a
count of 12 - 16. The behavior varies and is not always reproducible.

Indirect jumps are predicted to go to the same target as last time.

The return stack buffer appears to be very deep. All returns were predicted correctly even in
very deeply nested subroutines in my tests.

The misprediction penalty is typically 16 clock cycles, max. 20.

The branch prediction mechanism fails if a branch is followed by a serializing instruction
such as CPUID. This is not a performance problem, but it must be taken into account when
testing.

 3.11 Branch prediction in AMD K8 and K10

BTB organization
The branch prediction mechanism of the K8 and K10 AMD processors is connected to the
code cache. The level-1 code cache has 1024 lines of 4*16 bytes each, 2-way set
associative.

Each 16-bytes block in the code cache has an associated set of branch indicators. There
are nine branch indicators, associated with byte number 0, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13 and 15 of the
code block. Most branch instructions are two or more bytes long. A branch instruction that is
two or more bytes long will have at least one branch indicator even when there are only
indicators for the odd addresses and address 0. The extra indicator at byte 0 covers the
case where a branch instruction crosses a 16-bytes boundary and ends at byte 0.

Each branch indicator has two bits of information to cover the following cases: (0) no branch
or never jump, (1) use branch selector 1, (2) use branch selector 2, (3) use branch selector
3. There are three branch selectors in addition to the nine branch indicators. Each branch
selector has an index into the branch target buffer as well as a local branch prediction
information. The local branch prediction information can be "never jump", "always jump",
"use dynamic prediction", or "use return stack buffer". There is also an indication of whether
the branch is a call. This is used for pushing a return address on the return address stack
(see page 38).

The branch target addresses are saved in the branch target buffer (BTB), which has 2048
entries. Return addresses are stored in the return address stack, which has 12 entries in K8
and 24 entries in K10.

The branch prediction mechanism works as follows: A branch that is never taken gets no
branch indicator, no branch selector and no BTB entry. The first time a branch is taken, it
gets a branch selector which is set to "always jump" and a BTB entry to indicate the target
address. If the branch is later not taken, then the branch selector is changed to "use
dynamic prediction". It never goes back from "use dynamic prediction" to "always jump" or
"never jump". The dynamic prediction mechanism is described below. The predictor bits can
indicate at least the following values: "no jump", "always jump", "use dynamic prediction",
"use return stack buffer". The K10 also has predictors for indirect jumps.

Some documents say that return instructions occupy a branch target entry which is used
when the return stack buffer is exhausted, but experiments seem to indicate that returns are
always mispredicted when the return stack buffer is exhausted.

The branch indicators and part of the local branch prediction information is copied to the
level-2 cache when evicted from the level-1 cache. The index into the BTB is not copied to
the level-2 cache due to lack of space. There is a branch target address calculator which
can calculate the target address for direct jumps and calls in case a BTB entry is missing or
the BTB index has been lost due to eviction to the level-2 cache. The calculation of a lost
branch target address takes an extra 4 clock cycles, according to my measurements, which
is less than the cost of a complete misprediction. This allows conditional and unconditional
jumps and calls to be predicted correctly, even if they have been evicted from the BTB
and/or the level-1 cache. The branch target address calculator cannot calculate the targets
of indirect jumps and returns, of course. Returns are mispredicted if they have been evicted
from the level-1 cache even they are still in the return stack buffer.

A drawback of this design is that there can be no more than three control transfer
instructions for every aligned 16-bytes block of code, except for branches that are never
taken. If there are more than three taken branches in the same 16-bytes block of code then
they will keep stealing branch selectors and BTB entries from each other and cause two
mispredictions for every execution. It is therefore important to avoid having more than three
jumps, branches, calls and returns in a single aligned 16-bytes block of code. Branches that
are never taken do not count. The three branch limit can easily be exceeded if for example
a switch/case statement is implemented as a sequence of dec / jz instructions.

A further problem is that the design allows only one control transfer instruction for every two
bytes of code. Most control transfer instructions use more than one byte of code, but return
instructions can be coded as a single-byte instruction. This can cause two kinds of
problems. This first kind of problem occurs if two branches share the same branch selector.
If a branch instruction ending at an even address if followed by a single-byte return
instruction at the following odd address, then the two instructions will share the same
branch selector and will therefore be mispredicted most of the time.

The second kind of problem relates to single-byte return instructions having no branch
selector. This can happen when there is a jump directly to a single-byte return instruction or
a single-byte return instruction follows immediately after a mispredicted branch. If the single-
byte return instruction is at an even address not divisible by 16 then the branch selector will
not be loaded in these situations, and the return will be mispredicted.

The first kind of problem can be avoided by placing the single-byte return instruction at an
even address, the second kind of problem by placing it at an odd address (or an address
divisible by 16). Both kinds of problem can be avoided by making the return instruction
longer than one byte. This can be done by inserting a segment prefix or F3 prefix before the
return instruction to make it two bytes long, or by coding the return instruction with an offset
operand of zero, which makes it three bytes long. It is recommended to make return
instructions longer than one byte if there is a conditional jump immediately before it, or if
there is a jump directly to it. A call instruction immediately before a return should be
replaced by a jump.

Misprediction penalty
AMD manuals say that the branch misprediction penalty is 10 clock cycles if the code
segment base is zero and 12 clocks if the code segment base is nonzero. In my
measurements, I have found a minimum branch misprediction penalty of 12 and 13 clock
cycles, respectively. The code segment base is zero in most 32-bit operating systems and
all 64-bit systems. It is almost always nonzero in 16-bit systems (see page 208).

The misprediction penalty corresponds to the length of the pipeline. Far jumps, calls and
returns are not predicted.

Pattern recognition for conditional jumps
The AMD uses a two-level adaptive branch predictor with a global 8 or 12-bit history, as
explained on page 17. Simple repetitive patterns and small loops with a repeat count up to 9
or 13 can be predicted by this mechanism. The rule on page 16 tells which repetitive branch
patterns can be predicted perfectly.

The AMD optimization guide tells that the global pattern history table has 16k entries. This
table is indexed by the 8 or 12 bits of the global history combined with part of the branch
address. My tests on K8 indicate that it is indexed by an 8-bit history and bits number 4-9 of
the address of the last byte of the branch instruction. This makes 16k entries if none of the
bits are combined. It is possible that some of the bits are XOR'ed with each other and/or
with part of the branch target address.

Branches that always go the same way do not pollute the global branch history register.
This is accomplished by the information stored in the branch selector block. A branch is
assumed to be not taken until the first time it is taken. After a branch has been taken for the
first time it is assumed always taken until next time it is not taken. After a branch has been
taken and then not taken it is tagged as needing dynamic prediction. It is then predicted
using the two-level adaptive algorithm with an 8 bit global history.

This mechanism makes it possible to predict loops with repeat counts up to 9 or 13 even if
they contain branches, as long as the branches always go the same way.

My tests on K8 indicate that the dynamic branch prediction fails much more often than what
can be expected from the design described above and that the pattern learning time can be
quite long. I have no explanation for this, but it is possible that the branch pattern history
table is smaller than indicated or that the mechanism is more complicated than described
here.

Prediction of indirect branches
The K10 has a separate target buffer with 512 entries for indirect jumps and indirect calls. It
probably shares the 12-bit history counter with the two-way branches. Indirect jumps with
multiple target can thereby be predicted if they follow a regular pattern. Earlier processors
predict indirect jumps to always go the same way, as described below.

Return stack buffer
The return stack buffer has 12 entries in K8 and 24 entries in K10. This is more than
sufficient for normal applications except for recursive procedures. See page 38 for an
explanation of the return stack buffer.

Literature:
The branch prediction mechanism is described in the following documents, though these
may not be accurate:

AMD Software Optimization Guide for AMD64 Processors, 2005, 2008.

Hans de Vries: Understanding the detailed Architecture of AMD's 64 bit Core, Chip
Architect, Sept. 21, 2003. www.chip-architect.com.
Andreas Kaiser: K7 Branch Prediction, 1999.
www.agner.org/optimize/KaiserK7BranchPrediction.pdf.
Talk at Stanford 2004 stanford-online.stanford.edu/courses/ee380/040107-ee380-100.asx.

 3.12 Branch prediction in AMD Bulldozer, Piledriver, Steamroller, and
      Excavator
The AMD Bulldozer has a new branch prediction design which has no connection to the
code cache, unlike previous models. The prediction mechanism is described as a hybrid
with a local predictor and a global predictor. Most probably, the branch predictor is based on
perceptrons. A perceptron is similar to a neuron, and it learns by tracking correlations in the
branch history. Unlike the adaptive two-level predictor, the perceptron predictor can learn
very long branch patterns.

The branch target buffer (BTB) has two levels, according to AMD's software optimization
guide. The level-1 BTB is organized as a set-associative cache with 128 sets of 4 ways =
512 entries. The level-2 BTB has1024 sets of 5 ways = 5120 entries in the Bulldozer and
Piledriver, and probably 10240 entries in the Steamroller.

The BTB and predictor is shared between the two cores of a compute unit.

My tests indicate that complex repetitive patterns are predicted well after a certain learning
period. There appears to be no sharp limit to the length of branch patterns that can be
predicted, and even very long patterns can be predicted. There seems to be no loop
counter, and nested loops are not predicted particularly well. Indirect branches are predicted
well. The prediction success rate is somewhat higher in the Steamroller than in the previous
models.

Misprediction penalty
The misprediction penalty is specified as minimum 20 clock cycles for conditional and
indirect branches and 15 clock cycles for unconditional jumps and returns. My
measurements indicated up to 19 clock cycles for conditional branches and 22 clock cycles
for returns.

Return stack buffer
The return stack buffer has 24 entries.

Literature:
Software Optimization Guide for AMD Family 15h Processors. AMD, January 2012.
Daniel A. Jiménez, and Calvin Lin. "Dynamic branch prediction with perceptrons." The
Seventh International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, 2001., pp.
197-206. IEEE, 2001.

 3.13 Branch prediction in AMD Zen
Branch prediction in Zen 1-4 is based on perceptrons. My tests show that loops with a
repeat count of up to 12 are predicted very well in Zen 1 and 2. Zen 3 and 4 can predict
loops with a count of up to 64. Zen 5 can predict loop counts up to 128. Loops with higher
repeat counts usually have one misprediction after the last iteration. Nested loops and
branches inside loops are predicted well. Repetitive patterns are predicted very well, with no
apparent limit to the length of the period. Multiway branches in the form of indirect jumps or
calls are also predicted, though not as efficiently as conditional jumps.

Branch information is no longer attached to the code cache in Zen 1 and 2, and there is no
serious problem in having many branches in the same code cache line. This does not apply
to the Zen 3, 4 and 5 which have lower throughput if there are more than 8, 12, or 16 jumps
or taken branches, respectively, in a 64-bytes block of code.

The Zen 2 has three levels of branch target buffer (BTB). The three levels of BTB have 16,
512, and 7168 entries, respectively, with a latency of 0, 1, and 4 clock cycles, respectively.

The Zen 3 has a level-1 BTB with 1024 entries and a level-2 BTB with 6656 entries. It has
an additional predictor for indirect jumps with 1536 entries. The Zen 4 has a level-1 BTB
with 2*1536 entries and a level-2 BTB with 2*7168 entries.

The Zen 5 provides a major improvement with a predictor that looks two branches ahead
and decodes both sides of a 2-way branch simultaneously. The Zen 5 has a level-1 BTB
with 16k entries and a level-2 BTB with 8k entries as well as a separate array for indirect
branches. I am not able to verify what goes on under the hood, but my tests show a very
good branch prediction rate, even for complicated patterns, and an unprecedented
throughput of 2 taken branches or 3 not-taken branches per clock cycle. This includes fused
ALU-branch instructions.

The average misprediction penalty was measured to approximately 18 clock cycles for Zen
1-3. The misprediction penalty varies from 15 - 18 in Zen 4 and 15 - 25 in Zen 5.

The return stack buffer has 32 entries in Zen 1-4, and 52 entries in Zen5.

The details are given in AMD Software Optimization Guides and in the articles listed below.

Literature:
Mike Clark: "AMD and the new “Zen” High Performance x86 Core". Hot Chips Symposium,
California. August 23, 2016.

AMD: Software Optimization Guide for AMD Family 17h Models 30h and Greater
Processors, 2020.

AMD: Software Optimization Guide for AMD Family 19h Processors, 2020.

Anonymous: "Zen 2 - Microarchitectures - AMD", WikiChip, n.d.
https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/amd/microarchitectures/zen_2

Smith, R. & Bonshor, G.: AMD Zen 4 Ryzen 9 7950X and Ryzen 5 7600X Review: Retaking
The High-End. Anandtech, Sept. 2022.

George Cozma and Camacho: Zen 5’s 2-Ahead Branch Predictor Unit: How a 30 Year Old
Idea Allows for New Tricks. Chips and Cheese, 2024.

 3.14 Branch prediction in AMD Bobcat and Jaguar

BTB organization
The position of jumps and branches is stored in two arrays, a "sparse branch marker array"
which can hold 2 branches for each 64-bytes cache line, and a "dense branch marker array"
which can hold 2 branches for every 8 bytes of code, according to the article cited below. In
my tests, the Bobcat could predict 2 branches per 64 bytes of code in the level-2 cache,
which indicates that the sparse branch array, but not the dense branch array, is coupled to
both levels of cache. If both arrays are used, we would expect a maximum of 18 branches
per 64 bytes of level-1 cache. In my tests, the Bobcat and Jaguar were able to predict 16 or

17 branches per line of level-1 cache, depending on the position of the branches, but not
18.

There are many mispredictions when these number of branches are exceeded, as the
branches keep evicting each other from the arrays.

Branches that are never taken are included in the branch marker arrays.

Misprediction penalty
The article cited below indicates a misprediction penalty of 13 clock cycles. In my tests,
however, the misprediction penalty ranged from 8 to 19 clock cycles depending on the
subsequent instructions. There was no consistent difference between integer and floating
point code in this respect.

Pattern recognition for conditional jumps
The branch predictor behaves approximately as a two-level adaptive branch predictor with a
global 26-bit history (see page 17), or slightly better. There is no dedicated loop predictor.
This means that loops with many branches or other loops inside are poorly predicted. I have
no information on the size of the pattern history table, but we can surely assume that it is
less than 226.

Branches that are always taken are included in the history buffer, while unconditional jumps
and branches never taken are not.

Prediction of indirect branches
The processor can predict indirect jumps with more than two different targets, but
mispredictions are frequent.

Return stack buffer
There is a return stack buffer with 12 entries on Bobcat, and 16 entries on Jaguar,
according to my measurements.

Literature:
Brad Burgess, et. al.: Bobcat: AMD's Low-Power x86 Processor. IEEE Micro, March/April
2011, pp. 16-25.

 3.15 Indirect jumps on older processors
Indirect jumps, indirect calls, and returns may go to a different address each time. The
prediction method for an indirect jump or indirect call is, in processors older than PM and
K10, simply to predict that it will go to the same target as last time it was executed. The first
time an indirect jump or indirect call is seen, it is predicted to go to the immediately following
instruction. Therefore, an indirect jump or call should always be followed by valid code.
Don't place a list of jump addresses immediately after an indirect jump or call. Such a list
should preferably be placed in the data segment, rather than the code segment.

A multi-way branch (switch statement) is implemented either as an indirect jump using a
list of jump addresses, or as a tree of branch instructions. The indirect jump has the
disadvantage that it is poorly predicted on many processors, but the branch tree method
has other disadvantages, namely that it consumes more BTB entries and that many
processors have poor performance for dense or consecutive branches.

 3.16 Returns (all processors except P1)
A better method is used for returns. A Last-In-First-Out buffer, called the return stack buffer,
remembers the return address every time a call instruction is executed, and it uses this for
predicting where the corresponding return will go. This mechanism makes sure that return
instructions are correctly predicted when the same subroutine is called from several
different locations.

The P1 has no return stack buffer, but uses the same method for returns as for indirect
jumps. Later processors have a return stack buffer. The size of this buffer is 4 in the PMMX,
8 in Atom, 12 in AMD k8, 16 in PPro, P2, P3, P4, P4E, PM, Core2 and Nehalem, and 24 in
AMD k10. This size may seem rather small, but it is sufficient in most cases because only
the innermost subroutines matter in terms of execution time. The return stack buffer may be
insufficient, though, in the case of a deeply nesting recursive function.

In order to make this mechanism work, you must make sure that all calls are matched with
returns. Never jump out of a subroutine without a return and never use a return as an
indirect jump. It is OK, however, to replace a CALL MYPROC / RET sequence with JMP
MYPROC in 16 and 32 bit mode. In 64 bit mode, obeying the stack alignment standard, you
can replace SUB RSP,8 / CALL MYPROC / ADD RSP,8 / RET with JMP MYPROC.

On most processors, you must make sure that far calls are matched with far returns and
near calls with near returns. This may be problematic in 16-bit code because the assembler
will replace a far call to a procedure in the same segment with PUSH CS followed by a
near call. Even if you prevent the assembler from doing this by hard-coding the far call, the
linker is likely to translate the far call to PUSH CS and a near call. Use the
/NOFARCALLTRANSLATION option in the linker to prevent this. It is recommended to use
a small or flat memory model so that you don't need far calls, because far calls and returns
are expensive anyway.

 3.17 Static prediction
The first time a branch instruction is seen, a prediction is made according to the principles of
static prediction.

Static prediction in P1 and PMMX
A control transfer instruction which has not been seen before or which is not in the branch
target buffer (BTB) is always predicted to fall through on the P1 and PMMX.

A branch instruction will not get a BTB entry if it always falls through. As soon as it is taken
once, it will get into the BTB. On the PMMX, it will stay in the BTB no matter how many
times it falls through. Any control transfer instruction which jumps to the address
immediately following itself will not get a BTB entry and will therefore always have a
misprediction penalty.

Static prediction in PPro, P2, P3, P4, P4E
On PPro, P2, P3, P4 and P4E, a control transfer instruction which has not been seen
before, or which is not in the BTB, is predicted to fall through if it goes forwards, and to be
taken if it goes backwards (e.g. a loop). Static prediction takes longer time than dynamic
prediction on these processors.

On the P4 and P4E, you can change the static prediction by adding prediction hint prefixes.
The prefix 3EH will make the branch predicted taken the first time, and prefix 2EH will make
it predicted not taken the first time. These prefixes can be coded in this way:

    ; Example 3.6. P4/P4E static branch prediction hint
    DB 3EH     ; Prediction hint prefix
    JBE LL     ; Predicted taken first time

The prediction hint prefixes are in fact segment prefixes, which have no effect and cause no
harm on other processors.
It is rarely worth the effort to take static prediction into account. Almost any branch that is
executed sufficiently often for its timing to have any significant effect is likely to stay in the
BTB so that only the dynamic prediction counts. Static prediction only has a significant
effect if context switches or task switches occur very often.

Normally you don't have to care about the penalty of static mispredictions. It is more
important to organize branches so that the most common path is not taken, because this
improves code prefetching, trace cache use, and retirement.

Static prediction does have an influence on the way traces are organized in a trace cache,
but this is not a lasting effect because traces may be reorganized after several iterations.

Static prediction in PM and Core2
These processors do not use static prediction. The predictor simply makes a random
prediction the first time a branch is seen, depending on what happens to be in the BTB entry
that is assigned to the new branch. There is simply a 50% chance of making the right
prediction of jump or no jump, but the predicted target is correct. Branch hint prefixes have
no useful effect on PM and Core2 processors.

Static prediction in AMD
A branch is predicted not taken the first time it is seen. A branch is predicted always taken
after the first time it has been taken. Dynamic prediction is used only after a branch has
been taken and then not taken. Branch hint prefixes have no effect.

 3.18 Close jumps

Close jumps on PMMX
On the PMMX, there is a risk that two control transfer instructions will share the same BTB
entry if they are too close to each other. The obvious result is that they will always be
mispredicted. The BTB entry for a control transfer instruction is identified by bits 2-31 of the
address of the last byte in the instruction. If two control transfer instructions are so close
together that they differ only in bits 0-1 of the address, then we have the problem of a
shared BTB entry. The RET instruction is particularly prone to this problem because it is only
one byte long. There are various ways to solve this problem:

1. Move the code sequence a little up or down in memory so that you get a DWORD
   boundary between the two addresses.

2. Change a short jump to a near jump (with 4 bytes displacement) so that the end of the
   instruction is moved further down. There is no way you can force the assembler to use
   anything but the shortest form of an instruction so you have to hard-code the near jump
   if you choose this solution.

3. Put in some instruction between the two control transfer instructions. This is the easiest
   method, and the only method if you don't know where DWORD boundaries are because
   your segment is not DWORD aligned or because the code keeps moving up and down
   as you make changes in the preceding code.

There is a penalty when the first instruction pair following the target label of a call contains
another call instruction or if a return follows immediately after another return.

The penalty for chained calls only occurs when the same subroutines are called from more
than one location. Chained returns always have a penalty. There is sometimes a small stall
for a jump after a call, but no penalty for return after call; call after return; jump, call, or
return after jump; or jump after return.
Chained jumps on PPro, P2 and P3
A jump, call, or return cannot be executed in the first clock cycle after a previous jump, call,
or return on the PPro, P2 and P3. Therefore, chained jumps will take two clock cycles for
each jump, and you may want to make sure that the processor has something else to do in
parallel. For the same reason, a loop will take at least two clock cycles per iteration on these
processors.

Chained jumps on P4, P4E and PM
The retirement station can handle only one taken jump, call or return per clock cycle, and
only in the first of the three retirement slots. Therefore, preferably, no more than every third
µop should be a jump.

Chained jumps on AMD
Taken jumps have a throughput of one jump per two clock cycles. It is delayed another
clock cycle if there is a 16-byte boundary shortly after the jump target. Not taken branches
have a throughput of three per clock cycle. Avoid a one-byte return instruction immediately
after a branch instruction.

