4 Intel Pentium 1 and Pentium MMX pipeline
The P1 and PMMX processors cannot do out-of-order processing. But they can execute two
consecutive instructions simultaneously by an instruction pairing mechanism described
below.

 4.1 Pairing integer instructions

Perfect pairing
The P1 and PMMX have two pipelines for executing instructions, called the U-pipe and the
V-pipe. Under certain conditions it is possible to execute two instructions simultaneously,
one in the U-pipe and one in the V-pipe. This can almost double the speed. It is therefore
advantageous to reorder the instructions to make them pair.

The following instructions are pairable in either pipe:
   • MOV register, memory, or immediate into register or memory
   • PUSH register or immediate, POP register
   • LEA, NOP
   • INC, DEC, ADD, SUB, CMP, AND, OR, XOR,
   • and some forms of TEST (See manual 4: "Instruction tables").

The following instructions are pairable in the U-pipe only:
   • ADC, SBB
   • SHR, SAR, SHL, SAL with immediate count
   • ROR, ROL, RCR, RCL with an immediate count of 1

The following instructions can execute in either pipe but are only pairable when in the V-
pipe:
    • near call
    • short and near jump
    • short and near conditional jump.

All other integer instructions can execute in the U-pipe only, and are not pairable.

Two consecutive instructions will pair when the following conditions are met:

1. The first instruction is pairable in the U-pipe and the second instruction is pairable in the
V-pipe.

2. The second instruction does not read or write a register which the first instruction writes
to.

Examples:

     ; Example 4.1a. P1/PMMX pairing rules
     mov eax, ebx / mov ecx, eax     ; Read after write, do not pair
     mov eax, 1   / mov eax, 2       ; Write after write, do not pair
     mov ebx, eax / mov eax, 2       ; Write after read, pair ok
     mov ebx, eax / mov ecx, eax     ; Read after read, pair ok
     mov ebx, eax / inc eax          ; Read and write after read, pair ok

3. In rule 2, partial registers are treated as full registers. Example:

     ; Example 4.1b. P1/PMMX pairing rules
     mov al, bl / mov ah, 0

writes to different parts of the same register, do not pair.

4. Two instructions which both write to parts of the flags register can pair despite rule 2
and 3. Example:

     ; Example 4.1c. P1/PMMX pairing rules
     shr eax, 4 / inc ebx            ; pair OK

5. An instruction that writes to the flags can pair with a conditional jump despite rule 2.
Example:

     ; Example 4.1d. P1/PMMX pairing rules
     cmp eax, 2 / ja LabelBigger     ; pair OK

6. The following instruction combinations can pair despite the fact that they both modify the
stack pointer:

     ; Example 4.1e. P1/PMMX pairing rules
     push + push, push + call, pop + pop

7. There are restrictions on the pairing of instructions with prefixes. Many instructions which
were not implemented on the 8086 processor have a two-byte opcode where the first byte is
0FH. The 0FH byte behaves as a prefix on the P1. On PMMX and later processors the 0FH
byte behaves as part of the opcode. The most common instructions with 0FH prefix are:
MOVZX, MOVSX, PUSH FS, POP FS, PUSH GS, POP GS, LFS, LGS, LSS, SETcc, BT, BTC,
BTR, BTS, BSF, BSR, SHLD, SHRD, and IMUL with two operands and no immediate operand.

On the P1, a prefixed instruction can execute only in the U-pipe, except for conditional near
jumps.

On the PMMX, instructions with operand size or address size prefix can execute in either
pipe, whereas instructions with segment, repeat, or lock prefix can execute only in the U-
pipe.

8. An instruction which has both a displacement and immediate data is not pairable on the
P1 and only pairable in the U-pipe on the PMMX:

     ; Example 4.1f. P1/PMMX pairing rules
     mov dword [ds:1000], 0    ; Not pairable or only in u-pipe
     cmp byte [ebx+8], 1       ; Not pairable or only in u-pipe
     cmp byte [ebx], 1         ; Pairable
     cmp byte [ebx+8], al      ; Pairable

Another problem with instructions which have both a displacement and immediate data on
the PMMX is that such instructions may be longer than 7 bytes, which means that only one
instruction can be decoded per clock cycle.

9. Both instructions must be preloaded and decoded. This will not happen on the P1 unless
the first instruction is only one byte long.

10. There are special pairing rules for MMX instructions on the PMMX:

 •   MMX shift, pack or unpack instructions can execute in either pipe but cannot pair with
     other MMX shift, pack or unpack instructions.

 •   MMX multiply instructions can execute in either pipe but cannot pair with other MMX
     multiply instructions. They take 3 clock cycles and the last 2 clock cycles can overlap
     with subsequent instructions in the same way as floating point instructions can (see

     page 48).

 •   an MMX instruction that accesses memory or integer registers can execute only in the
     U-pipe and cannot pair with a non-MMX instruction.

Imperfect pairing
There are situations where the two instructions in a pair will not execute simultaneously, or
only partially overlap in time. They should still be considered a pair, though, because the
first instruction executes in the U-pipe, and the second in the V-pipe. No subsequent
instruction can start to execute before both instructions in the imperfect pair have finished.

Imperfect pairing will happen in the following cases:

1. If the second instruction suffers an AGI stall (see page 46).

2. Two instructions cannot access the same DWORD of memory simultaneously.
The following examples assume that ESI is divisible by 4:

     ; Example 4.2a. P1/PMMX imperfect pairing
     mov al, [esi] / mov bl, [esi+1]

The two operands are within the same DWORD, so they cannot execute simultaneously.
The pair takes 2 clock cycles.

     ; Example 4.2b. P1/PMMX perfect pairing
     mov al, [esi+3] / mov bl, [esi+4]

Here the two operands are on each side of a DWORD boundary, so they pair perfectly, and
take only one clock cycle.

3. The preceding rule is extended to the case where bits 2 - 4 are the same in the two
addresses (cache line conflict). For DWORD addresses this means that the difference
between the two addresses should not be divisible by 32.

Pairable integer instructions, which do not access memory, take one clock cycle to execute,
except for mispredicted jumps. MOV instructions to or from memory also take only one clock
cycle if the data area is in the cache and properly aligned. There is no speed penalty for
using complex addressing modes such as scaled index registers.

A pairable integer instruction that reads from memory, does some calculation, and stores
the result in a register or flags, takes 2 clock cycles. (read/modify instructions).

A pairable integer instruction that reads from memory, does some calculation, and writes
the result back to the memory, takes 3 clock cycles. (read/modify/write instructions).

4. If a read/modify/write instruction is paired with a read/modify or read/modify/write
instruction, then they will pair imperfectly.

The number of clock cycles used is given in the following table:

 First instruction                                 Second instruction
                           MOV or register           read/modify           read/modify/write
                               only
 MOV or register only           1                          2                       3
 read/modify                    2                          2                       3
 read/modify/write              3                          4                       5
Table 4.1. Pairing complex instructions

Examples:

    ; Example 4.3. P1/PMMX pairing complex instructions
    add [mem1], eax / add ebx, [mem2] ; 4 clock cycles
    add ebx, [mem2] / add [mem1], eax ; 3 clock cycles

5. When two paired instructions both take extra time due to cache misses, misalignment, or
jump misprediction, then the pair will take more time than each instruction, but less than the
sum of the two.

6. A pairable floating point instruction followed by FXCH will make imperfect pairing if the
next instruction is not a floating point instruction.

In order to avoid imperfect pairing you have to know which instructions go into the U-pipe,
and which to the V-pipe. You can find out this by looking backwards in your code and
search for instructions which are unpairable, pairable only in one of the pipes, or cannot pair
due to one of the rules above.

Imperfect pairing can often be avoided by reordering instructions. Example:

    ; Example 4.4. P1/PMMX reorder instructions to improve pairing
    L1:     mov     eax,[esi]
            mov     ebx,[esi]
            inc     ecx

Here the two MOV instructions form an imperfect pair because they both access the same
memory location, and the sequence takes 3 clock cycles. You can improve the code by
reordering the instructions so that INC ECX pairs with one of the MOV instructions.

    ; Example 4.5. P1/PMMX reorder instructions to improve pairing
    L2:     mov     eax,offset a
            xor     ebx,ebx
            inc     ebx
            mov     ecx,[eax]
            jmp     L1

The pair INC EBX / MOV ECX,[EAX] is imperfect because the latter instruction has an AGI
stall. The sequence takes 4 clocks. If you insert a NOP or any other instruction so that MOV
ECX,[EAX] pairs with JMP L1 instead, then the sequence takes only 3 clocks.

The next example is in 16-bit mode, assuming that SP is divisible by 4:

    ; Example 4.6. P1/PMMX imperfect pairing, 16 bit mode
    L3:     push    ax
            push    bx
            push    cx
            push    dx
            call    Func

Here the PUSH instructions form two imperfect pairs, because both operands in each pair go
into the same DWORD of memory. PUSH BX could possibly pair perfectly with PUSH CX
(because they go on each side of a DWORD boundary) but it doesn't because it has already
been paired with PUSH AX. The sequence therefore takes 5 clocks. If you insert a NOP or
any other instruction so that PUSH BX pairs with PUSH CX, and PUSH DX with CALL FUNC,
then the sequence will take only 3 clocks. Another way to solve the problem is to make sure
that SP is not divisible by 4. Knowing whether SP is divisible by 4 or not in 16-bit mode can
be difficult, so the best way to avoid this problem is to use 32-bit mode.

 4.2 Address generation interlock
It takes one clock cycle to calculate the address needed by an instruction that accesses
memory. Normally, this calculation is done at a separate stage in the pipeline while the
preceding instruction or instruction pair is executing. But if the address depends on the
result of an instruction executing in the preceding clock cycle, then we have to wait an extra
clock cycle for the address to be calculated. This is called an AGI stall.

    ; Example 4.7a. P1/PMMX AGI
    add ebx,4
    mov eax,[ebx] ; AGI stall

The stall in this example can be removed by putting some other instructions in between
these two, or by rewriting the code to:

    ; Example 4.7b. P1/PMMX AGI removed
    mov eax,[ebx+4]
    add ebx,4

You can also get an AGI stall with instructions that use ESP implicitly for addressing, such
as PUSH, POP, CALL, and RET, if ESP has been changed in the preceding clock cycle by
instructions such as MOV, ADD, or SUB. The P1 and PMMX have special circuitry to predict
the value of ESP after a stack operation so that you do not get an AGI delay after changing
ESP with PUSH, POP, or CALL. You can get an AGI stall after RET only if it has an immediate
operand to add to ESP. Examples:

    ; Example 4.8. P1/PMMX AGI
    add esp,4 / pop esi                      ; AGI stall
    pop eax   / pop esi                      ; no stall, pair
    mov esp,ebp / ret                        ; AGI stall
    call F1 / F1: mov eax,[esp+8]            ; no stall
    ret / pop eax                            ; no stall
    ret 8 / pop eax                          ; AGI stall

The LEA instruction is also subject to an AGI stall if it uses a base or index register that has
been changed in the preceding clock cycle. Example:

    ; Example 4.9. P1/PMMX AGI
    inc esi / lea eax,[ebx+4*esi]            ; AGI stall

PPro, P2 and P3 have no AGI stalls for memory reads and LEA, but they do have AGI stalls
for memory writes. This is not very significant unless the subsequent code has to wait for
the write to finish.

 4.3 Splitting complex instructions into simpler ones
You may split up read/modify and read/modify/write instructions to improve pairing.
Example:

    ; Example 4.10a. P1/PMMX Imperfect pairing
    add [mem1],eax
    add [mem2],ebx

This code may be split up into a sequence that reduces the clock count from 5 to 3 clock
cycles:

    ; Example 4.10b. P1/PMMX Imperfect pairing avoided
    mov ecx,[mem1]
    mov edx,[mem2]
    add ecx,eax
     add edx,ebx
     mov [mem1],ecx
     mov [mem2],edx

Likewise you may split up non-pairable instructions into pairable instructions:

     ; Example 4.11a. P1/PMMX Non-pairable instructions
     push [mem1]
     push [mem2]      ; Non-pairable

Split up into:

     ; Example 4.11b. Split nonpairable instructions into pairable ones
     mov eax,[mem1]
     mov ebx,[mem2]
     push eax
     push ebx         ; Everything pairs

Other examples of non-pairable instructions that may be split up into simpler pairable
instructions:

; Example 4.12. P1/PMMX Split non-pairable instructions
CDQ split into: mov edx,eax / sar edx,31
not eax change to xor eax,-1
neg eax split into xor eax,-1 / inc eax
movzx eax,byte [mem] split into xor eax,eax / mov al,byte [mem]
jecxz L1 split into test ecx,ecx / jz L1
loop L1 split into dec ecx, / jnz L1
xlat change to mov al,[ebx+eax]

If splitting instructions does not improve speed, then you may keep the complex or
nonpairable instructions in order to reduce code size. Splitting instructions is not needed on
later processors, except when the split instructions generate fewer µops.

 4.4 Prefixes
An instruction with one or more prefixes may not be able to execute in the V-pipe and it may
take more than one clock cycle to decode.

On the P1, the decoding delay is one clock cycle for each prefix except for the 0FH prefix of
conditional near jumps.

The PMMX has no decoding delay for 0FH prefix. Segment and repeat prefixes take one
clock extra to decode. Address and operand size prefixes take two clocks extra to decode.
The PMMX can decode two instructions per clock cycle if the first instruction has a segment
or repeat prefix or no prefix, and the second instruction has no prefix. Instructions with
address or operand size prefixes can only decode alone on the PMMX. Instructions with
more than one prefix take one clock extra for each prefix.

Where prefixes are unavoidable, the decoding delay may be masked if a preceding
instruction takes more than one clock cycle to execute. The rule for the P1 is that any
instruction that takes N clock cycles to execute (not to decode) can 'overshadow' the
decoding delay of N-1 prefixes in the next two (sometimes three) instructions or instruction
pairs. In other words, each extra clock cycle that an instruction takes to execute can be
used to decode one prefix in a later instruction. This shadowing effect even extends across
a predicted branch. Any instruction that takes more than one clock cycle to execute, and
any instruction that is delayed because of an AGI stall, cache miss, misalignment, or any
other reason except decoding delay and branch misprediction, has such a shadowing effect.
The PMMX has a similar shadowing effect, but the mechanism is different. Decoded
instructions are stored in a transparent first-in-first-out (FIFO) buffer, which can hold up to
four instructions. As long as there are instructions in the FIFO buffer you get no delay.
When the buffer is empty then instructions are executed as soon as they are decoded. The
buffer is filled when instructions are decoded faster than they are executed, i.e. when you
have unpaired or multi-cycle instructions. The FIFO buffer is emptied when instructions
execute faster than they are decoded, i.e. when you have decoding delays due to prefixes.
The FIFO buffer is empty after a mispredicted branch. The FIFO buffer can receive two
instructions per clock cycle provided that the second instruction is without prefixes and none
of the instructions are longer than 7 bytes. The two execution pipelines (U and V) can each
receive one instruction per clock cycle from the FIFO buffer. Examples:

     ; Example 4.13. P1/PMMX Overshadow prefix decoding delay
     cld
     rep movsd

The CLD instruction takes two clock cycles and can therefore overshadow the decoding
delay of the REP prefix. The code would take one clock cycle more if the CLD instruction
were placed far from the REP MOVSD.

     ; Example 4.14. P1 Overshadow prefix decoding delay
     cmp dword [ebx],0
     mov eax,0
     setnz al

The CMP instruction takes two clock cycles here because it is a read/modify instruction. The
0FH prefix of the SETNZ instruction is decoded during the second clock cycle of the CMP
instruction, so that the decoding delay is hidden on the P1 (The PMMX has no decoding
delay for the 0FH).

 4.5 Scheduling floating point code
Floating point instructions cannot pair the way integer instructions can, except for one
special case, defined by the following rules:

 •   The first instruction (executing in the U-pipe) must be FLD, FADD, FSUB, FMUL, FDIV,
     FCOM, FCHS, or FABS.

 •   The second instruction (in V-pipe) must be FXCH.

 •   The instruction following the FXCH must be a floating point instruction, otherwise the
     FXCH will pair imperfectly and take an extra clock cycle.

This special pairing is important, as will be explained shortly.

While floating point instructions in general cannot be paired, many can be pipelined, i.e. one
instruction can begin before the previous instruction has finished. Example:

     ; Example 4.15. Pipelined floating point instructions
     fadd st1,st0   ; Clock cycle 1-3
     fadd st2,st0   ; Clock cycle 2-4
     fadd st3,st0   ; Clock cycle 3-5
     fadd st4,st0   ; Clock cycle 4-6

Obviously, two instructions cannot overlap if the second instruction needs the result of the
first one. Since almost all floating point instructions involve the top of stack register, ST0,

there are seemingly not very many possibilities for making an instruction independent of the
result of previous instructions. The solution to this problem is register renaming. The FXCH
instruction does not in reality swap the contents of two registers; it only swaps their names.
Instructions that push or pop the register stack also work by renaming. Floating point
register renaming has been highly optimized on the Pentiums so that a register may be
renamed while in use. Register renaming never causes stalls - it is even possible to rename
a register more than once in the same clock cycle, as for example when FLD or FCOMPP is
paired with FXCH.

By the proper use of FXCH instructions you may obtain a lot of overlapping in your floating
point code. All versions of the instructions FADD, FSUB, FMUL, and FILD take 3 clock cycles
and are able to overlap, so that these instructions may be scheduled. Using a memory
operand does not take more time than a register operand if the memory operand is in the
level 1 cache and properly aligned.

By now you must be used to rules having exceptions, and the overlapping rule is no
exception: You cannot start an FMUL instruction one clock cycle after another FMUL
instruction, because the FMUL circuitry is not perfectly pipelined. It is recommended that you
put another instruction in between two FMUL's. Example:

    ; Example 4.16a. Floating point code with stalls
    fld    qword [a1]    ; Clock cycle 1
    fld    qword [b1]    ; Clock cycle 2
    fld    qword [c1]    ; Clock cycle 3
    fxch   st2           ; Clock cycle 3
    fmul   qword [a2]    ; Clock cycle 4-6
    fxch   st1           ; Clock cycle 4
    fmul   qword [b2]    ; Clock cycle 5-7    (stall)
    fxch   st2           ; Clock cycle 5
    fmul   qword [c2]    ; Clock cycle 7-9    (stall)
    fxch   st1           ; Clock cycle 7
    fstp   qword [a3]    ; Clock cycle 8-9
    fxch   st1           ; Clock cycle 10     (unpaired)
    fstp   qword [b3]    ; Clock cycle 11-12
    fstp   qword [c3]    ; Clock cycle 13-14

Here you have a stall before FMUL [b2] and before FMUL [c2] because another FMUL
started in the preceding clock cycle. You can improve this code by putting FLD instructions
in between the FMUL's:

    ; Example 4.16b. Floating point stalls filled with other instructions
    fld    qword [a1]    ; Clock cycle 1
    fmul   qword [a2]    ; Clock cycle 2-4
    fld    qword [b1]    ; Clock cycle 3
    fmul   qword [b2]    ; Clock cycle 4-6
    fld    qword [c1]    ; Clock cycle 5
    fmul   qword [c2]    ; Clock cycle 6-8
    fxch   st2           ; Clock cycle 6
    fstp   qword [a3]    ; Clock cycle 7-8
    fstp   qword [b3]    ; Clock cycle 9-10
    fstp   qword [c3]    ; Clock cycle 11-12

In other cases you may put FADD, FSUB, or anything else in between FMUL's to avoid the
stalls.

Not all floating point instructions can overlap. And some floating point instructions can
overlap more subsequent integer instructions than subsequent floating point instructions.
The FDIV instruction, for example, takes 39 clock cycles. All but the first clock cycle can
overlap with integer instructions, but only the last two clock cycles can overlap with floating

point instructions. A complete listing of floating point instructions, and what they can pair or
overlap with, is given in manual 4: "Instruction tables".

There is no penalty for using a memory operand on floating point instructions because the
arithmetic unit is one stage later in the pipeline than the read unit. The tradeoff of this comes
when a floating point value is stored to memory. The FST or FSTP instruction with a memory
operand takes two clock cycles in the execution stage, but it needs the data one clock
earlier so you will get a one-clock stall if the value to store is not ready one clock cycle in
advance. This is analogous to an AGI stall. In many cases you cannot hide this type of stall
without scheduling the floating point code into four threads or putting some integer
instructions in between. The two clock cycles in the execution stage of the FST(P)
instruction cannot pair or overlap with any subsequent instructions.

Instructions with integer operands such as FIADD, FISUB, FIMUL, FIDIV, FICOM may be
split up into simpler operations in order to improve overlapping. Example:

     ; Example 4.17a. Floating point code with integer operands
     fild dword [a]
     fimul dword [b]

Split up into:

     ; Example 4.17b. Overlapping integer operations
     fild dword [a]
     fild dword [b]
     fmul

In this example, we save two clocks by overlapping the two FILD instructions.

