5 Intel Pentium 4 (NetBurst) pipeline
The Intel P4, which was introduced in 2000, and the later variant P4E were based on the
so-called NetBurst microarchitecture, which was very different from the design of previous
Intel processors. This architecture has turned out to be less efficient than expected and is
no longer used in new designs.

The primary design goal of the NetBurst microarchitecture was to obtain the highest
possible clock frequency. This can only be achieved by making the pipeline longer. The 6'th
generation microprocessors PPro, P2 and P3 (see next chapter) have a pipeline of ten
stages. The PM, which is an improvement of the same design, has approximately 13
stages. The 7'th generation microprocessor P4 has a 20 stage pipeline, and the P4E has
even a few stages more. Some of the stages are just for moving data from one part of the
chip to another.

An important difference from previous processors was that the code cache was replaced by
a trace cache which contained decoded µops rather than instructions. The advantage of a
trace cache is that the decoding bottleneck is removed and the design can use RISC
technology. The disadvantage is that the information in the trace cache is less compact and
takes up more chip space.

The out-of-order core in P4 is similar to the PPro design, but bigger. The reorder buffer can
contain 126 µops in process. There is no limitation on register reads and renamings, but the
maximum throughput is still limited to 3 µops per clock cycle, and the limitations in the
retirement station are the same as in the PPro.

 5.1 Data cache
The on-chip level-2 cache is used for both code and data. The size of the level-2 cache
ranges from 256 kb to 2 MB for different models. The level-2 cache is organized as 8 ways,
64 bytes per line. It runs at full speed with a 256 bits wide data bus to the central processor,
and is quite efficient.

The level-1 data cache is 8 or 16 kb, 8 ways, 64 bytes per line. The relatively small size of
the level-1 data cache is compensated for by the fast access to the level-2 cache. The level-
1 data cache uses a write-through mechanism rather than write-back. This reduces the
write bandwidth.

The level-1 code cache is a trace cache, as explained below.

 5.2 Trace cache
Instructions are stored in the trace cache after being decoded into µops. Rather than storing
instruction opcodes in a level-1 cache, it stores decoded µops. One important reason for
this is that the decoding stage was a bottleneck on earlier processors. An opcode can have
any length from 1 to 15 bytes. It is quite complicated to determine the length of an
instruction opcode; and we have to know the length of the first opcode in order to know
where the second opcode begins. Therefore, it is difficult to determine opcode lengths in
parallel. The 6'th generation microprocessors could decode three instructions per clock
cycle. This may be more difficult at higher clock speeds. If µops all have the same size, then
the processor can handle them in parallel, and the bottleneck disappears. This is the
principle of RISC processors. Caching µops rather than opcodes enables the P4 and P4E to
use RISC technology on a CISC instruction set. A trace in the trace cache is a string of µops
that are executed in sequence, even if they are not sequential in the original code. The
advantage of this is that the number of clock cycles spent on jumping around in the cache is
minimized. This is a second reason for using a trace cache.

The µops take more space than opcodes on average. The following table shows the size of
each trace cache entry:

 Processor instruction immediate        address      total bits   number of    entries     total
            encoding,    data or        tag, bits    per entry      lines      per line    entries
               bits     address,
                          bits
     P4        21          16              16           53          2048          6           12k
    P4E        16          32              16           64          2048          6           12k
Table 5.1. Number of bits per trace cache entry and number of entries in trace cache.
 (These numbers are approximate and speculative. See www.chip-architect.com 2003-04-20)

The trace cache is organized as 2048 lines of 6 entries each, 8-way set-associative. The
trace cache runs at half clock speed, delivering up to 6 µops every two clock cycles.

Economizing trace cache use on P4
On the P4, 16 of the bits in each entry are reserved for data. This means that a µop that
requires more than 16 bits of data storage must use two entries. You can calculate whether
a µop uses one or two trace cache entries by the following rules, which have been obtained
experimentally.

   1. A µop with no immediate data and no memory operand uses only one trace cache
      entry.

   2. A µop with an 8-bit or 16-bit immediate operand uses one trace cache entry.

   3. A µop with a 32-bit immediate operand in the interval from -32768 to +32767 uses
      one trace cache entry. The immediate operand is stored as a 16-bit signed integer. If
      an opcode contains a 32-bit constant, then the decoder will investigate if this
      constant is within the interval that allows it to be represented as a 16-bit signed
      integer. If this is the case, then the µop can be contained in a single trace cache
      entry.

   4. If a µop has an immediate 32-bit operand outside the ±215 interval so that it cannot
      be represented as a 16-bit signed integer, then it will use two trace cache entries
      unless it can borrow storage space from a nearby µop.

   5. A µop in need of extra storage space can borrow 16 bits of extra storage space from
      a nearby µop that doesn't need its own data space. Almost any µop that has no
      immediate operand and no memory operand will have an empty 16-bit data space
      for other µops to borrow. A µop that requires extra storage space can borrow space
      from the next µop as well as from any of the preceding 3 - 5 µops (5 if it is not
      number 2 or 3 in a trace cache line), even if they are not in the same trace cache
      line. A µop cannot borrow space from a preceding µop if any µop between the two is
      double size or has borrowed space. Space is preferentially borrowed from preceding
      rather than subsequent µops.

   6. The displacement of a near jump, call or conditional jump is stored as a 16-bit signed
      integer, if possible. An extra trace cache entry is used if the displacement is outside
      the ±215 range and no extra storage space can be borrowed according to rule 5
      (Displacements outside this range are rare).

   7. A memory load or store µop will store the address or displacement as a 16-bit
      integer, if possible. This integer is signed if there is a base or index register,
      otherwise unsigned. Extra storage space is needed if a direct address is ≥ 216 or an
      indirect address (i.e. with one or two pointer registers) has a displacement outside

       the ±215 interval.

   8. Memory load µops can not borrow extra storage space from other µops. If 16 bits of
      storage is insufficient then an extra trace cache entry will be used, regardless of
      borrowing opportunities.

   9. Most memory store instructions generate two µops: The first µop, which goes to port
      3, calculates the memory address. The second µop, which goes to port 0, transfers
      the data from the source operand to the memory location calculated by the first µop.
      The first µop can always borrow storage space from the second µop. This space
      cannot be borrowed to any other µop, even if it is empty.

   10. Store operations with an 8, 16, or 32-bit register as source, and no SIB byte, can be
       contained in a single µop. These µops can borrow storage space from other µops,
       according to rule 5 above.

   11. Segment prefixes do not require extra storage space.

   12. A µop cannot have both a memory operand and an immediate operand. An
       instruction that contains both will be split into two or more µops. No µop can use
       more than two trace cache entries.

   13. A µop that requires two trace cache entries cannot cross a trace cache line
       boundary. If a double-space µop would cross a 6-entry boundary in the trace cache
       then an empty space will be inserted and the µop will use the first two entries of the
       next trace cache line.

The difference between load and store operations needs an explanation. My theory is as
follows: No µop can have more than two input dependences (not including segment
registers). Any instruction that has more than two input dependences needs to be split up
into two or more µops. Examples are ADC and CMOVcc. A store instruction like MOV
[ESI+EDI],EAX also has three input dependences. It is therefore split up into two µops.
The first µop calculates the address [ESI+EDI], the second µop stores the value of EAX to
the calculated address. In order to optimize the most common store instructions, a single-
µop version has been implemented to handle the situations where there is no more than
one pointer register. The decoder makes the distinction by seeing if there is a SIB byte in
the address field of the instruction. A SIB byte is needed if there is more than one pointer
register, or a scaled index register, or ESP as base pointer. Load instructions, on the other
hand, can never have more than two input dependences. Therefore, load instructions are
implemented as single-µop instructions in the most common cases. The load µops need to
contain more information than the store µops. In addition to the type and number of the
destination register, it needs to store any segment prefix, base pointer, index pointer, scale
factor, and displacement. The size of the trace cache entries has probably been chosen to
be exactly enough to contain this information. Allocating a few more bits for the load µop to
indicate where it is borrowing storage space from would mean that all trace cache entries
would have a bigger size. Given the physical constraints on the trace cache, this would
mean fewer entries. This is probably the reason why memory load µops cannot borrow
storage space. The store instructions do not have this problem because the necessary
information is already split up between two µops unless there is no SIB byte, and hence less
information to contain.

The following examples will illustrate the rules for trace cache use (P4 only):

    ; Example 5.1. P4 trace cache use

    add eax,10000    ; The constant 10000 uses 32 bits in the opcode, but
                     ; can be contained in 16 bits in uop. uses 1 space.
    add ebx,40000    ; The constant is bigger than 215, but it can borrow
                     ; storage space from the next uop.
    add ebx,ecx      ; Uses 1 space. gives storage space to preceding uop.
    mov eax,[mem1] ; Requires 2 spaces, assuming that address ≥ 216;
                     ; preceding borrowing space is already used.
    mov eax,[esi+4] ; Requires 1 space.
    mov [si],ax                  ; Requires 1 space.
    mov ax,[si]                  ; Requires 2 uops taking one space each.
    movzx eax, word [si]         ; Requires 1 space.
    movdqa xmm1,es:[esi+100h]    ; Requires 1 space.
    fld qword [es:ebp+8*edx+16] ; Requires 1 space.
    mov [ebp+4], ebx             ; Requires 1 space.
    mov [esp+4], ebx             ; Requires 2 uops because sib byte needed.
    fstp dword [mem2]            ; Requires 2 uops. the first uop borrows
                                 ; space from the second one.

No further data compression is used in the trace cache besides the methods mentioned
above. A program that has a lot of direct memory addresses will typically use two trace
cache entries for each data access, even if all memory addresses are within the same
narrow range. In a flat memory model, the address of a direct memory operand uses 32 bits
in the opcode. The assembler listing will typically show addresses lower than 216, but these
addresses are relocated twice before the microprocessor sees them. The first relocation is
done by the linker; the second relocation is done by the loader when the program is loaded
into memory. When a flat memory model is used, the loader will typically place the entire
program at a virtual address space beginning at a value > 216. You may save space in the
trace cache by accessing data through pointers. In high-level languages like C++, local data
are always saved on the stack and accessed through pointers. Direct addressing of global
and static data can be avoided by using classes and member functions. Similar methods
may be applied in assembly programs.

You can prevent double-size µops from crossing 6-entry boundaries by scheduling them so
that there is an even number (including 0) of single-size µops between any two double-size
µops (A long, continuous 2-1-2-1 pattern will also do). Example:

    ; Example 5.2a. P4 trace cache double entries
    mov eax, [mem1]   ; 1 uop, 2 TC entries
    add eax, 1        ; 1 uop, 1 TC entry
    mov ebx, [mem2]   ; 1 uop, 2 TC entries
    mov [mem3], eax   ; 1 uop, 2 TC entries
    add ebx, 1        ; 1 uop, 1 TC entry

If we assume, for example, that the first µop here starts at 6-entry boundary, then the MOV
[MEM3],EAX µop will cross the next 6-entry boundary at the cost of an empty entry. This
can be prevented by re-arranging the code:

    ; Example 5.2b. P4 trace cache double entries rearranged
    mov eax, [mem1]   ; 1 uop, 2 TC entries
    mov ebx, [mem2]   ; 1 uop, 2 TC entries
    add eax, 1        ; 1 uop, 1 TC entry
    add ebx, 1        ; 1 uop, 1 TC entry
    mov [mem3], eax   ; 1 uop, 2 TC entries

We cannot know whether the first two µops are crossing any 6-entry boundary as long as
we haven't looked at the preceding code, but we can be certain that the MOV [MEM3],EAX
µop will not cross a boundary, because the second entry of the first µop cannot be the first
entry in a trace cache line. If a long code sequence is arranged so that there is never an
odd number of single-size µops between any two double-size µops then we will not waste
any trace cache entries. The preceding two examples assume that direct memory operands
are bigger than 216, which is usually the case. For the sake of simplicity, I have used only
instructions that generate 1 µop each in these examples. For instructions that generate
more than one µop, you have to consider each µop separately.

Trace cache use on P4E
The trace cache entries on the P4E need to be bigger than on the P4 because the
processor can run in 64 bit mode. This simplifies the design considerably. The need for
borrowing storage space from neighboring entries has been completely eliminated. Each
entry has 32 bits for immediate data, which is sufficient for all µops in 32 bit mode. Only a
few instructions in 64 bit mode can have 64 bits of immediate data or address, and these
instructions are split into two or three µops which contain no more than 32 data bits each.
Consequently, each µop uses one, and only one, trace cache entry.

Trace cache delivery rate
The trace cache runs at half clock speed, delivering one trace cache line with six entries
every two clock cycles. This corresponds to a maximum throughput of three µops per clock
cycle.

The typical delivery rate may be slightly lower on P4 because some µops use two entries
and some entries may be lost when a two-entry µop crosses a trace cache line boundary.

The throughput on P4E has been measured to exactly 8/3 or 2.667 µops per clock cycle. I
have found no explanation why a throughput of 3 µops per clock cannot be obtained on
P4E. It may be due to a bottleneck elsewhere in the pipeline.

Branches in the trace cache
The µops in the trace cache are not stored in the same order as the original code. If a
branching µop jumps most of the time, then the traces will usually be organized so that the
jumping µop is followed by the µops jumped to, rather than the µops that follows it in the
original code. This reduces the number of jumps between traces. The same sequence of
µops can appear more than once in the trace cache if it is jumped to from different places.

Sometimes it is possible to control which of the two branches are stored after a branching
µop by using branch hint prefixes (see page 39), but my experiments have shown no
consistent advantage of doing so. Even in the cases where there is an advantage by using
branch hint prefixes, this effect does not last very long because the traces are rearranged
quite often to fit the behavior of the branch µops. You can therefore assume that traces are
usually organized according to the way branches go most often.

The µop delivery rate is usually less than the maximum if the code contains many jumps,
calls and branches. If a branch is not the last entry in a trace cache line and the branch
goes to another trace stored elsewhere in the trace cache, then the rest of the entries in the
trace cache line are loaded for no use. This reduces the throughput. There is no loss if the
branching µop is the last µop in a trace cache line. In theory, it might be possible to organize
code so that branch µops appear in the end of trace cache lines in order to avoid losses.
But attempts to do so are rarely successful because it is almost impossible to predict where
each trace begins. Sometimes, a small loop containing branches can be improved by
organizing it so that each branch contains a number of trace cache entries divisible by the
line size (six). A number of trace cache entries that is slightly less than a multiple of the line
size is better than a number slightly more than a multiple of the line size.

Obviously, these considerations are only relevant if the throughput is not limited by any
other bottleneck in the execution units, and the branches are predictable.

Guidelines for improving trace cache performance
The following guidelines can improve performance on the P4 if the delivery of µops from the
trace cache is a bottleneck:
   1. Prefer instructions that generate few µops.

   2. Replace branch instructions by conditional moves if this does not imply extra
      dependences.

   3. Keep immediate operands in the range between -215 and +215 if possible. If a µop
      has an immediate 32-bit operand outside this range, then you should preferably
      have a µop with no immediate operand and no memory operand before or
      immediately after the µop with the big operand.

   4. Avoid direct memory addresses. The performance can be improved by using
      pointers if the same pointer can be used repeatedly and the addresses are within
      ±215 of the pointer register.

   5. Avoid having an odd number of single-size µops between any two double-size µops.
      Instructions that generate double-size µops include memory loads with direct
      memory operands, and other µops with an unmet need for extra storage space.

Only the first two of these guidelines are relevant to the P4E.

 5.3 Instruction decoding
Instructions that are not in the trace cache will go directly from the instruction decoder to the
execution pipeline. In this case, the maximum throughput is determined by the instruction
decoder.

In most cases, the decoder generates 1 - 4 µops for each instruction. For complex
instructions that require more than 4 µops, the µops are submitted from microcode ROM.
The tables in manual 4: "Instruction tables" list the number of decoder µops and microcode
µops that each instruction generates.

The decoder can handle instructions at a maximum rate of one instruction per clock cycle.
There are a few cases where the decoding of an instruction takes more than one clock
cycle:

An instruction that generates micro-code may take more than one clock cycle to decode,
sometimes much more. The following instructions, which may in some cases generate
micro-code, do not take significantly more time to decode: moves to and from segment
registers, ADC, SBB, IMUL, MUL, MOVDQU, MOVUPS, MOVUPD.

Instructions with many prefixes take extra time to decode. The instruction decoder on P4
can handle one prefix per clock cycle. An instruction with more than one prefix will thus take
one clock cycle for each prefix to decode on the P4. Instructions with more than one prefix
are rare in a 32-bit flat memory model where segment prefixes are not needed.

The instruction decoder on P4E can handle two prefixes per clock cycle. Thus, an
instruction with up to two prefixes can be decoded in a single clock cycle, while an
instruction with three or four prefixes is decoded in two clock cycles. This capability was
introduced in the P4E because instructions with two prefixes are common in 64 bit mode
(e.g. operand size prefix and REX prefix). Instructions with more than two prefixes are very
rare because segment prefixes are rarely used in 64 bit mode.

Decoding time is not important for small loops that fit entirely into the trace cache. If the
critical part of the code is too big for the trace cache, or scattered around in many small
pieces, then the µops may go directly from the decoder to the execution pipeline, and the

decoding speed may be a bottleneck. The level-2 cache is so efficient that you can safely
assume that it delivers code to the decoder at a sufficient speed.

If it takes longer time to execute a piece of code than to decode it, then the trace may not
stay in the trace cache. This has no negative influence on the performance, because the
code can run directly from the decoder again next time it is executed, without delay. This
mechanism tends to reserve the trace cache for the pieces of code that execute faster than
they decode. I have not found out which algorithm the microprocessor uses to decide
whether a piece of code should stay in the trace cache or not, but the algorithm seems to be
rather conservative, rejecting code from the trace cache only in extreme cases.

 5.4 Execution units
µops from the trace cache or from the decoder are queued when they are waiting to be
executed. After register renaming and reordering, each µop goes through a port to an
execution unit. Each execution unit has one or more subunits which are specialized for
particular operations, such as addition or multiplication. The organization of ports, execution
units, and subunits is outlined in the following two tables for the P4 and P4E, respectively.

   port    execution       subunit               speed          latency         reciprocal
           unit                                                                 throughput
    0        alu0           add, sub, mov          double             0.5           0.5
                                   logic           double             0.5           0.5
                             store integer         single              1             1
                                 branch            single              1             1
    0         mov          move and store          single              6             1
                            fp, mmx, xmm
                                    fxch           single              0              1
    1         alu1          add, sub, mov          double             0.5            0.5
    1          int                misc.            single
                          borrows mmx shift        single            4                1
                           borrows fp mul          single           14               >4
                            borrows fp div         single         53 - 61            23
    1           fp               fp add            single          4-5              1-2
                                 fp mul            single          6-7                2
                                  fp div           single         23 - 69          23 - 69
                                fp misc.           single
    1         mmx              mmx alu             single             2             1-2
                               mmx shift           single             2             1-2
                              mmx misc.            single
    2         load              all loads          single                               1
    3         store         store address          single                               2
Table 5.2. Execution units in P4

  port    execution        subunit                  speed      latency      reciprocal
          unit                                                              throughput
   0          alu0           add, sub, mov          double        1                0.5
                                  logic             double        1                0.5
                              store integer         single        1                 1
                                 branch             single        1                 1
   0          mov           move and store fp,      single        7                 1
                               mmx, xmm
                                   fxch             single        0                1
   1          alu1           add, sub, mov          double        1               0.5

                                     shift           double         1               0.5
                                  multiply           double        10               2.5
   1            int                  misc            single
                               borrows fp div        single     63 - 96             34
   1            fp                 fp add            single      5-6               1-2
                                   fp mul            single      7-8                 2
                                    fp div           single     32 - 71           32 - 71
                                  fp misc.           single
   1          mmx                 mmx alu            single         2               1-2
                                 mmx shift           single         2               1-2
                                 mmx misc.           single
   2          load                all loads          single                          1
   3          store            store address         single                          2
Table 5.3. Execution units in P4E

Further explanation can be found in "Intel Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon Processor Optimization
Reference Manual". The table above deviates slightly from diagrams in the Intel manual in
order to account for various delays.

A µop can be executed when the following conditions are met:

   •   All operands for the µop are ready.
   •   An appropriate execution port is ready.
   •   An appropriate execution unit is ready.
   •   An appropriate execution subunit is ready.

Two of the execution units run at double clock speed. This is alu0 and alu1, which are used
for integer operations. These units are highly optimized in order to execute the most
common µops as fast as possible. The double clock speed enables these two units to
receive a new µop every half clock cycle. An instruction like ADD EAX,EBX can execute in
either of these two units. This means that the execution core can handle four integer
additions per clock cycle. alu0 and alu1 are both pipelined in three stages. The lower half of
the result (16 bits on P4, 32 bits on P4E) is calculated in the first half clock cycle, the upper
half is calculated in the second half clock cycle, and the flags are calculated in the third half-
clock cycle. On the P4, the lower 16 bits are available to a subsequent µop already after a
half clock cycle, so that the effective latency will appear to be only a half clock cycle. The
double-speed execution units are designed to handle only the most common instructions in
order to make them as small as possible. This is necessary for making the high speed
possible.

This so-called "staggered addition" in three pipeline stages in alu0 and alu1 is revealed in
"The Microarchitecture of the Pentium 4 Processor", Intel Technology journal 2001. I haven't
been able to confirm this experimentally, since there is no difference in latencies between 8-
bit, 16-bit, 32-bit and 64-bit additions.

It is unknown whether the floating point and MMX units also use staggered addition, and at
what speed. See page 60 for a discussion.

The trace cache can submit approximately three µops per clock cycle to the queue. This
sets a limit to the execution speed if all µops are of the type that can execute in alu0 and
alu1. The throughput of four µops per clock cycle can thus only be obtained if µops have
been queued during a preceding period of lower throughput (due to slow instructions or
cache misses). My measurements show that a throughput of four µops per clock cycle can
be obtained for a maximum of 11 consecutive clock cycles if the queue has been filled
during a preceding period of lower throughput.

Each port can receive one µop for every whole clock tick. Port 0 and port 1 can each
receive one additional µop at every half-clock tick, if the additional µop is destined for alu0
or alu1. This means that if a code sequence consists of only µops that go to alu0 then the
throughput is two µops per clock cycle. If the µops can go to either alu0 or alu1 then the
throughput at this stage can be four µops per clock cycle. If all µops go to the single-speed
execution units under port 1 then the throughput is limited to one µop per clock cycle. If all
ports and units are used evenly, then the throughput at this stage may be as high as six
µops per clock cycle.

The single-speed execution units can each receive one µop per clock cycle. Some subunits
have a lower throughput. For example, the FP-DIV subunit cannot start a new division
before the preceding division is finished. Other subunits are perfectly pipelined. For
example, a floating point addition may take 6 clock cycles, but the FP-ADD subunit can start
a new FADD operation every clock cycle. In other words, if the first FADD operation goes
from time T to T+6, then the second FADD can start at time T+1 and end at time T+7, and
the third FADD goes from time T+2 to T+8, etc. Obviously, this is only possible if each FADD
operation is independent of the results of the preceding ones.

Details about µops, execution units, subunits, throughput and latencies are listed in manual
4: "Instruction tables". The following examples will illustrate how to use this table for making
time calculations. Timings are for P4E.

    ; Example 5.3. P4E instruction latencies
    fadd st0, st1       ; 0 - 6
    fadd qword [esi]    ; 6 - 12

The first FADD instruction has a latency of 6 clock cycles. If it starts at time T=0, it will be
finished at time T=6. The second FADD depends on the result of the first one. Hence, the
time is determined by the latency, not the throughput of the FP-ADD unit. The second
addition will start at time T=6 and be finished at time T=12. The second FADD instruction
generates an additional µop that loads the memory operand. Memory loads go to port 2,
while floating point arithmetic operations go to port 1. The memory load µop can start at
time T=0 simultaneously with the first FADD or perhaps even earlier. If the operand is in the
level-1 or level-2 data cache then we can expect it to be ready before it is needed.

The second example shows how to calculate throughput:

    ; Example 5.4. P4E instruction throughput
                          ; Clock cycle
    pmullw xmm1, xmm0     ; 0 - 7
    paddw xmm2, xmm0      ; 1 - 3
    paddw mm1, mm0        ; 3 - 5
    paddw xmm3, [esi]     ; 4 - 6

The 128-bit packed multiplication has a latency of 7 and a reciprocal throughput of 2. The
subsequent addition uses a different execution unit. It can therefore start as soon as port 1
is vacant. The 128-bit packed additions have a reciprocal throughput of 2, while the 64-bit
versions have a reciprocal throughput of 1. Reciprocal throughput is also called issue
latency. A reciprocal throughput of 2 means that the second PADD can start 2 clocks after
the first one. The second PADD operates on 64-bit registers, but uses the same execution
subunit. It has a throughput of 1, which means that the third PADD can start one clock later.
As in the previous example, the last instruction generates an additional memory load µop.
As the memory load µop goes to port 0, while the other µops go to port 1, the memory load
does not affect the throughput. None of the instructions in this example depend on the
results of the preceding ones. Consequently, only the throughput matters, not the latency.
We cannot know if the four instructions are executed in program order or they are
reordered. However, reordering will not affect the overall throughput of the code sequence.

 5.5 Do the floating point and MMX units run at half speed?
Looking at the tables in manual 4: "Instruction tables", we notice that many of the latencies
for 64-bit and 128-bit integer and floating point instructions are even numbers, especially for
the P4. This has led to speculations that the MMX and FP execution units may be running at
half clock speed. I have put up four different hypotheses in order to investigate this
question:

Hypothesis 1
128-bit instructions are split into two 64-bit µops as in the P3. However, this hypothesis is
not in accordance with the µop counts that can be measured with the performance monitor
counters on the P4.

Hypothesis 2
We may assume that the P4 has two 64-bit MMX units working together at half speed. Each
128-bit µop will use both units and take 2 clock cycles, as illustrated on fig 5.1. A 64-bit µop
can use either of the two units so that independent 64-bit µops can execute at a throughput
of one µop per clock cycle, assuming that the half-speed units can start at both odd and
even clocks. Dependent 64-bit µops will have a latency of 2 clocks, as shown in fig 5.1.

Figure 5.1

The measured latencies and throughputs are in accordance with this hypothesis. In order to
test this hypothesis, I have made an experiment with a series of alternating 128-bit and 64-
bit µops. Under hypothesis 2, it will be impossible for a 64-bit µop to overlap with a 128-bit
µop, because the 128-bit µop uses both 64-bit units. A long sequence of n 128-bit µops
alternating with n 64-bit µops should take 4·n clocks, as shown in figure 5.2.

Figure 5.2

However, my experiment shows that this sequence takes only 3·n clocks. (I have made the
64-bit µops interdependent, so that they cannot overlap with each other). We therefore have
to reject hypothesis 2.

Hypothesis 3
We may modify hypothesis 2 with the assumption that the internal data bus is only 64 bits
wide, so that a 128-bit operand is transferred to the execution units in two clock cycles. If we
still assume that there are two 64-bit execution units running at half speed, then the first 64-
bit unit can start at time T = 0 when the first half of the 128-bit operand arrives, while the
second 64-bit unit will start one clock later, when the second half of the operand arrives (see
figure 5.3). The first 64-bit unit will then be able to accept a new 64-bit operand at time T=2,
before the second 64-bit unit is finished with the second half of the 128-bit operand. If we
have a sequence of alternating 128-bit and 64-bit µops, then the third µop, which is 128-bit,
can start with its first half operand at time T=3, using the second 64-bit execution unit, while
the second operand starts at T=4 using the first 64-bit execution unit. As figure 5.3 shows,
this can explain the observation that a sequence of n 128-bit µops alternating with n 64-bit
µops takes 3·n clocks.

Figure 5.3

The measured latency of simple 128-bit µops is not 3 clocks, but 2. In order to explain this,
we have to look at how a dependency chain of 128-bit µops is executed. Figure 5.4 shows
the execution of a chain of interdependent 128-bit µops.

Figure 5.4

The first µop handles the first half of its operand from time T = 0 to 2, while the second half
of the operand is handled from time T = 1 to time 3. The second µop can start to handle its
first half operand already at time T = 2, even though the second half operand is not ready
until time T = 3. A sequence of n interdependent 128-bit µops of this kind will thus take
2·n+1 clocks. The extra 1 clock in the end will appear to be part of the latency of the final
instruction in the chain, which stores the result to memory. Thus, for practical purposes, we
can calculate with a latency of 2 clocks for simple 128-bit µops.

Hypothesis 4
The assumption is now that there is only one 64-bit arithmetic unit running at full speed. It
has a latency of 2 clocks and is pipelined in two stages, so that it can accept a new 64-bit
operand every clock cycle. Under this assumption, the sequence of alternating 128-bit and
64-bit µops will still be executed as shown in figure 5.3.

There is no experimental way to distinguish between hypothesis 3 and 4 if the two units
assumed under hypothesis 3 are identical, because all inputs and outputs to the execution
units occur at the same times under both of these hypotheses. It would be possible to prove
hypothesis 3 and reject hypothesis 4 if there were some 64-bit operations that could
execute only in one of the two assumed 64-bit units. It is likely that some of the rarest
operations would be supported only in one of the two units. And it would be possible to
prove this by making an experiment where only the unit that does not support a particular
operation is vacant when this operation is scheduled for execution. I have made a

systematic search for operations that might be supported only by one of the two
hypothetical units. The only candidate I have found is the 64-bit addition PADDQ. My
experiments show that the 64-bit PADDQ MM executes in the MMX-ALU unit, while the 128-
bit PADDQ XMM executes in the FP-ADD unit. However, further experiments show that if
there are two 64-bit MMX-ADD units then they are both able to perform the PADDQ MM. This
makes hypothesis 4 more likely than hypothesis 3.

If hypothesis 4 is right, then we have a problem explaining why it needs two pipeline stages.
If the MMX-ALU unit is able to do a staggered 64-bit addition in 2 clock cycles, then it would
be possible to do a packed 32-bit addition in 1 clock cycle. It is difficult to believe that the
designers have given all MMX instructions a latency of 2 rather than 1 just for the sake of
the rare PADDQ MM instruction. A more likely explanation is that each adder is fixed at a
particular pipeline stage. I therefore consider hypothesis 4 the most likely explanation.

However, the following sentence may be read as support for hypothesis 3: "Intel NetBurst
micro-architecture [...] uses a deeply pipelined design to enable high clock rates with
different parts of the chip running at different clock rates, some faster and some slower than
the nominally-quoted clock frequency of the processor" (Intel Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon
Processor Optimization Reference Manual, 2001). Letting different units run at different
speeds may actually be a better design decision than letting the slowest unit determine the
overall clock frequency. A further reason for this choice may be to reduce power
consumption and optimize the thermal design. It is possible that some parts of e. g. the
floating point unit run at half speed, but the above citation may just as well refer to the trace
cache running at half speed.

Those 128-bit MMX µops where the two 64-bit halves are interdependent of each other all
have a latency of 4 clocks. This is in accordance with hypothesis 3 and 4.

Floating point addition and multiplication µops operating on 80-bit registers have latencies
that are one clock cycle more than the latencies of similar µops in 128-bit registers. Under
hypothesis 3, the extra clock cycle can be explained as the extra time it takes to transfer an
80-bit operand over a 64-bit data bus. Under hypothesis 4, the extra clock cycle can be
explained as the time needed to generate the extra 80-bit precision.

Scalar floating point operations in 80-bit registers have a throughput of 1 µop per clock
cycle, while scalar floating point operations in 128-bit registers have half throughput, even
though they only use 32 or 64 of the 128 bits. This is probably because the remaining 96 or
64 bits of the destination operand, which remain unchanged, are going through the
execution unit to the new (renamed) destination register.

Divisions behave differently. There is a separate division unit which uses iteration and is not
pipelined. Divisions can have both odd and even latencies, so it is likely that the division unit
runs at full speed. Division uses the FP-MUL unit, which implies that the FP-MUL unit
probably also runs at full speed.

 5.6 Transfer of data between execution units
The latency of an operation is in most cases longer if the next dependent operation is not
executed in the same execution unit. Example (P4E):

    ; Example 5.5. P4E transfer data between execution units
                          ; clock      ex.unit   subunit
    paddw xmm0, xmm1      ; 0 - 2      MMX       ALU
    psllw xmm0, 4         ; 2 - 4      MMX       SHIFT
    pmullw xmm0, xmm2     ; 5 - 12     FP        MUL
    psubw xmm0, xmm3      ; 13 - 15    MMX       ALU
    por    xmm6, xmm7     ; 3 - 5      MMX       ALU
    movdqa xmm1, xmm0     ; 16 - 23    MOV
    pand      xmm1, xmm4         ; 23 - 25          MMX         ALU

The first instruction PADDW runs in the MMX unit under port 1, and has a latency of 2. The
shift instruction PSLLW runs in the same execution unit, though in a different subunit. There
is no extra delay, so it can start at time T=2. The multiplication instruction PMULLW runs in a
different execution unit, the FP unit, because there is no multiplication subunit in the MMX
execution unit. This gives an extra delay of one clock cycle. The multiplication cannot start
until T=5, even though the shift operation finished at T=4. The next instruction, PSUBW, goes
back to the MMX unit, so again we have a delay of one clock cycle from the multiplication is
finished till the subtraction can begin. The POR does not depend on any of the preceding
instructions, so it can start as soon as port 1 and the MMX-ALU subunit are both vacant.
The MOVDQA instruction goes to the MOV unit under port 0, which gives us another delay of
one clock cycle after the PSUBW has finished. The last instruction, PAND, goes back to the
MMX unit under port 1. However, there is no additional delay after a move instruction. The
whole sequence takes 25 clock cycles.

There is no delay between the two double-speed units, ALU0 and ALU1, but on the P4
there is an additional delay of a half clock cycle from these units to any other (single-speed)
execution unit. Example (P4):

    ; Example 5.6a. P4 transfer data between execution units
                        ;   clock        ex.unit   subunit
    and eax, 0fh        ; 0.0 - 0.5      ALU0      LOGIC
    xor ebx, 30h        ; 0.5 - 1.0      ALU0      LOGIC
    add eax, 1          ; 0.5 - 1.0      ALU1      ADD
    shl eax, 3          ; 2.0 - 6.0      INT       MMX SHIFT
    sub eax, ecx        ; 7.0 - 7.5      ALU0/1    ADD
    mov edx, eax        ; 7.5 - 8.0      ALU0/1    MOV
    imul edx, 100       ; 9.0 - 23.0     INT       FP MUL
    or   edx, ebx       ; 23.0 - 23.5    ALU0/1    MOV

The first instruction, AND, starts at time T=0 in ALU0. Running at double speed, it is finished
at time 0.5. The XOR instruction starts as soon as ALU0 is vacant, at time 0.5. The third
instruction, ADD, needs the result of the first instruction, but not the second. Since ALU0 is
occupied by the XOR, the ADD has to go to ALU1. There is no delay from ALU0 to ALU1, so
the ADD can start at time T=0.5, simultaneously with the XOR, and finish at T=1.0. The SHL
instruction runs in the single-speed INT unit. There is a half clock delay from ALU0 or ALU1
to any other unit, so the INT unit cannot receive the result of the ADD until time T=1.5.
Running at single speed, the INT unit cannot start at a half-clock tick so it will wait until time
T=2.0 and finish at T=6.0. The next instruction, SUB, goes back to ALU0 or ALU1. There is a
one-clock delay from the SHL instruction to any other execution unit, so the SUB instruction
is delayed until time T=7.0. After the two double-speed instructions, SUB and MOV, we have
a half clock delay again before the IMUL running in the INT unit. The IMUL, running again at
single speed, cannot start at time T=8.5 so it is delayed until T=9.0. There is no additional
delay after IMUL, so the last instruction can start at T=23.0 and end at T=23.5.

There are several ways to improve this code. The first improvement is to swap the order of
ADD and SHL (then we have to add (1 SHL 3) = 8):

    ; Example 5.6b. P4 transfer data between execution units
                        ;   clock        ex.unit   subunit
    and eax, 00Fh       ; 0.0 - 0.5      ALU0      LOGIC
    xor ebx, 0F0h       ; 0.5 - 1.0      ALU0      LOGIC
    shl eax, 3          ; 1.0 - 5.0      INT       MMX SHIFT
    add eax, 8          ; 6.0 - 6.5      ALU1      ADD
    sub eax, ecx        ; 6.5 - 7.0      ALU0/1    ADD
    mov edx, eax        ; 7.0 - 7.5      ALU0/1    MOV
    imul edx, 100       ; 8.0 - 22.0     INT       FP MUL
    or   edx, ebx       ; 22.0 - 22.5    ALU0/1    MOV
Here we are saving a half clock before the SHL and a half clock before the IMUL by making
the data for these instructions ready at a half-clock tick so that they are available to the
single-speed unit a half clock later, at an integral time. The trick is to reorder the instructions
so that we have an odd number of double-speed µops between any two single-speed µops
in a chain of interdependent instructions. We can improve the code further by minimizing the
number of transitions between execution units. Even better, of course, is to keep all
operations in the same execution unit, and preferably the double-speed units. SHL EAX,3
can be replaced by 3 × (ADD EAX,EAX).

If we want to know why there is an additional delay when going from one execution unit to
another, there are three possible explanations:

Explanation A
The physical distance between the execution units on the silicon chip is quite large, and this
may cause a propagation delay in the traveling of electrical signals from one unit to another
because of the induction and capacity in the wires.

Explanation B
The "logical distance" between execution units means that the data have to travel through
various registers, buffers, ports, buses and multiplexers to get to the right destination. The
designers have implemented various shortcuts to bypass these delaying elements and
forward results directly to execution units that are waiting for these results. It is possible that
these shortcuts connect to only execution units under the same port.

Explanation C
If 128-bit operands are handled 64 bits at a time in staggered additions, as figure 5.4
suggests, then we will have a 1 clock delay at the end of a chain of 128-bit instructions
when the two halves have to be united. Consider, for example, the addition of packed
double precision floating point numbers in 128-bit registers on P4. If the addition of the
lower 64-bit operand starts at time T=0, it will finish at T=4. The upper 64-bit operand can
start at time T=1 and finish at T=5. If the next dependent operation is also a packed
addition, then the second addition can start to work on the lower 64-bit operand at time T=4,
before the upper operand is ready.

Figure 5.5

The latency for a chain of such instructions will appear to be 4 clock cycles per operation. If
all operations on 128-bit registers can overlap in this way, then we will never see the 128-bit
operations having higher latency than the corresponding 64-bit operations. But if the
transport of the data to another execution unit requires that all 128 bits travel together, then
we get an additional delay of 1 clock cycle for the synchronization of the upper and lower
operands, as figure 5.5 shows. In the same way, the double-speed units ALU0 and ALU1 on
P4 handle 32-bit operations as two 16-bit operations taking a half-clock cycle each. But if all
32 bits are needed together, then there is an extra delay of a half clock. It is not known
whether the data buses between execution units are 32 bits, 64 bits or 128 bits wide.

 5.7 Retirement
The retirement of executed µops works in the same way in the P4 and P4E as in the 6'th
generation processors. This process is explained on page 84.

The retirement station can handle three µops per clock cycle. This may not seem like a
problem because the throughput is already limited to 3 µops per clock in the trace cache.
But the retirement station has the further limitation that taken jumps must retire in the first of
the three slots in the retirement station. This sometimes limits the throughput of small loops.
If the number of µops in the loop is not a multiple of 3, then the jump-back instruction in the
bottom of the loop may go into the wrong retirement slot, at the penalty of one clock cycle
per iteration. It is therefore recommended that the number of µops (not instructions) in small
critical loops should be a multiple of 3. In some cases, you can actually save one clock
cycle per iteration by adding one or two NOP's to the loop to make the number of µops
divisible by 3. This applies only if a throughput of 3 µops per clock cycle is expected.

 5.8 Partial registers and partial flags
Registers AL, AH, and AX are all parts of the EAX register. These are called partial registers.
On 6'th generation microprocessors, the partial registers could be split into separate
temporary registers, so that different parts could be handled independently of each other.
This caused a serious delay whenever there was a need to join different parts of a register
into a single full register. This problem is explained on page 85 and 102.

The P4/P4E prevents this problem in a different way than the PM, namely by always
keeping the whole register together. This solution has other drawbacks, however. The first
drawback is that it introduces false dependences. Any read or write to AL will be delayed if a
preceding write to AH is delayed.

Another drawback is that access to a partial register sometimes requires an extra µop.
Examples:

    ; Example 5.7. Partial register access
    mov eax, [mem32]        ; 1 uop
    mov ax, [mem16]         ; 2 uops
    mov al, [mem8]          ; 2 uops
    mov ah, [mem8]          ; 2 uops
    add al, bl              ; 1 uop
    add ah, bh              ; 1 uop
    add al, bh              ; 2 uops
    add ah, bl              ; 2 uops

For optimal performance, you may follow the following guidelines when working with 8-bit
and 16-bit operands:

   •   Avoid using the high 8-bit registers AH, BH, CH, DH.

   •   When reading from an 8-bit or 16-bit memory operand, use MOVZX to read the entire
       32-bit register, even in 16-bit mode.

   •   When sign-extension is needed then use MOVSX with the largest possible
       destination register, i.e. 32-bit destination in 16 or 32-bit mode, and 64-bit
       destination in 64-bit mode.

   •   Alternatively, use MMX or XMM registers to handle 8-bit and 16-bit integers, if they
       can be packed.

The problems with partial access also apply to the flags register when an instruction
modifies some of the flags but leaves other flags unchanged.

For historical reasons, the INC and DEC instructions leave the carry flag unchanged, while
the other arithmetic flags are written to. This causes a false dependence on the previous
value of the flags and costs an extra µop. To avoid these problems, it is recommended that
you always use ADD and SUB instead of INC and DEC. For example, INC EAX should be
replaced by ADD EAX,1.

SAHF leaves the overflow flag unchanged but changes the other arithmetic flags. This
causes a false dependence on the previous value of the flags, but no extra µop.

BSF and BSR change the zero flag but leave the other flags unchanged. This causes a false
dependence on the previous value of the flags and costs an extra µop.

BT, BTC, BTR, and BTS change the carry flag but leave the other flags unchanged. This
causes a false dependence on the previous value of the flags and costs an extra µop. Use
TEST, AND, OR and XOR instead of these instructions. On P4E you can also use shift
instructions efficiently. For example, BT RAX,40 / JC X can be replaced by SHR
RAX,41 / JC X if the value of RAX is not needed again later.

 5.9 Store forwarding stalls
The problems with accessing part of a memory operand are much bigger than when
accessing part of a register. These problems are the same as for previous processors, see
page 88. Example:

    ; Example 5.8a. Store forwarding stall
    mov dword [mem1], eax
    mov dword [mem1+4], 0
    fild qword [mem1]             ; Large penalty

You can save 10-20 clocks by changing this to:

    ; Example 5.8b. Avoid store forwarding stall
    movd xmm0, eax
    movq qword [mem1], xmm0
    fild qword [mem1]             ; No penalty

 5.10 Memory intermediates in dependency chains
The P4 has an unfortunate proclivity for trying to read a memory operand before it is ready.
If you write

    ; Example 5.9. Memory intermediate in dependency chain
    imul eax, 5
    mov [mem1], eax
    mov ebx, [mem1]
    add ebx, ecx

then the microprocessor may try to read the value of [MEM1] into EBX before the IMUL and
the memory write have finished. It soon discovers that the value it has read is invalid, so it
will discard EBX and try again. It will keep replaying the read instruction as well as the
subsequent instructions until the data in [MEM1] are ready. There seems to be no limit to
how many times it can replay a series of instructions, and this process steals resources from
other processes. In a long dependency chain, this may typically cost 10 - 20 clock cycles!
Using the MFENCE instruction to serialize memory access does not solve the problem
because this instruction is even more costly. On other microprocessors, including P4E, the
penalty for reading a memory operand immediately after writing to the same memory
position is only a few clock cycles.

The best way to avoid this problem is, of course, to replace MOV EBX,[MEM1] with MOV
EBX,EAX in the above example. Another possible solution is to give the processor plenty of
work to do between the store and the load from the same address.

However, there are two situations where it is not possible to keep data in registers. The first
situation is the transfer of parameters in high-level language procedure calls in 16-bit and
32-bit mode; the second situation is transferring data between floating point registers and
other registers.

Transferring parameters to procedures
Calling a function with one integer parameter in C++ will typically look like this in 32-bit
mode:

    ; Example 5.10. Memory intermediate in function call (32-bit mode)
    push eax              ; Save parameter on stack
    call _ff              ; Call function _ff
    add esp,4             ; Clean up stack after call
    ...
    _ff:                  ; Function entry
    push ebp              ; Save ebp
    mov ebp,esp           ; Copy stack pointer
    mov eax,[ebp+8]       ; Read parameter from stack
    ...
    pop ebp               ; Restore ebp
    ret                   ; Return from function

As long as either the calling program or the called function is written in high-level language,
you may have to stick to the convention of transferring parameters on the stack. Most C++
compilers can transfer 2 or 3 integer parameters in registers when the function is declared
__fastcall. However, this method is not standardized. Different compilers use different
registers for parameter transfer. To avoid the problem, you may have to keep the entire
dependency chain in assembly language. The problem can be avoided in 64-bit mode
where most parameters are transferred in registers.

Transferring data between floating point and other registers
There is no way to transfer data between floating point registers and other registers, except
through memory. Example:

    ; Example 5.11. Memory intermediate in integer to f.p. conversion
    imul eax,     ebx
    mov   [temp], eax      ; Transfer data from integer register to f.p.
    fild [temp]
    fsqrt
    fistp [temp]           ; Transfer data from f.p. register to integer
    mov   eax,    [temp]

Here we have the problem of transferring data through memory twice. You may avoid the
problem by keeping the entire dependency chain in floating point registers, or by using XMM
registers instead of floating point registers.

Another way to prevent premature reading of the memory operand is to make the read
address depend on the data. The first transfer can be done like this:

    ; Example 5.12. Avoid stall in integer to f.p. conversion
    mov [temp], eax
    and eax,     0        ; Make eax = 0, but keep dependence

     fild [temp+eax]              ; Make read address depend on eax

The AND EAX,0 instruction sets EAX to zero but keeps a false dependence on the previous
value. By putting EAX into the address of the FILD instruction, we prevent it from trying to
read before EAX is ready.

It is a little more complicated to make a similar dependence when transferring data from
floating point registers to integer registers. The simplest way to solve the problem is:

     ; Example 5.13. Avoid stall in f.p. to integer conversion
     fistp [temp]
     fnstsw ax                ; Transfer status after fistp to ax
     and    eax, 0            ; Set to 0
     mov    eax, [temp+eax]   ; Make dependent on eax

Literature
A detailed study of the replay mechanism is published by Victor Kartunov, et. al.: "Replay:
Unknown Features of the NetBurst Core", www.xbitlabs.com/articles/cpu/print/replay.html.
See also US Patents 6,163,838; 6,094,717; 6,385,715.

 5.11 Breaking dependency chains
A common way of setting a register to zero is XOR EAX,EAX or SUB EBX,EBX. The
P4/P4E processor recognizes that these instructions are independent of the prior value of
the register. So any instruction that uses the new value of the register will not have to wait
for the value prior to the XOR or SUB instruction to be ready. The same applies to the PXOR
instruction with a 64-bit or 128-bit register, but not to any of the following instructions: XOR or
SUB with an 8-bit or 16-bit register, SBB, PANDN, PSUB, XORPS, XORPD, SUBPS, SUBPD,
FSUB.

The instructions XOR, SUB and PXOR are useful for breaking an unnecessary dependence,
but it doesn't work on e.g. the PM processor.

You may also use these instructions for breaking dependences on the flags. For example,
rotate instructions have a false dependence on the flags in P4. This can be removed in the
following way:

     ; Example 5.14. Break false dependence on flags
     ror eax, 1
     sub edx, edx   ; Remove false dependence on the flags
     ror ebx, 1

If you don't have a spare register for this purpose, then use an instruction that doesn't
change the register, but only the flags, such as CMP or TEST. You cannot use CLC for
breaking dependences on the carry flag.

 5.12 Choosing the optimal instructions
There are many possibilities for replacing less efficient instructions with more efficient ones.
The most important cases are summarized below.

INC and DEC
These instructions have a problem with partial flag access, as explained on page 66.
Always replace INC EAX with ADD EAX,1, etc.

8-bit and 16-bit integers
Replace MOV AL,BYTE [MEM8] by MOVZX EAX,BYTE [MEM8]
Replace MOV BX,WORD [MEM16] by MOVZX EBX,WORD [MEM16]

Avoid using the high 8-bit registers AH, BH, CH, DH.

If 8-bit or 16-bit integers can be packed and handled in parallel, then use MMX or XMM
registers.

These rules apply even in 16-bit mode.

Memory stores
Most memory store instructions use 2 µops. Simple store instructions of the type MOV
[MEM],EAX use only one µop if the memory operand has no SIB byte. A SIB byte is
needed if there is more than one pointer register, if there is a scaled index register, or if ESP
is used as base pointer. The short-form store instructions can use a general purpose
register (see page 53). Examples:

    ; Example 5.15. uop counts for memory stores
    mov array[ecx], eax     ; 1 uop
    mov array[ecx*4], eax   ; 2 uops because of scaled index
    mov [ecx+edi], eax      ; 2 uops because of two index registers
    mov [ebp+8], ebx        ; 1 uop
    mov [esp+8], ebx        ; 2 uops because esp used
    mov [es:mem8], cl       ; 1 uop
    mov [es:mem8], ch       ; 2 uops because high 8-bit register used
    movq [esi], mm1         ; 2 uops because not a general purp.register
    fstp dword [mem32]      ; 2 uops because not a general purp.register

The corresponding memory load instructions all use only 1 µop. A consequence of these
rules is that a procedure which has many stores to local variables on the stack should use
EBP as pointer, while a procedure which has many loads and few stores may use ESP as
pointer, and save EBP for other purposes.

Shifts and rotates
Shifts and rotates on integer registers are quite slow on the P4 because the integer
execution unit transfers the data to the MMX shift unit and back again. Shifts to the left may
be replaced by additions. For example, SHL EAX,3 can be replaced by 3 times ADD
EAX,EAX. This does not apply to the P4E, where shifts are as fast as additions.

Rotates through carry (RCL, RCR) by a value different from 1 or by CL should be avoided.

If the code contains many integer shifts and multiplications, then it may be advantageous to
execute it in MMX or XMM registers on P4.

Integer multiplication
Integer multiplication is slow on the P4 because the integer execution unit transfers the data
to the FP-MUL unit and back again. If the code has many integer multiplications then it may
be advantageous to handle the data in MMX or XMM registers.

Integer multiplication by a constant can be replaced by additions. Replacing a single
multiply instruction by a long sequence of ADD instructions should, of course, only be done
in critical dependency chains.

LEA
The LEA instruction is split into additions and shifts on the P4 and P4E. LEA instructions
with a scale factor may preferably be replaced by additions. This applies only to the LEA
instruction, not to any other instructions with a memory operand containing a scale factor.

In 64-bit mode, a LEA with a RIP-relative address is inefficient. Replace LEA RAX,[MEM]
by MOV RAX, OFFSET MEM .

Register-to-register moves with FP, mmx and xmm registers
The following instructions, which copy one register into another, all have a latency of 6
clocks on P4 and 7 clocks on P4E: MOVQ MM,MM, MOVDQA XMM,XMM, MOVAPS XMM,XMM,
MOVAPD XMM,XMM, FLD ST(X), FST ST(X), FSTP ST(X). These instructions have no
additional latency. A possible reason for the long latency of these instructions is that they
use the same execution unit as memory stores (port 0, MOV).

There are several ways to avoid this delay:

   •   The need for copying a register can sometimes be eliminated by using the same
       register repeatedly as source, rather than destination, for other instructions.

   •   With floating point registers, the need for moving data from one register to another
       can often be eliminated by using FXCH. The FXCH instruction has no latency.

   •   If the value of a register needs to be copied, then use the old copy in the most critical
       dependence path, and the new copy in a less critical path. The following example
       calculates Y = (a+b)2.5 :

           ; Example 5.16. Optimize register-to-register moves
           fld qword [a]
           fadd qword [b] ; a+b
           fld st          ; Copy a+b
           fxch            ; Get old copy
           fsqrt           ; (a+b)0.5
           fxch            ; Get new (delayed) copy
           fmul st,st      ; (a+b)2
           fmul            ; (a+b)2.5
           fstp qword [y]

       The old copy is used for the slow square root, while the new copy, which is available
       6-7 clocks later, is used for the multiplication.

   If none of these methods solve the problem, and latency is more important than
   throughput, then use faster alternatives:

   •   For 80-bit floating point registers:

           fld st0                    ; copy register

       can be replaced by

           fldz                       ; make an empty register
           xor eax, eax               ; set zero flag
           fcmovz st0, st1            ; conditional move

   •   For 64-bit MMX registers:

           movq mm1, mm0

       can be replaced by the shuffle instruction

           pshufw mm1, mm0, 11100100B

   •   For 128-bit XMM registers:

           movdqa xmm1, xmm0

       can be replaced by the shuffle instruction

           pshufd xmm1, xmm0, 11100100B

       or even faster:

           pxor xmm1, xmm1           ; Set new register to 0
           por xmm1, xmm0            ; OR with desired value

   These methods all have lower latencies than the register-to-register moves. However, a
   drawback of these tricks is that they use port 1 which is also used for all calculations on
   these registers. If port 1 is saturated, then it may be better to use the slow moves, which
   go to port 0.

 5.13 Bottlenecks in P4 and P4E
It is important, when optimizing a piece of code, to find the limiting factor that controls
execution speed. Tuning the wrong factor is unlikely to have any beneficial effect. In the
following paragraphs, I will explain each of the possible limiting factors. You have to
consider each factor in order to determine which one is the narrowest bottleneck, and then
concentrate your optimization effort on that factor until it is no longer the narrowest
bottleneck.

Memory access
If the program is accessing large amounts of data, or if the data are scattered around
everywhere in the memory, then we will have many data cache misses. Accessing
uncached data is so time consuming that all other optimization considerations are
unimportant. The caches are organized as aligned lines of 64 bytes each. If one byte within
an aligned 64-bytes block has been accessed, then we can be certain that all 64 bytes will
be loaded into the level-1 data cache and can be accessed at no extra cost. To improve
caching, it is recommended that data that are used in the same part of the program be
stored together. You may align large arrays and structures by 64. Store local variables on
the stack if you don't have enough registers.

The level-1 data cache is only 8 kb on the P4 and 16 kb on P4E. This may not be enough to
hold all the data, but the level-2 cache is more efficient on the P4/P4E than on previous
processors. Fetching data from the level-2 cache will cost only a few clock cycles extra.

Data that are unlikely to be cached may be prefetched before they are used. If memory
addresses are accessed consecutively, then they will be prefetched automatically. You
should therefore preferably organize the data in a linear fashion so that they can be
accessed consecutively, and access no more than four large arrays, preferably less, in the
critical part of the program.

The PREFETCH instructions can improve performance in situations where you access
uncached data and cannot rely on automatic prefetching. However, excessive use of the
PREFETCH instructions can slow down program throughput on P4. If you are in doubt
whether a PREFETCH instruction will benefit the program, then you may simply load the data
needed into a spare register rather than using a PREFETCH instruction. If you have no spare
register then use an instruction which reads the memory operand without changing any
register, such as CMP or TEST. As the stack pointer is unlikely to be part of any critical
dependency chain, a useful way to prefetch data is CMP ESP,[MEM], which will change
only the flags.
When writing to a memory location that is unlikely to be accessed again soon, you may use
the non-temporal write instructions MOVNTI, etc., but excessive use of non-temporal moves
will slow down performance on P4.

Further guidelines regarding memory access can be found in "Intel Pentium 4 and Intel
Xeon Processor Optimization Reference Manual".

Execution latency
The executing time for a dependency chain can be calculated from the latencies listed in
manual 4: "Instruction tables". Many instructions have an additional latency of 1 clock cycle
when the subsequent instruction goes to a different execution unit. See page 62 for further
explanation.

If long dependency chains limit the performance of the program then you may improve
performance by choosing instructions with low latency, minimizing the number of transitions
between execution units, breaking up dependency chains, and utilizing all opportunities for
calculating subexpressions in parallel.

Always avoid memory intermediates in dependency chains, as explained on page 66.

Execution unit throughput
If your dependency chains are short, or if you are working on several dependency chains in
parallel, then the program is most likely limited by throughput rather than latency. Different
execution units have different throughputs. ALU0 and ALU1, which handle simple integer
instructions and other common µops, both have a throughput of 2 instructions per clock
cycle. Most other execution units have a throughput of one instruction per clock cycle. When
working with 128-bit registers, the throughput is usually one instruction per two clock cycles.
Division and square roots have the lowest throughputs. Each throughput measure applies to
all µops executing in the same execution subunit (see page 59).

If execution throughput limits the code then try to move some calculations to other execution
subunits.

Port throughput
Each of the execution ports can receive one µop per clock cycle. Port 0 and port 1 can
receive an additional µop at each half-clock tick if these µops go to the double-speed units
ALU0 and ALU1. If all µops in the critical part of the code go to the single-speed units under
port 1, then the throughput will be limited to 1 µop per clock cycle. If the µops are optimally
distributed between the four ports, then the throughput may be as high as 6 µops per clock
cycle. Such a high throughput can only be achieved in short bursts, because the trace
cache and the retirement station limit the average throughput to less than 3 µops per clock
cycle.

If port throughput limits the code then try to move some µops to other ports. For example,
MOV REGISTER,IMMEDIATE can be replaced by MOV REGISTER,MEMORY.

Trace cache delivery
The trace cache can deliver a maximum of approx. 3 µops per clock cycle. On P4, some
µops require more than one trace cache entry, as explained on page 52. The delivery rate
can be less than 3 µops per clock cycle for code that contains many branches and for tiny
loops with branches inside (see page 55).

If none of the abovementioned factors limit program performance, then you may aim at a
throughput of approx. 3 µops per clock cycle.

Choose the instructions that generate the smallest number of µops. Avoid µops that require
more than one trace cache entry on P4 (see page 52).

Trace cache size
The trace cache can hold less code than a traditional code cache using the same amount of
physical chip space. The limited size of the trace cache can be a serious bottleneck if the
critical part of the program doesn't fit into the trace cache.

µop retirement
The retirement station can handle 3 µops per clock cycle. Taken branches can only be
handled by the first of the three slots in the retirement station.

If you aim at an average throughput of 3 µops per clock cycle then avoid an excessive
number of jumps, calls and branches. Small critical loops should preferably have a number
of µops divisible by 3 (see page 65).

Instruction decoding
If the critical part of the code doesn't fit into the trace cache, then the limiting stage may be
instruction decoding. The decoder can handle one instruction per clock cycle, provided that
the instruction generates no more than 4 µops and no microcode, and does not have an
excessive number of prefixes (see page 56). If decoding is a bottleneck, then you may try to
minimize the number of instructions rather than the number of µops.

Branch prediction
The calculations of latencies and throughputs are only valid if all branches are predicted.
Branch mispredictions can seriously slow down performance when latency or throughput is
the limiting factor. The inability of the P4 to cancel bogus µops after a misprediction can
seriously degrade performance.

Avoid poorly predictable branches in critical parts of the code unless the alternative (e.g.
conditional moves) outweighs the advantage by adding costly extra dependences and
latency. See page 25 for details.

Replaying of µops
The P4 often wastes an excessive amount of resources on replaying bogus µops after
cache misses, failed store-to-load forwarding, etc. This can result in a serious degradation
of performance, especially when there are memory intermediates in long dependency
chains.

