6 Intel Pentium Pro, II, and III pipeline
 6.1 The pipeline in PPro, P2, and P3
The Pentium Pro from 1995 was the first Intel processor with out-of-order execution. The
microarchitecture design was quite successful. This design has been further developed
through many generations to the processors that we have today - with a little detour to the
less successful Pentium 4 or Netburst architecture.

The pipeline of the PPro, P2 and P3 microprocessors is explained in various manuals and
tutorials from Intel, which unfortunately are no longer available. I will therefore explain the
pipeline here.

Figure 6.1. Pentium Pro pipeline.

The pipeline is illustrated in fig. 6.1. The pipeline stages are as follows:

BTB0,1:        Branch prediction. Tells where to fetch the next instructions from.
IFU0,1,2:      Instruction fetch unit.
ID0,1:         Instruction decoder.
RAT:           Register alias table. Register renaming.
ROB Rd:        µop re-ordering buffer read.
RS:            Reservation station.
Port0,1,2,3,4: Ports connecting to execution units.
ROB wb:        Write-back of results to re-order buffer.
RRF:           Register retirement file.

Each stage in the pipeline takes at least one clock cycle. The branch prediction has been
explained on p. 23. The other stages in the pipeline will be explained below (Literature: Intel
Architecture Optimization Manual, 1997).

 6.2 Instruction fetch
Instruction codes are fetched from the code cache in aligned 16-byte chunks into a double
buffer that can hold two 16-byte chunks. The purpose of the double buffer is to make it
possible to decode an instruction that crosses a 16-byte boundary (i.e. an address divisible
by 16). The code is passed on from the double buffer to the decoders in blocks which I will
call IFETCH blocks (instruction fetch blocks). The IFETCH blocks are up to 16 bytes long. In
most cases, the instruction fetch unit makes each IFETCH block start at an instruction
boundary rather than a 16-byte boundary. However, the instruction fetch unit needs
information from the instruction length decoder in order to know where the instruction
boundaries are. If this information is not available in time then it may start an IFETCH block
at a 16-byte boundary. This complication will be discussed in more detail below.

The double buffer is not big enough for handling fetches around jumps without delay. If the
IFETCH block that contains the jump instruction crosses a 16-byte boundary, then the
double buffer needs to keep two consecutive aligned 16-bytes chunks of code in order to
generate it. If the first instruction after the jump crosses a 16-byte boundary, then the double
buffer needs to load two new 16-bytes chunks of code before a valid IFETCH block can be

generated. This means that, in the worst case, the decoding of the first instruction after a
jump can be delayed for two clock cycles. There is a one clock penalty for a 16-byte
boundary in the IFETCH block containing the jump instruction, and also a one clock penalty
for a 16-byte boundary in the first instruction after the jump. The instruction fetch unit can
fetch one 16-byte chunk per clock cycle. If it takes more than one clock cycle to decode an
IFETCH block then it is possible to use this extra time for fetching ahead. This can
compensate for the penalties of 16-byte boundaries before and after jumps. The resulting
delays are summarized in table 6.1 below.

If the double buffer has time to fetch only one 16-byte chunk of code after the jump, then the
first IFETCH block after the jump will be identical to this chunk, that is, aligned to a 16-byte
boundary. In other words, the first IFETCH block after the jump will not begin at the first
instruction, but at the nearest preceding address divisible by 16. If the double buffer has had
time to load two 16-byte chunks, then the new IFETCH block can cross a 16-byte boundary
and begin at the first instruction after the jump. These rules are summarized in the following
table:

 Number of decode
 groups in IFETCH       16-byte boundary 16-byte boundary in                  alignment of first
  block containing       in this IFETCH first instruction after                 IFETCH after
        jump                   block             jump           decoder delay        jump
          1                      0                  0                0              by 16
          1                      0                  1                1          to instruction
          1                      1                  0                1              by 16
          1                      1                  1                2          to instruction
          2                      0                  0                0          to instruction
          2                      0                  1                0          to instruction
          2                      1                  0                0              by 16
          2                      1                  1                1          to instruction
     3 or more                   0                  0                0          to instruction
     3 or more                   0                  1                0          to instruction
     3 or more                   1                  0                0          to instruction
     3 or more                   1                  1                0          to instruction
Table 6.1. Instruction fetching around jumps

The first column in this table indicates the time it takes to decode all instructions in an
IFETCH block (Decode groups are explained below).

Instructions can have any length from 1 to 15 bytes. Therefore, we cannot be sure that a 16-
byte IFETCH block contains a whole number of instructions. If an instruction extends past
the end of an IFETCH block then it will go into the next IFETCH block, which will begin at
the first byte of this instruction. Therefore, the instruction fetch unit needs to know where the
last full instruction in each IFETCH block ends before it can generate the next IFETCH
block. This information is generated by the instruction length decoder, which is in stage
IFU2 in the pipeline (fig. 6.1). The instruction length decoder can determine the lengths of
three instructions per clock cycle. If, for example, an IFETCH block contains ten instructions
then it will take three clock cycles before it is known where the last full instruction in the
IFETCH block ends and before the next IFETCH block can be generated.

 6.3 Instruction decoding

Instruction length decoding
The IFETCH blocks go to the instruction length decoder, which determines where each
instruction begins and ends. This is a very critical stage in the pipeline because it limits the
degree of parallelism that can be achieved. We want to fetch more than one instruction per
clock cycle, decode more than one instruction per clock cycle, and execute more than one
µop per clock cycle in order to gain speed. But decoding instructions in parallel is difficult
when instructions have different lengths. You need to decode the first instruction in order to
know how long it is and where the second instruction begins before you can start to decode
the second instruction. So a simple instruction length decoder would only be able to handle
one instruction per clock cycle. The instruction length decoder in the PPro microarchitecture
can determine the lengths of three instructions per clock cycle and even feed back this
information to the instruction fetch unit early enough for a new IFETCH block to be
generated for the instruction length decoder to work on in the next clock cycle. This is quite
an impressive accomplishment, which I believe is achieved by tentatively decoding all 16
possible start addresses in parallel.

The 4-1-1 rule
After the instruction length decoder comes the instruction decoders which translate
instructions into µops. There are three decoders working in parallel so that up to three
instructions can be decoded in every clock cycle. A group of up to three instructions that are
decoded in the same clock cycle is called a decode group. The three decoders are called
D0, D1, and D2. D0 can handle all instructions and can generate up to 4 µops per clock
cycle. D1 and D2 can only handle simple instructions that generate no more than one µop
each and are no more than 8 bytes long. The first instruction in an IFETCH block always
goes to D0. The next two instructions go to D1 and D2 if possible. If an instruction that
would go into D1 or D2 cannot be handled by these decoders because it generates more
than one µop or because it is more than 8 bytes long, then it has to wait until D0 is vacant.
The subsequent instructions are delayed as well. Example:

    ; Example 6.1a. Instruction decoding
    mov [esi], eax     ; 2 uops, D0
    add ebx, [edi]     ; 2 uops, D0
    sub eax, 1         ; 1 uop, D1
    cmp ebx, ecx       ; 1 uop, D2
    je   L1            ; 1 uop, D0

The first instruction in this example goes to decoder D0. The second instruction cannot go
to D1 because it generates more than one µop. It is therefore delayed to the next clock
cycle when D0 is ready. The third instruction goes to D1 because the preceding instruction
goes to D0. The fourth instruction goes to D2. The last instruction goes to D0. The whole
sequence takes three clock cycles to decode. The decoding can be improved by swapping
the second and third instructions:

    ; Example 6.1b. Instructions reordered for improved decoding
    mov [esi], eax     ; 2 uops, D0
    sub eax, 1         ; 1 uop, D1
    add ebx, [edi]     ; 2 uops, D0
    cmp ebx, ecx       ; 1 uop, D1
    je   L1            ; 1 uop, D2

Now the decoding takes only two clock cycles because of a better distribution of instructions
between the decoders.

The maximum decoding speed is obtained when instructions are ordered according to the
4-1-1 pattern: If every third instruction generates 4 µops and the next two instructions
generate 1 µop each then the decoders can generate 6 µops per clock cycle. A 2-2-2
pattern gives the minimum decoding speed of 2 µops per clock because all the 2-µop
instructions go to D0. It is recommended that you order instructions according to the 4-1-1
rule so that every instruction that generates 2, 3 or 4 µops is followed by two instructions
that generate 1 µop each. An instruction that generates more than 4 µops must go into D0.
It takes two or more clock cycles to decode, and no other instructions can decode in
parallel.
IFETCH block boundaries
A further complication is that the first instruction in an IFETCH block always goes into D0. If
the code has been scheduled according to the 4-1-1 rule and if one of the 1-µop instructions
that was intended for D1 or D2 happens to be first in an IFETCH block, then that instruction
goes into D0 and the 4-1-1 pattern is broken. This will delay the coding for one clock cycle.
The instruction fetch unit cannot adjust the IFETCH boundaries to the 4-1-1 pattern because
the information about which instruction generates more than 1 µop is only available, I
suppose, two stages further down the pipeline.

This problem is difficult to handle because it is difficult to guess where the IFETCH
boundaries are. The best way to address this problem is to schedule the code so that the
decoders can generate more than 3 µops per clock cycle. The RAT and RRF stages in the
pipeline (fig. 6.1) can handle no more than 3 µops per clock. If instructions are ordered
according to the 4-1-1 rule so that we can expect at least 4 µops per clock cycle then maybe
we can afford to lose one clock cycle at every IFETCH boundary and still maintain an
average decoder throughput of no less than 3 µops per clock.

Another remedy is to make instructions as short as possible in order to get more instructions
into each IFETCH block. More instructions per IFETCH block means fewer IFETCH
boundaries and thus fewer breaks in the 4-1-1 pattern. For example, you may use pointers
instead of absolute addresses to reduce code size. See manual 2: "Optimizing subroutines
in assembly language" for more advices on how to reduce the size of instructions.

In some cases it is possible to manipulate the code so that instructions intended for decoder
D0 fall at the IFETCH boundaries. But it is usually quite difficult to determine where the
IFECTH boundaries are and probably not worth the effort. First you need to make the code
segment paragraph-aligned in order to know where the 16-byte boundaries are. Then you
have to know where the first IFETCH block of the code you want to optimize begins. Look at
the output listing from the assembler to see how long each instruction is. If you know where
one IFETCH block begins then you can find where the next IFETCH block begins in the
following way: Make the IFETCH block 16 bytes long. If it ends at an instruction boundary
then the next block will begin here. If it ends with an unfinished instruction then the next
block will begin at the beginning of this instruction. Only the lengths of the instructions count
here, it doesn't matter how many µops they generate or what they do. This way you can
work your way all through the code and mark where each IFETCH block begins. The
biggest problem is to know where to start. Here are some guidelines:

 •   The first IFETCH block after a jump, call, or return can begin either at the first
     instruction or at the nearest preceding 16-byte boundary, according to table 6.1. If you
     align the first instruction to begin at a 16-byte boundary then you can be sure that the
     first IFETCH block begins here. You may want to align important subroutine entries
     and loop entries by 16 for this purpose.

 •   If the combined length of two consecutive instructions is more than 16 bytes then you
     can be certain that the second one doesn't fit into the same IFETCH block as the first
     one, and consequently you will always have an IFETCH block beginning at the second
     instruction. You can use this as a starting point for finding where subsequent IFETCH
     blocks begin.

 •   The first IFETCH block after a branch misprediction begins at a 16-byte boundary. As
     explained on page 23, a loop that repeats more than 5 times will always have a
     misprediction when it exits. The first IFETCH block after such a loop will therefore
     begin at the nearest preceding 16-byte boundary.

I am sure you want an example now:

     ; Example 6.2. Instruction fetch blocks

    address      instruction             length    uops expected decoder
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------
    1000h        mov ecx, 1000             5         1       D0
    1005h   LL: mov [esi], eax             2         2       D0
    1007h        mov [mem], 0             10         2       D0
    1011h        lea ebx, [eax+200]        6         1       D1
    1017h        mov byte [esi], 0         3         2       D0
    101Ah        bsr edx, eax              3         2       D0
    101Dh        mov byte [esi+1],0        4         2       D0
    1021h        dec edx                   1         1       D1
    1022h        jnz LL                    2         1       D2

Let's assume that the first IFETCH block begins at address 0x1000 and ends at 0x1010.
This is before the end of the MOV [MEM],0 instruction so the next IFETCH block will begin
at 0x1007 and end at 0x1017. This is at an instruction boundary so the third IFETCH block
will begin at 1017h and cover the rest of the loop. The number of clock cycles it takes to
decode this is the number of D0 instructions, which is 5 per iteration of the LL loop. The last
IFETCH block contained three decode blocks covering the last five instructions, and it has
one 16-byte boundary (0x1020). Looking at table 6.1 above we find that the first IFETCH
block after the jump will begin at the first instruction after the jump, that is the LL label at
0x1005, and end at 0x1015. This is before the end of the LEA instruction, so the next
IFETCH block will go from 0x1011 to 0x1021, and the last one from 0x1021 covering the
rest. Now the LEA instruction and the DEC instruction both fall at the beginning of an
IFETCH block which forces them to go into D0. We now have 7 instructions in D0 and the
loop takes 7 clocks to decode in the second iteration. The last IFETCH block contains only
one decode group (DEC ECX / JNZ LL) and has no 16-byte boundary. According to table
6.1, the next IFETCH block after the jump will begin at a 16-byte boundary, which is 0x1000.
This will give us the same situation as in the first iteration, and you will see that the loop
takes alternately 5 and 7 clock cycles to decode. Since there are no other bottlenecks, the
complete loop will take 6000 clocks to run 1000 iterations. If the starting address had been
different so that you had a 16-byte boundary in the first or the last instruction of the loop,
then it would take 8000 clocks. If you reorder the loop so that no D1 or D2 instructions fall at
the beginning of an IFETCH block then you can make it take only 5000 clocks.

The example above was deliberately constructed so that fetch and decoding is the only
bottleneck. One thing that can be done to improve decoding is to change the starting
address of the procedure in order to avoid 16-byte boundaries where you don't want them.
Remember to make the code segment paragraph aligned so that you know where the
boundaries are. It may be possible to manipulate instruction lengths in order to put IFETCH
boundaries where you want them, as explained in the chapter "Making instructions longer
for the sake of alignment" in manual 2: "Optimizing subroutines in assembly language".

Instruction prefixes
Instruction prefixes can also incur penalties in the decoders. Instructions can have several
kinds of prefixes, as listed in manual 2: "Optimizing subroutines in assembly language".

1. An operand size prefix gives a penalty of a few clocks if the instruction has an immediate
operand of 16 or 32 bits because the length of the operand is changed by the prefix.
Examples (32-bit mode):

    ; Example 6.3a. Decoding instructions with operand size prefix
    add bx, 9      ; No penalty because immediate operand is 8 bits signed
    add bx, 200    ; Penalty for 16 bit immediate. Change to ADD EBX, 200
    mov word [mem],9 ; Penalty because operand is 16 bits

The last instruction may be changed to:

    ; Example 6.3b. Decoding instructions with operand size prefix
    mov eax, 9
     mov word [mem16], ax         ; No penalty because no immediate

2. An address size prefix gives a penalty whenever there is an explicit memory operand
(even when there is no displacement) because the interpretation of the r/m bits in the
instruction code is changed by the prefix. Instructions with only implicit memory operands,
such as string instructions, have no penalty with address size prefix.

3. Segment prefixes give no penalty in the decoders.

4. Repeat prefixes and lock prefixes give no penalty in the decoders.

5. There is always a penalty if an instruction has more than one prefix. This penalty is
usually one clock per extra prefix.

 6.4 Register renaming
Register renaming is controlled by the register alias table (RAT) shown in figure 6.1. The
µops from the decoders go to the RAT via a queue, and then to the ROB and the
reservation station. The RAT can handle 3 µops per clock cycle. This means that the overall
throughput of the microprocessor can never exceed 3 µops per clock cycle on average.

There is no practical limit to the number of renamings. The RAT can rename three registers
per clock cycle, and it can even rename the same register three times in one clock cycle.

This stage also calculates IP-relative branches and send them to the BTB0 stage.

 6.5 ROB read
After the RAT comes the ROB-read stage where the values of the renamed registers are
stored in the ROB entry, if they are available. Each ROB entry can have up to two input
registers and two output registers. There are three possibilities for the value of an input
register:

   1. The register has not been modified recently. The ROB-read stage reads the value
      from the permanent register file and stores it in the ROB entry.

   2. The value has been modified recently. The new value is the output of a µop that has
      been executed but not yet retired. I assume that the ROB-read stage will read the
      value from the not-yet-retired ROB entry and store it in the new ROB entry.

   3. The value is not ready yet. The needed value is the coming output of a µop that is
      queued but not yet executed. The new value cannot be written yet, but it will be
      written to the new ROB entry by the execution unit as soon as it is ready.

Case 1 appears to be the least problematic situation. But quite surprisingly, this is the only
situation that can cause delays in the ROB-read stage. The reason is that the permanent
register file has only two read ports. The ROB-read stage can receive up to three µops from
the RAT in one clock cycle, and each µop can have two input registers. This gives a total of
up to six input registers. If these six registers are all different and all stored in the permanent
register file, then it will take three clock cycles to perform the six reads through the two read
ports of the register file. The preceding RAT stage will be stalled until the ROB-read is ready
again. The decoders and instruction fetch will also be stalled if the queue between the
decoders and the RAT is full. This queue has only approximately ten entries so it will quickly
be full.

The limitation of permanent register reads applies to all registers used by an instruction
except those registers that the instruction writes to only. Example:

     ; Example 6.4a. Register read stall
     mov [edi + esi], eax
     mov ebx, [esp + ebp]

The first instruction generates two µops: one that reads EAX and one that reads EDI and
ESI. The second instruction generates one µop that reads ESP and EBP. EBX does not
count as a read because it is only written to by the instruction. Let's assume that these three
µops go through the RAT together. I will use the word triplet for a group of three consecutive
µops that go through the RAT together. Since the ROB can handle only two permanent
register reads per clock cycle and we need five register reads, our triplet will be delayed for
two extra clock cycles before it comes to the reservation station (RS). With 3 or 4 register
reads in the triplet it would be delayed by one clock cycle. The same register can be read
more than once in the same triplet without adding to the count. If the instructions above are
changed to:

     ; Example 6.4b. No register read stall
     mov [edi + esi], edi
     mov ebx, [edi + edi]

then we will need only two register reads (EDI and ESI) and the triplet will not be delayed.

Case 2 and 3 do not cause register read stalls. The ROB-read can read a register without
stall if it has not yet been through the ROB-writeback stage. It takes at least three clock
cycles to get from RAT to ROB-writeback, so you can be certain that a register written to in
one µop-triplet can be read without delay in at least the next three triplets. If the write-back
is delayed by reordering, slow instructions, dependency chains, cache misses, or by any
other kind of stall, then the register can be read without delay further down the instruction
stream. Example:

     ; Example 6.5. Register read stall
     mov eax, ebx
     sub ecx, eax
     inc ebx
     mov edx, [eax]
     add esi, ebx
     add edi, ecx

These 6 instructions generate 1 µop each. Let's assume that the first 3 µops go through the
RAT together. These 3 µops read register EBX, ECX, and EAX. But since we are writing to
EAX before reading it, the read is free and we get no stall. The next three µops read EAX,
ESI, EBX, EDI, and ECX. Since both EAX, EBX and ECX have been modified in the
preceding triplet and not yet written back then they can be read for free, so that only ESI
and EDI count, and we get no stall in the second triplet either. If the SUB ECX,EAX
instruction in the first triplet is changed to CMP ECX,EAX then ECX is not written to, and we
will get a stall in the second triplet for reading ESI, EDI and ECX. Similarly, if the INC EBX
instruction in the first triplet is changed to NOP or something else then we will get a stall in
the second triplet for reading ESI, EBX and EDI.

To count the number of register reads, you have to include all registers that are read by the
instruction. This includes integer registers, the flags register, the stack pointer, floating point
registers and MMX registers. An XMM register counts as two registers, except when only
part of it is used, as e.g. in ADDSS and MOVHLPS. Segment registers and the instruction
pointer do not count. For example, in SETZ AL you count the flags register but not AL. ADD
EBX,ECX counts both EBX and ECX, but not the flags because they are written to only. PUSH
EAX reads EAX and the stack pointer and then writes to the stack pointer.

The FXCH instruction is a special case. It works by renaming, but doesn't read any values so
that it doesn't count in the rules for register read stalls. An FXCH instruction generates a µop
that neither reads nor writes any registers with regard to the rules for register read stalls.

Don't confuse µop triplets with decode groups. A decode group can generate from 1 to 6
µops, and even if the decode group has three instructions and generates three µops there is
no guarantee that the three µops will go into the RAT together.

The queue between the decoders and the RAT is so short (10 µops) that you cannot
assume that register read stalls do not stall the decoders or that fluctuations in decoder
throughput do not stall the RAT.

It is very difficult to predict which µops go through the RAT together unless the queue is
empty, and for optimized code the queue should be empty only after mispredicted branches.
Several µops generated by the same instruction do not necessarily go through the RAT
together; the µops are simply taken consecutively from the queue, three at a time. The
sequence is not broken by a predicted jump: µops before and after the jump can go through
the RAT together. Only a mispredicted jump will discard the queue and start over again so
that the next three µops are sure to go into the RAT together.

A register read stall can be detected by performance monitor counter number 0A2H, which
unfortunately cannot distinguish it from other kinds of resource stalls.

If three consecutive µops read more than two different registers then you would of course
prefer that they do not go through the RAT together. The probability that they do is one
third. The penalty of reading three or four written-back registers in one triplet of µops is one
clock cycle. You can think of the one clock delay as equivalent to the load of three more
µops through the RAT. With the probability of 1/3 of the three µops going into the RAT
together, the average penalty will be the equivalent of 3/3 = 1 µop. To calculate the average
time it will take for a piece of code to go through the RAT, add the number of potential
register read stalls to the number of µops and divide by three. You can see that it doesn't
pay to remove the stall by putting in an extra instruction unless you know for sure which
µops go into the RAT together or you can prevent more than one potential register read stall
by one extra instruction that writes to a critical register.

In situations where you aim at a throughput of 3 µops per clock, the limit of two permanent
register reads per clock cycle may be a problematic bottleneck to handle. Possible ways to
remove register read stalls are:

   •   Keep µops that read the same register close together so that they are likely to go
       into the same triplet.

   •   Keep µops that read different registers spaced so that they cannot go into the same
       triplet.

   •   Place µops that read a register no more than 9-12 µops after an instruction that
       writes to or modifies this register to make sure it hasn't been written back before it is
       read (it doesn't matter if you have a jump between as long as it is predicted). If you
       have reason to expect the register write to be delayed for whatever reason then you
       can safely read the register somewhat further down the instruction stream.

   •   Use absolute addresses instead of pointers in order to reduce the number of register
       reads.

   •   You may rename a register in a triplet where it doesn't cause a stall in order to
       prevent a read stall for this register in one or more later triplets. This method costs

       an extra µop and therefore doesn't pay unless the expected average number of read
       stalls prevented is more than 1/3.

For instructions that generate more than one µop, you may want to know the order of the
µops generated by the instruction in order to make a precise analysis of the possibility of
register read stalls. I have therefore listed the most common cases below.

Writes to memory:
A memory write generates two µops. The first one (to port 4) is a store operation, reading
the register to store. The second µop (port 3) calculates the memory address, reading any
pointer registers. Example:

    ; Example 6.6. Register reads
    fstp qword [ebx+8*ecx]

The first µop reads ST0, the second µop reads EBX and ECX.

Read and modify
An instruction that reads a memory operand and modifies a register by some arithmetic or
logic operation generates two µops. The first one (port 2) is a memory load instruction
reading any pointer registers, the second µop is an arithmetic instruction (port 0 or 1)
reading and writing to the destination register and possibly writing to the flags. Example:

    ; Example 6.7. Register reads
    add eax, [esi+20]

The first µop reads ESI, the second µop reads EAX and writes EAX and flags.

Read / modify / write
A read / modify / write instruction generates four µops. The first µop (port 2) reads any
pointer registers, the second µop (port 0 or 1) reads and writes to any source register and
possibly writes to the flags, the third µop (port 4) reads only the temporary result that doesn't
count here, the fourth µop (port 3) reads any pointer registers again. Since the first and the
fourth µop cannot go into the RAT together, you cannot take advantage of the fact that they
read the same pointer registers. Example:

    ; Example 6.8. Register reads
    or [esi+edi], eax

The first µop reads ESI and EDI, the second µop reads EAX and writes EAX and the flags,
the third µop reads only the temporary result, the fourth µop reads ESI and EDI again. No
matter how these µops go into the RAT you can be sure that the µop that reads EAX goes
together with one of the µops that read ESI and EDI. A register read stall is therefore
inevitable for this instruction unless one of the registers has been modified recently, for
example by MOV ESI,ESI.

Push register
A push register instruction generates 3 µops. The first one (port 4) is a store instruction,
reading the register. The second µop (port 3) generates the address, reading the stack
pointer. The third µop (port 0 or 1) subtracts the word size from the stack pointer, reading
and modifying the stack pointer.

Pop register
A pop register instruction generates 2 µops. The first µop (port 2) loads the value, reading
the stack pointer and writing to the register. The second µop (port 0 or 1) adjusts the stack
pointer, reading and modifying the stack pointer.

Call
A near call generates 4 µops (port 1, 4, 3, 01). The first two µops read only the instruction
pointer which doesn't count because it cannot be renamed. The third µop reads the stack
pointer. The last µop reads and modifies the stack pointer.

Return
A near return generates 4 µops (port 2, 01, 01, 1). The first µop reads the stack pointer. The
third µop reads and modifies the stack pointer.

 6.6 Out of order execution
The reorder buffer (ROB) can hold 40 µops and 40 temporary registers (fig. 6.1), while the
reservation station (RS) can hold 20 µops. Each µop waits until all its operands are ready
and there is a vacant execution unit for it. This makes out-of-order execution possible.

Writes to memory cannot execute out of order relative to other writes. There are four write
buffers, so if you expect many cache misses on writes or you are writing to uncached
memory then it is recommended that you schedule four writes at a time and make sure the
processor has something else to do before you give it the next four writes. Memory reads
and other instructions can execute out of order, except IN, OUT and serializing instructions.

If the code writes to a memory address and soon after reads from the same address, then
the read may by mistake be executed before the write because the ROB doesn't know the
memory addresses at the time of reordering. This error is detected when the write address
is calculated, and then the read operation (which was executed speculatively) has to be re-
done. The penalty for this is approximately 3 clocks. The best way to avoid this penalty is to
make sure the execution unit has other things to do between a write and a subsequent read
from the same memory address.

There are several execution units clustered around five ports. Port 0 and 1 are for arithmetic
operations etc. Simple move, arithmetic and logic operations can go to either port 0 or 1,
whichever is vacant first. Port 0 also handles multiplication, division, integer shifts and
rotates, and floating point operations. Port 1 also handles jumps and some MMX and XMM
operations. Port 2 handles all reads from memory and a few string and XMM operations,
port 3 calculates addresses for memory write, and port 4 executes all memory write
operations. A complete list of the µops generated by code instructions with an indication of
which ports they go to is contained in manual 4: "Instruction tables". Note that all memory
write operations require two µops, one for port 3 and one for port 4, while memory read
operations use only one µop (port 2).

In most cases, each port can receive one new µop per clock cycle. This means that we can
execute up to 5 µops in the same clock cycle if they go to five different ports, but since there
is a limit of 3 µops per clock earlier in the pipeline you will never execute more than 3 µops
per clock on average.

You must make sure that no execution port receives more than one third of the µops if you
want to maintain a throughput of 3 µops per clock. Use the table of µops in manual 4:
"Instruction tables" and count how many µops go to each port. If port 0 and 1 are saturated
while port 2 is free then you can improve your code by replacing some MOV
register,register or MOV register,immediate instructions with MOV
register,memory in order to move some of the load from port 0 and 1 to port 2.

Most µops take only one clock cycle to execute, but multiplications, divisions, and many
floating point operations take more. Floating point addition and subtraction takes 3 clocks,
but the execution unit is fully pipelined so that it can receive a new FADD or FSUB in every
clock cycle before the preceding ones are finished (provided, of course, that they are
independent).
Integer multiplication takes 4 clocks, floating point multiplication 5, and MMX multiplication 3
clocks. Integer and MMX multiplication is pipelined so that it can receive a new instruction
every clock cycle. Floating point multiplication is partially pipelined: The execution unit can
receive a new FMUL instruction two clocks after the preceding one, so that the maximum
throughput is one FMUL per two clock cycles. The holes between the FMUL's cannot be filled
by integer multiplications because they use the same execution unit. XMM additions and
multiplications take 3 and 4 clocks respectively, and are fully pipelined. But since each
logical XMM register is implemented as two physical 64-bit registers, you need two µops for
a packed XMM operation, and the throughput will then be one arithmetic XMM instruction
every two clock cycles. XMM add and multiply instructions can execute in parallel because
they don't use the same execution port.

Integer and floating point division takes up to 39 clocks and is not pipelined. This means
that the execution unit cannot begin a new division until the previous division is finished.
The same applies to square root and transcendental functions.

You should, of course, avoid instructions that generate many µops. The LOOP XX
instruction, for example, should be replaced by DEC ECX / JNZ XX.

If you have consecutive POP instructions then you may break them up to reduce the number
of µops:

    ; Example 6.9a. Split up pop instructions
    pop ecx
    pop ebx
    pop eax

Can be changed to:
    ; Example 6.9b. Split up pop instructions
    mov ecx, [esp]
    mov ebx, [esp+4]
    mov eax, [esp+8]
    add esp, 12

The former code generates 6 µops, the latter generates only 4 and decodes faster. Doing
the same with PUSH instructions is less advantageous because the split-up code is likely to
generate register read stalls unless you have other instructions to put in between or the
registers have been renamed recently. Doing it with CALL and RET instructions will interfere
with prediction in the return stack buffer. Note also that the ADD ESP instruction can cause
an AGI stall on earlier processors.

 6.7 Retirement
Retirement is a process where the temporary registers used by the µops are copied into the
permanent registers EAX, EBX, etc. When a µop has been executed, it is marked in the ROB
as ready to retire.

The retirement station can handle three µops per clock cycle. This may not seem like a
problem because the throughput is already limited to 3 µops per clock in the RAT. But
retirement may still be a bottleneck for two reasons. Firstly, instructions must retire in order.
If a µop is executed out of order then it cannot retire before all preceding µops in the order
have retired. And the second limitation is that taken jumps must retire in the first of the three
slots in the retirement station. Just like decoder D1 and D2 can be idle if the next instruction
only fits into D0, the last two slots in the retirement station can be idle if the next µop to
retire is a taken jump. This is significant if you have a small loop where the number of µops
in the loop is not divisible by three.
All µops stay in the reorder buffer (ROB) until they retire. The ROB can hold 40 µops. This
sets a limit to the number of instructions that can execute during the long delay of a division
or other slow operation. Before the division is finished the ROB will possibly be filled up with
executed µops waiting to retire. Only when the division is finished and retired can the
subsequent µops begin to retire, because retirement takes place in order.

In case of speculative execution of predicted branches (see page 23) the speculatively
executed µops cannot retire until it is certain that the prediction was correct. If the prediction
turns out to be wrong then the speculatively executed µops are discarded without
retirement.

The following instructions cannot execute speculatively: memory writes, IN, OUT, and
serializing instructions.

 6.8 Partial register stalls
Partial register stall is a problem that occurs when we write to part of a 32-bit register and
later read from the whole register or a bigger part of it. Example:

     ; Example 6.10a. Partial register stall
     mov al, byte [mem8]
     mov ebx, eax              ; Partial register stall

This gives a delay of 5 - 6 clocks. The reason is that a temporary register has been
assigned to AL to make it independent of AH. The execution unit has to wait until the write to
AL has retired before it is possible to combine the value from AL with the value of the rest of
EAX. The stall can be avoided by changing to code to:

     ; Example 6.10b. Partial register stall removed
     movzx ebx, byte [mem8]
     and   eax, 0ffffff00h
     or    ebx, eax

Of course we can also avoid the partial stalls by putting in other instructions after the write
to the partial register so that it has time to retire before you read from the full register.

You should be aware of partial stalls whenever you mix different data sizes (8, 16, and 32
bits):

     ; Example 6.11. Partial register stalls
     mov bh, 0
     add bx, ax              ; Stall
     inc ebx                 ; Stall

We don't get a stall when reading a partial register after writing to the full register, or a
bigger part of it:

     ; Example 6.12. Partial register stalls
     mov eax, [mem32]
     add bl, al              ; No stall
     add bh, ah              ; No stall
     mov cx, ax              ; No stall
     mov dx, bx              ; Stall

The easiest way to avoid partial register stalls is to always use full registers and use MOVZX
or MOVSX when reading from smaller memory operands. These instructions are fast on the
PPro, P2 and P3, but slow on earlier processors. Therefore, a compromise is offered when

you want your code to perform reasonably well on all processors. The replacement for
MOVZX EAX,BYTE [MEM8] looks like this:

    ; Example 6.13. Replacement for movzx
    xor eax, eax
    mov al, byte [mem8]

The PPro, P2 and P3 processors make a special case out of this combination to avoid a
partial register stall when later reading from EAX. The trick is that a register is tagged as
empty when it is XOR'ed with itself. The processor remembers that the upper 24 bits of EAX
are zero, so that a partial stall can be avoided. This mechanism works only on certain
combinations:

    ; Example 6.14. Removing partial register stalls with xor
    xor eax, eax
    mov al, 3
    mov ebx, eax            ; No stall

    xor ah, ah
    mov al, 3
    mov bx, ax                     ; No stall

    xor eax, eax
    mov ah, 3
    mov ebx, eax                   ; Stall

    sub ebx, ebx
    mov bl, dl
    mov ecx, ebx                   ; No stall

    mov ebx, 0
    mov bl, dl
    mov ecx, ebx                   ; Stall

    mov bl, dl
    xor ebx, ebx                   ; No stall

Setting a register to zero by subtracting it from itself works the same as the XOR, but setting
it to zero with the MOV instruction doesn't prevent the stall.

We can set the XOR outside a loop:

    ; Example 6.15. Removing partial register stalls with xor outside loop
          xor eax, eax
          mov ecx, 100
    LL:   mov al, [esi]
          mov [edi], eax          ; no stall
          inc esi
          add edi, 4
          dec ecx
          jnz LL

The processor remembers that the upper 24 bits of EAX are zero as long as you don't get an
interrupt, misprediction, or other serializing event.

You should remember to neutralize any partial register you have used before calling a
subroutine that might push the full register:

    ; Example 6.16. Removing partial register stall before call
    add bl, al
    mov [mem8], bl

    xor ebx, ebx                       ; neutralize bl
    call _highLevelFunction

Many high-level language procedures push EBX at the start of the procedure, and this would
generate a partial register stall in the example above if you hadn't neutralized BL.

Setting a register to zero with the XOR method doesn't break its dependence on earlier
instructions on PPro, P2, P3 and PM (but it does on P4). Example:

    ; Example 6.17. Remove partial register stalls and break dependence
    div ebx
    mov [mem], eax
    mov eax, 0              ; Break dependence
    xor eax, eax            ; Prevent partial register stall
    mov al, cl
    add ebx, eax

Setting EAX to zero twice here seems redundant, but without the MOV EAX,0 the last
instructions would have to wait for the slow DIV to finish, and without XOR EAX,EAX you
would have a partial register stall.

The FNSTSW AX instruction is special: in 32-bit mode it behaves as if writing to the entire
EAX. In fact, it does something like this in 32-bit mode:

    ; Example 6.18. Equivalence model for fnstsw ax
    and    eax, 0ffff0000h
    fnstsw [temp]
    or     eax, [temp]

hence, you don't get a partial register stall when reading EAX after this instruction in 32 bit
mode:

    ; Example 6.19. Partial register stalls with fnstsw ax
    fnstsw ax / mov ebx,eax         ; Stall only if 16 bit mode
    mov ax,0 / fnstsw ax            ; Stall only if 32 bit mode

Partial flags stalls
The flags register can also cause partial register stalls:

    ; Example 6.20. Partial flags stall
    cmp eax, ebx
    inc ecx
    jbe xx           ; Partial flags stall

The JBE instruction reads both the carry flag and the zero flag. Since the INC instruction
changes the zero flag, but not the carry flag, the JBE instruction has to wait for the two
preceding instructions to retire before it can combine the carry flag from the CMP instruction
and the zero flag from the INC instruction. This situation is likely to be a bug in the assembly
code rather than an intended combination of flags. To correct it, change INC ECX to ADD
ECX,1. A similar bug that causes a partial flags stall is SAHF / JL XX. The JL instruction
tests the sign flag and the overflow flag, but SAHF doesn't change the overflow flag. To
correct it, change JL XX to JS XX.

Unexpectedly (and contrary to what Intel manuals say) we also get a partial flags stall after
an instruction that modifies some of the flag bits when reading only unmodified flag bits:

    ; Example 6.21. Partial flags stall when reading unmodified flag bits
    cmp eax, ebx
    inc ecx
    jc    xx             ; Partial flags stall

but not when reading only modified bits:

    ; Example 6.22. No partial flags stall when reading modified bits
    cmp eax, ebx
    inc ecx
    jz xx           ; No stall

Partial flags stalls are likely to occur on instructions that read many or all flags bits, i.e.
LAHF, PUSHF, PUSHFD. The following instructions cause partial flags stalls when followed by
LAHF or PUSHF(D): INC, DEC, TEST, bit tests, bit scan, CLC, STC, CMC, CLD, STD, CLI,
STI, MUL, IMUL, and all shifts and rotates. The following instructions do not cause partial
flags stalls: AND, OR, XOR, ADD, ADC, SUB, SBB, CMP, NEG. It is strange that TEST and AND
behave differently while, by definition, they do exactly the same thing to the flags. You may
use a SETcc instruction instead of LAHF or PUSHF(D) for storing the value of a flag in order
to avoid a stall.

Examples:

    ; Example 6.23. Partial flags stalls
    inc eax   / pushfd      ; Stall
    add eax,1 / pushfd      ; No stall

    shr eax,1 / pushfd      ; Stall
    shr eax,1 / or eax,eax / pushfd              ; No stall

    test ebx,ebx / lahf             ; Stall
    and ebx,ebx / lahf              ; No stall
    test ebx,ebx / setz al          ; No stall

    clc / setz al                   ; Stall
    cld / setz al                   ; No stall

The penalty for partial flags stalls is approximately 4 clocks.

Flags stalls after shifts and rotates
You can get a stall resembling the partial flags stall when reading any flag bit after a shift or
rotate, except for shifts and rotates by one (short form):

    ; Example 6.24. Partial flags stalls after shift and rotate
    shr eax,1 / jz xx                ; No stall
    shr eax,2 / jz xx                ; Stall
    shr eax,2 / or eax,eax / jz xx   ; No stall

    shr eax,5 / jc xx                           ; Stall
    shr eax,4 / shr eax,1 / jc xx               ; No stall

    shr eax,cl / jz xx                          ; Stall, even if cl = 1
    shrd eax,ebx,1 / jz xx                      ; Stall
    rol ebx,8 / jc xx                           ; Stall

The penalty for these stalls is approximately 4 clocks.

 6.9 Store forwarding stalls
A store forwarding stall is somewhat analogous to a partial register stall. It occurs when you
mix data sizes for the same memory address:

    ; Example 6.25. Store-to-load forwarding stall
    mov byte [esi], al
    mov ebx, dword [esi]                 ; Stall. Big read after small write

The large read after a small write prevents store-to-load forwarding, and the penalty for this
is approximately 7 - 8 clock cycles.

Unlike the partial register stalls, you also get a store forwarding stall when you write a bigger
operand to memory and then read part of it, if the smaller part doesn't start at the same
address:

    ; Example 6.26. Store-to-load forwarding stall
    mov dword [esi], eax
    mov bl, byte [esi]          ; No stall
    mov bh, byte [esi+1]        ; Stall. Not same start address

We can avoid this stall by changing the last line to MOV BH,AH, but such a solution is not
possible in a situation like this:

    ; Example 6.27. Store-to-load forwarding stall
    fistp qword [edi]
    mov eax, dword [edi]
    mov edx, dword [edi+4]      ; Stall. Not same start address

Interestingly, you can get a get a bogus store forwarding stall when writing and reading
completely different addresses if they happen to have the same set-value in different cache
banks:

    ; Example 6.28. Bogus store-to-load forwarding stall
    mov byte [esi], al
    mov ebx, dword [esi+4092]   ; No stall
    mov ecx, dword [esi+4096]   ; Bogus stall

 6.10 Bottlenecks in PPro, P2, P3
When optimizing code for these processors, it is important to analyze where the bottlenecks
are. Spending time on optimizing away one bottleneck doesn't make sense if another
bottleneck is narrower.

If you expect code cache misses, then you should restructure your code to keep the most
used parts of code together.

If you expect many data cache misses, then forget about everything else and concentrate
on how to restructure the data to reduce the number of cache misses (page 10), and avoid
long dependency chains after a data read cache miss.

If you have many divisions, then try to reduce them as described in manual 1: "Optimizing
software in C++" and manual 2: "Optimizing subroutines in assembly language", and make
sure the processor has something else to do during the divisions.

Dependency chains tend to hamper out-of-order execution. Try to break long dependency
chains, especially if they contain slow instructions such as multiplication, division, and
floating point instructions. See the manual 1: "Optimizing software in C++" and manual 2:
"Optimizing subroutines in assembly language".

If you have many jumps, calls, or returns, and especially if the jumps are poorly predictable,
then try if some of them can be avoided. Replace poorly predictable conditional jumps with
conditional moves if it doesn't increase dependencies. Inline small procedures. (See manual
2: "Optimizing subroutines in assembly language").

If you are mixing different data sizes (8, 16, and 32 bit integers) then look out for partial
stalls. If you use PUSHF or LAHF instructions then look out for partial flags stalls. Avoid
testing flags after shifts or rotates by more than 1 (page 85).

If you aim at a throughput of 3 µops per clock cycle then be aware of possible delays in
instruction fetch and decoding (page 75), especially in small loops. Instruction decoding is
often the narrowest bottleneck in these processors, and unfortunately this factor makes
optimization quite complicated. If you are making a modification in the beginning of your
code in order to improve it, then this modification may have the side effect of moving the
IFETCH boundaries and 16-byte boundaries in the subsequent code. This change of
boundaries can have unpredicted effects on the total clock count which obfuscates the
effect of the change you made.

The limit of two permanent register reads per clock cycle may reduce your throughput to
less than 3 µops per clock cycle (page 79). This is likely to happen if you often read
registers more than 4 clock cycles after they last were modified. This may, for example,
happen if you often use pointers for addressing your data but seldom modify the pointers.

A throughput of 3 µops per clock requires that no execution port gets more than one third of
the µops (page 83).

The retirement station can handle 3 µops per clock, but may be slightly less effective for
taken jumps (page 84).

