7 Intel Pentium M pipeline
 7.1 The pipeline in PM
This chapter applies to the Intel Pentium M, Core Solo and Core Duo, but not to Core 2. The
abbreviation PM in this manual includes Pentium M, Core Solo and Core Duo.

The PM builds on the same basic microarchitecture as PPro, P2 and P3, while the
P4/NetBurst design has been discontinued. The main stages in the pipeline are: branch
prediction, instruction fetch, instruction decoding, register renaming, reorder buffer read,
reservation station, execution ports, reorder buffer write-back, and retirement.

Several minor modifications have been made, but the overall functioning is almost identical
to the PPro pipeline, as shown in figure 6.1 page 74. The exact structure of the PM pipeline
has not been revealed by Intel. The only thing they have told is that the pipeline is longer, so
the following discussion is mainly guesswork based on my own measurements.

The total length of the pipeline can be estimated from the branch misprediction penalty (p.
13). This penalty is 3-4 clock cycles more than for the P2 and P3. This indicates that the
pipeline may have 3 or 4 extra stages. We may try to guess what these extra stages are
used for.

The branch prediction mechanism is much more complicated in PM than in previous
processors (p. 27), so it is likely that this mechanism requires three pipeline stages instead
of two.

Instruction fetching has also been improved so that 16-byte boundaries or cache line
boundaries do not cause delays in jumps (p. 92 below). This may require an extension of
the instruction fetch unit from 3 to 4 stages.

The new stack engine (p. 96) is implemented near the instruction decoding, according to the
Intel publication mentioned below. It is almost certain that at least one extra pipeline stage is
required for the stack engine and for inserting stack synchronization µops (p. 96). This claim
is based on my observation that an instruction that is decoded by D1 or D2 can generate a
synchronization µop without adding to the decode time even though these decoders can
only generate one µop. The extra synchronization µop must therefore be generated at a
pipeline stage that comes after the stage that contains decoders D0-2.

One may wonder if the µop fusion mechanism (explained below, p. 94) requires extra
stages in the pipeline. The number of stages from the ROB-read to the ROB-writeback
stage can be estimated by measuring register read stalls (p. 79). My measurements indicate
that this distance is still only 3 clocks. We can therefore conclude that no extra pipeline
stage is used for splitting fused µops before the execution units. The two parts of a fused
µop share the same ROB entry, which is submitted to two different ports, so there is
probably not any extra pipeline stage for joining the split µops before the retirement station,
either.

The RAT, ROB-read, and RS stages have all been modified in order to handle fused µops
with three input dependences. It is possible that an extra pipeline stage has been added to
the RAT because of the extra workload in this stage, but I have no experimental evidence
supporting such a hypothesis. The RS still needs only one clock according to my
measurements of the distance from ROB-read to ROB-writeback mentioned above. There
have been speculations that the RS and ROB might be smaller than in previous processors,
but this is not confirmed by my measurements. The RS and ROB can probably hold 20 and
40 fused µops respectively.

The conclusion is that the PM pipeline probably has 3 or 4 stages more than the PPro
pipeline, including one extra stage for branch prediction, one extra stage for instruction
fetching, and one extra stage for the stack engine.

The PM has many power-saving features that turn off certain parts of the internal buses,
execution units, etc. when they are not used. Whether any of these new features require
extra pipeline stages is unknown. These power-saving features have the positive side effect
that the maximum clock frequency we can have without overheating the chip is increased.

The µop fusion, stack engine and complicated branch prediction are improvements which
not only lower the power consumption but also speed up execution.

(Literature: S. Gochman, et al.: The Intel Pentium M Processor: Microarchitecture and
Performance. Intel Technology Journal, vol. 7, no. 2, 2003).

 7.2 The pipeline in Core Solo and Duo
I have not had the chance to do a thorough testing of the Core Solo and Core Duo yet, but a
preliminary testing shows that its kernel is very similar to the Pentium M. The Core Solo/Duo
have more advanced power saving features than the Pentium M, including the "SpeedStep"
technology that enables it to lower the CPU voltage and clock frequency when the workload
is small. The Core Duo has two processor cores with separate level-1 caches and a shared
level-2 cache.

(Literature: S. Gochman, et al.: Introduction to Intel Core Duo Processor Architecture. Intel
Technology Journal, vol. 10, no. 2, 2006).

 7.3 Instruction fetch
Instruction fetching in the PM works the same way as in PPro, P2 and P3 (see p. 74) with
one important improvement. Fetching of instructions after a predicted jump is more efficient
and is not delayed by 16-byte boundaries. The delays in table 6.1 (p. 75) do not apply to the
PM and it is possible to have one jump per clock cycle. For this reason, it is no longer
important to align subroutine entries and loop entries. The only reason for aligning code on
the PM is to improve cache efficiency.

Instructions are still fetched in IFETCH blocks (p. 74) which are up to 16 bytes long. The PM
can fetch a maximum of one IFETCH block per clock cycle. The first IFETCH block after a
predicted jump will normally begin at the first instruction. This is different from the previous
processors where the placement of the first IFETCH block was uncertain. The next IFETCH
block will begin at the last instruction boundary that is no more than 16 bytes away. Thus,
you can predict where all IFETCH blocks are by looking at the output listing of the
assembler. Assume that the first IFETCH block starts at a label jumped to. The second
IFETCH block is found by going 16 bytes forward. If there is no instruction boundary there
then go backwards to the nearest instruction boundary. This is where the second IFETCH
block starts. Knowing where the IFETCH boundaries are can help improve decoding speed,
as explained below.

 7.4 Instruction decoding
Instruction decoding on the PM works the same way as on PPro, P2 and P3, as explained
on page 75. There are three parallel decoders: D0, D1 and D2. Decoder D0 can handle any
instruction. D1 and D2 can handle only instructions that generate no more than one µop, are
no more than 8 bytes long, and have no more than one prefix.

It is possible to decode three instructions in the same clock cycle if they are contained in the
same IFETCH block and the second and third instruction satisfy the criteria for going into
decoders D1 and D2.

Some complex instructions take more than one clock cycle to decode:

   •   Instructions that generate more than four µops take more than one clock cycle to
       decode.

   •   Instructions with more than one prefix take 2+n clock cycles to decode, where n is
       the total number of prefixes. See manual 2: "Optimizing subroutines in assembly
       language" for an overview of instruction prefixes. Instructions with more than one
       prefix should be avoided.

   •   An operand size prefix causes problems if the size of the rest of the instruction is
       changed by the prefix. Decoder D0 will need an extra clock cycle to re-interpret the
       instruction. D1 and D2 are stalled in the meantime because the instruction length is
       re-adjusted. This problem happens when an instruction has a 16-bit immediate
       operand in 32-bit mode or a 32-bit immediate operand in 16-bit mode. See p. 78 for
       examples.

   •   The same problem occurs if an address size prefix changes the length of the rest of
       the instruction, for example LEA EAX,[BX+200] in 32-bit mode or
       LEA AX,[EBX+ECX] in 16-bit mode.

The maximum output of the decoders is six µops per clock cycle. This speed is obtained if
the abovementioned problems are avoided and instructions are scheduled according to a
4-1-1 pattern so that every third instruction generates 4 µops and the next two instructions
generate 1 µop each. The instruction that generates 4 µops will go into decoder D0, and the
next two instructions will go into D1 and D2. See manual 4: "Instruction tables" for a list of
how many µops each instruction generates, and use the values listed under "µops fused
domain". The first instruction in an IFETCH block must go to decoder D0. If this instruction
was intended for D1 or D2 according to the 4-1-1 pattern, then the pattern is broken and a
clock cycle is lost.

It is superfluous to schedule the code for a decoding output of six µops per clock cycle
because the throughput in later stages is only three µops per clock cycle. For example, a
2-1-2-1 pattern will generate three µops per clock cycle. But it is recommended to aim at an
average output somewhat higher than three µops per clock cycle because you may lose a
clock cycle when an instruction intended for decoder D1 or D2 falls at the beginning of an
IFETCH block.

If decoding speed is critical then you may reduce the risk of single-µop instructions falling in
the beginning of IFETCH blocks by reducing instruction sizes. See manual 2: "Optimizing
subroutines in assembly language" about optimizing for code size. A possibly more effective
strategy is to determine where each IFETCH block begins according to the method
explained on p. 92 and then adjust instruction lengths so that only instructions intended for
decoder D0 fall at the beginnings of IFETCH blocks. See the chapter "Making instructions
longer for the sake of alignment" in manual 2: "Optimizing subroutines in assembly
language" for how to make instruction codes longer. This method is tedious and should only
be used if decoding is a bottleneck. Example:

    ; Example 7.1. Arranging IFETCH blocks
    LL: movq    mm0,[esi+ecx]   ; 4 bytes long
         paddd mm0,[edi+ecx]    ; 4 bytes long
         psrld mm0,1            ; 4 bytes long
         movq   [esi+ecx],mm0   ; 4 bytes long
         add    ecx,8           ; 3 bytes long

           jnz     LL                   ; 2 bytes long

This loop calculates the average of two lists of integers. The loop has six instructions which
generate one µop each. The first four instructions are all four bytes long. If we assume that
the first IFETCH block starts at LL:, then the second IFETCH block will start 16 bytes after
this, which is at the beginning of ADD ECX,8. The first three instructions will be decoded in
one clock cycle. The fourth instruction will be decoded alone in the second clock cycle
because there are no more instructions in the first IFETCH block. The last two instructions
will be decoded in the third clock cycle. The total decoding time is three clock cycles per
iteration of the loop. We can improve this by adding a DS segment prefix, for example to the
fourth instruction. This makes the instruction one byte longer, so that the first IFETCH block
now ends before the end of the fourth instruction. This causes the second IFETCH block to
be moved up to the beginning of the fourth instruction. Now the last three instructions are in
the same IFETCH block so that they can be decoded simultaneously in D0, D1 and D2,
respectively. The decoding time is now only two clock cycles for the six instructions. The
total execution time has been reduced from three to two clock cycles per iteration because
nothing else limits the speed, except possibly cache misses.

 7.5 Loop buffer
The PM has a loop buffer of 4x16 bytes storing predecoded instructions. This is an
advantage in tiny loops where instruction fetching is a bottleneck. The decoders can reuse
the fetched instructions up to 64 bytes back. This means that instruction fetching is not a
bottleneck in a loop that has no more than 64 bytes of code and is aligned by 16. Alignment
of the loop is not necessary if the loop has no more than 49 bytes of code because a loop of
this size will fit into the 4*16 bytes even in the worst case of misalignment.

 7.6 Micro-op fusion
The register renaming (RAT) and retirement (RRF) stages in the pipeline are bottlenecks
with a maximum throughput of 3 µops per clock cycle. In order to get more through these
bottlenecks, the designers have joined some operations together that were split in two µops
in previous processors. They call this µop fusion. The fused operations share a single µop in
most of the pipeline and a single entry in the reorder buffer (ROB). But this single ROB entry
represents two operations that have to be done by two different execution units. The fused
ROB entry is dispatched to two different execution ports but is retired as a single unit.

The µop fusion technique can only be applied to two types of combinations: memory write
operations and read-modify operations.

A memory write operation involves both the calculation of the memory address and transfer
of the data. On previous processors, these two operations have been split into two µops,
where port 3 takes care of the address calculation and port 4 takes care of the data transfer.
These two µops are fused together in most PM instructions that write to memory. A memory
read operation requires only one µop (port 2), as it does in previous processors.

The second type of operations that can be fused is read-modify operations. For example,
the instruction ADD EAX,[mem32] involves two operations: The first operation (port 2)
reads from [mem32], the second operation (port 0 or 1) adds the value that has been read
to EAX. Such instructions have been split into two µops on previous processors, but can be
fused together on the PM. This applies to many read-modify instructions that work on
general purpose registers, floating point stack registers and MMX registers, but not to read-
modify instructions that work on XMM registers.

A read-modify-write operation, such as ADD [mem32],EAX does not fuse the read and
modify µops, but it does fuse the two µops needed for the write.

Examples of µop fusion:

    ; Example 7.2. Uop fusion
    mov    [esi], eax                  ; 1 fused uop
    add    eax, [esi]                  ; 1 fused uop
    add    [esi], eax                  ; 2 single + 1 fused uop
    fadd   qword [esi]                 ; 1 fused uop
    paddw mm0, qword [esi]             ; 1 fused uop
    paddw xmm0, xword [esi]            ; 4 uops, not fused
    addss xmm0, dword [esi]            ; 2 uops, not fused
    movaps xword [esi], xmm0           ; 2 fused uops

As you can see, the packed addition (PADDW) read-modify instruction can be fused in the
Pentium M if the destination is a 64-bit MMX register, but not if the destination is a 128-bit
XMM register. The latter instruction requires two µops for reading 64 bits each, and two
more µops for adding 64 bits each. The ADDSS instruction cannot be fused, even though it
uses only the lower part of the XMM register. No read-modify instruction that involves an
XMM register can be fused, but the XMM memory write instructions can be fused, as the
last example shows.

The Core Solo/Duo has more opportunities for µop fusion of XMM instructions. A 128-bit
XMM instruction is handled by two or more 64-bit µops in the 64-bit execution units. Two 64-
bit µops can be "laminated" together in the decoders and early pipeline stages, according to
the article cited in chapter 7.2. It is not clear whether there is any significant difference
between "fusion" and "lamination" of µops. The consequence of this mechanism is that the
throughput of XMM instructions is increased in the decoders, but not in the execution units
of the Core Solo/Duo.

The reorder buffer (ROB) of PM has been redesigned so that each entry can have up to
three input dependences, where previous designs allowed only two. For example, the
instructions MOV [ESI+EDI],EAX and ADD EAX,[ESI+EDI] both have three input
dependences, in the sense that both EAX, ESI and EDI have to be ready before all parts of
the instructions can be executed. The unfused µops that go to the execution units still have
only two input dependences. MOV [ESI+EDI],EAX is split into an address calculation
µop that depends on ESI and EDI, and a store µop that depends on the output of the
address calculation µop and on EAX. Similarly, ADD EAX,[ESI+EDI] is split into a read
µop that depends on ESI and EDI, and an ADD µop that depends on the output of the read
µop and on EAX. µops that are not fused can only have two input dependences. For
example, the instructions ADC EAX,EBX and CMOVE EAX,EBX both have three input
dependences: EAX, EBX and the flags. Since neither of these instructions can be fused, they
must generate two µops each.

µop fusion has several advantages:

   •   Decoding becomes more efficient because an instruction that generates one fused
       µop can go into any of the three decoders while an instruction that generates two
       µops can go only to decoder D0.

   •   The load on the bottlenecks of register renaming and retirement is reduced when
       fewer µops are generated.

   •   The capacity of the reorder buffer (ROB) is increased when a fused µop uses only
       one entry.

If a program can benefit from these advantages then it is preferred to use instructions that
generate fused µops over instructions that don't. If one or more execution unit is the only
bottleneck, then µop fusion doesn't matter because the fused µops are split in two when
sent to the execution units.
The table in manual 4: "Instruction tables" shows the fused and unfused µops generated by
each instruction in the PM. The column "µops fused domain" indicates the number of µops
generated by the decoders, where a fused µop counts as one. The columns under "µops
unfused domain" indicates the number of µops that go to each execution port. The fused
µops are split at the execution units so that a fused memory write µop is listed both under
port 3 and 4, and a fused read-modify µop is listed both under port 2 and port 0 or 1. The
instructions that generate fused µops are the ones where the number listed under "µops
fused domain" is less than the sum of the numbers listed under "µops unfused domain".

 7.7 Stack engine
Stack instructions such as PUSH, POP, CALL and RET all modify the stack pointer ESP.
Previous processors used the integer ALU for adjusting the stack pointer. For example, the
instruction PUSH EAX generated three µops on the P3 processor, two for storing the value
of EAX, and one for subtracting 4 from ESP. On PM, the same instruction generates only
one µop. The two store µops are joined into one by the mechanism of µop fusion, and the
subtraction of 4 from ESP is done by a special adder that is dedicated for the stack pointer
only, called the stack engine. The stack engine is placed immediately after the instruction
decoders in the pipeline, before the out-of-order core. The stack engine can handle three
additions per clock cycle. Consequently, no instruction will have to wait for the updated
value of the stack pointer after a stack operation. One complication by this technique is that
the value of ESP may also be needed or modified in the out-of-order execution units. A
special mechanism is needed for synchronizing the value of the stack pointer in the stack
engine and the out-of-order core. The true logical value of the stack pointer ESPP is
obtained as a 32-bit value ESPO stored in the out-of-order core or the permanent register file
and a signed 8-bit delta-value ESPd stored in the stack engine:

      ESPP = ESPO + ESPd.

The stack engine puts the delta value ESPd into the address syllable of every stack
operation µop as an offset so that it can be added to ESPO in the address calculation
circuitry at port 2 or 3. The value of ESPd cannot be put into every possible µop that uses
the stack pointer, only the µops generated by PUSH, POP, CALL and RET. If the stack engine
meets a µop other than these that needs ESP in the out-of-order execution units, and if
ESPd is not zero, then it inserts a synchronization µop that adds ESPd to ESPO and sets
ESPd to zero. The following µop can then use ESPO as the true value of the stack pointer
ESPP. The synchronization µop is generated after the instruction has been decoded, and
does not influence the decoders in any way.

The synchronization mechanism can be illustrated by a simple example:

    ; Example 7.3. Stack synchronization
    push eax
    push ebx
    mov   ebp, esp
    mov   eax, [esp+16]

This sequence will generate four µops. Assuming that ESPd is zero when we start, the first
PUSH instruction will generate one µop that writes EAX to the address [ESPO-4] and sets
ESPd = -4. The second PUSH instruction will generate one µop that writes EBX to the
address [ESPO-8] and sets ESPd = -8. When the stack engine receives the µop for MOV
EBP,ESP from the decoders, it inserts a synchronization µop that adds -8 to ESPO. At the
same time, it sets ESPd to zero. The synchronization µop comes before the MOV EBP,ESP
µop so that the latter can use ESPO as the true value of ESPP. The last instruction, MOV
EAX,[ESP+16], also needs the value of ESP, but we will not get another synchronization

µop here because the value of ESPd is zero at this point, so a synchronization µop would be
superfluous.

Instructions that require synchronization of ESPO include all instructions that have ESP as
source or destination operand, e.g. MOV EAX,ESP, MOV ESP,EAX and ADD ESP,4, as
well as instructions that use ESP as a pointer, e.g. MOV EAX,[ESP+16]. It may seem
superfluous to generate a synchronization µop before an instruction that only writes to ESP.
It would suffice to set ESPd to zero, but it would probably complicate the logic to make the
distinction between, say, MOV ESP,EAX and ADD ESP,EAX.

A synchronization µop is also inserted when ESPd is near overflow. The 8-bit signed value
of ESPd would overflow after 32 PUSH EAX or 64 PUSH AX instructions. In most cases, we
will get a synchronization µop after 29 PUSH or CALL instructions in order to prevent
overflow in case the next clock cycle gives PUSH instructions from all three decoders. The
maximum number of PUSH instructions before a synchronization µop is 31 in the case that
the last three PUSH instructions are decoded in the same clock cycle. The same applies to
POP and RET instructions (Actually, you can have one more POP than PUSH because the
value stored is -ESPd and the minimum of a signed 8-bit number is -128, while the
maximum is +127).

The synchronization µops are executed at any one of the two integer ALU's at port 0 and 1.
They retire as any other µops. The PM has a recovery table that is used for undoing the
effect of the stack engine in mispredicted branches.

The following example shows how synchronization µops are generated in a typical program
flow:

    ; Example 7.4. Stack synchronization
           push 1
           call FuncA
           pop ecx
           push 2
           call FuncA
           pop ecx
    ...
    ...
    FuncA:
           push ebp
           mov ebp, esp       ; Synch uop first time, but not second time
           sub esp, 100
           mov eax, [ebp+8]
           mov esp, ebp
           pop ebp
           ret

The MOV EBP,ESP instruction in FuncA comes after a PUSH, a CALL, and another PUSH. If
ESPd was zero at the start, then it will be -12 here. We need a synchronization µop before
we can execute MOV EBP,ESP. The SUB ESP,100 and MOV ESP,EBP don't need
synchronization µops because there have been no PUSH or POP since the last
synchronization. After this, we have the sequence POP / RET / POP / PUSH / CALL / PUSH
before we meet MOV EBP,ESP again in the second call to FUNCA. ESPd has now been
counted up to 12 and back again to 0, so we don't need a synchronization µop the second
time we get here. If POP ECX is replaced by ADD ESP,4 then we will need a
synchronization µop at the ADD ESP,4 as well as at the second instance of MOV
EBP,ESP. The same will happen if we replace the sequence POP ECX / PUSH 2 by MOV
DWORD [ESP],2 but not if it replaced by MOV DWORD [EBP],2.

We can make a rule for predicting where the synchronization µops are generated by
dividing instructions into the following classes:

   1. Instructions that use the stack engine: PUSH, POP, CALL, RET, except RET n.

   2. Instructions that use the stack pointer in the out-of-order core, i.e. instructions that
      have ESP as source, destination or pointer, and CALL FAR, RETF, ENTER.

   3. Instructions that use the stack pointer both in the stack engine and in the out-of-
      order core, e.g. PUSH ESP, PUSH [ESP+4], POP [ESP+8], RET n.

   4. Instructions that always synchronize ESPO: PUSHF(D), POPF(D), PUSHA(D),
      POPA(D), LEAVE.

   5. Instructions that don't involve the stack pointer in any way.

A sequence of instructions from class 1 and 5 will not generate any synchronization µops,
unless ESPd is near overflow. A sequence of instructions from class 2 and 5 will not
generate any synchronization µops. The first instruction from class 2 after an instruction
from class 1 will generate a synchronization µop, except if ESPd is zero. Instructions from
class 3 will generate synchronization µops in most cases. Instructions from class 4 generate
a synchronization µop from the decoder rather than from the stack engine, even if ESPd = 0.

You may want to use this rule for reducing the number of synchronization µops in cases
where the throughput of 3 µops per clock is a bottleneck and in cases where execution port
0 and 1 are both saturated. You don't have to care about synchronization µops if the
bottleneck is elsewhere.

(Literature: S. Gochman, et al.: The Intel Pentium M Processor: Microarchitecture and
Performance. Intel Technology Journal, vol. 7, no. 2, 2003).

 7.8 Register renaming
Register renaming is controlled by the register alias table (RAT) and the reorder buffer
(ROB), shown in figure 6.1. The µops from the decoders and the stack engine go to the
RAT via a queue that can hold approximately 10 µops, and then to the ROB-read and the
reservation station. The RAT can handle 3 µops per clock cycle. This means that the overall
throughput of the microprocessor can never exceed 3 fused µops per clock cycle on
average.

The RAT can rename three registers per clock cycle, and it can even rename the same
register three times in one clock cycle.

A code with many renamings can sometimes cause stalls, which are difficult to predict. My
hypothesis is that these stalls occur in the RAT when it is out of temporary registers. The
PM has 40 temporary registers.

The Core Solo/Duo can rename the floating point control word in up to four temporary
registers, while the Pentium M cannot rename the floating point control word. This is
important for the performance of floating point to integer conversions in C/C++ code.

 7.9 Register read stalls
The PM is subject to the same kind of register read stalls as the PPro, P2 and P3, as
explained on page 79. The ROB-read stage can read no more than three different registers
from the permanent register file per clock cycle. This applies to all general purpose
registers, the stack pointer, the flags register, floating point registers, MMX registers and
XMM registers. An XMM register counts as two, because it is stored as two 64-bit registers.
There is no limitation on registers that have been modified recently by a preceding µop so
that the value has not yet passed through the ROB-writeback stage. See page 79 for a
detailed explanation of register read stalls.

Previous processors allowed only two permanent register reads per clock cycle. This value
may have been increased to three in the PM, though this is uncertain. Three register read
ports may not be sufficient for preventing register read stalls, because many instructions
generate fewer µops on PM than on previous processors, thanks to µop fusion and the
stack engine, but not fewer register reads. This makes the µop stream more compact and
therefore increases the average number of register reads per µop. A fused µop can have up
to three input registers, while previous processors allowed only two inputs per µop. If three
fused µops with three input registers each go into the ROB-read stage in the same clock
cycle then we can have a maximum of nine inputs to read. If these nine input registers are
all different and all in the permanent register file, then it will take three clock cycles to read
them all through the three register read ports.

The following example shows how register read stalls can be removed:

    ; Example 7.5. Register read stalls
    inc eax             ; (1) read eax, write eax
    add ebx, eax        ; (2) read ebx eax, write ebx
    add ecx, [esp+4]    ; (3) read ecx esp, write ecx
    mov edx, [esi]      ; (4) read esi, write edx
    add edi, edx        ; (5) read edi edx, write edi

These instructions generate one µop each through the ROB-read. We assume that none of
the registers have been modified in the preceding three clock cycles. The µops go three by
three, but we do not know which three go together. There are three possibilities:

   A. (1), (2) and (3) go together. We need four register reads: EAX, EBX, ECX, ESP.

   B. (2), (3) and (4) go together. We need four register reads: EBX, ECX, ESP, ESI. (EAX
      doesn't count because it has been written to in the preceding triplet)

   C. (3), (4) and (5) go together. We need four register reads: ECX, ESP, ESI, EDI. (EDX
      doesn't count because it is written to before it is read).

All three possibilities involve a stall in the ROB-read for reading more than three registers
that have not been modified recently. We can remove this stall by inserting a
MOV ECX,ECX before the first instruction. This will refresh ECX so that we need only three
permanent register reads, both in situation A, B and C. If we had chosen to refresh, for
example, EBX instead then we would remove the stall in situation A and B, but not in
situation C. So we would have a 2/3 probability of removing the stall. Refreshing EDI would
have a 1/3 probability of removing the stall, because it works only in situation C. Refreshing
ESP would also remove the stall in all three situations, but this would delay the fetching of
the memory operands by approximately two clock cycles. In general, it doesn't pay to
remove a register read stall by refreshing a register used as pointer for a memory read
because this will delay the fetching of the memory operand. If we refresh ESI in the above
example then this would have a 2/3 probability of removing a register read stall, but it would
delay the fetching of EDX.

If ESP has been modified by a stack operation, e.g. PUSH, prior to the code in the above
example so that ESPd is not zero (see p. 96) then the stack engine will insert a stack
synchronization µop between (2) and (3). This will remove the register read stall but delay
the fetching of the memory operand.

 7.10 Execution units
Unfused µops are submitted from the reservation station to the five execution ports which
connect to all the execution units. Port 0 and 1 receive all arithmetic instructions. Port 2 is
for memory read instructions. Memory write instructions are unfused into two µops which go
to port 3 and 4, respectively. Port 3 calculates the address, and port 4 does the data
transfer.

The maximum throughput of the execution units is five unfused µops per clock cycle, one at
each port. On previous processors, such a high throughput could only be obtained in short
bursts when the reservation station was full because of the limitation of three µops per clock
cycle in the RAT and retirement station. The PM, however, can maintain the throughput of
five µops per clock cycle for unlimited periods of time because three fused µops in the RAT
can generate five unfused µops at the execution ports. The maximum throughput can be
obtained when one third of the µops are fused read-modify instructions (port 2 and port 0/1),
one third is fused store instructions (port 3 and 4), and one third is simple ALU or jump
instructions (port 0/1).

The execution units are well distributed between port 0 and 1, and many instructions can go
to either of these two ports, whichever is vacant first. It is therefore possible to keep both
ports busy most of the time in most cases. Port 0 and 1 both have an integer ALU, so that
both can handle the most common integer instructions like moves, addition and logic
instructions. Two such µops can be executed simultaneously, one at each port. Packed
integer ALU instructions can also go to any of the two ALU's.

Integer and floating point instructions share the same multiplication unit and the same
division unit, but not the same ALU (addition and logic). This means that the PM can do
floating point additions and integer additions simultaneously, but it cannot do floating point
multiplications and integer multiplications simultaneously.

Simple instructions such as integer additions have a latency of one clock cycle. Integer
multiplications and packed integer multiplications take 3-4 clock cycles. The multiplication
unit is pipelined so that it can start a new multiplication every clock cycle. The same applies
to floating point addition and single precision floating point multiplication. Double precision
floating point multiplications use part of the multiplier unit twice so that it can start a new
multiplication every second clock cycle, and the latency is 5.

128-bit XMM operations are split into two 64-bit µops, except if the output is only 64 bits. For
example, the ADDPD instruction generates two µops for the two 64-bit additions, while
ADDSD generates only one µop.

 7.11 Execution units that are connected to both port 0 and 1
Some execution units are duplicated as mentioned above. For example, two integer vector
addition µops can execute simultaneously, one at each ALU going through port 0 and 1,
respectively.

Some other execution units are accessible through both port 0 and 1 but are not duplicated.
For example, a floating point addition µop can go through either port 0 or port 1. But there is
only one floating point adder so it is not possible to execute two floating point addition µops
simultaneously.

This mechanism was no doubt implemented in order to improve performance by letting
floating point addition µops go through whichever port is vacant first. But unfortunately, this
mechanism is doing much more harm than good. A code where most of the µops are
floating point additions or other operations that can go through either port takes longer time
to execute than expected, typically 50% more time.

The most likely explanation for this phenomenon is that the scheduler will issue two floating
point add µops in the same clock cycle, one for each of the two ports. But these two µops
cannot execute simultaneously because they need the same execution unit. The
consequence is that one of the two ports is stalled and prevented from doing something
else for one clock cycle.

This applies to the following instructions:

   •   All floating point additions and subtractions, including single, double and long double
       precision, in ST() and XMM registers with both scalar and vector operands, e.g.
       FADD, ADDSD, SUBPS.

   •   xmm compare instructions with xmm result, e.g. CMPEQPS.

   •   xmm max and min instructions, e.g. MAXPS.

   •   xmm vector multiplications with 16 bit integers, e.g. PMULLW, PMADDWD.

Any code that contains many of these instructions is likely to take more time than it should.
It makes no difference whether the instructions are all of the same type or a mixture of the
types listed above.

The problem does not occur with µops that can go through only one of the ports, e.g.
MULPS, COMISS, PMULUDQ. Neither does the problem occur with µops that can go through
both ports where the ALU's are duplicated, e.g. MOVAPS, PADDW.

A further complication which has less practical importance but reveals something about the
hardware design is that instructions such as PMULLW and ADDPS cannot execute
simultaneously, even though they are using different execution units.

The poor performance of code that contains many instructions of the types listed above is a
consequence of a bad design. The mechanism was no doubt implemented in order to
improve performance. Of course it is possible to find examples where this mechanism
actually does improve performance, and the designers may have had a particular example
in mind. But the improvement in performance is only seen in code that has few of the
instructions listed above and many instructions that occupy port 1. Such examples are rare
and the advantage is limited because it applies only to code that has few of these
instructions. The loss in performance is highest when many, but not all, of the instructions
are of the types listed above. Such cases are very common in floating point code. The
critical innermost loop in floating point code is likely to have many additions. The
performance of floating point code is therefore likely to suffer quite a lot because of this poor
design.

It is very difficult for the programmer to do anything about this problem because you cannot
control the reordering of µops in the CPU pipeline. Using integers instead of floating point
numbers is rarely an option. A loop which does nothing but floating point additions can be
improved by unrolling because this reduces the relative cost of the loop overhead
instructions, which suffer from the blocked ports. A loop where only a minority of the
instructions are floating point additions can sometimes be improved by reordering the
instructions so that no two FADD µops are issued to the ports in the same clock cycle. This
requires a lot of experimentation and the result can be sensitive to the code that comes
before the loop.

The above explanation of the poor performance of code that contains many floating point
additions is based on systematic experimentation but no irrefutable evidence. My theory is
based on the following observations:

   •   The phenomenon is observed for all instructions that generate µops which can go to
       either port 0 or port 1, but have only one execution unit.

   •   The phenomenon is not observed for µops that can go to only one of the two ports.
       For example, the problem disappears when ADDPS instructions are replaced by
       MULPS.

   •   The phenomenon is not observed for µops that can go to both ports where the
       execution unit is duplicated so that two µops can execute simultaneously.

   •   Tests are performed with two nested loops where the inner loop contains many
       floating point additions and the outer loop measures the number of clock cycles used
       by the inner loop. The clock count of the inner loop is not always constant but often
       varies according to a periodic pattern. The period depends on small details in the
       code. Periods as high as 5 and 9 have been observed. These periods cannot be
       explained by any of the alternative theories I could come up with.

   •   All the test examples are of course designed to be limited by execution port
       throughput rather than by execution latencies.

   •   The information about which µops go to which ports and execution units is obtained
       by experiments where a particular port or execution unit is saturated.

 7.12 Retirement
The retirement station on the PM works exactly the same way as on PPro, P2 and P3. The
retirement station can handle three fused µops per clock cycle. Taken jumps can only retire
in the first of the three slots in the retirement station. The retirement station will therefore
stall for one clock cycle if a taken jump happens to fall into one of the other slots. The
number of fused µops in small loops should therefore preferably be divisible by three. See
p. 84 for details.

 7.13 Partial register access
The PM can store different parts of a register in different temporary registers in order to
remove false dependences. For example:

    ; Example 7.6. Partial registers
    mov al, [esi]
    inc ah

Here, the second instruction does not have to wait for the first instruction to finish because
AL and AH can use different temporary registers. AL and AH are stored into each their part
of the permanent EAX register when the µops retire.

A problem occurs when a write to a part of a register is followed by a read from the whole
register:

    ; Example 7.7. Partial register problem
    mov al, 1
    mov ebx, eax

On PM model 9, the read from the full register (EAX) has to wait until the write to the partial
register (AL) has retired and the value in AL has been joined with whatever was in the rest
of EAX in the permanent register. This is called a partial register stall. The partial register
stalls on PM model 9 are the same as on PPro. See p. 85 for details.

On the later PM model D, this problem has been solved by inserting extra µops to join the
different parts of the register. I assume that the extra µops are generated in the ROB-read
stage. In the above example, the ROB-read will generate an extra µop that combines AL
and the rest of EAX into a single temporary register before the MOV EBX,EAX instruction.
This takes one or two extra clock cycles in the ROB-read stage, but this is less than the 5-6
clock penalty of partial register stalls on previous processors.

The situations that generate extra µops on PM model D are the same as the situations that
generate partial register stalls on the earlier processors. Writes to the high 8-bit registers
AH, BH, CH, DH generate two extra µops, while writes to the low 8-bit or 16-bit part of a
register generate one extra µop. Example:

    ; Example 7.8a. Partial register access
    mov al, [esi]
    inc ax             ; 1 extra uop for read ax after write al
    mov ah, 2
    mov bx, ax         ; 2 extra uops for read ax after write ah
    inc ebx            ; 1 extra uop for read ebx after write ax

The best way to prevent the extra µops and the stalls in ROB-read is to avoid mixing
register sizes. The above example can be improved by changing it to:

    ; Example 7.8b. Partial register problem avoided
    movzx eax, byte [esi]
    inc    eax
    and    eax, 0ffff00ffh
    or     eax, 000000200h
    mov    ebx, eax
    inc    ebx

Another way avoid the problem is to neutralize the full register by XOR'ing it with itself:

    ; Example 7.8c. Partial register problem avoided
    xor    eax, eax
    mov    al, [esi]
    inc    eax         ; No extra uop

The processor recognizes the XOR of a register with itself as setting it to zero. A special tag
in the register remembers that the high part of the register is zero so that EAX = AL. This
tag is remembered even in a loop:

    ; Example 7.9. Partial register problem avoided in loop
          xor eax, eax
          mov ecx, 100
    LL:   mov al, [esi]
          mov [edi], eax          ; No extra uop
          inc esi
          add edi, 4
          dec ecx
          jnz LL

The rules for preventing extra µops by neutralizing a register are the same as the rules for
preventing partial register stalls on previous processors. See p. 86 for details.

(Literature: Performance and Power Consumption for Mobile Platform Components Under
Common Usage Models. Intel Technology Journal, vol. 9, no. 1, 2005).

Partial flags stall
Unfortunately, the PM doesn't generate extra µops to prevent stalls on the flags register.
Therefore, there is a stall of 4-6 clock cycles when reading the flags register after an
instruction that modifies part of the flags register. Examples:

     ; Example 7.10. Partial flags stalls
     inc     eax     ; Modifies zero flag and sign flag, but not carry flag
     jz      L1      ; No stall, reads only modified part
     jc      L2      ; Stall, reads unmodified part
     lahf            ; Stall, reads both modified and unmodified bits
     pushfd          ; Stall, reads both modified and unmodified bits

The above stalls can be removed by replacing INC EAX by ADD EAX,1 (modifies all
flags) or LEA EAX,[EAX+1] (modifies no flags). Avoid code that relies on the fact that
INC or DEC leaves the carry flag unchanged.

There is also a partial flags stall when reading the flags after a shift instruction with a count
different from 1:

     ; Example 7.11. Partial flags stalls after shift
     shr    eax, 1
     jc     l1          ; No stall after shift by 1
     shr    eax, 2
     jc     l2          ; Stall after shift by 2
     test   eax, eax
     jz     l3          ; No stall because flags have been rewritten

See p. 87 for details about partial flags stalls.

 7.14 Store forwarding stalls
Store forwarding stalls in the PM are the same as in previous processors. See p. 88 for
details.

     ; Example 7.12. Store forwarding stall
     mov byte [esi], al
     mov ebx, dword [esi]        ; Stall

 7.15 Bottlenecks in PM
It is important, when optimizing a piece of code, to find the limiting factor that controls
execution speed. Tuning the wrong factor is unlikely to have any beneficial effect. In the
following paragraphs, I will explain each of the possible limiting factors. You have to
consider each factor in order to determine which one is the narrowest bottleneck, and then
concentrate your optimization effort on that factor until it is no longer the narrowest
bottleneck. As explained before, you have to concentrate on only the most critical part of the
program - usually the innermost loop.

Memory access
If the program is accessing large amounts of data, or if the data are scattered around
everywhere in the memory, then you will have many data cache misses. Accessing
uncached data is so time consuming that all other optimization considerations are
unimportant. The caches are organized as aligned lines of 64 bytes each. If one byte within
an aligned 64-byte block has been accessed, then you can be certain that all 64 bytes will
be loaded into the level-1 data cache and can be accessed at no extra cost. To improve
caching, it is recommended that data that are used in the same part of the program be
stored together. You may align large arrays and structures by 64. Store local variables on
the stack if you don't have enough registers. The PM has four write ports. Having more than
four writes immediately after each other can slow down the process by a few clock cycles,
especially if there are memory reads simultaneously with the writes. Non-temporal writes to
memory are efficient on PM. You may use MOVNTI, MOVNTQ and MOVNTPS for scattered
writes to memory if you don't expect to read again soon from the same cache line.

The Core Solo/Duo has an improved data prefetching mechanism that predicts future
memory reads.

Instruction fetch and decode
The instructions should be organized according to the 4-1-1 rule if you aim at a throughput
of 3 µops per clock cycle. Remember that the 4-1-1 pattern can be broken at IFETCH
boundaries. Avoid instructions with more than one prefix. Avoid instructions with 16-bit
immediate operand in 32-bit mode. See p. 92.

Micro-operation fusion
µop fusion and the stack engine makes it possible to get more information into each µop.
This can be an advantage if decoding or the 3 µops/clock limit is a bottleneck. Floating point
registers allow µop fusion for read-modify instructions, but XMM registers do not. Use
floating point registers instead of XMM registers for floating point operations if you can take
advantage of µop fusion.

Register read stalls
Be aware of register read stalls if a piece of code has more than three registers that it often
reads but seldom writes to. See p. 98.

There is a tradeoff between using pointers and absolute addresses. Object oriented code
typically accesses most data through frame pointers and 'this' pointers. The pointer
registers are possible sources of register read stalls because they are often read but seldom
written to. Using absolute addresses instead of pointers has other disadvantages, however.
It makes the code longer so that the cache is used less efficiently and the problem with
IFETCH boundaries is increased.

Execution ports
The unfused µops should be distributed evenly between the five execution ports. Port 0 and
1 are likely to be bottlenecks in a code that has few memory operations. You may move
some of the load from port 0 and 1 to port 2 by replacing move-register-register and move
register-immediate instructions by move-register-memory instructions if this can be done
without cache misses.

Instructions using the 64-bit MMX registers are no less efficient than instructions using the
32-bit integer registers on PM. You may use the MMX registers for integer calculations if
you are out of integer registers. The XMM registers are slightly less efficient because they
do not use µop fusion for read-modify instructions. MMX and XMM instructions are slightly
longer than other instructions. This may increase the problem with IFETCH boundaries if
decoding is a bottleneck. Remember that you cannot use floating point registers and MMX
registers in the same code.

Code with many floating point additions is likely to stall port 0 and 1 because of the design
problem discussed on page 100.

Stack synchronization µops go to port 0 or 1. The number of such µops can sometimes be
reduced by replacing MOV instructions relative to the stack pointer by PUSH and POP
instructions. See page 96 for details.

Partial register access generates extra µops, see page 103.

Execution latencies and dependency chains
The execution units have reasonably low latencies on the PM, and many operations are
faster than on P4.

The performance is likely to be limited by execution latencies when the code has long
dependency chains with slow instructions.

Avoid long dependency chains and avoid memory intermediates in dependency chains. A
dependency chain is not broken by an XOR or PXOR of a register with itself.

Partial register access
Avoid mixing register sizes and avoid using the high 8-bit registers AH, BH, CH, DH. Be
aware of partial flags stalls when reading the flags after instructions that modify some of the
flag bits and leave other flag bits unchanged, and after shifts and rotates. See p. 104.

Branch prediction
Branch prediction is more advanced in PM than in other processors. Loops with a constant
repeat count of up to 64 are predicted perfectly. Indirect jumps and calls with varying targets
can be predicted if they follow a regular pattern or if they are well correlated with preceding
branches. But the branch target buffer (BTB) is much smaller than on other processors.
Therefore, you should avoid unnecessary jumps in order to reduce the load on the BTB.
Branch prediction will be good if most of the processor time is spent in a small piece of code
with relatively few branches. But branch prediction will be poor if the processor time is
distributed over large sections of code with many branches and no particular hot spot. See
p. 27.

Retirement
The retirement of taken branches can be a bottleneck in small loops with many branches.
See p. 84.

