8 Intel Core 2 and Nehalem pipeline
The microarchitecture named "Intel Core 2" is a further development of the PM design. The
pipeline has been expanded to handle four micro-operations per clock cycle and the
execution units have been expanded from 64 bits to 128 bits. A 45 nm version introduced in
2008 differs from the previous 65 nm version by faster division and shuffling operations.

The Core microarchitecture and its derivatives now form the basis of all Intel's x86
processors, including portable, desktop and server processors. The Intel Core 2 processors
have two or more CPU cores with separate level-1 caches and a shared level-2 cache. The
Nehalem has separate level-1 and level-2 caches and a shared level-3 cache.

The Nehalem is capable of running two threads in each of its four CPU cores, totaling eight
threads.

The x64, SSE3 and Supplementary SSE3 instruction sets are supported in all Core 2
processors. SSE4.1 is supported in the 45 nm versions. SSE4.2 is supported in Nehalem.

The Core has the same power-saving features as the PM. It can turn off certain parts of the
internal buses, execution units, etc. when they are not used. The clock frequency is reduced
when the workload is small. These power-saving features have the positive side effect that
the maximum clock frequency can be increased without overheating the chip. The Nehalem
can increase the clock frequency in one core when other cores are idle.

 8.1 Pipeline
The Core pipeline is very similar to the Pentium M, but with more of everything in order to
increase the throughput from 3 to 4 µops per clock cycle. The advanced power saving
technology makes it possible to use a high clock frequency without overheating the chip.
The trace cache of the Netburst architecture has been trashed in favor of a traditional code
cache.

The Core 2 microarchitecture allegedly has a pipeline of only fourteen stages in order to
reduce power consumption, speculative execution and branch misprediction penalty.
However, my measurements indicate that the pipeline is approximately two stages longer in
the Core2 than in PM. This estimate is based on the fact that the branch misprediction
penalty is measured to at least 15, which is 2 clock cycles more than on PM. The time a
register stays in the ROB, as measured by register read stalls (p. 79), is approximately 2
clock cycles more than on PM, and partial flags stalls are at least one clock cycle longer on
Core2 than on PM. These measurements are in accordance with the observation that
instruction fetching and retirement have been improved. It is likely that one extra pipeline
stage has been used for improving instruction fetch and predecoding, and one for improving
retirement. The pipeline of the Nehalem is at least 2 stages longer with a branch
misprediction penalty of at least 17.

The reorder buffer has 96 entries in Core 2 and 128 entries in Nehalem. The reservation
station has 32 entries in Core 2 and 36 entries in Nehalem, according to Intel publications.

 8.2 Instruction fetch and predecoding
Instruction fetching has been improved over previous Intel processors by adding a queue
between branch prediction and instruction fetching. This can remove the delay bubble at
taken branches in many cases. Unfortunately, the fetch bandwidth is still limited to 16 bytes
per clock cycle. The limiting bottleneck is the predecoder, as explained below.

The instruction decoding machinery is split between a predecoder and a decoder, with a
queue in between. This queue has an effective size of 64 bytes in Core 2. The main
purpose of the predecoder is to detect where each instruction begins. This is quite difficult
because each instruction can have any length from one to fifteen bytes and it can be
necessary to inspect several bytes of an instruction in order to determine its length and
know where the next instruction begins. The predecoders also identify instruction prefixes
and other components of each instruction.

The maximum throughput of the predecoders is 16 bytes or 6 instructions per clock cycle,
whichever is smallest. The throughput of the rest of the pipeline is typically 4 instructions per
clock cycle, or 5 in case of macro-op fusion (see below, page 111). The throughput of the
predecoders is obviously less than 4 instructions per clock cycle if there are less than 4
instructions in each 16-bytes block of code. The average instruction length should therefore
preferably be less than 4 bytes on average.

The predecoder throughput can also be reduced if there are more than 6 instructions in a
16-bytes block of code. The reason for this is that the predecoder will not load a new 16-
bytes block of code until the previous block is exhausted. If there are 7 instructions in a 16-
bytes block then the predecoders will process the first 6 instructions in the first clock cycle
and 1 instruction in the next clock cycle. This gives an average predecoder throughput of
3.5 instructions per clock cycle, which is less than desired. The optimal number of
instructions per 16-bytes block of code is therefore 5 or 6, corresponding to an average
instruction length of approximately 3. Any instruction that crosses a 16-bytes boundary will
be left over until the next 16-bytes block is processed. It may be necessary to adjust
instruction lengths in order to obtain the optimal number of instructions per 16-bytes block.
See manual 2: "Optimizing subroutines in assembly language" for a discussion of how to
make instructions shorter or longer.

Loopback buffer
The decoder queue in the Core2 can be used as a 64-bytes, 18 instructions, loop buffer.
The predecoded instructions in the decoder queue can be reused in case a branch
instruction loops back to an instruction that is still contained in the buffer. Predecoding is
therefore not a bottleneck for a small loop that is completely contained in the 64-bytes
buffer.

The Core2 loop buffer works almost as a 64 bytes level-0 code cache, organized as 4 lines
of 16 bytes each. A loop that can be completely contained in four aligned blocks of 16 bytes
each can execute at a rate of up to 32 bytes of code per clock cycle. The four 16-bytes
blocks do not even have to be consecutive. A loop that contains jumps (but not calls and
returns) can still exceed the predecoder throughput if all the code in the loop can be
contained in four aligned 16-bytes blocks.

The Nehalem design is slightly different. The Core2 has the loop buffer between the
predecoders and the decoders, while the Nehalem has the loop buffer after the decoders.
The Nehalem loop buffer can hold 28 (possibly fused) µops. The size of the loop code is
limited to 256 bytes of code, or up to 8 blocks of 32 bytes each. A loop containing more than
256 bytes of code cannot use the loop buffer. There is a one-clock delay in this loop
process, so that a loop containing 4*N (possibly fused) µops will take N+1 clock cycles to
execute if there are no other bottlenecks elsewhere. The Core2 does not have this one-
clock delay.

The loop buffer can speed up execution considerably in cases where predecoding or
decoding is a bottleneck, i.e. where instructions are longer than 4 bytes on average or
contain length-changing prefixes. Critical loops should therefore preferably be aligned by 16
and be no bigger than 64 bytes or 18 instructions on the Core 2 and 256 bytes or 28
instructions on Nehalem.

Length-changing prefixes
The instruction length decoder has a problem with certain prefixes that change the meaning
of the subsequent opcode bytes in such a way that the length of the instruction is changed.
This is known as length-changing prefixes.

For example, the instruction MOV AX,1 has an operand size prefix (66H) in 32-bit and 64-
bit mode. The same code without operand size prefix would mean MOV EAX,1. The MOV
AX,1 instruction has 2 bytes of immediate data to represent the 16-bit value 1, while MOV
EAX,1 has 4 bytes of immediate data to represent the 32-bit value 1. The operand size
prefix therefore changes the length of the rest of the instruction. The predecoders are
unable to resolve this problem in a single clock cycle. It takes 6 clock cycles to recover from
this error. It is therefore very important to avoid such length-changing prefixes. The Intel
documents say that the penalty for a length-changing prefix is increased to 11 clock cycles if
the instruction crosses a 16-bytes boundary, but I cannot confirm this. My measurements
show a penalty of 6 clock cycles in this case as well. The penalty may be less than 6 clock
cycles if there are more than 4 instructions in a 16-bytes block.

There are two prefixes that can cause this problem. This is the operand size prefix (66H)
and the seldom used address size prefix (67H). The operand size prefix will change the
length of an instruction and cause a delay in 32-bit and 64-bit mode in the following cases:

   •   If a MOV or TEST instruction has a 16-bit destination and an immediate constant as
       source. For example MOV AX,1. This should be replaced by MOV EAX,1.

   •   If any other instruction has a 16-bit destination and an immediate constant as source
       and the constant cannot be represented as an 8-bit sign-extended integer. For
       example ADD AX,200. This should be replaced by ADD EAX,200. But ADD
       AX,100 does not have a length-changing prefix because 100 is within the range of
       8-bit signed integers.

   •   If one of the instructions NEG, NOT, DIV, IDIV, MUL and IMUL with a single operand
       has a 16-bit operand and there is a 16-bytes boundary between the opcode byte and
       the mod-reg-rm byte. These instructions have a bogus length-changing prefix
       because these instructions have the same opcode as the TEST instruction with a 16-
       bit immediate operand, and the distinction between the TEST instruction and the
       other instructions is contained in the reg bits of the mod-reg-rm byte. Therefore, the
       decoder cannot determine if the prefix is length-changing or not until it has read the
       next 16-bytes block of code. You may want to avoid using the 16-bit versions of
       these instructions if you cannot control where the 16-bytes boundaries are.

These rules also apply to 32-bit operands in 16-bit mode. The disassembler in the objconv
utility can be used for detecting these length-changing prefixes.

The address size prefix (67H) will always cause a delay in 16-bit and 32-bit mode on any
instruction that has a mod/reg/rm byte, even if it doesn't change the length of the instruction.
The only instructions on which the 67H prefix makes sense and does not cause a stall are
JCXZ/JECXZ/JRCXZ, string instructions and XLAT. The address size prefix is not length-
changing in 64-bit mode in these cases and causes no delay in this mode, except for
instructions with absolute addresses. Address size prefixes are generally regarded as
obsolete and should be avoided.

The REX.W prefix (48H) can also change the length of an instruction in the case of a MOV
instruction with a 64-bit immediate operand, but the predecoder can resolve this case
without penalty.

The penalty for length-changing prefixes occurs only the first time in a loop that fits into the
loopback buffer because this buffer contains predecoded or decoded instructions.

 8.3 Instruction decoding
Instruction decoding in the Core2 and Nehalem is very similar to previous processors, as
explained on page 75, but extended from three to four decoders so that it can decode four
instructions per clock cycle. The first decoder can decode any instruction that generates up
to 4 µops in one clock cycle. The other three decoders can handle only instructions that
generate no more than one µop each. There are no other restrictions on which instructions
these decoders can handle. The maximum output of the decoders is 7 µops per clock cycle
if instructions are organized in a 4-1-1-1 pattern so that the first decoder generates four
µops and the other three decoders generate one µop each. The output from the decoders is
a minimum of 2 µops per clock cycle if all the instructions generate 2 µops each. In this
case, only the first decoder is active because the other three decoders cannot handle
instructions that generate more than one µop. If the code contains many instructions that
generate 2-4 µops each then these instructions should be spaced with two or three single-
µop instructions between in order to optimize decoder throughput. Instructions that generate
more than 4 µops use microcode ROM and take multiple clock cycles to decode. The
number of µops generated by each instruction is listed in manual 4: "Instruction tables". The
figure that is relevant to decoder throughput is the number listed under "µops fused
domain".

The decoders can read two 16-bytes blocks of code per clock cycle from the 64-bytes buffer
so that a total of 32 bytes can be decoded in one clock cycle. But the output of the
predecoders is limited to 16 bytes or less per clock cycle so that the decoders can only
receive more than 16 bytes in one clock cycle in linear code if they processed less than 16
bytes in the preceding clock cycle.

Previous processors had a limitation on the number of instruction prefixes that the decoders
can handle per clock cycle. The Core2 and Nehalem have no such limitation. Instructions
with any number of prefixes can be decoded by any of the four decoders in one clock cycle.
The only limitation is set by the instruction set definition which limits the length of instruction
plus prefixes to 15 bytes. Thus, it is possible to decode a one-byte instruction with 14
prefixes in a single clock cycle. No instruction needs so many prefixes, of course, but
redundant prefixes can be used instead of NOP's as fillers for aligning a subsequent loop
entry. See manual 2: "Optimizing subroutines in assembly language" for a discussion of
redundant prefixes.

 8.4 Micro-op fusion
The Core2 and Nehalem use µop fusion in the same way as the PM, as described on page
94. Some instructions that need two µops in the execution units can use the µop fusion
technique to keep these two µops together as one through most of the pipeline in order to
save pipeline bandwidth. The fused µop is treated as two µops by the scheduler and
submitted to two different execution units, but it is treated as one µop in all other stages in
the pipeline and uses only one entry in the reorder buffer. The decoding throughput is also
increased by µop fusion because a fused µop can be generated by those decoders that can
handle only single-µop instructions.

There are two cases of µop fusion: read-modify instructions and write instructions. A read-
modify instruction needs one µop for reading a memory operand and another µop for doing
a calculation with this operand. For example, ADD EAX,[MEM] needs one µop for reading
MEM and one for adding this value to EAX. These two µops can be fused into one. A write
instruction needs one µop for calculating the address and one for writing to that address.
For example, MOV [ESI+EDI],EAX needs one µop for calculating the address
[ESI+EDI] and one for storing EAX to this address. These two µops are fused together.
The Core2 and Nehalem can use µop fusion in more cases than the PM can. For example,
read-modify-write instructions can use both read-modify fusion and write fusion. Most XMM
instructions can use µop fusion, but not all.

A fused µop can have three input dependencies, while an unfused µop can have only two. A
write instruction may have three input dependencies, for example MOV [ESI+EDI],EAX.
This is the reason why write instructions are split into two µops, while read instructions have
only one µop.

Instructions that have both a rip-relative address and immediate data cannot use µop fusion.
For example, CMP BYTE [RIP+m],AL can fuse, but CMP BYTE [RIP+m],1 cannot.

You can see which instructions use µop fusion by looking at the tables in manual 4:
"Instruction tables". Instructions with µop fusion have a higher number of µops listed under
"unfused domain" than under "fused domain".

 8.5 Macro-op fusion
The Core2 and Nehalem can also fuse two instructions into one µop in a few cases. This is
called macro-op fusion. The decoders will fuse a compare or test instruction with a
subsequent conditional jump instruction into a single compare-and-branch µop in certain
cases. The compare-and-branch µop is not split in two at the execution units but executed
as a single µop by the branch unit at execution port 5. This means that macro-op fusion
saves bandwidth in all stages of the pipeline from decoding to retirement. Macro-op fusion
does not help, however, if predecoding is the bottleneck.

Macro-op fusion is possible only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:

   •   The first instruction is a CMP or TEST instruction and the second instruction is a
       conditional jump instruction except JECXZ and LOOP.

   •   The CMP or TEST instruction can have two register operands, a register and an
       immediate operand, a register and a memory operand, but not a memory and an
       immediate operand.

   •   Core2 can do macro-op fusion only in 16-bit and 32-bit mode. Core Nehalem can
       also do this in 64-bit mode.

   •   Branches that test the zero flag and/or the carry flag (JE, JNE, JB, JBE, JA, JAE)
       can fuse with a preceding CMP or TEST. This includes all unsigned comparisons.
       Branches for signed comparisons (JL, JLE, JG, JGE) can fuse with a preceding CMP
       or TEST on Core Nehalem but only with TEST on Core2.
       Branches that test the overflow, parity or sign flag only (JO, JNO, JP, JNP, JS, JNS)
       can fuse with TEST but not with CMP.

   •   There can be no other instructions between the two instructions (branch hint prefixes
       are allowed, but ignored).

   •   The branch instruction should not start at a 16-bytes boundary or cross a 16-bytes
       boundary.

   •   If more than one such instruction pair reaches the four decoders in the same clock
       cycle then only the first pair is macro-fused.

Any one of the four decoders can make a macro-op fusion, but not simultaneously. Thus,
we see that the four decoders can handle a maximum of five instructions in a single clock
cycle in case of macro-op fusion.

It is possible to have both micro-op fusion and macro-op fusion at the same time. A CMP or
TEST instruction with a memory operand and a register operand followed by a branch
instruction can generate a single micro-macro-fused µop containing all the three operations:
read, compare, and branch. However, there is a limit to how much information a µop can
contain. This limit is probably defined by the size of a reorder-buffer (ROB) entry. There is
not enough space for storing both an immediate operand, the address of a memory
operand, and the address of a branch target in the same ROB entry. My guess is that this is
the reason why we can't have macro-op fusion with both a memory operand and an
immediate operand. This may also be the reason why macro-op fusion doesn't work in 64-
bit mode on Core2: 64-bit branch addresses take more space in the ROB entry.

The programmer should keep CMP or TEST instructions together with the subsequent
conditional jump rather than scheduling other instructions in-between; and there should
preferably be at least three other instructions between one compare-branch pair and the
next compare-branch pair in order to take advantage of macro-op fusion. The branch
instruction after a CMP should preferably be of an unsigned type if it can be verified that
none of the operands can be negative.

The fact that macro-op fusion doesn't work in 64-bit mode on Core2 should not make any
programmer refrain from using 64-bit mode. The performance gain due to macro-op fusion
is unlikely to be more than a few percent, and only if µop throughput is a bottleneck. Macro-
op fusion has no effect in the much more likely case that the bottleneck lies elsewhere.

 8.6 Stack engine
The Core2 and Nehalem has a dedicated stack engine which works the same way as on the
PM, as described on page 96, with necessary adjustments for the larger pipeline.

The modification of the stack pointer by PUSH, POP, CALL and RET instructions is done by a
special stack engine, which is placed immediately after the decoding stage in the pipeline
and before the out-of-order core. This relieves the pipeline from the burden of µops that
modify the stack pointer. This mechanism saves two copies of the stack pointer: one in the
stack engine and another one in the register file and the out-of-order core. These two stack
pointers may need to be synchronized if a sequence of PUSH, POP, CALL and RET
instructions is followed by an instruction that reads or modifies the stack pointer directly,
such as ADD ESP,4 or MOV EAX,[ESP+8]. The stack engine inserts an extra stack-
synchronization µop in every case where synchronization of the two stack pointers is
needed. See page 96 for a more detailed explanation.

The stack synchronization µops can sometimes be avoided by not mixing instructions that
modify the stack pointer through the stack engine and instructions that access the stack
pointer in the out-of-order execution units. A sequence that contains only instructions from
one of these two categories will not need stack synchronization µops, but a sequence that
mixes these two categories will need these extra µops. For example, it is advantageous to
replace an ADD ESP,4 instruction after a function call by POP ECX if the preceding
instruction was a RET and the next instruction touching the stack pointer is a PUSH or CALL.

It may be possible to avoid stack synchronization µops completely in a critical function if all
function parameters are transferred in registers and all local variables are stored in registers
or with PUSH and POP. This is most realistic with the calling conventions of 64-bit Linux. Any
necessary alignment of the stack can be done with a dummy PUSH instruction in this case.

 8.7 Register renaming
All integer, floating point, MMX, XMM, flags and segment registers can be renamed. The
floating point control word can also be renamed.

Register renaming is controlled by the register alias table (RAT) and the reorder buffer
(ROB), shown in figure 6.1. The µops from the decoders and the stack engine go to the
RAT via a queue and then to the ROB-read and the reservation station. The RAT can
handle 4 µops per clock cycle. The RAT can rename four registers per clock cycle, and it
can even rename the same register four times in one clock cycle.

 8.8 Register read stalls
The Core2 and Nehalem are subject to the same kind of register read stalls as the PM and
earlier processors, as explained on page 79. The permanent register file has three read
ports on the Core2 and Nehalem for reading instruction operands.

The ROB-read stage can read no more than three different registers from the permanent
register file per clock cycle. This applies to all general purpose registers, the stack pointer,
the flags register, floating point registers, MMX registers and XMM registers. An XMM
register counts as one on the Core, while it counts as two 64-bit registers on previous
processors.

The first two of the three register read ports can read registers for instruction operands,
base pointers, and index pointers. The third read port can read only registers used as index
pointers on the Core2. On Core Nehalem, all three read ports can be used for any
operands. The same register can be read any number of times in the same clock cycle
without causing stalls.

Registers that have been written to recently can be read directly from the ROB if they have
not yet passed the ROB-writeback stage. Registers that can be read directly from the ROB
do not need the read ports on the register file. My measurements indicate that it takes
approximately 5 clock cycles for a µop to pass from the ROB-read stage to the ROB-
writeback stage. This means that a register can be read without problems if it has been
modified within the last 5 clock cycles. With a throughput of 4 µops per clock cycle, you can
assume that a register can be read without using the register read ports if it has been
modified within the last 20 µops unless the pipeline has been stalled for any reason in the
meantime.

A unfused µop can contain up to two register reads, and a fused µop can contain up to three
register reads. For example, the instruction ADD EAX,[EBX+ECX] reads register EAX,
EBX and ECX, and then writes register EAX. The decoders can send up to four fused µops to
the ROB-read stage in one clock cycle. The maximum number of register reads in a µop
quartet is therefore twelve. The ROB-read stage may need four clock cycles to read these
twelve registers in the worst case where all registers are in the permanent register file.

    ; Example 8.1a. Register read stall on Core2
    L: mov eax, [esi+ecx]
        mov [edi+ecx], ebx
        add ecx, 4
        js   L

This loop has a register read stall because there are three registers that are read inside the
loop, but not written to: ESI, EDI and EBX. ECX does not need a read port because it has
been modified recently. There are three register read ports, but on Core2 the third read port
can only be used for index registers, and none of the three read-only registers are used as
index registers. Note that the SIB byte of the instruction code makes a distinction between

base and index register. ESI and EDI are base registers in example 8.1a, while ECX is
index register. An index register can have a scale factor, while a base register cannot.

A slight modification of the code can make EDI an index register so that the third read port
can be used:

     ; Example 8.1b. Register read stall removed
     L: mov eax, [ecx+esi*1]
         mov [ecx+edi*1], ebx
         add ecx, 4
         js   L

Here, we have applied the scale factor *1 to ESI and EDI to make sure the assembler uses
ESI and EDI rather than ECX as the index register. ESI or EDI can now be read by the
third register read port so that the stall disappears. Example 8.1b takes 1 clock cycle per
iteration, while example 8.1a takes two clock cycles on Core2.

It is difficult to predict which µops will go into the ROB-read stage together. The µops arrive
in order, but you don't know where each quartet begins unless the decoders have been
stalled. A register read stall can therefore occur if more than two or three registers are read
in any four consecutive µops and these registers have not been written to recently.

Removing register read stalls often requires some experimentation. The Core2 and
Nehalem have performance monitor counters that you can use for detecting register read
stalls.

It is possible to change a base pointer to an index register in instructions like
mov eax,[ebx]. But this should be done only if there is experimental evidence that it
prevents a register read stall, because the instruction mov eax,[ebx*1] is five bytes
longer than mov eax,[ebx] (four bytes for a base address of zero, and one SIB byte).

Other methods for removing register read stalls are to minimize the number of registers that
are often read from but rarely written to, replacing read-only registers by constants or
memory operands, and to organize the code so as to limit the distance between writing to a
register and subsequently reading from the same register. The stack pointer, frame pointer
and 'this' pointer are common examples of registers that are often read but rarely modified.

 8.9 Execution units
The execution units of the Core2 have been expanded a lot over previous processors.
There are six execution ports. Port 0, 1 and 5 are for arithmetic and logic operations (ALU),
port 2 for memory read, port 3 for write address calculation, and port 4 for memory write
data. This gives a maximum throughput of six unfused µops per clock cycle.

All execution ports support full 128 bit vectors. Most ALU operations have a latency of 1
clock cycle. The different units are listed in table 8.1 below. All three ALU ports can handle
128-bit moves and Boolean operations. All three ports can handle additions on general
purpose registers. Port 0 and 5 can also handle integer vector additions.

There are separate units for integer multiplication and floating point multiplication. The
integer multiplier on port 1 is fully pipelined with a latency of 3 and a throughput of 1 full
vector operation per clock cycle. The floating point multiplier on port 0 has a latency of 4 for
single precision and 5 for double and long double precision. The throughput of the floating
point multiplier is 1 operation per clock cycle, except for long double precision on Core2.
The floating point adder is connected to port 1. It has a latency of 3 and is fully pipelined.

Integer division uses the floating point division unit. This is the only unit that is not pipelined.

The jump unit on port 5 handles all jump and branch operations, including the macro-fused
compare-and-branch operations.

The floating point unit connected to port 0 and 1 handles all operations on the floating point
stack registers and most floating point calculations on XMM registers. The Core2 makes no
distinction between integer and floating point operands, while the Core Nehalem does. For
example, MOVAPS, MOVAPD and MOVDQA are identical and all carried out by the integer unit
on Core2. On Core Nehalem, MOVAPS and MOVAPD are different from MOVDQA and executed
on port 5 only. Floating point XMM move, Boolean, and most floating point shuffle
operations are done by the integer units on Core2 but use a dedicated unit on port 5 on the
Core Nehalem.

The arithmetic/logic execution units are well distributed between port 0, 1 and 5. This makes
it possible to execute three vector instructions per clock cycle, for example floating point
vector multiplies on port 0, floating point vector additions on port 1, and a floating point
moves on port 5.

  Execution         Execution       Subunit           Max data         Latency,         Processor
  port              unit                              size, bits       clocks
 0                int              move              128              1
 1                int              move              128              1
 5                int              move              128              1
 0                int              add               128              1
 1                int              add               64               1                Core 2 only
 5                int              add               128              1
 0                int              Boolean           128              1
 1                int              Boolean           128              1
 5                int              Boolean           128              1
 1                int              multiply          128              3
 0                int              shift             128              1                Core 2 only
 1                int              shift             128              1                Nehalem only
 5                int              shift             64               1                Core 2 only
 0                int              pack              128              1
 1                int              pack              64               1                Nehalem only
 5                int              pack              128              1                Nehalem only
 1                int              shuffle           128              1                Nehalem only
 5                int              shuffle           128              1
 5                int              jump              64               1

 0                float            fp stack move     80               1
 1                float            fp add            128              3
 0                float            fp mul            128              4-5
 0                float            fp div and sqrt   128              >5
 0                float            fp convert        128              1
 1                float            fp convert        128              3
 5                float            fp mov, shuffle   128              1                Nehalem only
 5                float            fp boolean        128              1                Nehalem only

 2               int             memory read    128                   2
 3               store           store address 64                     1
 4               store           store data     128                   3
Table 8.1. Execution units in Core2 and Nehalem

The latency for integer vector operations is the same as for operations in general purpose
registers. This makes it convenient to use MMX registers or XMM registers for simple
integer operations when you are out of general purpose registers. The vector operations are
supported by fewer execution ports, though.

Data bypass delays on Core2
On the Core2, there is an extra latency of one clock cycle when the output of a µop in the
integer unit is used as input for a µop in the floating point unit, or vice versa. This is
illustrated in the following example.

    ; Example 8.2a. Bypass delays in Core 2
    .data
    align 16
    signbits label xmmword       ; Used for changing sign
    dq 2 dup (8000000000000000H) ; Two qwords with sign bit set

    .code
    movaps      xmm0, [a]                 ; Unit = int,   Latency = 2
    mulpd       xmm0, xmm1                ; Unit = float, Latency = 5 + 1
    xorps       xmm0, [signbits]          ; Unit = int,   Latency = 1 + 1
    addpd       xmm0, xmm2                ; Unit = float, Latency = 3 + 1

In example 8.2a there are three additional latencies for moving data back and forth between
the integer and floating point units. This code can be improved by reordering the instructions
so that the number of switches between the integer and floating point units is reduced:

    ; Example 8.2b. Bypass delays in Core 2
    .code
    movaps   xmm0, [a]           ; Unit = int,   Latency = 2
    xorps    xmm0, [signbits]    ; Unit = int,   Latency = 1
    mulpd    xmm0, xmm1          ; Unit = float, Latency = 5 + 1
    addpd    xmm0, xmm2          ; Unit = float, Latency = 3

In example 8.2b, we are changing the sign of XMM0 before multiplying with XMM1. This
reduces the number of transitions between the integer and floating point units from three to
one, and the total latency is reduced by 2. (We have used MOVAPS and XORPS instead of
MOVAPD and XORPD because the former instructions are shorter but have the same
functionality).

The load/store unit is closely connected with the integer unit, so that there is no additional
latency when transferring data between the integer unit and the load/store unit. There is a
one clock latency when transferring data from memory (load unit) to the floating point unit,
but there is no additional latency when transferring data from the floating point unit to
memory (store unit). The execution units are listed in the tables in manual 4: "Instruction
tables" where appropriate.

Data bypass delays on Nehalem
On the Nehalem, the execution units are divided into five "domains":

   •   The integer domain handles all operations in general purpose registers.
   •   The integer vector (SIMD) domain handles integer operations in vector registers.
   •   The FP domain handles floating point operations in XMM and x87 registers.
   •   The load domain handles all memory reads.
   •   The store domain handles all memory stores.

There is an extra latency of 1 or 2 clock cycles when the output of an operation in one
domain is used as input in another domain. These so-called bypass delays are listed in
table 8.2.

                                                   To domain
     From domain         integer         integer vector      FP                 store
        integer             0                  1              2                   0
    integer vector          1                  0              2                   1
           FP               2                  2              0                   1
          load              0                  1              2                   0
Table 8.2. Bypass delays in Nehalem

Several XMM instructions have multiple versions for the integer vector domain and the FP
domain respectively. For example, for a register-to-register move, there is MOVDQA in the
integer vector domain, and MOVAPS and MOVAPD in the FP domain. The extra latency for
using an instruction in the wrong domain is considerable, as shown in the following
example.

    ; Example 8.3a. Bypass delays in Nehalem
    movaps   xmm0, [a]           ; Load domain,   Latency = 2
    mulps    xmm0, xmm1          ; FP domain,     Latency = 4 + 2
    pshufd   xmm2, xmm0, 0       ; int vec. dom., Latency = 1 + 2
    addps    xmm2, xmm3          ; FP domain,     Latency = 3 + 2
    pxor     xmm2, xmm4          ; int vec. dom., Latency = 1 + 2
    movdqa   [b], xmm1           ; Store domain, Latency = 3 + 1

The bypass delays in this example can be reduced by using only instructions in the same
domain as far as possible:

    ; Example 8.3b. Bypass delays in Nehalem
    movaps   xmm0, [a]           ; Load domain,                Latency = 2
    mulps    xmm0, xmm1          ; FP domain,                  Latency = 4 + 2
    movaps   xmm2, xmm0          ; FP domain,                  Latency = 1 + 0
    shufps   xmm2, xmm2, 0       ; FP domain,                  Latency = 1 + 0
    addps    xmm2, xmm3          ; FP domain,                  Latency = 3 + 0
    xorps    xmm2, xmm4          ; FP domain,                  Latency = 1 + 0
    movaps   [b], xmm1           ; Store domain,               Latency = 3 + 1

Replacing PSHUFD with SHUFPS in example 8.3b requires an extra MOVAPS with a latency of
1 (if the value in XMM0 is needed later), but it saves 4 clock cycles in bypass delays.
Replacing PXOR with XORPS is straightforward because these two instructions are
functionally identical. Replacing the last MOVDQA with MOVAPS has no influence on latencies,
but it may have on future processors.

The important conclusion here is that there is a penalty in terms of latency to using an XMM
instruction of the wrong type on the Nehalem. On previous Intel processors there is no
penalty for using move and shuffle instructions on other types of operands than they are
intended for.

The bypass delay is important in long dependency chains where latency is a bottleneck, but
not where it is throughput rather than latency that matters. In fact, the throughput may
actually be improved by using the integer vector versions of the move and Boolean
instructions, which have a throughput of 3 instructions per clock cycle, where the FP move
and Boolean instructions have a throughput of only 1 instruction per clock cycle.

There is still no extra bypass delay for using load and store instructions on the wrong type of
data. For example, it can be convenient to use MOVHPS on integer data for reading or writing
the upper half of an XMM register.

Mixing µops with different latencies
There is a problem when µops with different latencies are issued to the same execution
port. For example:

    ; Example 8.4. Mixing uops with different latencies on port 0
    mulpd xmm1,xmm2   ; Double precision multiply has latency 5
    mulps xmm3,xmm4   ; Single precision multiply has latency 4

Assume that the double precision multiplication with a latency of 5 starts at time T and ends
at time T+5. If we attempt to start the single precision multiplication with a latency of 4 at
time T+1 then this would also end at time T+5. Both instructions use port 0. Each execution
port has only one write-back port, which can handle only one result at a time. It is therefore
not possible to end two instructions at the same time. The scheduler will predict and avoid
this write-back conflict by delaying the latter instruction to time T+2 so that it ends at time
T+6. The cost is one wasted clock cycle.

This kind of conflict can occur when two or more µops issued to the same execution port
have different latencies. The maximum throughput of one µop per clock cycle in each port
can only be obtained when all µops that go to the same port have the same latency. In the
example of floating point multiplications we can maximize the throughput by using the same
precision for all floating point calculations, or by keeping floating point multiplications with
different precisions apart from each other rather than mixing them.

The designers have tried to reduce this problem by standardizing µop latencies. Port 0 can
handle only µops with a latency of 1 or ≥ 4. Port 1 can handle only µops with a latency of 1
or 3. Port 5 can handle only latency 1. Port 2, 3 and 4 handle memory operations and
almost nothing else. There are no µops that use 2 clock cycles in any execution unit.
(Instructions like MOVD EAX,XMM0 have a latency of 2, but this in 1 clock cycle in the
execution unit and 1 extra cycle for bypass delay between units).

The problem with mixing latencies can also occur at port 1, but less frequently:

    ; Example 8.5. Mixing uops with different latency on port 1 (Nehalem)
    imul eax,10       ; Port 1. Latency 3
    lea ebx,[mem1]    ; Port 1. Latency 1
    lea ecx,[mem2]    ; Port 1. Latency 1

In example 8.5, we cannot issue the last LEA µop to port 1 two clock cycles after the IMUL
µop because they would both finish at the same time on Nehalem (Core 2 has the LEA on
port 0). This problem occurs only rarely on port 1 because most of the single-clock µops that
can go to port 1 can also go to port 0 or 5.

 8.10 Retirement
The retirement station seems to be more efficient than in the PM. I have not detected any
delays due to bottlenecks in the retirement station on the Core2 or Nehalem.

 8.11 Partial register access
There are three different ways that the Core2 and Nehalem uses for resolving writes to part
of a register. These three different ways are used for general purpose registers, the flags
register, and XMM registers, respectively.

Partial access to general purpose registers
Different parts of a general purpose register can be stored in different temporary registers in
order to remove false dependences. For example:

     ; Example 8.6. Partial registers
     mov al, [esi]
     inc ah

Here, the second instruction does not have to wait for the first instruction to finish because
AL and AH can use different temporary registers. AL and AH are stored into each their part
of the permanent EAX register when the µops retire.

A problem occurs when a write to a part of a register is followed by a read from the whole
register:

     ; Example 8.7. Partial register problem
     mov al, 1
     mov ebx, eax

This problem is solved by inserting an extra µop to join the different parts of the register. I
assume that the extra µops are generated in the ROB-read stage. In the above example,
the ROB-read will generate an extra µop that combines AL and the rest of EAX into a single
temporary register before the MOV EBX,EAX instruction. This takes 2 - 3 extra clock cycles
in the ROB-read stage, but this is less than the 5-6 clock penalty of partial register stalls on
processors that don't have this mechanism.

Writes to the high 8-bit registers AH, BH, CH, DH generate two extra µops, while writes to the
low 8-bit or 16-bit part of a register generate one extra µop. See page 103 for examples.

Partial flags stall
Unfortunately, the Core2 and Nehalem don't generate extra µops to prevent stalls on the
flags register. Therefore, there is a stall of approximately 7 clock cycles when reading the
flags register after an instruction that modifies part of the flags register. See page 104 for
examples.

There is also a partial flags stall when reading the flags after a rotate instruction or a shift
instruction with a count of CL. See page 104 for details.

Partial access to XMM registers
An XMM register is never split into its parts in the reorder buffer. Therefore, no extra µops
are needed and there is no partial access stall when writing to part of an XMM register. But
the write has a false dependence on the previous value of the register. Example:

     ; Example 8.8. Partial access to XMM register
     mulss xmm0,   xmm1
     movss [mem1], xmm0
     movss xmm0,   xmm2 ; has false dependence on previous value
     addss xmm0,   xmm3

The MOVSS and MOVSD instructions with register operands write to part of the destination
register and leave the rest of the register unchanged. In example 8.8, the
MOVSS XMM0,XMM2 instruction has a false dependence on the preceding MULSS
instruction because the lower 32 bits of the register cannot be separated from the unused
upper part of the register. This prevents out-of-order execution. The false dependence in
example 8.8 can be removed by replacing MOVSS XMM0,XMM2 with MOVAPS
XMM0,XMM2. Do not use the MOVSS and MOVSD instructions with two register operands
unless it is necessary to leave the rest of the register unchanged.

 8.12 Store forwarding stalls
The processor can forward a memory write to a subsequent read from the same address
under certain conditions. This store forwarding will fail in most cases of misaligned or partial
memory references as in previous processors (p. 88), but certain special cases have been
dealt with to allow store forwarding of partial memory operands. A failed store forwarding
will delay the subsequent read by approximately 10 clock cycles.

Store forwarding works if a write to memory is followed by a read from the same address
when the read has the same operand size and the operand has its natural alignment:

    ; Example 8.9. Successful store-to-load forwarding
    mov dword [esi], eax        ; esi aligned by 4
    mov ebx, dword [esi]        ; No stall

The store forwarding also works with misaligned memory operands if the operand is less
than 16 bytes and does not cross a 64-bytes boundary on 45 nm Core2, or an 8-bytes
boundary on 65 nm Core2. Store forwarding works in all cases of misaligned memory
operands on Nehalem.

    ; Example 8.10. Failed store forward because of misalignment on Core2
    mov dword [esi-2], eax     ; esi divisible by 64
    mov ebx, dword [esi-2]     ; Stall because 64 B boundary crossed

Store forwarding never works if the read has a bigger operand size than the preceding write:

    ; Example 8.11. Failed store forwarding when read bigger than write
    mov dword [esi], eax       ; Write lower 4 bytes
    mov dword [esi+4], edx     ; Write upper 4 bytes
    movq mm0, qword [esi]      ; Read 8 bytes. Stall

Store forwarding is possible if the read has a smaller operand size than the write and starts
at the same address, and the write operand does not cross a 64-bytes boundary on 45 nm
Core2 or the read operand does not cross an 8 bytes boundary on 65 nm Core2. On
Nehalem there is no restriction on boundary crossing here.

    ; Example 8.12. Store forwarding to smaller read
    mov dword [esi], eax       ; Write 4 bytes
    mov bx, word [esi]         ; Successful store forwarding
    mov cx, word [esi+2]       ; Stall because not same start address

There are a few special cases where store forwarding is possible to a smaller read with a
different start address. These special cases are:

(1) An 8-byte write can be followed by 4-byte reads of each of its halves if the read does not
cross an 8-bytes boundary on 65 nm Core2 or the write does not cross a 64-bytes boundary
on 45 nm Core2. On Nehalem there is no restriction on boundary crossing here.

(2) A 16-byte write can be followed by 8-byte reads of each of its halves and/or 4-byte reads
of each of its quarters if the write is aligned by 16. On Nehalem there is no restriction on
alignment or boundary crossing here.

    ; Example 8.13. Store forwarding in special case
    movapd xword [esi], xmm0 ; Write 16 bytes
    fld qword [esi]            ; Read lower half. Success
    fld qword [esi+8]          ; Read upper half. Success
    mov eax, dword [esi+12]    ; Read last quarter. Success
    mov ebx, dword [esi+2]     ; Not a quarter operand. Fail

The mechanism for detecting whether store forwarding is possible does not distinguish
between different memory addresses with the same set-value in the cache. This can cause
stalls for failed bogus store forwardings when addresses are spaced a multiple of 4 kb
apart:

    ; Example 8.14. Bogus store forwarding stall
    mov word [esi], ax
    mov ebx, dword [esi+800h] ; No stall
    mov ecx, dword [esi+1000h] ; Bogus stall

In example 8.14 there is a stall when reading ecx after writing ax because the memory
addresses have the same set-value (the distance is a multiple of 0x1000) and a large read
after a small write would give a stall if the addresses were the same.

 8.13 Cache and memory access

  Cache                            Core 2                           Nehalem
 Level 1 code                    32 kB, 8 way, 64 B line size,    32 kB, 8 way, 64 B line size,
                                 latency 3, per core              latency 4, per core
 Level 1 data                    32 kB, 8 way, 64 B line size,    32 kB, 8 way, 64 B line size,
                                 latency 3, per core              latency 4, per core
 Level 2                         2, 4 or 6 MB, 16 or 24 way,      256 kB, 8 way,
                                 64 B line size, latency 15,      64 B line size, latency 11,
                                 shared                           per core
 Level 3                         none                             8 MB, 16 way, 64 B line size,
                                                                  latency 38, shared
Table 8.3. Cache sizes on Core 2 and Nehalem

There is one cache on each core, except for the last-level cache. All caches are shared
between threads where a core can run two threads. It is likely that there will be more
versions in the future with different last-level cache sizes. There is a 256 bit data path
between the level-1 and level-2 caches.

The capability of reordering memory accesses is allegedly improved so that a memory read
can be executed speculatively before a preceding write that is expected to go to a different
address before the address is known with certainty.

The data prefetchers are able to automatically prefetch two data streams with different
strides for both level-1 and level-2 caches.

Cache bank conflicts
Each 64-bytes line in the data cache is divided into 4 banks of 16 bytes each. It is not
possible to do a memory read and a memory write in the same clock cycle if the two
memory addresses have the same bank number, i.e. if bit 4 and 5 in the two addresses are
the same on Core2. Example:

    ; Example 8.15. Core2 cache bank conflict
    mov eax, [esi]         ; Use bank 0, assuming esi is divisible by 40H
    mov [esi+100H], ebx    ; Use bank 0. Cache bank conflict
    mov [esi+110H], ebx    ; Use bank 1. No cache bank conflict

The Nehalem doesn't have these conflicts, but Core 2 and Nehalem both have a false
dependence between memory addresses with the same set and offset, i.e. with a distance
that is a multiple of 4 kB.

Misaligned memory accesses
The Core2 has a penalty for misaligned memory access when a cache line boundary (64
bytes) is crossed. The penalty is approximately 12 clock cycles for a misaligned read and 10

clock cycles for a misaligned write. The Nehalem has hardly any penalty for misaligned
memory access.

 8.14 Breaking dependency chains
A common way of setting a register to zero is XOR EAX,EAX or SUB EBX,EBX. The
Core2 and Nehalem processors recognize that certain instructions are independent of the
prior value of the register if the source and destination registers are the same.

This applies to all of the following instructions: XOR, SUB, PXOR, XORPS, XORPD, and all
variants of PSUBxxx and PCMPxxx except PCMPEQQ.

The following instructions are not recognized as being independent when source and
destination are the same: SBB, CMP, PANDN, ANDNPS, ANDNPD.

Floating point subtract and compare instructions are not truly independent when source and
destination are the same because of the possibility of NAN's etc.

These instructions are useful for breaking an unnecessary dependence, but only on
processors that recognize this independence.

 8.15 Multithreading in Nehalem
Thread synchronization primitives, e.g. the LOCK XCHG instruction, are considerably faster
than on previous processors.

The Nehalem can run two threads in each of its four cores. This means that each thread
gets only half of the resources. The resources are shared in the following way between two
threads running in the same core:

Cache: All cache resources are shared competitively between the threads. The more one
thread uses the less the other thread can use.

Branch target buffer and branch history pattern table: These are shared competitively
between threads.

Instruction fetch and decoding: The instruction fetcher and decoders are shared evenly
between the two threads so that each thread gets every second clock cycle.

Loop buffer: There is one loop buffer for each thread.

Register renaming and register read ports. These are shared evenly so that each thread
gets every second clock cycle. Register read stalls in one thread are independent of register
reads in the other thread.

Reorder buffer and reservation station. These are shared competitively.

Execution ports and execution units. These are shared competitively. One thread can use
one execution port while another thread uses another port.

Read and write buffers: These are shared competitively.

Permanent register file: There is one for each thread.

It is clear that there is no advantage to running two threads per core if any of the shared
resources are limiting factors for the performance. In many cases, however, the execution
resources are more than sufficient for a single thread. It can be particularly advantageous to
run two threads per core in situations where a large fraction of the time goes to cache
misses and branch misprediction. However, if any of the shared resources are bottlenecks
then it is not advantageous to run two threads per core. On the contrary, each thread is
likely to run at less than half the single-thread speed because of evictions in the cache and
branch target buffers and other resource conflicts. There is no way to give one thread higher
priority than the other in the CPU.

 8.16 Bottlenecks in Core2 and Nehalem

Instruction fetch and predecoding
All parts of the pipeline in the Core2 and Nehalem design have been improved over the PM
design so that the total throughput is increased significantly. The part that has been
improved the least is instruction fetch and predecoding. This part cannot always keep up
with the speed of the execution units. Instruction fetch and predecoding is therefore the
most likely bottleneck in CPU-intensive code.

It is important to avoid long instructions in order to optimize instruction fetch and
predecoding. The optimal average instruction length is approximately 3 bytes, which can be
impossible to obtain.

Instruction fetch and predecoding is not a bottleneck in a loop that fits into the loop buffer.
The performance of a program can therefore be improved if the innermost loop is sufficiently
small for fitting into the loop buffer, or if it can be split into multiple smaller loops that each fit
into the loop buffer.

Instruction decoding
The decoders can handle four instructions per clock cycle, or five in the case of macro-op
fusion. Only the first one of the four decoders can handle instructions that generate more
than one µop. The minimum output of the decoders is therefore 2 µops per clock cycle in
the case that all instructions generate 2 µops each so that only the first decoder can be
used. Instructions may be ordered according to the 4-1-1-1 pattern for optimal decoder
throughput.

Fortunately, most of the instructions that generated multiple µops in previous designs
generate only a single µop on the Core2 and Nehalem thanks to improved µop fusion, the
stack engine, and the 128-bit width of buses and execution units. The decoders will
generate four µops per clock cycle in an instruction stream where all of the instructions
generate only a single µop each. This matches the throughput of the rest of the pipeline.
Decoder throughput is therefore only critical if some of the instructions generate two µops
each.

Length-changing prefixes cause long delays in the decoders. These prefixes should be
avoided at all costs, except in small loops that fit into the loop buffer. Avoid instructions with
16-bit immediate operands in 32-bit and 64-bit mode.

Register read stalls
The number of register read ports on the permanent register file is insufficient in many
situations. Register read stalls is therefore a very likely bottleneck.

Avoid having more than two or three registers that are often read but seldom written to in
the code. The stack pointer, frame pointer, 'this' pointer, and loop-invariant expressions
that are stored in a register are likely contributors to register read stalls. Loop counters and
other registers that are modified inside a loop may also contribute to register read stalls if
the loop uses more than 5 clock cycles per iteration.

Execution ports and execution units
The capacity of the execution ports and execution units is quite high. Many µops have two
or three execution ports to choose between and each unit can handle one full 128-bit vector
operation per clock cycle. The throughput of the execution ports is therefore less likely to be
a bottleneck than on previous designs.

Execution ports can be a bottleneck if the code generates many µops that all go to the same
execution port. Memory operations can be a bottleneck in code that contains many memory
accesses because there is only one memory read port and one memory write port.

Most execution units are pipelined to a throughput of one µop per clock cycle. The most
important exceptions are division and square root.

Execution latency and dependency chains
Execution latencies on the Core2 and Nehalem are generally low. Most integer ALU
operations have a latency of only one clock cycle, even for 128-bit vector operations. There
is an additional latency of 1-2 clock cycles for moving data between the integer unit and the
floating point unit. The execution latencies are critical only in long dependency chains. Long
dependency chains should be avoided.

Partial register access
There is a penalty for reading a full register after writing to a part of the register. Use MOVZX
or MOVSX to read 8-bit or 16-bit memory operands into a 32-bit register rather than using a
smaller part of the register.

Retirement
The retirement of µops has not been observed to be a bottleneck in any of my experiments.

Branch prediction
The branch prediction algorithm is good, especially for loops. Indirect jumps can be
predicted. Unfortunately, the branch history pattern table on the Core2 is so small that
branch mispredictions are quite common.

A special branch target buffer for branches with loop behavior has only 128 entries which
may be a bottleneck for a program with many critical loops.

Memory access
The cache bandwidth, memory bandwidth and data prefetching are significantly better than
on previous processors.

Memory bandwidth is still a likely bottleneck, of course, for memory-intensive applications.

Literature
"Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual". Intel 2009.
Jeff Casazza: "First the Tick, Now the Tock: Intel® Microarchitecture (Nehalem)". White
Paper. Intel 2009.
Ofri Wechsler: "Inside Intel Core Microarchitecture: Setting New Standards for Energy-
Efficient Performance". White Paper. Intel 2006.
David Kanter: "Inside Nehalem: Intel's Future Processor and System".
www.realworldtech.com, 2008.

