9 Intel Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge pipeline
Intel's microarchitecture code named Sandy Bridge is a further development of the Core 2
and Nehalem design. A new µop cache has been added after the decoders, and the floating
point execution units have been expanded from 128 bits to 256 bits.

The Sandy Bridge has 2 - 8 cores, and some versions are capable of running two threads in
each core.

The new AVX instruction set is supported. This expands the sixteen 128-bit XMM registers
to 256-bit YMM registers for floating point vector operations. Most XMM and YMM
instructions have non-destructive three-operand versions in the AVX instruction set.

 9.1 Pipeline
The Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge pipeline is very similar to the Core2 and Nehalem, but with
an added µop cache after the decoders.

The reorder buffer has 168 entries on Sandy Bridge and 192 entries on Haswell. The
reservation station has 54 entries on Sandy Bridge and 60 on Haswell. The Sandy Bridge
has 160 integer registers and 144 vector registers; the Haswell has 168 of each, according
to Intel publications.

 9.2 Instruction fetch and decoding
The pre-decoders and decoders can handle 16 bytes or 4 instructions per clock cycle, or 5
instructions in case of macro-op fusion. It appears to be almost identical to the decoders in
the Core2 and Nehalem.

Instructions with any number of prefixes are decoded in a single clock cycle.

The penalty for length-changing prefixes (see page 109) has been removed in some cases,
while a few cases remain:

   •   Move instructions with an immediate operand using an operand size prefix,
       e.g. mov ax,1234 has no penalty.
   •   Arithmetic and logic instructions with an immediate operand using an operand size
       prefix, e.g. add ax,1234 has a penalty of 2-3 clock cycles in the decoders,
       regardless of alignment. This applies to all arithmetic and logic instructions with a 16-
       bit immediate constant as operand in 32-bit or 64-bit mode.
   •   The instructions NEG, NOT, DIV, IDIV, MUL and IMUL with a single 16-bit operand
       no penalty.
   •   An address size prefix does not cause a penalty, even if it changes the length of the
       instruction (instructions with absolute memory addresses have not been tested).

There are four decoders, which can handle instructions generating one or more µops
according to certain patterns. The following instruction patterns were successfully decoded
in a single clock cycle in my experiments:

   •   1-1-1-1
   •   2-1-1
   •   3
   •   4

Instructions that generate 3 or 4 µops are decoded alone. Instructions that generate more
than four µops are handled by microcode which is less efficient.
The multi-byte NOP instruction with opcode 0F 1F can only be decoded at the first of the
four decoders on Sandy Bridge, while a simple NOP with extra prefixes (opcode 66 66 90)
can be decoded at any of the four decoders. The Ivy Bridge does not have this limitation.
Both types of long NOPs are decoded at a rate of four per clock on Ivy Bridge.

 9.3 µop cache
The Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge have a cache for decoded µops after the decoders. This is
useful because the limitation of 16 bytes per clock cycle in the fetch/decode units is a
serious bottleneck if the average instruction length is more than four bytes. The throughput
is doubled to 32 bytes per clock for code that fits into the µop cache.

The µop cache is organized as 32 sets  8 ways  6 µops, totaling a maximum capacity of
1536 µops. It can allocate a maximum of 3 lines of 6 µops each for each aligned and
contiguous 32-bytes block of code.

Code that runs out of the µop cache are not subject to the limitations of the fetch and
decode units. It can deliver a throughput of 4 (possibly fused) µops or the equivalent of 32
bytes of code per clock cycle.

The µop cache is rarely used to the maximum capacity of 1536 µops. The utilization is often
less than optimal for the following reasons:

   •   A µop cache line is assigned to a specific 32-bytes block of code. A new µop cache
       line will be started every time a 32-bytes boundary in the code is passed, even if the
       previous µop cache line is only partially filled.

   •   Instructions that generate multiple µops cannot be split between two µop cache
       lines. If an instruction cannot be fully contained in the current line then the rest of this
       line will be unused and the instruction will be placed at the start of a new line.

   •   Instructions that generate more than 4 µops use microcode ROM. Such instructions
       use an entire µop cache line.

   •   An unconditional jump or call always ends a µop cache line

   •   The same piece of code can have multiple entries in the µop cache if it has multiple
       jump entries.

   •   Instructions that require more than 32 bits of storage may take up two entries in the
       µop cache and may take an extra clock cycle to load. The details are given below.

   •   It cannot load more than one µop cache line per clock cycle. This may be a
       bottleneck if many instructions use two entries each.

   •   A 32-bytes block of code which generates more than 18 µops or which would require
       more than 18 entries in the µop cache will not be allocated in the µop cache.

   •   The pipeline switches frequently between taking µops from the decoders and from
       the µop cache. Each switch may cost one clock cycle.

Each entry in the µop cache has 32 bits of storage space for address and data bits. A µop
may need more than 32 bits of storage space, for example if it has both a memory operand
and an immediate data operand. The system uses various methods for dealing with this
problem. The 32 bits of storage space may be split into two 16-bit fields, one for address
bits and one for immediate data bits. A 32-bit address may be stored as a 16-bit sign-
extended number if it is in the range from -215 to +215. Likewise, a 32-bit immediate data
value may be stored as a 16-bit sign-extended number if it is in the range from -215 to +215,
and a 64-bit immediate data value may be stored as a 32-bit sign-extended number if it is in
the range from -231 to +231. However, a 64-bit address field cannot be converted to a 32-bit
sign-extended number.

If the necessary data cannot be squeezed into a 32-bit number or two 16-bit numbers, then
it will borrow unused data space from another entry in the same µop cache line if possible. If
this is not possible, then it will use two entries in the µop cache.

A µop cache line takes an extra clock cycle to load if it has one or more entries that use
extra data space, regardless of whether the extra storage space is borrowed from another
entry or uses an extra entry, except for instructions with RIP-relative addresses.

Instructions with RIP-relative addresses behave slightly differently from other instructions. A
disadvantage is that the 32-bits storage space cannot be split into two 16-bit fields. On the
other hand, it has the advantage that it does not take an extra clock cycle to load if it uses
extra data space for storing an immediate operand.

The details are given in table 9.1 below, according to my tests.

     Address mode            Address or            Immediate           µop            µop
                             offset bits            data bits         cache          cache
                                                                      entries      load time
  no memory operand               0             0, 8, 16, 32            1              1
  no memory operand               0               64small               1              1
  no memory operand               0                  64                 2              2
      32 bit absolute         32small        0, 8, 16, 32small          1              1
      32 bit absolute         32small                32                 2              2
      32 bit absolute            32                   0                 1              1
      32 bit absolute            32              8, 16, 32              2              2
 pointer, index or both 0, 8, 16, 32small 0, 8, 16, 32small             1              1
 pointer, index or both 0, 8, 16, 32small            32                 2              2
 pointer, index or both          32                   0                 1              1
 pointer, index or both          32              8, 16, 32              2              2
        rip relative        32small, 32               0                 1              1
        rip relative        32small, 32          8, 16, 32              2              1
      64 bit absolute       64small, 64               0                 2              2
Table 9.1. Size of different instructions in µop cache
 Note: 32small means a 32-bit number in the range from -215 to +215, 64small means a 64-
 bit number in the range from -231 to +231.

Examples:

    ; Example 9.1. Instructions in µop cache
    mov dword [rsi+4], 1000H        ; one entry
    mov dword [rsi+4], 10000H       ; two entries
    mov dword [rsi+40000H], 0       ; two entries
    mov dword [rsi+40000H], eax     ; one entry
    cmp dword [fs:8], 2             ; one entry
    cmp dword [fs:8], 20000H        ; two entries
    cmp dword [fs:80000H], 2        ; two entries
    mov rax,-10000000H              ; one entry (even if long form)
    mov rax,-100000000H             ; two entries
    vinsertf128 ymm0,ymm1,[rip+x],1 ; two entries

The gain in performance due to the µop cache can be quite considerable if the average
instruction length is more than 4 bytes. The following methods of optimizing the use of the
µop cache may be considered:

   •   Make sure that critical loops are small enough to fit into the µop cache.

   •   Align the most critical loop entries and function entries by 32.

   •   Avoid unnecessary loop unrolling.

   •   Avoid instructions that have extra load time according to table 9.1.

   •   Instructions that require extra data space according to table 9.1 may be mixed with
       instructions that use no data space so that the vacant data space can be borrowed.

   •   If a 32-bytes block of code that is part of a critical loop generates more than 18 µops
       or does not fit into three µop cache lines then it may be useful to reorganize the code
       or make some instructions longer if this can make it fit into three µop cache lines.
       This will avoid the cost of switching between µop cache and decoder.

 9.4 Loopback buffer
The 28 µop loop buffer of the Nehalem (see page 108) is preserved in Sandy Bridge and Ivy
Bridge. The loop buffer is placed after the µop cache, but it can also receive µops from the
decoders in case of misses in the µop cache. The loop buffer increases the performance of
tiny loops that do not perform well in the µop cache for whatever reason. The loop buffer
has no measurable effect in the cases where the µop cache is not a bottleneck, which is, in
fact, most cases.

It is advantageous to make loops smaller than 28 µops in order to take advantage of the
loop buffer.

 9.5 Micro-op fusion
The processor uses µop fusion in the same way as previous processors. Some instructions
that need two µops in the execution units can use the µop fusion technique to keep these
two µops together as one through most of the pipeline in order to save pipeline bandwidth.
See page 94 and 110.

You can see which instructions use µop fusion by looking at the tables in manual 4:
"Instruction tables". Instructions with µop fusion has a higher number of µops listed under
"unfused domain" than under "fused domain".

 9.6 Macro-op fusion
The Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge can fuse two instructions into one µop in more cases than
previous processors can (see page 111).

The decoders will fuse an arithmetic or logic instruction and a subsequent conditional jump
instruction into a single compute-and-branch µop in certain cases. The compute-and-branch
µop is not split in two at the execution units but executed as a single µop by the branch unit
at execution port 5.

The CMP, ADD and SUB instructions can fuse with signed and unsigned branch instructions.
INC and DEC can fuse with signed branch instructions, and TEST and AND instructions can

fuse with all branch instructions (including useless combinations), as indicated in the
following table:

 First instruction               can pair with these             cannot pair with
                                 (and the inverse)
 cmp                             jz, jc, jb, ja, jl, jg          js, jp, jo
 add, sub                        jz, jc, jb, ja, jl, jg          js, jp, jo
 adc, sbb                        none
 inc, dec                        jz, jl, jg                      jc, jb, ja, js, jp, jo
 test                            all
 and                             all
 or, xor, not, neg               none
 shift, rotate                   none
Table 9.2. Instruction fusion

The first instruction can have an immediate operand or a memory source operand, but not
both. It cannot have a memory destination operand. It cannot have a RIP-relative memory
operand. Examples:

    ; Example 9.2. Instruction fusion
    dec ecx
    jnz L1                ; Fusion is possible
    cmp dword [esi], 0
    je L2                 ; No fusion. Both memory operand and immediate
    dec dword [esi]
    jnz L3                ; No fusion. Memory destination operand
    add eax, ebx
    jo L4                 ; No fusion. See table 9.2
    cmp eax,[mem]         ; Will use RIP-relative address in 64-bit mode
    jg L5                 ; Fusion only in 32 bit mode

The JECXZ and LOOP instructions cannot be fused. The instruction fusion works even if
instructions cross a 16-bytes boundary on the Ivy Bridge. It is uncertain whether this also
applies to the Sandy Bridge. The instruction fusion does not work if the two instructions are
separated by a cache line boundary.

If more than one fuseable instruction pair reaches the four decoders in the same clock cycle
then only the first pair is macro-fused.

The programmer should keep fuseable arithmetic instructions together with a subsequent
conditional jump rather than scheduling other instructions in-between; and there should
preferably be at least three other instructions between one fuseable pair and the next
fuseable pair in order to take advantage of macro-op fusion.

Instruction fusion can increase the throughput to a maximum of five instructions per clock
cycle. Unfortunately, it can also decrease the throughput. The fuseable arithmetic/logic
instructions (ADD, SUB, INC, DEC, CMP, AND, TEST) decode at a lower rate than similar non-
fuseable instructions (e.g. OR). The probable explanation is this: If any of the fuseable
arithmetic/logic instructions get into the last of the four decoders then the decoding will be
postponed and the instruction will go into the first decoder in the next clock cycle in order to
check if the next instruction is a fuseable branch. This means that the decoding throughput
is lowered for these instructions for code that doesn't fit into the µop cache, even if the code
contains no branches.

 9.7 Stack engine
The Sandy Bridge has a dedicated stack engine which works the same way as on previous
processors, as described on page 96.
The modification of the stack pointer by PUSH, POP, CALL and RET instructions is done by a
special stack engine, which is placed immediately after the decoding stage in the pipeline
and probably before the µop cache. This relieves the pipeline from the burden of µops that
modify the stack pointer. This mechanism saves two copies of the stack pointer: one in the
stack engine and another one in the register file and the out-of-order core. These two stack
pointers may need to be synchronized if a sequence of PUSH, POP, CALL and RET
instructions is followed by an instruction that reads or modifies the stack pointer directly,
such as ADD ESP,4 or MOV EAX,[ESP+8]. The stack engine inserts an extra stack-
synchronization µop in every case where synchronization of the two stack pointers is
needed. See page 96 for a more detailed explanation.

 9.8 Register allocation and renaming
All integer, floating point, MMX, XMM, YMM, flags and probably also segment registers can
be renamed. The floating point control word can also be renamed.

Register renaming is controlled by the register alias table (RAT) and the reorder buffer
(ROB), shown in figure 6.1. The µops from the decoders and the stack engine go to the
RAT via a queue and then to the ROB-read and the reservation station. The RAT can
handle 4 µops per clock cycle. The RAT can rename four registers per clock cycle, and it
can even rename the same register four times in one clock cycle.

Special cases of independence
A common way of setting a register to zero is by XOR'ing it with itself or subtracting it from
itself, e.g. XOR EAX,EAX. The processor recognizes that certain instructions are
independent of the prior value of the register if the two operand registers are the same.

This applies to all of the following instructions: XOR, SUB, PXOR, XORPS, XORPD, VXORPS,
VXORPD and all variants of PSUBxxx and PCMPGTxx, but not CMP, SBB, PANDN etc.

This register is set to zero at the rename stage by these instructions. The throughput is four
of these zeroing instructions per clock cycle, because no execution unit is used.

The PCMPEQxx instructions set all bits to 1 if the two registers are the same. This instruction
is recognized as being independent of the prior value of the register, but it does need an
execution unit. A zeroing instruction with a 64-bit mmx register also uses an execution unit
because of the overlap with the x87 style floating point stack registers.

Instructions that need no execution unit
The abovementioned special cases where registers are set to zero by instructions such as
XOR EAX,EAX are handled at the register rename/allocate stage without using any
execution unit. This makes the use of these zeroing instructions extremely efficient, with a
throughput of four zeroing instructions per clock cycle. The carry flag can be zeroed with
CLC in the same efficient way.

Previous processors can handle only the FXCH instruction at the register renaming stage.
The Sandy Bridge can handle these special cases of zeroing instructions as well as NOP
instructions at the register rename/allocate stage too.

NOP instructions, including multi-byte NOPs are therefore very efficient with a throughput of 4
NOPs per clock cycle. For reasons of efficiency, it is much better to use multi-byte NOPs than
the commonly used pseudo-NOPs such as MOV EAX,EAX or LEA RAX,[RAX+0].

Elimination of move instructions
The Ivy Bridge (but not the Sandy Bridge) can eliminate register-to-register moves at the
register allocation stage. The following example illustrates this:

    ; Example 9.3. Move elimintaion
    add eax,4
    mov ebx,eax     ; this move can be eliminated
    sub ebx,ecx

In this example, the mov ebx,eax instruction is likely to be eliminated by register
renaming. The physical register that represents the ebx input in the third instruction is
simply the same as the register that represents the eax output value in the first instruction.
Register renaming is explained on page 12.

Move elimination is not always successful. It fails when the necessary operands are not
ready. But typically, move elimination succeeds in more than 80% of the possible cases.
Chained moves can also be eliminated.

Move elimination is possible with all 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers and all 128-
bit and 256-bit vector registers.

A zero-extended move from an 8-bit register to a 32-bit or 64-bit register can also be
eliminated, e.g. MOVZX EAX,BL. Zero-extended moves from 16-bit registers cannot be
eliminated. No move to 8-bit registers,16-bit registers or mmx registers can be eliminated.
Sign-extended moves cannot be eliminated.

A move of a register to itself will never be eliminated. For example mov eax,eax is not
eliminated.

An eliminated move has zero latency and does not use any execution port. But is does
consume bandwidth in the decoders.

 9.9 Register read stalls
Register read stalls has been a serious, and often neglected, bottleneck in previous
processors since the Pentium Pro. All Intel processors based on the P6 microarchitecture
and its successors, the Pentium M, Core and Nehalem microarchitectures have a limitation
of two or three reads from the permanent register file per clock cycle.

This bottleneck has now finally been removed in the Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge. In my
experiments, I have found no practical limit to the number of register reads.

 9.10 Execution units
The Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge have six execution ports. Port 0, 1 and 5 are for arithmetic
and logic operations (ALU). There are two identical memory read ports on port 2 and 3
where previous processors had only one. Port 4 is for memory write. The memory write unit
on port 4 has no address calculation. All write operations use port 2 or 3 for address
calculation. The maximum throughput is one unfused µop on each port per clock cycle.

Port 0, 1 and 5 support full 256 bit vector operations. Port 2, 3 and 4 use two clock cycles
for 256 bit read and write operations. The different units are listed in table 9.3 and 9.4
below.

There are separate ports for multiplication in general purpose registers and vector registers.
The general purpose register multiplier on port 1 has a latency of 3. The integer and floating
point vector multiplier on port 0 has a latency of 5 for all precisions. These two multipliers
can run simultaneously and both are fully pipelined with a throughput of 1 vector operation
per clock cycle.

Integer division uses the floating point division unit on port 0. This is the only unit that is not
pipelined.

The jump unit on port 5 handles all jump and branch operations, including the macro-fused
compute-and-branch operations.

The processor has different execution units for integer and floating point vector operands.
For example, the floating point vector moves (MOVAPS and MOVAPD) are executed on port 5
only, while integer vector moves (MOVDQA) can execute on port 0, 1 or 5.

The execution units are well distributed between port 0, 1 and 5. This makes it possible to
execute three vector instructions per clock cycle, for example floating point vector multiplies
on port 0, floating point vector additions on port 1, and a floating point shuffles on port 5.

  Execution         Data type          Operation         Max data           Latency,
  port                                                   size, bits         clocks
 0                 gp and ivec        move              128                1
 1                 gp and ivec        move              128                1
 5                 gp and ivec        move              128                1
 0                 gp and ivec        add               128                1
 1                 gp                 add               64                 1
 5                 gp and ivec        add               128                1
 0                 gp and ivec        Boolean           128                1
 1                 gp and ivec        Boolean           128                1
 5                 gp and ivec        Boolean           128                1
 0                 ivec               multiply          128                5
 1                 gp                 multiply          64                 3
 0                 gp                 shift             64                 1
 1                 ivec               shift             128                1
 5                 gp                 shift             64                 1
 0                 ivec               shuffle, pack     128                1
 5                 ivec               shuffle, pack     128                1
 5                 gp                 jump              64                 1

 5                 float              fp mov, shuffle   256                1
 1                 float              fp add            256                3
 0                 float              fp mul            256                5
 0                 float              fp div and sqrt   128                10-22
 5                 float              fp boolean        256                1

 2                 all               memory read    128
 3                 all               memory read    128
 4                 all               memory write 128
Table 9.3. Execution ports in Sandy Bridge
 Data types: gp = general purpose registers, ivec = integer vectors, float = floating
 point registers and floating point vectors.

  Execution         Data type          Operation         Max data           Latency,
  port                                                   size, bits         clocks
 0                 gp and ivec        move              128                1
 1                 gp and ivec        move              128                1

 5                gp and ivec       move              128              1
 0                gp                add               64               1
 1                gp and ivec       add               128              1
 5                gp and ivec       add               128              1
 0                gp and ivec       Boolean           128              1
 1                gp and ivec       Boolean           128              1
 5                gp and ivec       Boolean           128              1
 0                ivec              multiply          128              5
 1                gp                multiply          64               3
 0                gp and ivec       shift             128              1
 5                gp                shift             64               1
 1                ivec              shuffle, pack     128              1
 5                ivec              shuffle, pack     128              1
 5                gp                jump              64               1

 5                float             fp mov, shuffle   256              1
 1                float             fp add            256              3
 0                float             fp mul            256              5
 0                float             fp div and sqrt   128              10-20
 5                float             fp boolean        256              1

 2                 all               memory read    128
 3                 all               memory read    128
 4                 all               memory write 128
Table 9.4. Execution ports in Ivy Bridge
 Data types: gp = general purpose registers, ivec = integer vectors, float = floating
 point registers and floating point vectors.

The latency for integer vector operations is the same as for operations in general purpose
registers. This makes it convenient to use MMX registers or XMM registers for simple
integer operations if there are not enough general purpose registers. The vector operations
are supported by fewer execution ports, though.

Read and write bandwidth
The processor has two identical memory read ports (port 2 and 3) where previous Intel
processors have only one read port. Port 2 and 3 are also used for address calculation.
There is one write port (port 4). Port 4 has no address calculation unit. Instead, all write
operations use port 2 or 3 for address calculation. All memory write operations require two
µops: one µop for address calculation on port 2 or 3, and one µop for writing on port 4.

Memory operations of 128 bits or less have a throughput of two reads or one read and one
write per clock cycle. It is not possible to do two reads and one write per clock cycle
because there are only two address calculation units (port 2 and 3).

The situation is different for 256-bit operands in the new YMM registers. Each read port
uses two clock cycles for a 256-bit read (but only one µop), and the write port uses two
clock cycles for a 256-bit write. Obviously, a read port cannot execute another read µop in
the second clock cycle of a 256-bit read, but it can execute an address calculation µop in
the second clock cycle, which can be used by the write port. Therefore, it is possible to
obtain a throughput of two 256-bit reads and one 256-bit write per two clock cycles.

The risk of cache bank conflicts (see below) is quite high when reading and writing at the
maximum memory bandwidth.

Data bypass delays
The execution units are divided into domains in the same way as on the Nehalem, as
described on page 116, and there are different register files for integer and floating point
values. However, the delays for passing data between the different domains or different
types of registers are smaller on the Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge than on the Nehalem, and
often zero.

Instructions such as MOVD that move data between general purpose registers and vector
registers have a latency of only 1 clock and no extra bypass delay. Likewise, instructions
that move data from vector registers to the integer flags, such as COMISS and PTEST have
no extra bypass delay.

There is often a data bypass delay of 1 clock cycle when passing data from a floating point
instruction to an integer shuffle instruction, and 1 more clock cycle for passing the data back
again to a floating point instruction, for example when PSHUFD is used between two ADDPS
instructions. The same happens when using a floating point blend instruction on integer
data, for example PADDD followed by BLENDPS. In some cases, there is no bypass delay
when using the wrong type of shuffle or Boolean instruction. For example, I found no delay
when mixing PADDD and SHUFPS. There is only rarely a bypass delay when using the wrong
type of move instruction, for example MOVAPS instead of MOVDQA.

There is no extra bypass delay for using load and store instructions on the wrong type of
data. For example, it can be convenient to use MOVHPS on integer data for reading or writing
the upper half of an XMM register.

There is always a data bypass delay of 1 extra clock cycle on instructions that can move
data between the upper 128 bits and the lower 128 bits of the YMM registers. For example,
the VINSERTF128 instruction has a latency of 2 clock cycles while other shuffle and blend
instructions that do not cross the 128 bits boundary have a latency of 1 clock. The latency of
the VINSERTF128 instruction is independent of whether the data are actually inserted in the
lower half or the upper half of the YMM register.

Mixing µops with different latencies
Previous processors have a write-back conflict when µops with different latencies are issued
to the same execution port, as described on page 118. This problem is largely solved on the
Sandy Bridge. Execution latencies are standardized so that all µops with a latency of 3 are
issued to port 1 and all µops with a latency of 5 go to port 0. µops with a latency of 1 can go
to port 0, 1 or 5. No other latencies are allowed, except for division and square root.

The standardization of latencies has the advantage that write-back conflicts are avoided.
The disadvantage is that some µops have higher latencies than necessary.

256-bit vectors
The execution units on port 0, 1 and 5 have full 256-bit throughput. There appears to be two
128-bit data busses, one for the lower 128 bits and one for the upper 128 bits. There is a
delay of one clock cycle for moving data between the upper and the lower 128 bits. The two
halves of a 256-bit register are not treated as independent, except in the undesired "saved
state", as explained below in chapter 9.12. Apparently the two halves are always transmitted
simultaneously when in the "modified state".

Underflow and subnormals
Subnormal numbers (also called denormal) occur when floating point operations are close
to underflow. The handling of subnormal numbers is very costly in some cases because the
subnormal results are handled by microcode exceptions.

Some of these penalties have been removed by handling underflow and subnormal
numbers in hardware rather than in microcode exceptions in some cases.

The processor has a penalty of approximately 140 - 150 clock cycles in all cases where an
operation on normal numbers gives a subnormal result. There is a similar penalty for a
multiplication between a normal and a subnormal number, regardless of whether the result
is normal or subnormal. There is no penalty for adding a normal and a subnormal number,
regardless of the result. There is no penalty for overflow, underflow, infinity or not-a-number
results.

The penalties for subnormal numbers are avoided if the "flush-to-zero" mode and the
"denormals-are-zero" mode are both set in the MXCSR register.

 9.11 Partial register access
Different parts of a general purpose register can be stored in different temporary registers in
order to remove false dependences. A problem occurs when a write to a part of a register is
followed by a read from the whole register:

    ; Example 9.4. Partial register problem
    mov al, 1
    mov ebx, eax

This problem is solved in the Sandy Bridge by inserting an extra µop to join the different
parts of the register. I assume that the extra µops are generated in the ROB-read stage. In
the above example, the ROB-read will generate an extra µop that combines AL and the rest
of EAX into a single temporary register before the MOV EBX,EAX instruction. There is no
penalty for writing to a partial register unless there is a later read from a larger part of the
same register. See page 103 for examples.

The Ivy Bridge inserts an extra µop only in the case where a high 8-bit register (AH, BH, CH,
DH) has been modified, not in cases like example 9.4.

Partial flags stall
The Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge use the method of an extra µop to join partial registers not
only for general purpose registers but also for the flags register, unlike previous processors
which used this method only for general purpose registers. This occurs when a write to a
part of the flags register is followed by a read from a larger part of the flags register. The
partial flags stall of previous processors (See page 104) is therefore replaced by an extra
µop. The Sandy Bridge also generates an extra µop when reading the flags after a rotate
instruction, the Ivy Bridge does not.

Partial access to vector registers
An XMM register is never split into its parts in the reorder buffer. Therefore, no extra µops
are needed and there is no partial access stall when writing to part of an XMM register. But
a write to part of a vector register has a dependence on the previous value of the register.
See example 8.8, on page 119.

The two halves of a YMM register are never treated as independent in VEX instructions, but
the two halves can be separated when switching between VEX and non-VEX modes, as
described below.

 9.12 Transitions between VEX and non-VEX modes
The AVX instruction set defines three processor modes, as described in manual 2:
"Optimizing subroutines in assembly language", chapter 13.6 "Using AVX instruction set
and YMM registers". The three states are:
   A. (Clean state) The upper half of all YMM registers is unused and known to be zero.

   B. (Modified state) The upper half of at least one YMM register is used and contains
      data.

   C. (Saved state) All YMM registers are split in two. The lower half is used by legacy
      XMM instructions which leave the upper part unchanged. All the upper-part halves
      are stored in a scratchpad. The two parts of each register will be joined together
      again if needed by a transition to state B.

State C is an undesired state. It appears when code that uses YMM registers is mixed with
code that uses XMM registers in non-VEX instructions. The transitions B → C, C → B and C
→ A take approximately 70 clock cycles each on the Sandy Bridge, according to my
measurements. The transitions A → B and B → A take zero or one clock cycle. The slow
transitions to and from state C are best avoided by not mixing VEX and non-VEX
instructions and by inserting a VZEROUPPER instruction after any sequence of code that
uses the VEX-coded instructions.

 9.13 Cache and memory access

  Cache                           Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge
 µop cache                      1536 µops, 8 way, 6 µop line size,
                                per core
 Level 1 code                   32 kB, 8 way, 64 B line size,
                                latency 4, per core
 Level 1 data                   32 kB, 8 way, 64 B line size,
                                latency 4, per core
 Level 2                        256 kB, 8 way, 64 B line size,
                                latency ca. 11, per core.
 Level 3                        up to 16 MB, 12 way, 64 B line
                                size, latency ca. 28, shared
Table 9.5. Cache sizes on Sandy Bridge

There is one cache on each core, except for the last-level cache. All caches are shared
between threads where a core can run two threads. It is likely that there will be more
versions in the future with different last-level cache sizes.

Cache bank conflicts
Each consecutive 128 bytes, or two cache lines, in the data cache is divided into 8 banks of
16 bytes each. It is not possible to do two memory reads in the same clock cycle if the two
memory addresses have the same bank number, i.e. if bit 4 - 6 in the two addresses are
the same. Example:

    ; Example 9.5. Sandy bridge cache bank conflict
    mov eax, [rsi]         ; Use bank 0, assuming rsi is divisible by 40H
    mov ebx, [rsi+100H]    ; Use bank 0. Cache bank conflict
    mov ecx, [rsi+110H]    ; Use bank 1. No cache bank conflict

In addition, there is a false dependence between memory addresses with the same set and
offset, i.e. with a distance that is a multiple of 4 Kbytes:

    ; Example 9.6. Sandy bridge false memory dependence
    mov [rsi], eax
    mov ebx, [rsi+1000H]        ; False memory dependence

Misaligned memory accesses
There is hardly any penalty for misaligned memory access with operand sizes of 64 bits or
less, except for the effect of using multiple cache banks.

Prefetch instructions
The Ivy Bridge has a problem with the prefetch instructions. It appears that the Ivy Bridge is
wasting time on prefetching data that are already in the cache. The measured throughput
for repeated prefetch from the same address is one prefetch per 43 clocks on Ivy Bridge
while the Sandy Bridge has a throughput of two prefetch instructions per clock cycle.

 9.14 Store forwarding stalls
The processor can forward a memory write to a subsequent read from the same address
under certain conditions. This store forwarding works in more cases than on previous
processors, including misaligned cases. Store forwarding works in the following cases:

   •   When a write of 64 bits or less is followed by a read of the same size and the same
       address, regardless of alignment.

   •   When a write of 128 or 256 bits is followed by a read of the same size and the same
       address, aligned by 16.

   •   When a write of 64 bits or less is followed by a read of a smaller size which is fully
       contained in the write address range, regardless of alignment.

   •   When an aligned write of any size is followed by two reads of the two halves, or four
       reads of the four quarters, etc. with their natural alignment within the write address
       range.

   •   When an aligned write of 128 bits or 256 bits is followed by a read of 64 bits or less
       that does not cross an 8 bytes boundary.

There is no penalty for crossing a cache line boundary for store forwarding of 64 bits or less.

Store forwarding never works if the read has a bigger operand size than the preceding write
or is partially overlapping the write address:

    ; Example 9.7. Failed store forwarding when read bigger than write
    mov dword [esi], eax       ; Write lower 4 bytes
    mov dword [esi+4], edx     ; Write upper 4 bytes
    movq xmm0, qword [esi]     ; Read 8 bytes. Stall

The penalty for a failed store forwarding is approximately 12 clock cycles in most cases.

The penalty can be exceptionally large for 128 bits or 256 bits store forwarding when writes
are not aligned by at least 16. In this case I have measured a delay on the Ivy Bridge of
approximately 50 clock cycles for 16 bytes read/write and 210 clock cycles for 32 bytes
read/write.

 9.15 Multithreading
Some versions of Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge can run two threads in each of its cores.
This means that each thread gets only half of the resources. The resources are shared in
the following way between two threads running in the same core:

Cache: All cache resources are shared competitively between the treads. The more one
thread uses the less the other thread can use.
Branch target buffer and branch history pattern table: These are shared competitively
between threads.

Instruction fetch and decoding: The instruction fetcher and decoders are shared evenly
between the two threads so that each thread gets every second clock cycle.

Loop buffer: There is one loop buffer for each thread.

Register allocation and renaming resources are shared evenly so that each thread gets
every second clock cycle.

Reorder buffer and reservation station. These are shared competitively.

Execution ports and execution units. These are shared competitively. One thread can use
one execution port while another thread uses another port.

Read and write buffers: These are shared competitively.

Permanent register file: There is one for each thread.

It is clear that there is no advantage to running two threads per core if any of the shared
resources are limiting factors for the performance. In many cases, however, the execution
resources are more than sufficient for a single thread. It can be particularly advantageous to
run two threads per core in situations where a large fraction of the time goes to cache
misses and branch misprediction. However, if any of the shared resources are bottlenecks
then it is not advantageous to run two threads per core. On the contrary, each thread is
likely to run at less than half the single-thread speed because of evictions in the cache and
branch target buffers and other resource conflicts. There is no way to give one thread higher
priority than the other in the CPU.

 9.16 Bottlenecks in Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge

Instruction fetch and predecoding
The instruction fetch and decoders are very similar to previous processors and continue to
be a bottleneck. Fortunately, the new µop cache reduces the pressure on the decoders.

µop cache
The new µop cache is a very significant improvement because it removes the bottleneck of
instruction fetch and decoding in cases where the critical part of the code fits into the µop
cache. The maximum throughput of 4 instructions per clock (or 5 in case of macro-fusion) is
now easily obtained even for longer instructions.

The programmer should be careful to economize the use of the µop cache in CPU-intensive
code. The difference in performance between loops that fit into the µop cache and loops
that do not can be quite remarkable if the average instruction length is more than four bytes.

The µop cache has some similarities with the trace cache in the old P4/NetBurst processor
(see p. 51) and some of the same weaknesses. Instructions that need more than 32 bits of
storage for address and data operands may use extra space in the µop cache and take an
extra clock cycle to load. It is possible to optimize code to avoid these weaknesses, but it is
unlikely that this will be done by anybody but the most dedicated assembly programmers.

It is a mystery to me why the processor is not marking instruction boundaries in the code
cache. This would remove the bottleneck of instruction length decoding and thereby

eliminate the need for the µop cache. AMD processors are doing this and the old Pentium
MMX did the same.

Register read stalls
This old bottleneck, which has bothered Intel processors since the Pentium Pro, has finally
been removed. No such stall was detected in my measurements.

Execution ports and execution units
The capacity of the execution ports and execution units is quite high. Many µops have two
or three execution ports to choose between and each unit can handle one full 256-bit vector
operation per clock cycle. The throughput of the execution ports is therefore not a serious
bottleneck if instructions are evenly distributed between the ports.

Execution ports can be a bottleneck if the code generates many µops that all go to the same
execution port.

Execution latency and dependency chains
Execution latencies are generally low. Most integer ALU operations have a latency of only
one clock cycle, even for 256-bit vector operations. The execution latencies are critical only
in long dependency chains.

Partial register access
There is a penalty for reading a full register after writing to a part of the register. Use MOVZX
or MOVSX to read 8-bit or 16-bit memory operands into a 32-bit register rather than using a
smaller part of the register.

Retirement
The retirement of µops has not been observed to be a bottleneck in any of my tests.

Branch prediction
The branch predictor does not have a special recognition of loops. Prediction of loops with
many branches inside is inferior to the previous processors. The branch history pattern
tables and branch target buffer may be bigger than on previous processors, but
mispredictions are still common. The misprediction penalty is shorter for code that fits into
the µop cache.

Memory access
The Sandy Bridge has two memory read ports where previous processors have only one.
This is a significant improvement. Cache bank conflicts are quite common when the
maximum memory bandwidth is utilized.

The Ivy Bridge has a serious problem with prefetch instructions, which are extremely slow.

Multithreading
Most of the critical resources are shared between threads. This means that the bottlenecks
become even more critical in multithreaded applications.

Literature
"Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual". Intel 2011.

