10 Intel Haswell and Broadwell pipeline
The Haswell has several important improvements over previous designs. The bandwidth to
the data cache has been doubled to two reads and one write per clock cycle, of up to 32
bytes each. The number of execution units is increased from six to eight. Most execution
units have a bandwidth of one full 256-bit vector per clock cycle.

The Haswell is currently available with 2 - 18 cores, and most versions are capable of
running two threads in each core. Most of the critical resources are shared between the two
threads running in the same core, as described on page 137 for the Sandy Bridge and Ivy
Bridge processors.

The Haswell is the first processor to support the AVX2 instruction set, which can handle
integer instructions on 256-bit vectors. It is also the first Intel processor to support fused
multiply-and-add (FMA) instructions.

The Broadwell is a 14 nm die shrink of the Haswell, with just a few improvements in the
execution units.

 10.1 Pipeline
The pipeline is similar to previous designs, but improved with more of everything. It is
designed for a throughput of four instructions per clock cycle.

Each core has a reorder buffer with 192 entries, the reservation station has 60 entries, and
the register file has 168 integer registers and 168 vector registers, according to the literature
listed on page 150 below.

All parts of the pipeline are shared between two threads in those CPU models that can run
two threads in each core. Each thread gets half of the total throughput when two threads are
running in the same core.

 10.2 Instruction fetch and decoding
The instruction fetch unit can fetch a maximum of 16 bytes of code per clock cycle in single
threaded applications.

There are four decoders, which can handle instructions generating up to four µops per clock
cycle in the way described on page 125 for Sandy Bridge.

Instructions with any number of prefixes are decoded in a single clock cycle. There is no
penalty for redundant prefixes.

The penalty for length-changing prefixes is the same as for Sandy Bridge (see page 125).
Arithmetic and logic instructions with an immediate operand using an operand size prefix,
e.g. add ax,1234 has a penalty of 2-3 clock cycles in the decoders, regardless of
alignment. This applies to all arithmetic and logic instructions with a 16-bit immediate
constant as operand in 32-bit or 64-bit mode. Move instructions have no penalty for length-
changing prefixes. (Instructions with absolute memory addresses have not been tested).

 10.3 µop cache
The µop cache from the Sandy Bridge (see p. 126) has been preserved in the Haswell and
Broadwell with the same size and organization. The most important effect of the µop cache
is that the throughput is no longer limited by a fetch rage of 16 bytes per clock cycle for
small code loops. A piece of code that fits into the µop cache can be delivered at a rate
corresponding to up to a maximum of 32 bytes per clock cycle. This is a big advantage
when the average instruction length is more than four bytes.

The limitations and weaknesses of the Sandy Bridge µop cache also apply to the Haswell
and Broadwell. See page 126 for details.

 10.4 Loopback buffer
The processor has a loop buffer which simply recycles µops from the µop queue. The loop
buffer will rarely use all 56 entries of the queue, but small loops of up to 30 µops, or
sometimes up to 40, will benefit from the loop buffer. The µop queue is dynamically shared
between threads so that you get only half the size if two threads are running in the same
core. The loop buffer gives a stable throughput of 4 µops per clock, regardless of instruction
length for tiny loops.

To recapitulate, the pipeline can be fed from three different sources, depending on the size
of critical loops:
    • The loop buffer is used for tiny loops of up to 30 - 40 instructions. The throughput is
         4 µops per clock cycle with no restriction on instruction length.
    • The µop cache is used for loops up to approximately 1000 instructions. The
         throughput is up to 4 instructions or 32 bytes of code per clock cycle.
    • The fetch and decode units are used for instructions that are not in the µop cache.
         The throughput is up to 4 instructions or 16 bytes of code per clock cycle.

Fused instruction pairs (see below) count as one in the µop cache and the loop buffer. With
two fused not-taken branches per clock, it is possible to obtain a maximum throughput of six
instructions per clock cycle from the loop buffer or µop cache.

There may be a difference in branch misprediction penalty between the three sources of
µops, but I have not been able to verify such a difference because the variance in the
measurements is high. The measured misprediction penalty varies between 16 and 20 clock
cycles in all three cases.

 10.5 Micro-op fusion
µop fusion is used in the same way as on previous processors. Some instructions that need
two µops in the execution units can use the µop fusion technique to keep these two µops
together as one from the decoders to the reservation station in order to save pipeline
bandwidth. The reservation station will then submit two µops to two different ports. Most
memory write instructions and most arithmetic and logic instructions with a memory operand
use µop fusion, regardless of register size. See page 94 and 110 for further explanation.

The decoders can handle four µop-fused instructions per clock cycle.

You can see which instructions use µop fusion by looking at the tables in manual 4:
"Instruction tables". Instructions with µop fusion has a higher number of µops listed under
"unfused domain" than under "fused domain".

 10.6 Macro-op fusion
The Haswell and Broadwell can fuse two instructions into one µop in the same way that
previous processors can (see page 111 and 128).

The decoders will fuse an arithmetic or logic instruction and a subsequent conditional jump
instruction into a single compute-and-branch µop in certain cases. The compute-and-branch
µop is not split in two at the execution units but executed as a single µop by the branch unit
at execution port 0 or 6.
The CMP, ADD and SUB instructions can fuse with signed and unsigned branch instructions.
INC and DEC can fuse with signed branch instructions, and TEST and AND instructions can
fuse with all branch instructions (including useless combinations), as indicated in table 9.2
page 129.

The first instruction can have an immediate operand or a memory source operand, but not
both. It cannot have a memory destination operand. It cannot have a RIP-relative memory
operand.

The JECXZ and LOOP instructions cannot be fused.

Unlike previous processors, it can make fusion even if a 16-bytes code boundary is crossed.

Two fuseable pairs can be decoded in the same clock cycle.

The programmer should keep any fuseable arithmetic instruction together with a
subsequent conditional jump rather than scheduling other instructions in-between in order to
take advantage of macro-op fusion. All four decoders support macro-op fusion.

 10.7 Stack engine
The Haswell and Broadwell have a stack engine similar to the Sandy Bridge, as described
on page 129. An extra stack synchronization µop is inserted automatically when stack
operations such as push, pop, call or return are interspersed by instructions that access the
stack pointer explicitly, such as add rsp, 8 or mov eax,[rsp+16].

 10.8 Register allocation and renaming
All integer, floating point, MMX, XMM, YMM, flags and perhaps also segment registers can
be renamed. The floating point control word can also be renamed.

Register renaming is controlled by the reorder buffer and the scheduler. Register allocation
and renaming has not been observed to be a bottleneck.

Special cases of independence
A common way of setting a register to zero is by xor'ing it with itself or subtracting it from
itself, e.g. XOR EAX,EAX. The processor recognizes that certain instructions are
independent of the prior value of the register if the two input operands are the same
register. This register is set to zero at the register allocation stage without using any
execution unit and without waiting for the previous value of the register to be available.

The following instructions can set a register to zero in this way if xor'ed with or subtracted
from itself: XOR, SUB, PXOR, XORPS, XORPD and all variants of PSUBxxx and PCMPGTxx.
Instructions with V-prefix behave the same. No execution unit is used, and the throughput is
four zeroing operations per clock cycle.

This works with all 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers and all 128-bit and 256-bit
vector registers. It does not work with 8-bit and 16-bit registers, because only part of the
register is set to zero. It works partially with 64-bit mmx registers: The register is set to zero
without waiting for the previous value, but it does use an execution unit (in order to resolve
the dual use as floating point stack register and mmx register).

All variants of the PCMPEQxx instruction can set a register to all ones without waiting for the
previous value of the register. It does, however, use an execution unit.

The following instructions have no special case for the two input operands being the same
register: CMP, SBB, ANDN, PANDN, ANDNPS, ANDNPD, CMPEQPS, CMPEQPD.

Instructions that need no execution unit
The abovementioned special cases where registers are set to zero by instructions such as
XOR EAX,EAX are handled at the register allocation stage without using any execution unit.

A few other instructions are also handled without using any execution unit. These are CLC,
FXCH, NOP (including long nops), but not FNOP.

Elimination of move instructions
Most register-to-register moves are eliminated at the register allocation stage in the same
way as in the Ivy Bridge, as explained on page 131.

Move elimination typically succeeds in more than 80% of the possible cases. Chained
moves can also be eliminated.

Move elimination is possible with all 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers and all 128-
bit and 256-bit vector registers. It is not possible with 8-bit and 16-bit registers, and it is not
possible with 64-bit mmx registers.

Unlike the Ivy Bridge, the Haswell and Broadwell cannot eliminate a zero-extended moves.
But moves with implicit zero-extension can be eliminated, e.g. MOV EAX,EBX (zero-extends
into RAX), and VMOVAPS XMM0,XMM1 (zero-extends into YMM0).

A move of a register to itself will never be eliminated. For example mov eax,eax is not
eliminated.

An eliminated move has zero latency and does not use any execution port. But is does
consume bandwidth in the decoders.

 10.9 Execution units
The processor has a number of execution units accessed through eight execution ports.
This gives a theoretical maximum throughput of eight µops per clock cycle in the execution
units. However, the typical throughput of the whole design is four instructions per clock.
Thus, even with µop fusion it is impossible to keep all execution ports busy more than in
temporary bursts.

Many of the execution units are duplicated so that there is always high probability that a
vacant unit can be found that is applicable for a particular µop. There are four integer ALUs
so that the most common integer operations can execute with a throughput of four
instructions per clock cycle. There are three ports that can handle integer vector operations.
Two ports can handle floating point vector operations. Two ports can handle branches. Two
ports can handle memory read operations, and one port can handle memory writes.

It is strange that there is only one port for floating point addition, but two ports for floating
point multiplication.

The eight ports and their common operations are listed in table 10.1.

  Port            Operations                                             Latency
 0              integer and vector arithmetic, logic, shift             1
 0              floating point multiplication                           Haswell: 5
                                                                        Broadwell: 3
 0              floating point FMA and long double multiplication       5

 0              integer vector multiplication                        5
 0              division                                             variable
 0              branch                                               1-2
 1              integer and vector arithmetic, logic                 1
 1              floating point addition                              3
 1              integer multiplication                               3
 1              bit scan and other complex integer operations        3
 1              floating point multiplication                        Haswell: 5
                                                                     Broadwell: 3
 1             floating point FMA                                    5
 2             load, address generation
 3             load, address generation
 4             store
 5             integer and vector arithmetic, logic                  1
 5             vector permute                                        1 (3 if lane crossed)
 5             AES encryption                                        7
 6             integer arithmetic, logic, shift                      1
 6             branch                                                1-2
 7             store address generation
Table 10.1. Execution units in Haswell and Broadwell

All vector execution units have full 256-bit capacity, except for division, square root and
encryption. A 256-bit unit cannot be split up and used for two 128-bit operations
simultaneously.

The latency for integer vector operations is the same as for operations in general purpose
registers. This makes it possible to use XMM registers for simple integer operations when
you are out of general purpose registers. The vector operations are supported by fewer
execution ports, though.

Fused multiply and add
The Haswell and Broadwell have two execution units that can handle fused multiply-and-
add (FMA) instructions of the type a = b * c + d.

An FMA instruction does a multiplication and an addition or subtraction with a single
instruction and a single µop. This can improve performance in floating point code where the
combination of multiplication and addition often occurs. The throughput is two FMA
instructions per clock cycle and the latency is 5.

Intel initially designed the FMA instructions with four operands (FMA4) but later changed
their plans to a design with three operands (FMA3) where it is necessary to reuse one of the
three input registers as output register, e.g. a = b * c + a.

How many input dependencies can a µop have?
All previous Intel processors with out-of-order capabilities had the design limitation that no
µop can have more than two input dependencies. I am concluding this from the fact that all
instructions with more than two input dependencies are split into at least two µops. The
most common examples are:

     ; Example 10.1. Instructions with three input dependencies
     mov [eax+ebx],ecx ; depends on 3 registers
     adc eax,ebx        ; depends on 2 registers and carry flag
     cmovz eax,ebx      ; depends on 2 registers and zero flag
     pblendvb xmm1,xmm2,xmm0 ; depends on 3 registers

All of these instructions are split into two µops on the Haswell and all previous Intel
processors. The introduction of fused multiply-and-add (FMA) instructions in the Haswell
made it necessary to get rid of the limitation of two input dependencies for a µop. Thus, the
FMA instructions are the first instructions to use a µop with more than two input
dependencies on an Intel processor. It has probably required a redesign of the out-of-order
mechanism to allow µops with three input dependencies.

The Broadwell takes this redesign a little step further by using a single µop with three input
dependencies for add-with-carry, subtract-with-borrow, and conditional moves on general
purpose registers. All memory stores and blend instructions are still split into two µops on
the Broadwell.

Read and write bandwidth
There are two identical memory read ports (port 2 and 3) and one write port (port 4). These
ports have all been expanded to 256 bits. This makes it possible to make two memory reads
and one memory write per clock cycle, all with any register size up to 256 bits. All write
operations need an address calculation on port 2, 3 or 7.

Data bypass delays
The execution units are divided into domains as described on page 116, and there are
sometimes a delay of one clock cycle when the output of an instruction in the integer
domain is used as input for an instruction in the floating point domain or vice versa. For
example:

    ; Example 10.2. Data bypass delays
    addps xmm0, xmm1
    por   xmm0, xmm2   ; 1 clock delay
    mulps xmm0, xmm3   ; 1 clock delay

The delays in example 10.2 can be avoided by replacing the POR instruction with the more
appropriate ORPS.

However, there are fewer such delays on Haswell and Broadwell than on previous
processors. I found no such delays in the following cases:

   •   when a floating point Boolean instruction, such as ORPS is used with integer data
   •   when a wrong type of move instruction is used, e.g. MOVPS or MOVDQA
   •   when a wrong type of shuffle instruction is used, e.g. SHUFPS or PFHUFD

I did, however, find delays when a floating point blend instruction, such as BLENDPS is used
with integer data.

Instructions such as MOVD that move data between general purpose registers and vector
registers have a latency of only 1 clock and no extra bypass delay. Likewise, instructions
that move data from vector registers to the integer flags, such as COMISS and PTEST have
no extra bypass delay.

256-bit vectors
All vector execution units have full 256-bit throughput, except for division, square root and
encryption.

The 256-bit data path that is used for all operations on YMM registers is divided into two
lanes of 128 bits each. All instructions that can move data between these two lanes have a
latency of 3 clock cycles, while other move instructions have a latency of only one clock
cycle. For example:

    ; Example 10.3. Moving data between 128-bit lanes
    vextracti128 xmm0,ymm1,1   ; move from upper to lower lane, 3 clocks
    vextracti128 xmm0,ymm1,0   ; move in lover lane only, still 3 clocks
    vmovdqa xmm0,xmm1                   ; same operation in 0 - 1 clocks

The second instruction in example 10.3 has a latency of 3 clock cycles, even though all data
stay in the lower lane, because the VEXTRACTI128 instruction has the potential for moving
data between lanes. This delay can be avoided by using the VMOVDQA instruction which
does the same in this case, but has no potential for moving data across lanes.

There is a severe penalty for mixing 256-bit VEX code with 128-bit non-VEX code as
explained in chapter 9.12. All transitions between state B (modified) and state C (saved)
have a delay of 70 clock cycles. This delay is the same in 32-bit mode and 64-bit mode
even though the number of registers to save is different. The delay should be avoided either
by replacing all non-VEX vector instructions with the V-prefix version, or by issuing a
VZEROUPPER instruction whenever a function containing 256-bit vector code calls another
function that may use non-VEX code or returns to a function that may use non-VEX code.

The two halves of a 256-bit register are not treated as independent, except in the undesired
state C (saved), as explained in chapter 9.12. It is not possible to split a 256-bit execution
unit into two 128-bit units to do two 128-bit operations simultaneously.

Mixing µops with different latencies
Some older processors have a write-back conflict when µops with different latencies are
issued to the same execution port, as described on page 118. I found no evidence of such a
problem on Haswell and Broadwell. The problem has been solved partly by standardizing
latencies, as is evident from table 10.1, and partly, perhaps, by having multiple write-back
paths.

Underflow and subnormals
Subnormal numbers occur when floating point operations are close to underflow. The
handling of subnormal numbers is very costly in some cases because the subnormal results
are handled by microcode exceptions.

The Haswell and Broadwell have a penalty of approximately 124 clock cycles in all cases
where an operation on normal numbers gives a subnormal result. There is a similar penalty
for a multiplication between a normal and a subnormal number, regardless of whether the
result is normal or subnormal. There is no penalty for adding a normal and a subnormal
number, regardless of the result. There is no penalty for overflow, underflow, infinity or not-
a-number results.

The penalties for subnormal numbers are avoided if the "flush-to-zero" mode and the
"denormals-are-zero" mode are both set in the MXCSR register.

 10.10 Partial register access
Different parts of a general purpose register can be stored in different temporary registers in
order to remove false dependences. A problem occurs when a write to a part of a register is
followed by a read from a larger part of the same register:

    ; Example 10.4. Partial register access
    mov al, 1
    mov ebx, eax

The Haswell and Broadwell solve this problem without any visible performance penalties.
Perhaps it makes dual bookkeeping of both the partial register and the full register.

The situation is different if one of the high 8-bit registers (AH, BH, CH, DH) are modified, and
a larger part of the register is read afterwards:

    ; Example 10.5. Partial register problem with AH
    mov ah, 1
    mov ebx, eax

Here, an extra µop is inserted to combine AH and the rest of EAX into a single temporary
register before the MOV EBX,EAX instruction. This causes an extra latency of one clock
cycle.

Partial flags access
A similar situation occurs when part of the flags register is modified and a larger part of the
same register is read afterwards. Some of these cases require an extra µop like example
10.5.

    ; Example 10.6. Partial flags access
    inc eax         ; modifies zero flag but not carry flag
    jbe L1          ; reads both sero flag and carry flag

    ; Example 10.7. Partial register access
    bt eax,2        ; modifies carry flag but not zero flag
    cmovbe eax,ebx ; reads both carry flag and zero flag

The processor will insert an extra µop to join the two parts of the flags register in these
cases.

In cases like this, you may consider whether it is a programming error or a deliberate testing
of two different conditions with a single instruction.

There is no penalty or extra µop when reading the flags after a shift or rotate instruction.

Partial access to vector registers
An XMM register is never split into its parts in the reorder buffer. Therefore, no extra µops
are needed and there is no partial access stall when writing to part of an XMM register. But
a write to part of a vector register has a dependence on the previous value of the register.
See example 8.8, on page 119.

The two halves of a YMM register are never treated as independent in VEX instructions, but
the two halves can be separated when switching between VEX and non-VEX modes. There
is a penalty of 70 clock cycles when mixing VEX and non-VEX code as described in chapter
9.12.

 10.11 Cache and memory access

  Cache                             Haswell and Broadwell
 µop cache                        1536 µops, 8 way, 6 µop line size, per core
 Level 1 code                     32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                                  latency 4, per core
 Level 1 data                     32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                                  latency 4, per core
 Level 2                          256 kB, 8 way, 512 sets, 64 B line size,
                                  latency 12, per core.
 Level 3                          2 - 45 MB, 12-16 way, 64 B line size, latency 34,
                                  shared
Table 10.2. Cache sizes on Haswell and Broadwell

There is one cache on each core, except for the last-level cache. All caches are shared
between two threads where a core can run two threads. It is likely that there will be more
versions in the future with different level 3 cache sizes. Some versions have a level 4 cache.
The 256-bit read and write bandwidth (see p. 145) makes it advantageous to use 256-bit
registers for copying or zeroing large blocks of memory. The REP MOVS instruction has full
efficiency only if the source and destination are both aligned by 32. In all other cases, it is
better to use a function library that uses 256-bit registers.

Cache bank conflicts
The phenomenon of cache bank conflicts has been a performance problem in previous
processors. This problem has been removed now. It is always possible to do two cache
reads in the same clock cycle without causing a cache bank conflict.

However, the problem with false dependence between memory addresses with the same
set and offset remains. It is not possible to read and write simultaneously from addresses
that are spaced by a multiple of 4 Kbytes:

    ; Example 10.8. False memory dependence
    mov [rsi], eax
    mov ebx, [rsi+1000H]        ; False memory dependence

Misaligned memory accesses
There is hardly any penalty for misaligned memory access, except for the effect of using
multiple cache lines.

 10.12 Store forwarding stalls
The processor can forward a memory write to a subsequent read from the same address
under certain conditions. Store forwarding works in the following cases:

   •   When a write of 64 bits or less is followed by a read of the same size and the same
       address, regardless of alignment.

   •   When a write of 128 or 256 bits is followed by a read of the same size and the same
       address, fully aligned.

   •   When a write of 64 bits or less is followed by a read of a smaller size which is fully
       contained in the write address range, regardless of alignment.

   •   When an aligned write of any size is followed by two reads of the two halves, or four
       reads of the four quarters, etc. with their natural alignment within the write address
       range.

   •   When an aligned write of 128 bits or 256 bits is followed by a read of 64 bits or less
       that does not cross an 8 bytes boundary.

A delay of 2 clocks occur if the memory block crosses a 64-bytes cache line boundary. This
can be avoided if all data have their natural alignment.

Store forwarding fails in the following cases:

   •   When a write of any size is followed by a read of a larger size

   •   When a write of any size is followed by a partially overlapping read

    •   When a write of 128 bits is followed by a smaller read crossing the boundary
        between the two 64-bit halves

    •   When a write of 256 bits is followed by a 128 bit read crossing the boundary
        between the two 128-bit halves

    •   When a write of 256 bits is followed by a read of 64 bits or less crossing any
        boundary between the four 64-bit quarters

A failed store forwarding takes 10 clock cycles more than a successful store forwarding. The
penalty is much higher - approximately 50 clock cycles - after a write of 128 or 256 bits
which is not aligned by at least 16.

 10.13 Multithreading
Some versions of Haswell and Broadwell can run two threads in each of its cores. This
means that each thread gets only half of the resources.

The resources are shared between two threads running in the same core in the same way
as in Sandy Bridge (see p. 137). A small difference is that there is one loop buffer shared
between the two threads.

There is no advantage to running two threads per core if any of the shared resources are
limiting factors for the performance. There are so many execution ports and execution units
that execution is rarely a limiting factor. If the code aims at more than two instructions per
clock cycle, or if cache size is a limiting factor, then there is no advantage in running two
threads in each core.

There is no way to give one thread higher priority than the other in the CPU.

 10.14 Bottlenecks in Haswell and Broadwell

Instruction fetch and predecoding
The instruction fetch rate is still limited to 16 bytes per clock cycle, which is likely to be a
bottleneck for code that doesn't fit well into the µop cache.

µop cache
The µop cache is efficient for loops of up to approximately a thousand instructions.

It is important to economize the use of the µop cache in CPU-intensive code. The difference
in performance between loops that fit into the µop cache and loops that do not can be quite
significant if the average instruction length is more than four bytes.

The µop cache has the same weaknesses as in the Sandy Bridge, as explained on page
126 and 138.

Execution ports and execution units
The capacity of the execution ports and execution units is quite high. The most common
integer instructions have four execution units to choose between, and most floating point
and vector instructions have two or three execution unit to choose between. Therefore, it is
realistic to obtain a throughput of four instructions per clock cycle if the code has no long
dependency chains.

Almost all vector execution units and data paths have full 256 bit width. This makes it very
advantageous to use the 256-bit vector registers and the AVX or AVX2 instruction set.
The new AVX2 gather instructions are efficient for gathering non-contiguous data into
vectors, and for vectorizing table-based lookup functions. Gather instructions are more
efficient in Broadwell than in Haswell.

The fused multiply-and-add (FMA) instructions are useful for improving the performance of
floating point code.

Register-to-register moves are eliminated to zero latency in most cases.

Floating point addition has lower throughput than multiplication
The throughput for floating point vector multiplications and FMA operations is two vector
operations per clock cycle, but the throughput for floating point vector addition is only one
vector operation per clock cycle. It is odd that there are two multiplication/FMA units and
only one addition unit since additions are typically more common than multiplications in
floating point code. The floating point performance will be sub-optimal if the code contains
more additions than multiplications or FMA instructions. In my opinion, this is not the best
design decision for typical floating point code, but at least it enables Intel to boast a floating
point performance of 32 FLOPS per cycle.

For a code that contains mostly floating point additions, you can actually improve the
throughput by replacing additions by FMA instructions with a multiplier of 1.0. The FMA
instructions have a latency of 5 and a throughput of two instructions per clock, which means
that you may need 10 accumulator registers to get the maximum throughput.

Execution latency and dependency chains
Execution latencies are generally low. Most integer ALU operations have a latency of only
one clock cycle, even for 256-bit vector operations. Floating point addition has a latency of
3, and floating point multiplication has a latency of 3 on Broadwell and 5 on Haswell. These
execution latencies are critical in long dependency chains.

Branch prediction
The size of the branch target buffer and the construction of the branch predictor is unknown,
but at least the prediction rate seems good.

The throughput for taken branches is one jump per clock or one jump per two clocks,
depending on the density of branches. Predicted not taken branches have a higher
throughput of two per clock. Therefore, it is advantageous to organize branches so that they
are most often not taken.

Memory access
The width of the memory ports has been doubled relative to previous processors. The
maximum throughput to the level-1 cache is now two 32-byte reads and one 32-byte write
per clock. This makes it possible to copy a block of memory at a speed of 32 bytes per clock
cycle. The throughput for the level-2 cache is much lower than this.

Cache bank conflicts were a quite common performance problem on previous processors.
This problem has been completely removed on Haswell and Broadwell.

Multithreading
Most of the critical resources are shared between threads. This means that the bottlenecks
become even more critical in multithreaded applications.

Literature
Intel: "Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual". July 2013.

David Kanter: "Intel’s Haswell CPU Microarchitecture". November 2012.
http://www.realworldtech.com/haswell-cpu/
Anand Lal Shimpi: "Intel's Haswell Architecture Analyzed: Building a New PC and a New
Intel". October 2012. http://www.anandtech.com/show/6355/intels-haswell-architecture
Anna Filatova: "4th Generation of Core Microarchitecture: Intel Haswell". September 2012.
http://www.xbitlabs.com/articles/cpu/display/haswell-uarch-idf.html

