11 Intel Skylake pipeline
The Skylake represents a further development of the Haswell and Broadwell design. The
cache and decoder front end is basically the same as in Haswell with somewhat more
bandwidth, while the execution engine has been reorganized somewhat to improve the
throughput.

Several subsequent processor models named Kaby Lake, Cannon Lake, Coffee Lake, etc.
are based on the same design. They differ mainly in processing technology, number of
cores, and cache sizes. These are also known as 7'th, 8'th, and 9'th generation Intel Core
processors.

Some versions of Skylake named Skylake-X have support for the AVX512 instruction set,
defining 512-bit vector registers and masked instructions. This includes the instruction
subsets AVX512F, AVX512BW, AVX512DQ, AVX512VL, and AVX512CD. The
implementation of AVX512 instructions is very efficient. Cannon Lake also supports
AVX512, while Kaby Lake and Coffee Lake do not.

The Skylake is available with 2 - 18 cores. Larger versions are capable of running two
threads in each core. Most of the critical resources are shared between the two threads
running in the same core, as described on page 137.

The Skylake, Kaby Lake, and Coffee Lake use 14 nm technology like Broadwell, but
supports the faster DDR4 RAM. Cannon Lake uses 10 nm technology.

 11.1 Pipeline
The pipeline is very similar to previous designs, but the execution units have been
reorganized somewhat to provide more than one execution port for nearly all important
instructions. It is designed for a throughput of four instructions per clock cycle.

The resources for out-of-order execution have been increased. The reorder buffer has 224
entries on Skylake. The reservation station has 97 entries. The number of temporary
registers in Skylake is 180 integer registers and 168 vector registers, according to Intel
publications. It is unknown whether these vector registers are 128, 256, or 512 bits.

All parts of the pipeline are shared between two threads in those CPU models that can run
two threads in each core. Each thread gets half of the total throughput when two threads are
running in the same core.

 11.2 Instruction fetch and decoding
The instruction fetch unit can fetch a maximum of 16 bytes of code per clock cycle in single
threaded applications.

There are four decoders. The first decoder can decode instructions that generate up to four
µops. The other three decoders can decode only simple instructions that generate a single
µop. The maximum throughput from the decoders is four instructions or five µops per clock
cycle. The minimum throughput is seen in a sequence where all instructions generate two
µops each so that only the first decoder is active. Fused ALU and branch instructions (see
page 154) count as one. Instructions with any number of prefixes are decoded in a single
clock cycle. There is no penalty for redundant prefixes.

The penalty for length-changing prefixes is the same as for Sandy Bridge (see page 125).
Arithmetic and logic instructions with an immediate operand using an operand size prefix,
e.g. add ax,1234 have a penalty of 2-3 clock cycles in the decoders, regardless of
alignment. This applies to all arithmetic and logic instructions with a 16-bit immediate
constant as operand in 32-bit or 64-bit mode. Move instructions have no penalty for length-
changing prefixes.

 11.3 µop cache
The µop cache has the same size and organization as in the Sandy Bridge (see p. 126). It is
organized as 32 sets  8 ways  6 µops, totaling a maximum capacity of 1536 µops. It can
allocate a maximum of 3 lines of 6 µops each for each aligned and contiguous 32-bytes
block of code.

Code that runs out of the µop cache are not subject to the limitations of the fetch and
decode units. It can deliver one cache line per clock, but the average throughput cannot
exceed 4 (possibly fused) µops or the equivalent of 32 bytes of code per clock cycle. The
µop cache is a big advantage when the average instruction length is more than four bytes.
The limitations and weaknesses of the Sandy Bridge µop cache still apply. See page 126 for
details.

 11.4 Loopback buffer
The processor has a loop buffer which simply recycles µops from the µop queue, which has
64 entries per thread. The loop buffer will rarely use all 64 entries of the queue, but small
loops of up to 30 µops, or sometimes up to 40, will benefit from the loop buffer. The loop
buffer gives a stable throughput of 4 µops per clock, regardless of instruction length for tiny
loops, according to my measurements.

To recapitulate, the pipeline can be fed from three different sources, depending on the size
of critical loops:
    • The loop buffer is used for tiny loops of up to 30 - 40 instructions. The throughput is
         4 µops per clock cycle with no restriction on instruction length.
    • The µop cache is used for loops up to approximately 1000 instructions. The
         throughput is up to 4 instructions or 32 bytes of code per clock cycle.
    • The fetch and decode units are used for instructions that are not in the µop cache.
         The throughput is up to 4 instructions or 16 bytes of code per clock cycle.

Fused instruction pairs (see below) count as one in the µop cache and the loop buffer. With
two fused not-taken branches per clock, it is possible to obtain a maximum throughput of six
instructions per clock cycle from the loop buffer or µop cache.

There may be a difference in branch misprediction penalty between the three sources of
µops, but I have not been able to verify such a difference because the variance in the
measurements is high. The measured misprediction penalty varies between 16 and 20 clock
cycles in all three cases.

 11.5 Micro-op fusion
µop fusion is used in the same way as on previous processors. Some instructions that need
two µops in the execution units can use the µop fusion technique to keep these two µops
together as one from the decoders to the reservation station in order to save pipeline
bandwidth. The reservation station will then submit two µops to two different ports. Most
memory write instructions and most arithmetic and logic instructions with a memory operand
use µop fusion, regardless of register size. See page 94 and 110 for further explanation.

The decoders can handle four µop-fused instructions per clock cycle. You can see which
instructions use µop fusion by looking at the tables in manual 4: "Instruction tables".
Instructions with µop fusion have a higher number of µops listed under "unfused domain"
than under "fused domain".

 11.6 Macro-op fusion
The processor can fuse two instructions into one µop in the same way that previous
processors can (see page 111 and 128).

The decoders will fuse an arithmetic or logic instruction and a subsequent conditional jump
instruction into a single compute-and-branch µop in certain cases. The compute-and-branch
µop is not split in two at the execution units but executed as a single µop by the branch unit
at execution port 0 or 6.

The CMP, ADD and SUB instructions can fuse with signed and unsigned branch instructions.
INC and DEC can fuse with signed branch instructions, and TEST and AND instructions can
fuse with all branch instructions (including useless combinations), as indicated in table 9.2
page 129.

The first instruction can have an immediate operand or a memory source operand, but not
both. It cannot have a memory destination operand. It cannot have a RIP-relative memory
operand.

The JECXZ and LOOP instructions cannot be fused.

Unlike previous processors, it can make fusion even if a 16-bytes code boundary is crossed.

Two fuseable pairs can be decoded in the same clock cycle.

The programmer should keep any fuseable arithmetic instruction together with a
subsequent conditional jump rather than scheduling other instructions in-between in order to
take advantage of macro-op fusion. All four decoders support macro-op fusion.

 11.7 Stack engine
The processor has a stack engine similar to the Sandy Bridge, as described on page 129.
An extra stack synchronization µop is inserted automatically when stack operations such as
push, pop, call or return are interspersed by instructions that access the stack pointer
explicitly, such as add rsp,8 or mov eax,[rsp+16].

 11.8 Register allocation and renaming
All integer, floating point, vector registers, flags and perhaps also segment registers can be
renamed. The floating point control word can also be renamed.

Register renaming is controlled by the reorder buffer and the scheduler. Register allocation
and renaming has not been observed to be a bottleneck.

Special cases of independence
A common way of setting a register to zero is by xor'ing it with itself or subtracting it from
itself, e.g. XOR EAX,EAX. The processor recognizes that certain instructions are
independent of the prior value of the register if the two input operands are the same
register. This register is set to zero at the register allocation stage without using any
execution unit and without waiting for the previous value of the register to be available.

The following instructions can set a register to zero in this way if both source operands are
the same register: XOR, SUB, PXOR, XORPS, XORPD, PANDN, ANDNPS, ANDNPD and all
variants of PSUBxxx and PCMPGTxx. Instructions with V-prefix behave the same. No
execution unit is used, and the throughput is four zeroing operations per clock cycle.

This works with all 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers and all 128, 256, and 512-bit
vector registers. It does not work with 8-bit and 16-bit registers, because only part of the
register is set to zero. It works partially with 64-bit mmx registers: The register is set to zero
without waiting for the previous value, but it does use an execution unit (in order to resolve
the dual use as floating point stack register and mmx register).

All variants of the PCMPEQxx instruction can set a register to all ones without waiting for the
previous value of the register. It does, however, use an execution unit.

The following instructions have no special case for the two input operands being the same
register: CMP, SBB, CMPEQPS, CMPEQPD.

Instructions that need no execution unit
The abovementioned special cases where registers are set to zero by instructions such as
XOR EAX,EAX are handled at the register allocation stage without using any execution unit.

A few other instructions are also handled without using any execution unit. These are CLC
and NOP (including long nops), but not FNOP.

Elimination of move instructions
Most register-to-register moves are eliminated at the register allocation stage in the same
way as on the Ivy Bridge, as explained on page 131. Move elimination typically succeeds in
more than 80% of the possible cases. Chained moves can also be eliminated.

Move elimination is possible with all 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers and all
vector registers of 128 bits or more. It is not possible with 8-bit and 16-bit registers, and it is
not possible with 64-bit mmx registers.

The Skylake cannot eliminate zero-extended moves (MOVZX), but moves with implicit zero-
extension can be eliminated, e.g. MOV EAX,EBX (zero-extends into RAX), and VMOVAPS
XMM0,XMM1 (zero-extends into YMM0 or ZMM0).

A move of a register to itself will never be eliminated. For example mov eax,eax is not
eliminated.

An eliminated move has zero latency and does not use any execution port. But is does
consume bandwidth in the decoders.

 11.9 Execution units
The Skylake has a number of execution units accessed through eight execution ports. This
gives a theoretical maximum throughput of eight µops per clock cycle in the execution units.
However, the throughput of the whole design rarely exceeds four instructions per clock.
Thus, even with µop fusion it is impossible to keep all execution ports busy more than in
temporary bursts.

Most of the execution units are duplicated so that a µop will rarely have to wait for a vacant
unit. There are four integer ALUs so that the most common integer operations can execute
with a throughput of four instructions per clock cycle. There are three ports that can handle
integer vector operations of up to 256 bits. Two ports can handle floating point vector
operations. Two ports can handle branches. Two ports can handle memory read operations,
and one port can handle memory writes. The Skylake can handle more different latencies at
the same port than on previous processors.

The eight ports and their common operations are listed in table 11.1.

  Port           Operations                                            Latency
 0             integer and vector arithmetic, logic, shift            1
 0             vector string instructions                             3
 0             floating point add, multiply, FMA                      4
 0             AES encryption                                         4
 0             integer vector multiplication                          5
 0             integer and floating point division, squareroot        variable
 0             branch                                                 1-2
 1             integer and vector arithmetic, logic, shift            1
 1             integer multiplication, bit scan                       3
 1             floating point add, multiply, FMA                      4
 1             integer vector multiplication                          5
 5             integer and vector arithmetic, logic                   1
 5             vector permute                                         1 (3 if lane crossed)
 5             x87 floating point add, SADBW                          3
 5             PCLMUL                                                 7
 6             integer arithmetic, logic, shift                       1
 6             jump and branch                                        1-2
 2             load, address generation
 3             load, address generation
 4             store
 7             load and store address generation
Table 11.1. Execution units in Skylake

All vector execution units have at least 256-bit capability, except for division, square root
and encryption. A 256-bit unit cannot be split up and used for two 128-bit instructions
simultaneously.

The latency for integer vector operations is mostly the same as for operations in general
purpose registers. This makes it possible to use XMM registers for simple integer operations
if you are out of general purpose registers.

512-bit vector instructions
The Skylake-X and Cannon Lake support the AVX512 instruction set. There are two 256-bit
vector execution units at port 0 and 1, respectively. These two units can be combined into
one 512-bit unit when 512-bit vector instructions are executed. This combined 512-bit unit is
accessed through port 0, while port 1 can be used for other purposes simultaneously.

There is an additional 512-bit vector unit under port 5. Floating point vector instructions of
256 bits or less go through port 0 or 1, while 512-bit floating point instructions go through
port 0 or 5. Permute instructions and other instructions that may cross the 128-bit lane
boundaries are always handled by port 5.

Early versions of Skylake-X with less than ten cores do not have the extra 512-bit floating
point unit at port 5. These versions have a throughput of one 512-bit floating point vector
operation or two 256-bit floating point vector operations per clock cycle. Later Skylake-X
processors have a throughput of two 512-bit floating point vector operations per clock cycle,
including floating point addition, multiplication, and fused multiply-and-add. It is difficult to
see whether a particular Skylake-X processor has the extra 512-bit floating point unit or not,
because processors with and without this unit may have the same CPUID model and
stepping number and the same number of cores. You may check the version name at
ark.intel.com for clarification.

Some common integer vector instructions have a throughput of three instructions per clock
for up to 256 bits, using port 0, 1, and 5. The 512-bit versions of the same instructions have
a throughput of two instructions per clock, going through port 0 and 5. All versions of

Skylake-X have a throughput of two 512-bit integer vector additions or three 256-bit integer
vector additions per clock.

Most 512-bit vector instructions have the same latency as similar instructions with 256 bits
or less. Exceptions are division and square root.

All vector units are divided into two or four lanes of 128 bits each. All instructions that can
move data between these lanes have a latency of at least 3 clock cycles, as explained on
page 145.

Masked instructions
The AVX512 instruction set includes support for masked vector instructions. Each element
in the vector is enabled or disabled depending on a bit in a mask register. Mask register k1 -
k7 can be used for masking.

In general, there is no extra cost to masking. The latencies and throughputs of masked
instructions is the same as without masking, except for memory read and write instructions
and register-to-register moves.

Masked register-to-register moves cannot be eliminated. Masked memory read instructions
have an extra µop at port 0 or 5 and an extra latency of one clock cycle. Masked memory
write instructions have an extra latency of approximately 10 clock cycles.

A masked instruction depends on the previous value of the destination register unless the
zeroing option is also applied. Therefore, it is recommended to use the zeroing option on
masked instructions if it is acceptable that the disabled elements of the result vector are set
to zero rather than unchanged.

How many input dependencies can a µop have?
Until the Ivy Bridge, all Intel processors with out-of-order capabilities had the design
limitation that no µop could have more than two input dependencies. The introduction of
fused multiply-and-add (FMA) instructions in the Haswell made it necessary to get rid of the
limitation of two input dependencies for each µop. Thus, the FMA instructions were the first
instructions to use µops with more than two inputs on an Intel processor. A few more
instructions with three inputs in a single µop have later been added: add-with-carry,
subtract-with-borrow, and conditional moves in Broadwell, and a blend instruction in
Skylake. An FMA instruction with a mask has four input dependencies with just a single µop.

Read and write bandwidth
There are two identical memory read ports (port 2 and 3) and one write port (port 4). These
ports all have the full width of 256 or 512 bits. This makes it possible to make two memory
reads and one memory write per clock cycle, with any register size. The measured
throughput is a little lower than this due to cache effects. All write operations need an
address calculation on port 2, 3 or 7. The Skylake has 72 read buffers and 56 write buffers.

Data bypass delays
The execution units are divided into domains as described on page 116, and there is
sometimes a delay of one clock cycle when the output of an instruction in the integer
domain is used as input for an instruction in the floating point domain. For example:

    ; Example 11.1. Data bypass delays
    addps xmm0, xmm1
    por   xmm0, xmm2
    mulps xmm0, xmm3   ; 1 clock delay

The delays in example 11.1 can be avoided by replacing the POR instruction with the more
appropriate ORPS.
However, such delays are few on the Skylake processor. I found no such delays in the
following cases:

   •   when a floating point Boolean instruction, such as ORPS is used with integer data
   •   when a wrong type of move instruction is used, e.g. MOVPS or MOVDQA
   •   when a wrong type of shuffle instruction is used, e.g. SHUFPS or PFHUFD
   •   when a wrong type of blend instruction is used, e.g. VPBLENDD or BLENDPS

Instructions such as MOVD that move data between general purpose registers and vector
registers have a latency of 2 clock cycles.

Warm-up period for YMM and ZMM vector instructions
The processor turns off the upper parts of the vector execution units when it is not used, in
order to save power. Instructions with 256-bit vectors have a throughput that is
approximately 4.5 times slower than normal during an initial warm-up period of
approximately 56,000 clock cycles or 14 µs. A sequence of code containing 256-bit vector
operations will run at full speed after this warm-up period. The processor returns to the
mode of slow 256-bit execution 2.7 million clock cycles, or 675 µs, after the last 256-bit
instruction (These times were measured on a 4 GHz processor). Similar times apply to 512-
bit vectors.

It is possible to prepare the processor for executing YMM or ZMM instructions by giving it a
dummy YMM or ZMM instruction at least 56,000 clock cycles before a critical sequence of
vector instructions. You may insert a YMM or ZMM vector instruction such as, for example,
vxorps zmm0,zmm0,zmm0 somewhere before a piece of code that contains time-
consuming YMM or ZMM operations. Any instruction with YMM or ZMM registers will start
the warmup process, except vzeroupper and vzeroall. The first YMM or ZMM
instruction takes 150 - 250 clock cycles - probably to start a power-up process.

The processor simply turns off power for the upper parts of the 256-bit and 512-bit units
when they are not used, rather than just gating the clock. It is using the 128-bit lane twice
when executing a 256-bit instruction during the warm-up period. The performance of 256-bit
instructions is mostly limited by throughput rather than by latency during this period.

Underflow and subnormals
Subnormal numbers occur when floating point operations are close to underflow. The
handling of subnormal numbers is very costly in some cases because the subnormal results
are handled by microcode exceptions.

The processor has a penalty of approximately 129 clock cycles in all cases where an
operation on normal numbers gives a subnormal result. There is a similar penalty for a
multiplication or division between a normal and a subnormal number, regardless of whether
the result is normal or subnormal. There is no penalty for adding a normal and a subnormal
number, regardless of the result. There is no penalty for overflow, underflow, infinity or not-
a-number results.

The penalties for subnormal numbers are avoided if the "flush-to-zero" mode and the
"denormals-are-zero" mode are both set in the MXCSR register.

 11.10 Transitions between VEX and non-VEX modes
The severe penalty for mixing 256-bit VEX code with 128-bit non-VEX code in previous
processors (see chapter 9.12 page 135) is no longer found in the Skylake.

Instead of the three states in the Sandy Bridge processor, the Skylake has two states:
   A. (Clean state) The upper parts of YMM0-15 or ZMM0-15 are all unused and known to
      be zero.

   B. (Dirty state) The upper part of at least one of these registers is used and contains
      data.

There is little or no cost to transitions between these states. The vector registers are never
separated into upper and lower parts. Instead, the processor will combine the upper and
lower parts when writing a 128-bit vector register with a non-VEX instruction in state D. This
creates a false dependence on the previous value of the register. For example, the
instruction MOVDQA XMM1,XMM2 will have to wait for any previous value of XMM1. This
can slow down a sequence of SSE code that follows after a sequence of VEX code.

There are two ways to avoid this problem. The first method, which is compatible with
previous processors, is to insert a VZEROUPPER instruction after any sequence of VEX code
before a call or return to a code that may use non-VEX vector code.

The second method, which requires AVX512 support, is to use only registers ZMM16-
ZMM31 in VEX code. These registers are not accessible to non-VEX code and do not
influence the VEX state.

 11.11 Partial register access
Different parts of a general purpose register can be stored in different temporary registers in
order to remove false dependences. A problem occurs when a write to a part of a register is
followed by a read from a larger part of the same register:

    ; Example 11.2. Partial register access
    mov al, 1
    mov ebx, eax

The processor solves this problem without any visible performance penalties. Perhaps it
makes dual bookkeeping of both the partial register and the full register.

The situation is different if one of the high 8-bit registers (AH, BH, CH, DH) are modified, and
a larger part of the register is read afterwards:

    ; Example 11.3. Partial register problem with AH
    mov ah, 1
    mov ebx, eax

Here, an extra µop is inserted to combine AH and the rest of EAX into a single temporary
register before the MOV EBX,EAX instruction. This causes an extra latency of one clock
cycle.

Partial flags access
A similar situation occurs in a few situations where part of the flags register is modified and
a larger part of the same register is read afterwards. A few of these cases require an extra
µop like example 11.3.

    ; Example 11.4. Partial register access
    bt eax,2        ; modifies carry flag but not zero flag
    cmovbe eax,ebx ; reads both carry flag and zero flag

The processor may insert an extra µop to join the two parts of the flags register in these
examples. There is no extra µop when reading the flags after INC and DEC instructions.

In cases like this, you may consider whether it is a programming error or a deliberate testing
of two different conditions with a single instruction.

There is no penalty or extra µop when reading the flags after a shift or rotate instruction.

 11.12 Cache and memory access

  Cache                             Skylake
 µop cache                        1536 µops, 8 way, 6 µop line size, per core
 Level 1 code                     32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                                  latency 4, per core
 Level 1 data                     32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                                  latency 4, per core
 Level 2                          256 kB - 1MB, 4 - 16 ways, 1024 sets, 64 B line
                                  size, latency 14, per core.
 Level 3                          3-24 MB, 64 B line size, latency 34-85, shared
Table 11.2. Cache sizes on Skylake

There is a level-1 data cache and a level-1 code cache on each core. These caches are
shared between two threads running in the same core. There is a level-3 cache shared
between all cores.

Different processors with Lake names are quite similar, but the sizes of level 2 and 3 caches
differ between different versions and different models. Some versions also have a level-4
cache.

The 256-bit or 512-bit read and write bandwidth (see p. 145) makes it advantageous to use
YMM or ZMM registers for copying or zeroing large blocks of memory. The REP MOVS
instruction has full efficiency only if the source and destination are both aligned by 32. In all
other cases, it is better to use a function library that uses YMM or ZMM registers.

Cache bank conflicts
The phenomenon of cache bank conflicts has been a performance problem in some
previous processors. This problem has been removed now. It is always possible to do two
cache reads in the same clock cycle without causing a cache bank conflict.

However, the problem with false dependence between memory addresses with the same
set and offset remains. It is not possible to read and write simultaneously from addresses
that are spaced by a multiple of 4 Kbytes:

    ; Example 11.5. False memory dependence
    mov [rsi], eax
    mov ebx, [rsi+1000H]        ; False memory dependence

The theoretical maximum throughput is two cache reads and one write per clock cycle.
However, this throughput cannot be maintained continuously because of limited cache
ways, read and write buffers, etc. Some of the memory writes may use port 2 or 3 for
address calculation, rather than port 7, and thereby delaying a read.

 11.13 Store forwarding stalls
The Skylake processor can forward a memory write to a subsequent read from the same
address under certain conditions. Store forwarding is one clock cycle faster than on
previous processors. A memory write followed by a read from the same address takes 4
clock cycles in the best case for operands of 32 or 64 bits, and 5 clock cycles for other
operand sizes.
Store forwarding has a penalty of up to 3 clock cycles extra when an operand of 128 bits or
more is misaligned.

A store forwarding usually takes 4 - 5 clock cycles extra when an operand of any size
crosses a cache line boundary, i.e. an address divisible by 64 bytes.

A write followed by a smaller read from the same address has little or no penalty.

A write of 64 bits or less followed by a smaller read has a penalty of 1 - 3 clocks when the
read is offset but fully contained in the address range covered by the write.

An aligned write of 128 bits or more followed by a read of one or both of the two halves or
the four quarters, etc., has little or no penalty. A partial read that does not fit into the halves
or quarters can take 11 clock cycles extra.

A read that is bigger than the write, or a read that covers both written and unwritten bytes,
takes approximately 11 clock cycles extra.

 11.14 Multithreading
Larger versions of the processor can run two threads in each of its cores. This means that
each thread gets only half of the resources.

Level-1 cache, instruction fetch, decoding and execution units are shared between two
threads running in the same core in the same way as in previous processors.

There is no advantage to running two threads per core if any of the shared resources are
limiting factors for the performance. There are so many execution ports and execution units
that execution is rarely a limiting factor. If the code aims at more than two instructions per
clock cycle, then there is no advantage in running two threads in each core. Some of the
most common performance bottlenecks are cache size and instruction fetching. It is
preferred to run only one thread in each core if cache or instruction fetching is a limiting
factor. There is no way to give one thread higher priority than the other in the CPU.

 11.15 Bottlenecks in Skylake, Kaby Lake, Cannon Lake, and Coffee Lake
The pipelines and execution units in Skylake and other "Lake" models are quite efficient.
Memory access is the most common bottleneck.

Instruction fetch and predecoding
The instruction fetch rate is still limited to 16 bytes per clock cycle, which is likely to be a
bottleneck for code that does not fit well into the µop cache.

µop cache
The µop cache is efficient for loops of up to approximately a thousand instructions.

It is important to economize the use of the µop cache in CPU-intensive code. The difference
in performance between loops that fit into the µop cache and loops that do not can be quite
significant if the average instruction length is more than four bytes. Avoid unnecessary loop
unrolling. The µop cache has the same weaknesses as earlier processors.

Execution ports and execution units
The capacity of the execution ports and execution units is high. The most common integer
instructions have four execution units to choose between, and most floating point and vector
instructions have two or three execution units to choose between. It is realistic to obtain a

throughput of close to four instructions per clock cycle if the code has a mixture of general
purpose register and vector instructions and no long dependency chains.

The vector execution units and data paths have full 256 or 512 bit width. This makes it very
advantageous to use the YMM or ZMM registers.

The gather instructions are efficient for gathering non-contiguous data into vectors, and for
vectorizing table-based lookup functions. Gather instructions are more efficient than in
previous processors. Conflict detection instructions are slow.

The fused multiply-and-add (FMA) instructions are useful for improving the performance of
floating point code. Floating point vector additions, multiplications and FMA instructions all
have a throughput of one or two instructions per clock cycle and a latency of 4 clock cycles.

Execution latency and dependency chains
Execution latencies are generally low. Most integer ALU operations have a latency of only
one clock cycle, even for 512-bit vector operations, and floating point arithmetic operations
have a latency of 4. These execution latencies are critical mainly in long dependency
chains.

Register-to-register moves are eliminated to zero latency in many cases.

Branch prediction
The size of the branch target buffer and the construction of the branch predictor is unknown,
but at least the prediction rate seems good.

The throughput for taken branches is one jump per clock or one jump per two clocks,
depending on the density of branches. Predicted not taken branches have a higher
throughput of two per clock. Therefore, it is advantageous to organize branches so that they
are most often not taken.

Memory access
The theoretical maximum throughput to the level-1 cache is two 512-bit reads and one 512-
bit write per clock. This makes it possible to copy a block of memory at a speed of 64 bytes
per clock cycle. However, the continuous cache throughput is always lower than the
theoretical maximum because of limitations of cache ways, read and write buffers, etc.

The throughput for the level-2 cache is much lower than for the level-1 cache. Different
versions of "Lake" processors have different number of level-2 cache ways. Cache bank
conflicts is no longer a problem.

Multithreading
Most of the critical resources are shared between threads. This means that the bottlenecks
become more critical in multithreaded applications.

Literature
Intel: "Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual". January 2016.
Orestis Bastounis: "Intel’s Skylake Core i7-6700K reviewed: Modest gains from a full Tick-
Tock cycle". http://arstechnica.co.uk/gadgets/2015/08/intel-skylake-core-i7-6700k-reviewed/
Intel Developer Forum 2015, session SPCS001:
http://myeventagenda.com/sessions/0B9F4191-1C29-408A-8B61-65D7520025A8/7/5
Ian Cutress: "The Intel Skylake-X Review: Core i9 7900X, i7 7820X and i7 7800X Tested".
https://www.anandtech.com/show/11550/the-intel-skylakex-review-core-i9-7900x-i7-7820x-
and-i7-7800x-tested
Wikichip: Skylake (client) - Microarchitectures - Intel.
https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/intel/microarchitectures/skylake_(client)

