12 Intel Ice Lake and Tiger Lake pipeline
Intel's Ice Lake represents a further development of previous designs. It is based on the
Sunny Cove architecture with a 10 nm process. This processor is also known as 10'th
generation Intel Core processors. The 11'th generation is called Tiger Lake or Willow Cove
architecture. The Tiger lake has several improvements in peripherals, but the CPU core is
quite similar to the Ice Lake.

Important improvements over previous designs include larger caches and more execution
units. The maximum throughput is improved to five instructions per clock cycle, where
Skylake has four.

Ice Lake and Tiger Lake have support for the AVX512 instruction set, defining 512-bit vector
registers and masked instructions. This includes the general subsets AVX512BW,
AVX512DQ, AVX512VL, as well as several extensions for particular purposes.

The Ice Lake and Tiger Lake are available with 2 or more cores, capable of running two
threads in each core. Most of the critical resources are shared between two threads running
in the same core, as described on page 137.

 12.1 Pipeline
The pipeline is very similar to previous designs, but the number of execution units has been
increased to improve the throughput from four to five instructions per clock cycle. The
number of output ports is doubled so that the processor can do two memory reads and two
memory writes per clock cycle under favorable circumstances. The size of the µop cache
has been increased by 50%.

The resources for out-of-order execution have been increased further. The reorder buffer
has 352 entries. The reservation station has 160 entries. The number of temporary registers
in Ice Lake is 280 integer registers and 224 vector registers, according to Intel publications.
It is unknown whether these vector registers are 128, 256, or 512 bits.

All parts of the pipeline are shared between two threads running in the same core. Each
thread gets half of the total throughput when two threads are running in the same core.

 12.2 Instruction fetch and decoding
The instruction fetch unit can fetch a maximum of 16 bytes of code per clock cycle in single
threaded applications.

There are four decoders as in the Skylake (see page 152). Instruction pairs with µop fusion
(see below) count as two instructions in the decoders, unlike in previous CPU models.
Instructions with macro-op fusion count as one.

Instructions with any number of prefixes are decoded in a single clock cycle. There is no
penalty for redundant prefixes, but there is a penalty for length-changing prefixes in most
cases (see page 125). Arithmetic and logic instructions with an immediate operand using an
operand size prefix, e.g. add ax,1234 take 3 clock cycles in the decoders. This applies to
all instructions with a 16-bit immediate constant as operand in 32-bit or 64-bit mode. 16-bit
move instructions, but not 64-bit move instructions, have a penalty for length-changing
prefixes.

 12.3 µop cache
The µop cache has a maximum capacity of 2304 µops. It is probably organized as 48 sets 
8 ways  6 µops.

Code that runs out of the µop cache are not subject to the limitations of the fetch and
decode units. It can deliver one cache line per clock, but the average throughput cannot
exceed 5 µops or the equivalent of 64 bytes of code per clock cycle. The µop cache is a big
advantage when the average instruction length is more than four bytes. The limitations and
weaknesses of the Sandy Bridge µop cache may still apply. See page 126 for details.

 12.4 Loopback buffer
The processor has a loop buffer which recycles µops from the µop queue. The size of this
queue is variously reported as 50 or 70 entries. My tests on a Tiger Lake indicate that loops
with up to 50 µops can run from the loop buffer.

The loop buffer gives a stable throughput of 5 µops per clock, regardless of instruction
length for tiny loops.

To recapitulate, the pipeline can be fed from three different sources, depending on the size
of critical loops:
    • The loop buffer is used for tiny loops of up to 50 instructions. The maximum
         throughput is 5 µops per clock cycle with no restriction on instruction length.
    • The µop cache is used for loops up to approximately 2000 instructions. The
         throughput is up to 5 instructions or 32 bytes of code per clock cycle.
    • The fetch and decode units are used for instructions that are not in the µop cache.
         The throughput is up to 4 instructions or 16 bytes of code per clock cycle.

Fused instruction pairs (see below) count as two in the µop cache and the loop buffer,
unlike on previous CPU models. The maximum throughput of five instructions per clock
cannot be increased by instruction fusion, according to my measurements.

There may be a difference in branch misprediction penalty between the three sources of
µops, but I have not been able to verify such a difference because the variance in the
measurements is high. The measured misprediction penalty varies between 16 and 20 clock
cycles.

 12.5 Micro-op fusion
Most instructions with a memory operand are split into multiple µops at the allocation stage.
Read-modify instructions, such as add eax,[rbx], are split into two µops, one for
address calculation and memory read, and one for the addition. Read-modify-write
instructions, such as add [rbx],eax, are split into four µops. Memory write instructions
are split into two µops, one for address calculation and one for the store operation. Memory
read instructions with an operand size of 32 bits or more generate only one µop.

The split into multiple µops happens later in the pipeline at the allocation stage so that the
maximum throughput is not limited by the decoder or the µop cache. A throughput of up to
nine unfused µops per clock cycle has been observed with five instructions, four of which
are split into two µops each. It is unknown whether an instruction with fusion occupies one
or more entries in the reorder buffer.

You can see which instructions use µop fusion by looking at the tables in manual 4:
"Instruction tables". Instructions with µop fusion have a higher number of µops listed under
"unfused domain" than under "fused domain".

 12.6 Macro-op fusion
The processor can fuse an arithmetic or logic instruction and a subsequent conditional jump
instruction into a single compute-and-branch µop in certain cases. This works slightly
different from previous processors. The fusion is not done by the decoders but immediately
after the decode stage. The compute-and-branch µop is not split in two at the execution
units but executed as a single µop by the branch unit.

The CMP, ADD, SUB, AND, and TEST instructions can be fused with several different
branch instructions. The possible combinations are listed in table 12.1.

Instructions with a memory operand cannot fuse, unlike previous CPU models. Instructions
with an immediate operand can fuse. The JECXZ and LOOP instructions cannot be fused.
16-bytes boundaries in the instructions does not prevent fusion.

The programmer should keep any fuseable arithmetic instruction together with a
subsequent conditional jump rather than scheduling other instructions in-between in order to
take advantage of macro-op fusion.

 First instruction             can pair with these,               cannot pair with
                               and the inverse
 cmp                           jz, jc, jb, ja, jl, jg             js, jo, jp
 add, sub, inc, dec            jz, jc, jb, ja, jl, jg             js, jo, jp
 adc, sbb                      none
 neg, not                      none
 test                          all
 and                           all
 or, xor                       none
 shift, rotate                 none
 Table 12.1. Instruction fusion

 12.7 Stack engine
The processor has a stack engine similar to the Sandy Bridge, as described on page 129.
An extra stack synchronization µop is inserted automatically when stack operations such as
push, pop, call or return are interspersed by instructions that access the stack pointer
explicitly, such as add rsp,8 or mov eax,[rsp+16].

 12.8 Register allocation and renaming
All integer, floating point, vector registers, flags, and perhaps also segment registers can be
renamed. The floating point control word can also be renamed.

Register renaming is controlled by the reorder buffer and the scheduler. Register allocation
and renaming has not been observed to be a bottleneck.

Special cases of independence
A common way of setting a register to zero is by xor'ing it with itself or subtracting it from
itself, e.g. XOR EAX,EAX. The scheduler recognizes that certain instructions are
independent of the prior value of the register if the two input operands are the same
register. The instruction does not have to wait for the previous value of the register to be
available.

The following instructions can set a register to zero in this way if both source operands are
the same register: XOR, SUB, PXOR, XORPS, XORPD, PANDN, ANDNPS, ANDNPD and
all variants of PSUBxxx and PCMPGTxx. Instructions with V-prefix behave the same.
This works with all 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers and all 64, 128, 256, and
512-bit vector registers. It does not work with 8-bit and 16-bit registers, because only part of
the register is set to zero.

All variants of the PCMPEQxx instruction can set a register to all ones without waiting for
the previous value of the register.

The following instructions have no special case for the two input operands being the same
register: CMP, SBB, CMPEQPS, CMPEQPD.

The abovementioned special cases where registers are set to zero by instructions such as
XOR EAX,EAX are useful for eliminating dependence on previous instructions, but these
instructions use an execution unit, unlike on previous models.

Elimination of move instructions
Vector register-to-register moves are eliminated at the register allocation stage in the same
way as on the Ivy Bridge, as explained on page 131. Chained moves can also be
eliminated. Moves with general purpose registers are not eliminated, unlike on previous
models.

Move elimination is possible with all vector registers of 128 bits or more. It is not possible
with 64-bit mmx registers.

A move of a register to itself will never be eliminated. For example movaps xmm1,xmm1 is
not eliminated.

An eliminated move has zero latency and does not use any execution port. But is does
consume bandwidth in the decoders.

 12.9 Execution units
The Ice Lake and Tiger Lake have a number of execution units accessed through ten
execution ports. This gives a theoretical maximum throughput of ten µops per clock cycle in
the execution units. However, the average throughput of the whole design cannot exceed
five instructions per clock. Thus, even with µop fusion it is impossible to keep all execution
ports busy more than in temporary bursts.

Most of the execution units are duplicated so that a µop will rarely have to wait for a vacant
unit. There are four integer ALUs so that the most common operations on general purpose
registers can execute with a throughput of four instructions per clock cycle.

There are three ports that can handle integer vector arithmetic and logic operations, port 0,
1, and 5. Port 0 and 1 have 256 bit width, while port 5 has 512 bit width. A 512 bit vector
operation can use either port 5 or port 0 and 1 combined. For example, integer vector
addition with a vector size of up to 256 bits has a throughput of three instructions per clock
cycle, while addition of 512 bit vectors has a throughput of two instructions per clock cycle
because port 0 and 1 need to be combined to make a 512-bit operation.

Only port 0 and 1 can handle floating point vector operations. Both have 256 bit width. The
throughput is two floating point operations per clock cycle with scalars and vectors of 128 or
256 bits, while the throughput is one floating point vector operation per clock cycle with 512
bit vectors, using port 0 and 1 combined.

Two ports can handle branches, port 0 and 6. The throughput for predicted not taken
branches is two branches per clock cycle, while the throughput for predicted taken branches
is one branch per clock cycle, or less. The throughput is lower if there are more than two
branches per 16 bytes block of code. Mispredicted branches take approximately 20 clock
cycles extra.

Memory reads are handled by ports 2 and 3. Both have 512 bit width so it can do two
memory reads of any size per clock cycle.

Memory writes are split into two µops, one for address calculation and one for the store.
Address calculation for memory writes are done by port 7 and 8, while the stores are done
by port 4 and 9. Both have 256 bit width. This gives a throughput of two memory writes per
clock cycle for integers and vectors of up to 256 bits under the requirement that both writes
must go to the same cache line. 512-bit writes have a throughput of one aligned write per
clock cycle, using port 4 and 9 combined.

There are separate address calculation units and data ports for memory reads and writes so
that there are no restrictions on doing reads and writes simultaneously.

The ten execution ports and their operations are listed in table 12.2.

 Port         Operations                                              Latency
 0            integer arithmetic, logic, shift                        1
 0            vector arithmetic, logic, shift. 256 bits               1
 0            vector string instructions
 0            floating point add, multiply, FMA. 256 bits             4
 0            integer vector multiplication. 256 bits                 5
 0            floating point division, square root. 256 bits          11-16
 0            AES encryption                                          3
 0            jump and branch                                         1+
 1            integer arithmetic, logic                               1
 1            integer vector arithmetic, logic, shift. 256 bits       1
 1            integer multiplication, bit scan                        3
 1            floating point add, multiply, FMA. 256 bits             4
 1            integer vector multiplication. 256 bits                 5
 1            integer division                                        variable
 1            AES encryption                                          3
 5            integer arithmetic, logic, shift                        1
 5            integer vector arithmetic, logic. 512 bits              1
 5            vector permute                                          1 (3 if lane crossed)
 6            integer arithmetic, logic                               1
 6            jump and branch                                         1+
 2            address generation and read. 512 bits
 3            address generation and read. 512 bits
 7            address generation for write
 8            address generation for write
 4            memory write. 256 bits
 9            memory write. 256 bits
 Table 12.2. Execution units in Ice Lake

Most 512-bit vector instructions have the same latency as similar instructions with 256 bits
or less. Exceptions are division and square root.

All vector units are divided into two or four lanes of 128 bits each. All instructions that can
move data between these lanes have a latency of at least 3 clock cycles, as explained on
page 145.

Masked instructions
The AVX512 instruction set includes support for masked vector instructions. Each element
in the vector is enabled or disabled depending on a bit in a mask register. Mask register k1 -
k7 can be used for masking.

In general, there is no extra cost to masking. The latencies and throughputs of masked
instructions with register operands are the same as without masking, with few exceptions.

Masked register-to-register moves cannot be eliminated. Masked memory read instructions
have an extra µop at port 0 or 5 and an extra latency of one clock cycle. Masked memory
write instructions have an extra latency of approximately 13 clock cycles.

A masked instruction depends on the previous value of the destination register unless the
zeroing option is also applied. Therefore, it is recommended to use the zeroing option on
masked instructions if it is acceptable that the disabled elements of the result vector are
zero rather than unchanged.

Data bypass delays
The execution units are divided into domains as described on page 116, and there is
sometimes a delay of one clock cycle when the output of an instruction in the integer
domain is used as input for an instruction in the floating point domain. See example 11.1
page 157.

Instructions such as MOVD that move data between general purpose registers and vector
registers have a latency of 2 clock cycles.

Warm-up period for ZMM vector instructions
The processor puts the upper parts of the 512 bit vector execution units into a low power
mode when they are not used.

Instructions with 512-bit vectors have a throughput that is approximately 4.5 times slower
than normal during an initial warm-up period of approximately 50,000 clock cycles.

Underflow and subnormals
Subnormal numbers occur when floating point operations are close to underflow. The
handling of subnormal numbers is very costly in some cases because the subnormal results
are handled by microcode exceptions.

The processor has a penalty of approximately 120 clock cycles in all cases where an
operation on normal numbers gives a subnormal result. There is a similar penalty for a
multiplication or division between a normal and a subnormal number, regardless of whether
the result is normal or subnormal. There is no penalty for adding a normal and a subnormal
number, regardless of the result. There is no penalty for overflow, underflow, infinity or not-
a-number results.

The penalties for subnormal numbers are avoided if the "flush-to-zero" mode and the
"denormals-are-zero" mode are both set in the MXCSR register.

 12.10 Transitions between VEX and non-VEX modes
The severe penalty for mixing 256-bit VEX code with 128-bit non-VEX code in early
processors (see chapter 9.12 page 135) is no longer found in the Ice Lake.

Instead of the three states in the Sandy Bridge processor, the Skylake has two states:

   C. (Clean state) The upper parts of YMM0-15 or ZMM0-15 are all unused and known to
      be zero.

   D. (Dirty state) The upper part of at least one of these registers is used and contains
      data.

There is little or no cost to transitions between these states. The vector registers are never
separated into upper and lower parts. Instead, the processor will combine the upper and
lower parts when writing a 128-bit vector register with a non-VEX instruction in state D. This
creates a false dependence on the previous value of the register. For example, the
instruction MOVDQA XMM1,XMM2 will have to wait for any previous value of XMM1. This can
slow down a sequence of SSE code that follows after a sequence of VEX code.

There are two ways to avoid this problem. The first method, which is compatible with
previous processors, is to insert a VZEROUPPER instruction after any sequence of VEX
code before a call or return to a code that may use non-VEX vector code.

The second method is to use only registers ZMM16-ZMM31 in VEX code. These registers
are not accessible to non-VEX code and do not influence the VEX state.

 12.11 Partial register access
Different parts of a general purpose register can be stored in different temporary registers in
order to remove false dependences. The functionality is similar to the Skylake as explained
on page 159. The same applies to partial access to the flags register, as explained on page
159.

 12.12 Cache and memory access

 Cache                        Ice Lake and Tiger Lake
 µop cache                    2304 µops, 8 way, 6 µop line size, per core
 Level 1 code                 32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                              latency 4, per core
 Level 1 data                 48 kB, 12 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                              latency 4, per core
 Level 2                      512 - 1280 kB, 8 - 20 ways, 1024 sets, 64 B line
                              size, latency 14, per core.
 Level 3                      4 - 8 MB, 64 B line size, latency 50-100, shared
 Table 12.3. Cache sizes on Ice Lake and Tiger Lake

There is a level-1 data cache and a level-1 code cache on each core. These caches are
shared between two threads running in the same core. There is a level-3 cache shared
between all cores.

Different processors based on the Ice Lake and Tiger Lake architectures are quite similar,
but the sizes of level 2 and level 3 caches differ between different versions and different
models.

The translation lookaside buffer (TLB) is increased with five levels of paging to support 57
bits virtual addresses.

The REP MOVS instruction is more efficient than in previous models, but in most cases it is
more efficient to use a function library that uses ZMM registers.

Cache bank conflicts
There are no problems with cache bank conflicts, but there is a problem with false
dependence between memory addresses with the same set and offset, as explained on
page 148.

 12.13 Store forwarding stalls
The processor can forward a memory write to a subsequent read from the same address
under certain conditions. A memory write followed by a read from the same address takes 5
clock cycles in the best case for operands of up to 128 bits, and 7 or more clock cycles for
larger operands.

Store forwarding has a penalty of typically 2 clock cycles extra when an operand of 128 bits
or more is misaligned.

A store forwarding usually takes 2 clock cycles extra when an operand of any size crosses a
cache line boundary, i.e. an address divisible by 64 bytes.

A write followed by a smaller read from the same address has little or no penalty.

A write of 64 bits or less followed by a smaller read has little or no penalty when the read is
offset but fully contained in the address range covered by the write.

An aligned write of 128 bits or more followed by a read of one or both of the two halves or
the four quarters, etc., has little or no penalty. A partial read that does not fit into the halves
or quarters fails to forward. The write-to-read latency is 19-20 clock cycles when forwarding
fails.

A read that is bigger than the write, or a read that covers both written and unwritten bytes,
fails to forward. The write-to-read latency is 19-20 clock cycles.

Fast forwarding
A particularly fast write-to-read forwarding with zero latency has been observed on the Ice
Lake and Tiger Lake in certain cases. It is currently unknown how this mechanism works
and I cannot find any description of it in any literature from Intel or elsewhere (August 2021).
It may be somewhat similar to the mechanism in the AMD Zen2 that stores copies of written
data in temporary registers, as described on page 237. There are important differences
between these Intel processors and the AMD Zen2, however. The Zen2 tries to predict
whether memory operands have the same address, and forwards data accordingly. The
Zen2 has a penalty if the prediction turns out to be wrong. No such misprediction penalties
have been observed on the Ice Lake and Tiger Lake in connection with operand forwarding.
It is likely that the fast forwarding on the Intel processors is based on calculated addresses
rather than on prediction. Write operations on Intel processors are split into two µops, where
the first µop calculates the address while the second µop stores data to the calculated
address. This may allow the processor to detect matching addresses before the data to
write are available. We do not know whether the written data are mirrored in temporary
registers or forwarded directly to read instructions in flight.

The fast forwarding with zero latency has been observed with operand sizes of 8, 32, and
64 bits, but not with 16 bits and not with vector registers. It works with memory addresses
that have a pointer and/or an offset. It also works if the write address and the subsequent
read address are calculated in different ways. The fast forwarding does not work in the
following cases, according to my tests:

    •   The address is not divisible by 4
    •   The address range is crossing a cache line boundary
    •   The address is rip-relative
   •   The address has an index register
   •   Read-modify-write instructions

 12.14 Multithreading
Most versions of the processor can run two threads in each of its cores. This means that
each thread gets only half of the resources.

Level-1 cache, instruction fetch, decoding and execution units are shared between two
threads running in the same core in the same way as in previous processors.

There is no advantage to running two threads per core if any of the shared resources are
limiting factors for the performance. There are so many execution ports and execution units
that execution is rarely a limiting factor. If the code aims at more than two instructions per
clock cycle, then there is no advantage in running two threads in each core. Some of the
most common performance bottlenecks are cache size and instruction fetching. It is
preferred to run only one thread in each core if cache or instruction fetching is a limiting
factor. There is no way to give one thread higher priority than the other in a CPU core.

 12.15 Bottlenecks in Ice Lake and Tiger Lake
The pipelines and execution units in Ice Lake and Tiger Lake processors are quite powerful
and the throughput has been increased to a maximum of five instructions per clock cycle.

Instruction fetch and decoding
The instruction fetch rate is still limited to 16 bytes per clock cycle while the throughput of
almost everything else has been improved. This makes instruction fetch and decoding a
very serious bottleneck for code that does not fit well into the µop cache.

µop cache
The size of the µop cache has been increased in order to mitigate the bottleneck of fetch
and decoding.

It is important to economize the use of the µop cache in CPU-intensive code. The difference
in performance between loops that fit into the µop cache and loops that do not can be quite
high. It is recommended to avoid unnecessary loop unrolling and to make sure that the most
critical hot spots in the code have less than 2000 instructions.

Execution ports and execution units
The capacity of the execution ports and execution units is high. The most common integer
instructions have four execution units to choose between, and most floating point and vector
instructions have two or three execution units to choose between. It is possible to obtain a
throughput of close to five instructions per clock cycle if the code has a mixture of general
purpose register instructions, vector instructions, and memory read/write instructions.

Such a high throughput is of course not possible if the code has long dependency chains
where each instruction must wait for the result of the previous instruction. Breaking up
dependency chains has become increasingly important as the throughput of the execution
units is increased.

The vector execution units and data paths have 256 or 512 bit width. The latencies of 512-
bit vector instructions are the same as for smaller vectors in most cases. The throughput of
512-bit vector instructions is one or two vectors per clock cycle, while the throughput for
vectors of 256 bits or less is two or three vectors per clock cycle. This makes it advantage-

ous to use the longest possible vector registers in most cases. The higher power consump-
tion of 512-bit vector instructions may reduce the clock frequency somewhat, but not
enough to outweigh the advantage of using 512-bit vectors.

The gather instructions are efficient for gathering non-contiguous data into vectors, and for
vectorizing table-based lookup functions. Gather instructions are more efficient than in older
processors.

The fused multiply-and-add (FMA) instructions are useful for improving the performance of
floating point code. Floating point vector additions, multiplications, and FMA instructions all
have a throughput of one or two instructions per clock cycle and a latency of 4 clock cycles.

Execution latency and dependency chains
Execution latencies are generally low. Most integer ALU operations have a latency of only
one clock cycle, even for 512-bit vector operations, and floating point arithmetic operations
have a latency of 4. These execution latencies are critical mainly in long dependency
chains.

The latency of integer division has been improved.

Branch prediction
The branch prediction mechanism is quite complicated and allegedly improved over
previous models. The size of the branch target buffer and the construction of the branch
predictor is unknown, but at least the prediction rate seems good.

The throughput for taken branches is one jump per clock or one jump per two clocks,
depending on the density of branches. Predicted not taken branches have a higher
throughput of two per clock. Therefore, it is advantageous to organize branches so that they
are most often not taken.

Memory access
The theoretical maximum throughput to the level-1 cache is two 512-bit reads and two 256-
bit writes per clock. This makes it possible to copy a block of memory at a speed of 64 bytes
per clock cycle. However, the continuous cache throughput is always lower than the
theoretical maximum because of limitations of cache ways, read and write buffers, etc.

Multithreading
Most of the critical resources are shared between two threads running in the same core,
including instruction fetching, decoders, µop cache, and level-1 caches. This means that the
bottlenecks become more critical in multithreaded applications. It is not recommended to
run two threads in each core (hyperthreading) if any of these resources are limiting the
performance.

Literature
Intel: "Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual". May 2020.
WikiChip: Sunny Cove - Microarchitectures - Intel.
https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/intel/microarchitectures/sunny_cove
Spelman, Lisa: 3rd Gen Intel Xeon Scalable Platform Technology Preview. April 2021.

