13 Intel Alder Lake
The Alder Lake is a hybrid design with two different kinds of CPU cores: P cores for
performance, and E cores for efficiency. The P cores are based on the Golden Cove
microarchitecture, while the E cores are based on the Gracemont architecture that belongs
to the Atom series of low-power processors.

The first Alder Lake processors on the market had different CPUID model numbers for the P
cores and E cores, but this caused problems with DRM software that failed to recognize the
two kinds of cores as belonging to the same computer. A microcode update changed this so
that both kinds of cores had the CPUID family number 6 model 0x9A.

The two architectures support different instruction set extensions. Golden Cove supports
several AVX512 extensions while Gracemont is limited to AVX2. Instructions that are not
supported by both architectures are disabled in order to avoid incompatibilities when a
running thread jumps from a P core to an E core. The hybrid design is actually sacrificing
support for the latest instruction set extensions for the sake of compatibility between P cores
and E cores.

The hardware for the disabled instructions is actually present in the P cores. It is possible to
disable the E cores and enable the additional P core instructions with early versions of the
microcode on certain motherboards that have BIOS options for this. The CPUID model
number is changed to 0x97 when only the P cores are enabled. Enabling the P core
instructions is not endorsed by Intel and it is not possible with later microcode updates. I
have verified that all the P-core-only instructions are working. This includes the AVX512-
FP16 instruction set extension for half-precision floating point operations. Alder Lake is the
first processor to implement this instruction set extension.

The throughput sets a new record with a maximum of six instructions per clock cycle with six
decoders and twelve execution ports. Only the first decoder can handle instructions that
generate more than one µop.

Instruction timings for the P cores are mostly the same as for Ice Lake and Tiger Lake with
some improvements. Floating point addition of vectors up to 256 bits has a latency of only 2
clock cycles when followed by another addition instruction, and 3 clock cycles otherwise.
Integer addition with a small immediate constant has zero latency in some cases. Simple
integer instructions have a throughput of 5 instructions per clock cycle. Memory reads have
a throughput of three reads or two writes per clock cycle for sizes up to 256 bits, and two
reads or one write per clock cycle with 512 bits size.

The half-precision floating point additions and multiplications have latencies of 4 clock
cycles and throughputs of 1-2 instructions per clock cycle, except for division and square
root which have latencies of typically 31 clock cycles.

I have not included instruction timings for the Alder Lake in my instruction tables and I am
not describing all details here because there are two different kinds of cores with different
timings and because many of the instructions are not normally accessible. The reader is
referred to the timings for Tiger Lake and Gracemont.

The AVX512-FP16 instruction set includes new instructions for calculations with complex
numbers with half precision. The complex number multiplication and FMA instructions are
using the multiplication hardware twice while each instruction is issued as a single µop. The
latency is 8 clock cycles for complex number multiplication where real number multiplication
takes 4 clock cycles.

The complex number multiplication instructions have the restriction that the destination
register must be different from the source registers. This restriction is weird since the
processor has register renaming so that the destination register is always renamed to a
different physical register. No other x86 instructions have this restriction.

The precision of complex number multiplication is reduced. A complex number multiplication
is calculated as a multiplication followed by a fused multiply-and-add (FMA) operation. FMA
operations are normally calculated with extended precision on the intermediate
multiplication result, but this would give rise to an asymmetry in complex number
multiplication because the two intermediate multiplication results would have different
precisions. This would have the undesired consequence that A*B and B*A might give
slightly different results. The hardware implementation avoids this asymmetry by rounding
all intermediate results to half precision. It would be more expensive to calculate all
intermediate results with extended precision. The cost of the desired symmetry is that the
precision of complex number multiplication is reduced.

The µop cache has been improved while other caches are similar to previous models:

 Cache                        Alder Lake P core
 µop cache                    4096 µops, 8 µop line size, per core
 Level 1 code                 32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                              per core
 Level 1 data                 48 kB, 12 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                              latency 5, per core
 Level 2                      1280 kB, 10 ways, 2048 sets, 64 B line size,
                              latency 15, per core.
 Level 3                      4 - 30 MB, 10 ways, 64 B line size, latency 65,
                              shared
 Table 13.1. Cache sizes on Alder Lake P core

 Cache                        Alder Lake E core
 Level 1 code                 64 kB, 8 way, 128 sets, 64 B line size,
                              per core
 Level 1 data                 32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                              latency 3, per core
 Level 2                      2048 kB, 16 ways, 2048 sets, 64 B line size,
                              latency 20, per core.
 Level 3                      4 - 30 MB, 10 ways, 64 B line size, shared
 Table 13.2. Cache sizes on Alder Lake E core

 13.1 Bottlenecks in Alder Lake
It is difficult to optimize software for a hybrid architecture. The performance of a thread
depends on whether it runs in an E core, alone in a P core, or in a P core shared with
another thread. Intel has published a complicated guide for how to optimize software for the
hybrid design. However, I think it is completely unrealistic that application software can
make specific optimizations for every microprocessor model and take into account new
peculiarities every time a new processor comes on the market. This is far too expensive for
software developers in terms of development, verification, updating, maintenance, and
support. Instead, we have to rely on the operating system for optimizing the distribution of
programs and threads between the different types of cores. The Alder Lake has
implemented a special hardware solution to this problem called the 'Intel Thread Director'.
The Intel Thread Director is an embedded microcontroller that monitors all threads and
measures the resource use of each thread. The operating system can use this information
to calculate the optimal allocation of P cores and E cores to the different threads. A problem
with this approach is that the operating system has little knowledge about which threads are
most critical in a program or which tasks are most important to the user. In my opinion, it is
unrealistic that the operating system can solve this task optimally. Hybrid systems are
simply too difficult to optimize for.

The Alder Lake P core sets a new record for instruction throughput. This is the first
microprocessor that can maintain a steady throughput of six instructions per clock cycle per
core. Cache throughput is up to three memory reads and one write or two reads and two
writes per clock cycle for sizes up to 128 bits, and somewhat less for 256 bits and 512 bits
vectors.

A throughput of six instructions per clock cycle can of course only be obtained if instructions
are independent. A long dependency chain can only execute one instruction at a time. This
makes dependency chains a serious bottleneck. Programmers and compilers should do
everything possible to avoid long dependency chains in critical parts of the program.

The penalty for branch misprediction is high, sometimes exceeding 20 clock cycles in my
measurements. An improved branch prediction mechanism may compensate for this, but
some branches are simply not predictable no matter how advanced the prediction
mechanism.

Instruction decoding has been a serious bottleneck through many generations of Intel
processors. The P cores are finally addressing this problem efficiently. The decoders in the
P cores are now so efficient that the µop cache is less important, yet the µop cache has
been increased to 4096 µops. This helps making a high instruction throughput possible for
code with no long dependency chains.

The data caches have hardly been improved over previous models. This makes memory
access the most likely bottleneck for many applications.

The new half-precision floating point instructions are almost doubling the throughput of
floating point calculations in cases where a low precision is acceptable, such as graphics
and artificial intelligence. A 512-bit vector can hold 32 half-precision floats to give a
maximum throughput of 32 fused multiply-and-add instructions per clock cycle per core.

Unfortunately, the 512-bit vector instructions and the half-precision instructions have been
disabled for the sake of compatibility with the E cores that support only the AVX2 instruction
set. It is a strange decision to disable these top-performance instructions for the sake of
compatibility with a few extra E cores with lower capabilities. There are up to eight P cores
that can run two threads each, and up to eight E cores that can run one thread each. It was
possible on early versions of the Alder Lake to disable the E cores and enable all the P-core
instructions, but this trick is not endorsed by Intel and it is prevented by a microcode update.
The AVX512 instructions are not even enabled on those Alder Lake models that have no E
cores. Hackers may be able to inject the old microcode, but ordinary users will have to wait
for the forthcoming Sapphire Rapids processor to get this record-breaking performance.

Literature and references
Ian Cutress & Andrei Frumusanu: The Intel 12th Gen Core i9-12900K Review: Hybrid
Performance Brings Hybrid Complexity, 2021. https://www.anandtech.com/show/17047/the-
intel-12th-gen-core-i912900k-review-hybrid-performance-brings-hybrid-complexity

Ian Cutress & Andrei Frumusanu: Intel Architecture Day 2021: Alder Lake, Golden Cove,
and Gracemont Detailed, 2021. https://www.anandtech.com/show/16881/a-deep-dive-into-
intels-alder-lake-microarchitectures

Intel: Intel® Advanced Vector Extensions 512-FP16 Instruction Set for Intel® Xeon®
Processor Based Products, 2022. https://builders.intel.com/docs/networkbuilders/intel-avx-
512-fp16-instruction-set-for-intel-xeon-processor-based-products-technology-guide-
1651874188.pdf
Intel: Game Dev Guide for Alder Lake Performance Hybrid Architecture, 2022.
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/guide/alder-lake-developer-
guide.html

Zingaburga: Enabling AVX-512 on Alder Lake, 2022.
https://github.com/zingaburga/alderlake_avx512/wiki#enabling-avx-512-on-alder-lake

Agner Fog: Intel's new Chimera: Alder Lake, 2022.
https://www.agner.org/forum/viewtopic.php?f=1&t=79

Xaver Amberger: Intel completely disables AVX-512 on Alder Lake after all – Questionable
interpretation of “efficiency”, 2021. https://www.igorslab.de/en/intel-deactivated-avx-512-on-
alder-lake-but-fully-questionable-interpretation-of-efficiency-news-editorial/

