14 Intel Atom pipeline
The Intel Atom processor has a simpler design where power saving has the highest priority.
It has almost no out-of-order capabilities. It has one or two cores, where each core can run
two threads, totaling up to four simultaneous threads. The caches, decoders, and execution
units are all shared between two threads. It supports the Supplementary SSE3 instruction
set. Some versions support x64.

The pipeline has sixteen stages: three stages for instruction fetch, three stages for
instruction decoding, two for instruction dispatch, one for reading register operands, one for
calculating the address of a memory operand, two for reading the data cache, one for
execution, two for exception handling and multithreading, and one for committing the result.
Instructions of the read-modify or read-modify-write type are handled as a single µop. Only
more complex instructions are split into µops.

The pipeline can handle two instructions per clock cycle. There are two execution ports,
each of which is connected to an integer unit and a floating point/SIMD unit.

This description is based on the limited information available from second hand sources in
addition to my own test results (Scott Wasson: Intel's Atom processor unveiled.
http://techreport.com/articles.x/14458/1, April 2008. Anand Lal Shimpi: Intel's Atom
Architecture: The Journey Begins. http://www.anandtech.com/showdoc.aspx?i=3276&p=1,
April 2008).

 14.1 Instruction fetch
The instruction fetch rate is approximately 8 bytes per clock cycle on average when running
a single thread. The fetch rate can get as high as 10.5 bytes per clock cycle in rare cases,
such as when all instructions are 8 bytes long and aligned by 8, but in most situations the
fetch rate is slightly less than 8 bytes per clock when running a single thread. The fetch rate
is lower when running two threads in the same core.

The instruction fetch rate is likely to be a bottleneck when the average instruction length is
more than 4 bytes. The instruction fetcher can catch up and fill the instruction queue in case
execution is stalled for some other reason.

 14.2 Instruction decoding
The two instruction decoders are identical. Instructions with up to three prefixes can be
decoded in a single clock cycle. There are severe delays for instructions with more than
three prefixes (which would almost never occur unless prefixes are used for padding). Most
instructions generate only a single µop. There is no penalty for length-changing prefixes.

Decoded instructions go into a queue with 16 entries per thread. The two 16-entry queues
can be combined to a single 32 entries queue if one thread is disabled.

 14.3 Execution units
There are two clusters of execution units: an integer cluster which handles all instructions
on general purpose registers, and a floating point and SIMD cluster which handles all
instructions on floating point registers and SIMD vector registers. A memory access cluster
is connected to the integer unit cluster. Moving data between the clusters is slow.

The µops from the decoders can be dispatched to two execution ports, which I will call port
0 and port 1. Each execution port has access to part of the integer cluster and part of the
floating point/SIMD cluster. I will call the two parts of the integer cluster ALU0 and ALU1 and
the two parts of the floating point/SIMD cluster FP0 and FP1, respectively. The two

execution ports can thus handle two parallel streams of µops, with the work divided as
follows:

Instructions that can be handled by both port 0 and port 1:
    • Register-to-register moves
    • Integer addition in general purpose or SIMD registers
    • Boolean operations in general purpose or SIMD registers

Instructions that can be handled only by port 0:
    • Memory read or write
    • Integer shift, shuffle, pack in general purpose or SIMD registers
    • Multiply
    • Divide
    • Various complex instructions

Instructions that can be handled only by port 1:
    • Floating point addition
    • Jumps and branches
    • LEA instruction

The four units ALU0, ALU1, FP0 and FP1 probably have one integer ALU each, though it
cannot be ruled out that there are only two integer ALUs, which are shared between ALU0
and FP0 and between ALU1 and FP1, respectively. There is one multiply unit in FP0, and
one division unit in FP0. Integer multiplication and integer division go through port 0.

The SIMD integer adders and shift units have full 128-bit widths and a one clock latency.
The floating point adder has full 128-bit capability for single precision vectors, but only 64-bit
capability for double precision. The multiplier and the divider are 64-bits wide.

The floating point adder has a latency of 5 clock cycles and is fully pipelined to give a
throughput of one single precision vector addition per clock cycle. The multiplier is partially
pipelined with a latency of 4 clocks and a throughput of one single precision multiplication
per clock cycle. Double precision and integer multiplications have longer latencies and a
lower throughput. The time from one multiplication starts till the next multiplication can start
varies from 1 clock cycle in the most favorable cases, to 2 clock cycles or more in less
favorable cases. Double precision vector multiplication and some integer multiplications
cannot overlap in time.

Division is slow and not pipelined. A single precision scalar floating point division takes 30
clock cycles. Double precision takes 60 clock cycles. A 64-bit integer division takes 207
clock cycles.

The list of instructions in manual 4: "Instruction tables" tell which instructions use which
units.

 14.4 Instruction pairing
The maximum throughput of two instructions per clock cycle can only be obtained when
instructions are ordered so that they can execute two at a time. Two instructions can
execute simultaneously when the following rules are obeyed:

   •   The core runs only one thread. The other thread, if any, must be idle or stalled by a
       cache miss etc.

   •   The two instructions must be consecutive with no other instructions between.

   •   The two instructions do not have to be contiguous. A predicted taken branch
       instruction can pair with the first instruction at the branch target.

   •   The second instruction does not read a register that the first instruction writes to.
       This rule has one exception: A branch instruction that reads the flags can pair with a
       preceding instruction that modifies the flags.

   •   The two instructions do not write to the same register, except for the flags register.
       For example: INC EAX / MOV EAX,0 cannot pair because both modify EAX.
       INC EAX / INC EBX pair OK even though both modify the flags.

   •   The two instructions do not use the same execution port. The first instruction goes to
       port 0 and the second instruction to port 1; or the first instruction goes to port 1 and
       the second instruction to port 0.

   •   An instruction that uses resources from both ports or pipelines cannot pair with any
       other instruction. For example, a floating point add instruction with a memory
       operand uses FP1 under port 1 for floating point addition and the memory unit under
       port 0 for the memory operand.

It follows from these rules that it is not possible to do a memory read and a memory write at
the same time because both use the memory unit under port 0. But it is possible to do a
floating point addition (without memory operand) and a floating point multiplication
simultaneously because they use FP1 and FP0 respectively.

 14.5 X87 floating point instructions
Instructions that use the x87-style floating point registers are handled in a very unfortunate
way by the Atom processor. Whenever there are two consecutive x87 instructions, the two
instructions fail to pair and instead cause an extra delay of one clock cycle due to problems
in the decoders. This gives a throughput of only one instruction every two clock cycles,
while a similar code using XMM registers would have a maximum throughput of two
instructions per clock cycle.

This applies to all x87 instructions (names beginning with F), even the FNOP. For example,
a sequence of 100 consecutive FNOP instructions takes 200 clock cycles to execute in my
tests. If the 100 FNOPs are interspersed by 100 NOPs then the sequence takes only 100
clock cycles. It is therefore important to avoid consecutive x87 instructions. If you have
nothing else to put in between two x87 instructions then put in a NOP. Making every second
instruction a NOP obviously takes half the bandwidth, but this is still better than the quarter
bandwidth that you would have without the NOPs.

The FXCH instruction has a latency of one clock cycle, while many other processors give a
zero latency for FXCH. This is a further disadvantage of running x87-style floating point
code on the Atom because the floating point register stack structure makes it necessary to
use many FXCH instructions.

It is therefore advantageous to replace any x87-style floating point code with SSE2-style
code using XMM registers. The SSE2 instructions are often more than 4 bytes long while
x87 instructions are shorter. With a maximum instruction fetch rate of 8 bytes per clock cycle
we are likely to make instruction fetching a bottleneck, but the shorter length of the x87
instructions does not outweigh the severe disadvantages explained above.

 14.6 Instruction latencies
Simple integer instructions have a latency of one clock cycle. Multiplications, divisions and
floating point instructions have longer latencies.
Unlike most other processors, I have found no delays in the Atom processor when mixing
instructions with different latencies in the same pipeline.

The LEA instruction uses the address generation unit (AGU) rather than the ALU. This
causes a latency of 4 clock cycles when dependent on a pointer register or index register
because of the distance between the AGU and the ALU. It is therefore faster to use addition
and shift instructions than to use the LEA instruction in most cases.

Instructions that move data between a SIMD vector register and a general purpose register
or flag have a latency of 4-5 clock cycles because the integer execution cluster and the
floating point/SIMD cluster have separate register files.

There is no penalty for using XMM move, shuffle and Boolean instructions for other types of
data than they are intended for. For example, you may use PSHUFD for floating point data or
MOVAPS for integer data.

 14.7 Memory access
Each core has three caches:

   •   Level 1 instruction cache. 32 kB, 8 way, set associative, 64 B line size
   •   Level 1 data cache. 24 kB, 6 way, set associative, 64 B line size
   •   Level 2 cache. 512 kB or 1 MB, 8 way, set associative, 64 B line size

Each cache is shared between two threads, but not between cores. All caches have a
hardware prefetcher.

An instruction with a memory operand takes no more time to execute than a similar
instruction with a register operand, provided that the memory operand is cached. It is not
totally "free" to use memory operands, though, for two reasons. Firstly, the memory operand
uses the memory unit under port 0 so that the instruction cannot pair with another
instruction that would require port 0. And secondly, the memory operand may make the
instruction code longer, especially if it has a full 4-bytes address. This can be a bottleneck
when instruction fetching is limited to 8 bytes per clock cycle.

Cache access is fast for instructions running in the integer execution cluster, but slower for
instructions running in the floating point/SIMD cluster because the memory unit is connected
to the integer cluster only. Instructions using floating point or XMM registers typically take 4-
5 clock cycles to read or write memory while integer instructions have only 1 clock cycle of
effective cache latency thanks to store forwarding, as described below. The latency for a
memory read that depends on a recently changed pointer register is 3 clock cycles.

Store forwarding is very efficient. A memory operand that is written in one clock cycle can
be read back in the next clock cycle. Unlike most other processors, the Atom can do store
forwarding even if the read operand is larger than the preceding write operand or differently
aligned. The only situation I have found where store forwarding fails is when a cache line
boundary is crossed.

Misaligned memory accesses are very costly when a cache line boundary is crossed. A
misaligned memory read or write that crosses a 64 bytes boundary takes 16 clock cycles.
The performance monitor counters indicate that the misaligned memory access involves
four accesses to the level-1 cache, where two accesses would suffice. There is no cost to
misaligned memory accesses when no 64 bytes boundary is crossed.

 14.8 Branches and loops
The throughput for jumps and taken branches is one jump per two clock cycles. Not-taken
branches go at one per clock cycle. The minimum execution time for a loop is thus 2 clock
cycles if the loop contains no 16 bytes boundary, and 3-4 clock cycles if a 16 bytes
boundary is crossed inside the loop.

Branch prediction uses a 12 bits global history register, as explained on page 32. This gives
reasonably good predictions, but the branch target buffer (BTB) has only 128 entries. In
some of my tests, there were more BTB misses than hits. A branch misprediction costs up
to 13 clock cycles, sometimes a little less. If a branch is correctly predicted taken, but it fails
to predict a target because the BTB entry has been evicted, then the penalty is
approximately 7 clock cycles. This happens very often because the pattern history table has
4096 entries while the BTB has only 128.

 14.9 Multithreading
Each processor core can run two threads. The two treads are competing for the same
resources so that both threads run slower than they would when running alone.

The caches, decoders, ports and execution units are shared between the two threads of the
core, while the prefetch buffers, instruction queues and register files are separate.

The maximum throughput for the whole core is still two instructions per clock cycles, which
gives one instruction per clock cycle in each thread on average.

If both threads need the same resource, for example memory access, then each thread will
get the contested resource half of the time. In other words, you will have one memory
access every two clock cycles in each thread if there are no cache misses.

Interestingly, I found that the instruction fetch rate for each thread when running two threads
is more than half the fetch rate for a single thread but less than the full single-thread rate.
The instruction fetch rate per thread when running two threads is between 4 and 8 bytes per
clock cycle, but never more than eight. The numbers depend heavily on instruction lengths
and alignment. These findings indicate that there may be two instruction fetchers that are
capable, to a limited extent, of serving the same thread when the other thread is idle.

The branch target buffer (BTB) and the pattern history table are shared between the two
threads. If the two threads are running the same code (with different data) then we might
expect the two threads to share identical entries in these two tables. However, this doesn't
happen. The two tables are apparently indexed by some simple hash function of the branch
address and the thread number, so that identical entries in the two threads don't use the
same table index. My tests indicate that two threads running the same code have slightly
more branch mispredictions and significantly more BTB misses than a single thread running
alone. In the worst case of a code with many branches, each thread may run at less than
half the speed of a single thread running alone.

These resource conflicts apply only to the case where two threads are running in the same
processor core, of course. Some versions of the Atom processor have two cores capable of
running two threads each, giving a maximum of four threads running simultaneously. If each
core runs only one thread then there are no resource conflicts. Fortunately, most operating
systems will preferably put two threads in two different cores rather than in the same core.
But if there are more than two threads running then you will have some threads sharing the
same processor core.

It is impossible to assign different priorities to two threads running in the same core. Thus, a
low priority thread may take resources from a high priority thread running in the same core,

