with the unfortunate result that the high priority thread runs at only half the maximum
possible speed. This has happened several times during my tests.

 14.10 Bottlenecks in Atom
Some of the execution units in the Atom processor are quite powerful. It can handle two full
128-bit integer vector ALU instructions per clock cycle, though this capacity would rarely be
fully utilized because of bottlenecks elsewhere in the system. The floating point addition unit
is also reasonably good, while multiplication and division are slower.

The execution is likely to be limited by other factors than the execution units in most cases.
The most likely bottlenecks are:

   •   In order execution. The processor can do nothing while it is waiting for a cache miss
       or a long-latency instruction, unless another thread can use its resources in the
       meantime.

   •   The instruction fetch rate is less than 8 bytes per clock cycle in most cases. This is
       insufficient if the average instruction length is more than 4 bytes.

   •   Memory access is limited to one read or one write per clock cycle. It cannot read and
       write simultaneously.

   •   Memory access has long latencies for floating point and SIMD instructions.

   •   The branch target buffer is rather small.

   •   x87 style floating point code executes much slower than SSE style code.

   •   The maximum throughput of two instructions per clock cycle can only be achieved if
       the code is optimized specifically for the Atom and instructions are ordered in a way
       that allows pairing.

   •   The throughput is halved if two threads are running simultaneously in the same core.
       The resources most likely to be bottlenecks, such as cache, memory port and
       branch target buffer, are shared between two threads.

The conclusion is that the Atom may be insufficient for highly CPU-intensive and memory
intensive applications, such as games, graphics processing and floating point math. The low
price and low power consumption makes it useful for less demanding purposes, such as
office applications and embedded applications. The ability to run four threads makes the
Atom useful for server applications with limited traffic.

15 Intel Silvermont pipeline
The low-power Atom design has finally moved a major step forward after several years of
only small improvements. The Silvermont processor is now a serious competitor for the
ARM processors. It has limited out-of-order execution capabilities for integer instructions,
but not for floating point and vector instructions. It supports SSE4.2 instructions, but not
AVX.

The pipeline has 14 stages where the previous Atom design had 16. There are three stages
for instruction fetch, three stages for instruction decoding, two for register allocation and
renaming, one for scheduling, one for execution, and four for retirement and commitment.
The shorter pipeline should allegedly reduce the branch misprediction penalty to 10 clock

cycles, but my measurements show approximately 12 clock cycles, which is almost the
same as for the Atom.

The chip has one to four units with two execution cores in each for a total of up to eight
threads. The two cores in a unit share the level-2 cache, but no pipeline or execution
resources.

 15.1 Pipeline
The Silvermont has five pipelines: One for memory read and write operations, two for
integer operations, and two for floating point and vector operations. The maximum average
throughput is two instructions per clock cycle, which can be achieved when the two
instructions are going to two different pipelines.

The two integer pipelines have out-of-order execution. Each integer pipe has a reservation
station which can hold 8 instructions in queue. Memory operations can also operate out of
order with a 6-entry reservation station, while floating point and vector operations cannot be
reordered within their respective pipelines.

 15.2 Instruction fetch and decoding
Instruction boundaries are marked in the code cache. This is a simple technique for
removing the bottleneck of instruction length decoding that Intel hasn’t used since the
Pentium MMX, while AMD has been doing it all the time.

The Silvermont has two decoders, and it can fetch and decode two simple instructions per
clock cycle. Instructions longer than 8 bytes have a throughput of only one instruction per
clock cycle.

Most instructions generate only 1 µop from the decoders. Read-modify, and read-modify-
write instructions generate a single µop from the decoders, which is sent to both the
memory unit and the execution unit. Instructions that generate more than one µop are using
microcode ROM, except for the POP register and FXCH instructions. All instructions that
use microcode ROM take at least 4 clock cycles to decode if they go into decoder 0. If such
an instruction goes into decoder 1 first then it is redirected to decoder 0 with a further delay
of 2 clocks. This means that the decoding process takes 6 clock cycles for an instruction
that generates 2 µops and happens to go into decoder 1 first.

Instructions with more than three prefixes and escape bytes cause significant delays in the
decoders. Unlike most other processors from Intel and AMD, the Silvermont includes not
only the standard prefixes in this limitation, but also escape bytes such as 0F. Therefore,
this limitation can easily be exceeded. All xmm instructions belonging to the SSSE3 and
later instruction sets have one prefix byte (66) and two escape bytes (0F 38 or 0F 3A) in the
instruction code. If any of the registers r8 – r15 or xmm8 – xmm15 is used in such an
instruction then we need an extra REX prefix whereby the limit of three prefix and escape
bytes is exceeded. For example:

    ; Example 15.1. Prefix limitation in Silvermont
    pblendw xmm1, xmm2, 2 ; 1 prefix + 2 escape bytes
    pblendw xmm1, xmm8, 2 ; 2 prefixes + 2 escape bytes

The first instruction in this example can decode normally in a single clock cycle, while the
second instruction takes 4 clock cycles to decode if it goes into the first decoder, or 6 clock
cycles if it goes into the second decoder. There is no penalty for length-changing prefixes.

The two decoders cannot handle two branch instructions simultaneously. Consecutive
branch instructions should be avoided for this reason.

 15.3 Loop buffer
The Silvermont has a loop buffer that recycles decoded µops. It can improve the
performance of loops with up to 29 instructions by removing the bottleneck of decoding.

 15.4 Macro-op fusion
The Silvermont has no fusion of multiple instructions into a single µop.

 15.5 Register allocation and out of order execution
Instructions on general purpose registers can execute out of order to a limited degree.
Apparently, no more than eight instructions can be pending at the same time. Instructions
on floating point and vector registers cannot execute out of order with other instructions
going to the same execution port and pipeline. But a floating point instruction in one pipeline
can bypass a floating point instruction in the other pipeline. For example, a floating point
multiply instruction (in FP0) can execute before a preceding floating point add instruction (in
FP1).

The same logical register can be allocated to different physical registers in order to remove
false dependencies. This also applies to floating point and vector registers, even though
they cannot execute out of order in the same pipeline.

 15.6 Special cases of independence
A common way of setting a register to zero is by xor'ing it with itself or subtracting it from
itself, e.g. XOR EAX,EAX. The Silvermont processor recognizes that certain instructions are
independent of the prior value of the register if the two input operands are the same
register. This works only in a few cases. The XOR of a 32-bit register with itself is recognized
as independent of the previous value, but this does not work with 8-, 16- or 64-bit registers.
Thus, the best way to clear a general purpose register is to xor the 32-bit version of the
register with itself. This will clear all 64 bits. SUB, SBB and CMP instructions are not
recognized in this way. A vector register can be cleared of its dependence on previous
values by xor’ing it with itself using the PXOR, XORPS or XORPD instructions, but not by any
subtract, compare or other instructions.

 15.7 Execution units
The Silvermont has five execution ports with each their scheduler:

  Port            Operations
 Memory          memory read and write
 Integer port 0  ALU, multiply, shift
 Integer port 1  ALU, jump
 F.P. port 0     multiply, divide, shift, pack, convert
 F.P. port 1     add
Table 15.1. Execution units in Silvermont

The execution units are partially pipelined. The integer multiplier as well as the floating point
adder and multiplier all have a throughput of one instruction per clock for smaller data and
one instruction per two clocks or less for larger data:

  Port and unit        Data size                              Latency           Reciprocal
                                                                                throughput
 IP0 multiply        32 bit integer                              3                  1
 IP0 multiply        64 bit integer                              5                  2
 FP0 multiply        64 bit vector of 4 16-bit integers     4                         1
 FP0 multiply        128 bit vector of 8 16-bit             5                         2
                     integers
 FP0 multiply        single prec. float                     4                         1
 FP0 multiply        128 bit vector of 4 single prec.       5                         2
 FP0 multiply        double precision                       5                         2
 FP0 multiply        128 bit vector of 2 double prec.       7                         4
 FP0/1 add           vectors of 8-, 16-, 32 bit             1                        0.5
                     integers
 FP0/1 add           vectors of 64 bit integers             4                         ?
 FP1 add             single prec. float                     3                         1
 FP1 add             128 bit vector of 4 single prec.       3                         1
 FP1 add             double precision                       3                         1
 FP1 add             128 bit vector of 2 double prec.       4                         2
Table 15.2. Partially pipelined execution units in Silvermont

There is one division unit which is shared between integer port 0 and floating point port 0. It
has latencies from 19 to 69 and is not pipelined. Floating point division has fixed latencies.

Read and write bandwidth
The memory bandwidth is one 128-bit read or write instruction per clock cycle. It is possible
to do one read operation and one write operation per clock cycle, but only when the two
operations are part of the same instruction, i.e. a read-modify-write instruction. In all other
cases, the maximum bandwidth is one memory operation per clock cycle.

Data bypass delays
Instructions that move data between the integer units and the floating point/vector units
have a latency of 3-4 clock cycles. Otherwise, there is no extra delay for moving data
between different execution units, and there is no penalty for using integer vector
instructions on floating point data or vice versa.

Underflow and subnormals
Operations that have subnormal numbers as input or output or generate underflow take
approximately 160 clock cycles unless the flush-to-zero mode and denormals-are-zero
mode are both used.

 15.8 Partial register access
A write to a partial register has a false dependence on the rest of the register. The different
parts of a general purpose register or vector register are never treated as independent.

The flags register may be treated as different parts. A read of any flag after writing to part of
the flags has an extra delay of one clock cycle.

 15.9 Cache and memory access

  Cache                             Silvermont
 Level 1 code                     32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core
 Level 1 data                     24 kB, 6 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                                  latency 3, per core
 Level 2                          1 MB, 16 way, 1024 sets, 64 B line size,
                                  latency 19. Shared between two threads
Table 15.3. Cache sizes on Silvermont

Cache bank conflicts have not been observed. There is a false dependence between
memory addresses spaced a multiple of 4 kB apart.

 15.10 Store forwarding
A memory write can be forwarded to a subsequent read of the same size or a smaller size
with the same start address. The latency of the write + subsequent read is 7 clock cycles.
There is an extra delay of 3 clock cycles if an unaligned store forwarding is crossing a cache
line boundary.

Store forwarding fails when the read is bigger than the write or does not start at the same
address. It is not possible to forward a store to two reads of the two halves. A failed store
forwarding has an extra delay of 5 clock cycles.

 15.11 Multithreading
The Silvermont has one or more units with two cores each. The two cores in a unit share
the same level-2 cache. The two threads running in the same unit do not compete for any
resources other than the level-2 cache.

 15.12 Bottlenecks in Silvermont

Instruction fetch and decoding
Decoding is definitely the weakest part of the Silvermont design. Instructions that generate
more than one µop take at least 4 clock cycles to decode, and quite often more (with few
exceptions). The same applies to instructions that need an extra prefix. All xmm instructions
that belong to the SSSE3 and later instruction sets take 4 or 6 clock cycles to decode if they
use any of the registers r8 – r15 or xmm8 – xmm15. Instructions that take extra time in the
decoders should be avoided at all costs in code designed for the Silvermont.

Execution ports and execution units
Most of the execution units have full 128-bit capabilities, but some execution units are only
partially pipelined and take an extra clock cycle for full vectors or double precision data.

The capacity of the execution units seems to be satisfactory for a small low-power
processor.

The disastrous performance of the Atom on legacy x87 code has finally been repaired.

Out of order execution
The Silvermont has register renaming, but only very little capacity for out-of-order execution.
Scheduling by the compiler may be necessary for best performance.

Branch prediction
The size of the branch target buffer is unknown. The prediction rate is fair. The
misprediction penalty is relatively low. Indirect branches have no pattern prediction
according to my tests.

Memory access
The throughput is one read/write instruction per clock cycle. Cache performance is good.

Multithreading
No critical resources are shared between threads other than the level-2 cache. This makes
multithreading efficient.

Literature
Intel: "Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual”. July 2013.
Sebastian Anthony: “Intel’s Silvermont revealed: After a five-year snooze, Intel is finally
ready to crush ARM”. http://www.extremetech.com/computing/155082-intels-silvermont-
revealed-after-a-five-year-snooze-intel-is-finally-ready-to-crush-arm. 2013.
Anand Lal Shimpi: “Intel’s Silvermont Architecture Revealed: Getting Serious about Mobile”.
http://www.anandtech.com/show/6936/intels-silvermont-architecture-revealed-getting-
serious-about-mobile. 2013.
David Kanter: ”Silvermont, Intel’s Low Power Architecture”.
http://www.realworldtech.com/silvermont/. 2013.

