16 Intel Goldmont and Tremont pipeline
The low-power Goldmont processor is a further development of the Silvermont. It has full
out-of-order processing capabilities and a maximum throughput of three instructions per
clock cycle. The Goldmont Plus has only few improvements over Goldmont in the
executions units. The Tremont has further improvements in decoders, branch prediction,
and some execution units. The graphics unit has not been tested.

The vector instruction set is limited to 128-bit vectors. These processors support vector
instructions up to SSE4.2, but not any of the AVX instruction sets. Encryption instructions
such as AES and SHA are also supported.

The Goldmont and Tremont have more execution units than the Silvermont. The length of
the pipeline is not known, but it is approximately the same as in Silvermont.

The processor has 2–24 execution cores running one thread in each.

 16.1 Pipeline
The Goldmont has six execution pipelines, the Tremont has ten. These are described below
under execution units. The pipelines have full out-of-order execution. The reorder buffer has
78 entries on Goldmont, 95 on Goldmont plus, and 208 on Tremont.

The maximum average throughput is three instructions per clock cycle, or slightly more
when executing instructions out of the loop buffer.

 16.2 Instruction fetch and decoding
Instruction boundaries are marked in the code cache.

The Goldmont has three decoders. It can fetch and decode three simple instructions or 15-
16 bytes per clock cycle. The Tremont has two sets of three decoders so that it can decode
two branches simultaneously. This is useful for reducing branch misprediction delays, but
the maximum throughput of a linear code stream is only slightly more than three instructions
per clock cycle.

Most instructions generate only 1 µop from the decoders. Read-modify, and read-modify-
write instructions generate a single µop which is sent to both the memory unit and the
execution unit. Instructions that generate three or more µops are using microcode ROM.
Apparently, some instructions that generate two µops are using microcode ROM as well. All
instructions that use microcode ROM take at least 4 clock cycles to decode.

Instructions with more than four prefixes and escape bytes cause significant delays in the
decoders. A few combinations of three prefixes and escape bytes also cause high delays,
including the combination of F3 with 66 or REX prefixes.

There is no penalty for length-changing prefixes.

 16.3 Jumps
The branch target buffer is connected to the code cache in aligned 16-bytes blocks of code.
The reciprocal throughput (issue latency) for taken jumps depends on the number of jumps
in the same 16-bytes block of code. The Goldmont Plus and Tremont are faster than the
Goldmont for sparse jumps but slower for dense jumps. Conditional jumps that are
predicted and not taken have a throughput of one branch per clock cycle in these
processors.

   Jump instructions per            Goldmont            Goldmont Plus            Tremont
    16 bytes code block
             1                           2                     1                     1
             2                           2                    2.5                    2
             3                           2                     4                     4
             4                           2                     5                     5
             5                           3                     6                     7
             6                           4                     6                     7
             8                           5                     6                     7
Table 16.1. Reciprocal throughput of taken jumps depending on jump density

 16.4 Loop buffer
The Goldmont has a loop buffer that recycles decoded µops. It can improve the
performance of loops with up to 29 instructions by removing the bottleneck of fetch and
decoding. The loop buffer is bigger on Tremont, but the size is unknown.

 16.5 Macro-op fusion
The Goldmont and Tremont have no fusion of multiple instructions into a single µop.

 16.6 Special cases of independence
A common way of setting a register to zero is by xor'ing it with itself or subtracting it from
itself, e.g. XOR EAX,EAX. The processor recognizes that xor instructions are independent
of the prior value of the register if the two input operands are the same register. This works
with 32- and 64-bit registers, mmx, and xmm registers. It does not work for subtract,
compare, or other instructions.

 16.7 Execution units
The Goldmont has an integer execution unit consisting of three ALUs, one address
generation unit, and one jump execution unit. In addition, there is a floating point / vector
unit with two ALUs. All units are fully pipelined, except for division.

The Tremont has ten execution units: Three for integer operations, one for branches, two for
address generation, one for integer store, one for vector store, and two for floating point and
vector operations.

Move elimination
Register-to-register moves can be eliminated be register renaming for 32- and 64-bit
registers and xmm registers, but not for mmx registers. No more than one move can be
eliminated per clock cycle. Only the first of a chain of moves can be eliminated. Move
elimination often fails.

Read and write bandwidth
The memory bandwidth is one 128-bit read and one 128-bit write instruction per clock cycle
on Goldmont. The Tremont can do two memory reads or one read and one write per clock
cycle.

Data bypass delays
Instructions that move data between the integer units and the floating point/vector units
have a latency of 4 clock cycles. Otherwise, there is no extra delay for moving data between
different execution units, and there is no penalty for using integer vector instructions on
floating point data or vice versa.

Underflow and subnormals
Operations that have subnormal numbers as input or output or generate underflow take
100–200 clock cycles unless the flush-to-zero mode and denormals-are-zero mode are both
used.

 16.8 Partial register access
A write to a partial register has a false dependence on the rest of the register. The different
parts of a general purpose register or vector register are never treated as independent.

The flags register may be treated as different parts. A read of any flag after writing to part of
the flags has an extra delay of one clock cycle.

 16.9 Cache and memory access

  Cache        Goldmont                    Goldmont Plus               Tremont
 Level 1     32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets,      32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets,      32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets,
 code        64 B line size              64 B line size              64 B line size
 Level 1     24 kB, 6 way, 64 sets,      24 kB, 6 way, 64 sets,      24 kB, 6 way, 64 sets,
 data        64 B line size,             64 B line size,             64 B line size,
             latency 3                   latency 3                   latency 3
 Level 2     1 MB, 16 way, 1024          4 MB, 16 way, 1024          1.5MB, 12 way, 2048
             sets, 64 B line size,       sets, 64 B line size,       sets, 64 B line size,
             latency 18                  latency 18                  latency 20
 Level 3                                                             0 – 4 MB, 16 way,
                                                                     latency 46
Table 16.2. Cache sizes on Goldmont, Goldmont Plus, and Tremont

Cache bank conflicts have not been observed. There is a false dependence between
memory addresses spaced a multiple of 4 kB apart.

 16.10 Store forwarding
A memory write can be forwarded to a subsequent read of the same size or a smaller size
with the same start address. The latency of the write + subsequent read is 5-6 clock cycles.
There is an extra delay of 6 clock cycles if an unaligned store forwarding is crossing a cache
line boundary.

Store forwarding fails when the read is bigger than the write or does not start at the same
address. It is possible to forward a store to two reads of the two halves on Tremont, but not
on earlier processors. A failed store forwarding has an extra delay of 3–7 clock cycles.

 16.11 Bottlenecks in Goldmont and Tremont
The Goldmont and Tremont are well-designed lightweight processors with a reasonable
performance in all units.

Vector instructions are supported only up to instruction set SSE4.2 with 128-bit vectors. The
AVX instruction sets with 256 and 512 bit vectors are not supported. AES and SHA
encryption instructions are supported.

This processors are suitable for all but the most demanding CPU-intensive applications.

Instruction fetch and decoding
Instruction fetch and decoding can be a bottleneck if instructions are long or complex. Many
of the more complex instructions take 4 or more clock cycles to decode.

Execution ports and execution units
The capacity of the execution units seems to be satisfactory for a small low-power
processor. The processors have full out-of-order capabilities. There is no support for 256-
and 512-bit vector instructions.

Branch prediction
The size of the branch target buffer is unknown. The prediction rate is fair. The
misprediction penalty is relatively low. Jumps and taken branches are particularly slow if
there are multiple jump instructions in the same 16-bytes block of code.

Memory access
The throughput on the Goldmont is one read and one write instruction per clock cycle. The
Tremont can do two memory reads or one read and one write per clock cycle. Cache
performance is good.

Multithreading
No critical resources are shared between threads other than the level-2 and level-3 cache.
This makes multithreading efficient.

Literature
Intel: "Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual”. December 2017.

Wikichip: "Goldmont Plus - Microarchitectures - Intel".
https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/intel/microarchitectures/goldmont_plus
Accessed 2018-06-15.

Wikichip: "Tremont - Microarchitectures - Intel."
https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/intel/microarchitectures/tremont
Accessed 2022-06-08.

