18 Intel Knights Landing pipeline
The Xeon Phi / Knights Landing is the second generation of Intel's "Many Integrated Core"
(MIC) series. It has 64-72 cores that can run four threads each. It is built with a 14 nm
process and runs at a clock frequency of 1.3-1.5 GHz.

Each core has 32 kB L1 code cache and 32 kB L1 data cache. 1 MB of L2 cache is shared
between every two cores. 16 GB of MCDRAM inside the package is shared between all
cores.

The Knights Landing was the first microprocessor to support the AVX512 instruction set
extension. This instruction set extension doubles the number of vector registers from 16 to
32 (in 64 bit mode only) and increases the size of vector registers to 512 bits, versus 256
bits in AVX and 128 bits in SSE. AVX512 also adds eight mask registers which are used for
conditional operations on vector elements. Some desktop and laptop processors are now
supporting AVX512 as well, which makes the MIC processors binary compatible with
standard PC processors.

The pipeline design is based on the Silvermont microarchitecture with improved out-of-order
processing capabilities. The maximum throughput is two instructions per clock cycle.

 18.1 Pipeline
The Knights Landing has a better out-of-order pipeline than the Knights Corner which can
execute only in order, and the Silvermont that cannot execute floating point and vector
instructions out of order. Memory operations are dispatched in order and executed out of
order. All other operations are dispatched and executed out of order.

The throughput is limited to two instructions per clock cycle in the decode and register
rename stages. The dual pipeline in the decode and rename stages is split into six lines with
each their reservation stations: two lines for integer instructions on general purpose
registers, two lines for floating point and vector operations, and two for memory operations.
This makes it possible to execute six µops per clock cycle in short bursts, while the average
throughput is limited to two µops per clock cycle.

The exact length of the pipeline is not known, but an approximate length can be estimated
based on the branch misprediction penalty. The pipeline of the Knights Landing appears to
be the same length, or slightly longer, than on the Silvermont.

The register rename and reorder buffer has 72 entries. The reservation stations have 2x12
entries for the integer lines, 2x20 entries for the floating point and vector lines, and 12
entries shared for the two memory lines.

 18.2 Instruction fetch and decoding
Instruction boundaries are marked in the code cache in order to remove the bottleneck of
instruction length decoding.

The Knights Landing has two decoders. The maximum throughput is two instructions or 16
bytes per clock cycle on average. A small buffer allows it to decode isolated bursts of up to
24 bytes in a single clock cycle, but not in multiple consecutive clock cycles. Function
entries and important loop entries may be aligned by 16 in order to optimize instruction
decoding.

There is no fusion of multiple instructions into a single µop.

Simple instructions generate only 1 µop from the decoders. Read-modify, and read-modify-
write instructions generate a single µop from the decoders, which is sent to both the
memory unit and the execution unit. Instructions that generate more than one µop are using
microcode ROM, except for the POP register instruction. Instructions that use microcode
ROM have poor performance, taking typically 7 clock cycles or more to decode.

Instructions with more than three byte prefixes and escape bytes cause a significant delay
of 5-6 clock cycles in the decoders. This limitation applies to standard prefixes as well as 0F
escape byte sequences. This limitation can easily be exceeded. All xmm instructions
belonging to the SSSE3 and later instruction sets have one prefix byte (66) and two escape
bytes (0F 38 or 0F 3A) in the instruction code. If any of the registers r8 – r15 or xmm8 –
xmm15 is used in such an instruction then we need an extra REX prefix whereby the limit of
three prefix and escape bytes is exceeded. For example:

    ; Example 18.1. Prefix limitation in Knights Landing
    pblendw xmm1, xmm2, 2     ; 1 prefix + 2 escape bytes. no penalty
    pblendw xmm1, xmm8, 2     ; 2 prefixes + 2 escape bytes = penalty
    vpblendw xmm1,xmm1,xmm8,2 ; 3-bytes VEX prefix. no penalty

There is no penalty for the 2- and 3-byte VEX prefixes and 4-byte EVEX prefixes unless
there are additional prefixes before these. A segment prefix before a VEX or EVEX prefix
generates a penalty. There is no penalty for length-changing prefixes.

The two decoders cannot handle two branch instructions simultaneously. Consecutive
branch instructions should be avoided for this reason.

 18.3 Loop buffer
The Knights Landing has no loop buffer, unlike the Silvermont. This means that the
decoding of instructions is a very likely bottleneck, even for small loops.

 18.4 Execution units
The pipeline has two lines in the instruction decode, register allocate, and rename stages.
These are forked after the register allocate and renaming stages into three units with two
lines each: the integer unit, the floating point unit, and the memory unit. The integer unit
handles instructions on general purpose registers. The floating point unit handles all
instructions on floating point registers, vector registers, and mask registers. The memory
unit handles memory reads and writes. The integer unit, the floating point unit, and the
memory unit each has two lines so that it is possible to execute two integer instructions or
two vector instructions or two memory instructions simultaneously. All operations on mask
registers use the floating point unit.

         Unit/line        Operations
        Memory 0        integer and f.p./vector read and write
        Memory 1        integer and f.p./vector read
        Integer 0       ALU, multiply, shift
        Integer 1       ALU, jump, lea
        F.P. 0          vector add, multiply, div, logic, shift, convert
        F.P. 1          vector add, multiply, logic
        Table 18.1. Execution units/lines in Knights Landing

There is one division unit which is shared between integer unit 0 and floating point unit 0.
Floating point divisions have fixed latencies of 27-42 clock cycles. Integer divisions have
variable latencies.

Latencies of the f.p./vector unit
All instructions in the floating point unit have latencies of at least two clock cycles, while
simple instructions in the integer unit have latencies of one clock cycle. Most other Intel
processors, including the Silvermont, have single-clock latencies in the floating point / vector
unit. A possible explanation for the double latency in the floating point / vector unit is that the
integer reservation station can hold source data, while the floating point reservation station
cannot. This means that an integer ALU can write its result directly to any subsequent µop
in the reservation station that needs it, while results in the floating point unit have to go via
the floating point register file. A floating point µop can have three input operands of 512 bits
each and a 16-bit mask, to a total of 1552 data bits. This would probably take up too much
space in the reservation station. An integer µop can have no more than two input operands
of 64 bits each and a flag.

Even simple operations on mask registers have latencies of two clock cycles, while identical
operations in the integer unit have single-clock latencies.

Mask operations
Vector operations can have a mask so that each bit in the mask register determines
whether the operation on the corresponding vector element is carried out or not. Masking is
a simple operation in hardware that does not take extra time. All instructions have the same
latencies and throughputs with or without masking. The timing is also independent of the
value of the mask (even for gather and scatter instructions). The mask register is read at the
same time as the other input operands. The scheduler cannot save time when a mask
register is all zeroes, because the value of the mask is not available at the time the µop is
scheduled from the reservation station.

The timings of mask operations can be illustrated by the following example:

     ; Example 18.2. Masked read in Knights Landing
     vmovdqa32 zmm1{k1}, [rsi]

This instruction reads 512 bits from the memory operand pointed to by rsi and stores it in
the 512 bit vector register zmm1. The operation is masked with 32-bit granularity, so that
each 32-bit vector element in zmm1 is unchanged if the corresponding bit in mask register
k1 is zero.

Here, the latency from the memory operand to the destination register, zmm1, is approxi-
mately 5 clock cycles. The latency from the mask register, k1, to the destination is 2 clock
cycles. There is also a dependency on the previous value of zmm1 because the previous
value will be retained for elements where the mask bit is zero. The latency from zmm1 input
to zmm1 output is 2 clock cycles. In other words, the output zmm1 is available on the latest of
these three events: 5 clock cycles after the memory operand, or 2 clock cycles after the
mask register k1, or 2 clock cycles after the zmm1 input is available.

The dependency on the previous value of the destination register can be eliminated by
adding a zeroing option:

     ; Example 18.3. Masked read without dependence on prior value
     vmovdqa32 zmm1{k1}{z}, [rsi]

The {z} option makes the elements in the destination vector zero, rather than unchanged,
when the corresponding mask bit is zero. It is recommended to use the zeroing option when
possible to avoid the dependence on the previous value of the destination register on
masked instructions. There is no dependence on the previous value of the destination
register if there is no mask.

Data bypass delays
Instructions that move data between the integer units and the floating point/vector units
have a latency of 4-5 clock cycles. There is no penalty for using integer vector instructions
on floating point data or vice versa.

Permute, shuffle, and a few other instructions are implemented in a separate unit at a
distance from the other execution units. There is a delay of up to 2 clock cycles for moving
data to or from this unit. For example, the PALIGNR instruction has a latency of 2 clock
cycles when measured in a chain of similar instructions, but 6 clock cycles when the input
comes from another type of instruction and the output goes to another type of instruction,
e.g. move or add. The extra 4 clock cycles are 2 clock for moving data to the distant unit
and 2 clock cycled for moving the result back again to the general unit. Some shuffle
instructions, such as VPSHUFB, have multiple µops and very long latencies.

Underflow and subnormals
A division that has subnormal numbers as input or output, or generates underflow, takes
approximately 300 clock cycles unless the flush-to-zero mode and the denormals-are-zero
mode are both used. There is no penalty for subnormal numbers on addition and
multiplication.

Mathematical functions
The Knights Landing supports a special instruction set extension, AVX512ER, that includes
some powerful mathematical functions. VRCP28PS calculates reciprocals on a single
precision vector in 8 clock cycles. VRSQRT28PS calculates a reciprocal square root in 7
clock cycles. And VEXP2PS calculates a base-2 exponential function on a single precision
vector in just 10 clock cycles. The Intel manual has somewhat confusing descriptions of the
precision of these instructions, but they were all precise to the last bit in my tests on single
precision vectors. They are only approximate on double precision vectors.

AVX512ER makes the Knights Landing very suitable for mathematical calculations with
large amounts of parallel data where single precision is sufficient, for example neural
networks.

The legacy x87 instructions have poor performance. Especially the FXCH instruction can
cause performance problems because this instruction is heavily used in most x87 code, and
it takes 9 clock cycles. x87 instructions should not be used, unless the long double precision
is needed.

 18.5 Partial register access
A write to a partial register has a false dependence on the rest of the register. The different
parts of a general purpose register are never treated as independent.

The flags register may be treated as different parts. A read of multiple flag bits after writing
to only some of the flag bits has an extra delay of one clock cycle.

 18.6 Partial access to vector registers and VEX / non-VEX transitions
The Knights Landing does not have separate VEX modes like the Sandy Bridge (see
chapter 9.12). Instead, it has a partial register stall (see chapter 6.8) when a non-VEX
instruction that modifies the lower 128 bits of a vector register is followed by a VEX
instruction that reads 256 or 512 bits of the vector.

The VZEROALL or VZEROUPPER instructions are not only superfluous here, they are actually
harmful for the performance. A VZEROALL or VZEROUPPER instruction takes 36 clock cycles
in 64 bit mode or 30 clock cycles in 32 bit mode. Note that this breaks with the previous ABI
recommendations. The recommendation for previous processors was that VEX code should
be followed by a VZEROUPPER before any call or return to non-VEX code or code with
unknown VEX status.

 18.7 Special cases of independence
A common way of setting a register to zero is by xor'ing it with itself or subtracting it from
itself, e.g. XOR EAX,EAX. The Knights Landing processor recognizes that certain
instructions are independent of the prior value of the register, but only in the following
cases:
    • xor of a 32-bit register with itself
    • vpxor, vpxord, vpxorq, vxorps, vxorpd of a vector register with itself
It does not recognize independence for 64-bit registers, mmx registers or mask registers. It
does not recognize independence for subtract and compare instructions, and not for vector
instructions without VEX prefix. A 64-bit register can be cleared by xor'ing the corresponding
32-bit register with itself.

 18.8 Cache and memory access

  Cache                            Silvermont
 Level 1 code                    32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core
 Level 1 data                    32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size,
                                 latency 4, per core.
 Level 2                         1 MB, 16 way, 1024 sets, 64 B line size,
                                 latency 17. Shared between two cores.
 In package MCDRAM               16 GB, latency ~200. Can optionally be
                                 configured as cache. Shared between all cores.
 Table 18.2. Cache sizes on Knights Landing

Cache bank conflicts have not been observed. There is a false dependence between
memory addresses spaced a multiple of 4 kB apart.

There is a penalty for jumps, calls and returns that cross a 4GB boundary.

Read and write bandwidth
The processor can do two memory reads per clock cycle or one read and one write with
vector registers of up to 512 bits. It cannot do two reads with general purpose registers in
the same clock cycle, but it can do one read and one write simultaneously with any register
type.

The size of the vector registers (512 bits) is the same as the size of a cache line (64 bytes).
Thus, it is possible to read or write an entire cache line in one operation. The maximum read
and write throughput for 512-bit vectors can only be obtained when the memory operands
are aligned to cache lines, i.e. to addresses divisible by 64.

 18.9 Store forwarding
A memory write can be forwarded to a subsequent read of the same size or half the size
with the same start address. The latency of the write + subsequent read is 6-7 clock cycles
for general purpose registers and 9-10 clock cycles for vector registers.

Store forwarding fails in the following cases

   •   The address crosses a cache line boundary
   •   The read starts at a different address than the write
   •   The size of the read is not the same as the write or half the write
   •   A vector write/read is unaligned
   •   Forwarding from vector register to integer register, or vice versa
   •   The store uses a mask

It is not possible to forward a store to two reads of the two halves. A failed store forwarding
takes 16-20 clock cycles.

 18.10 Multithreading
The Knights Landing can run four threads in each core. Each thread gets a share of the
pipeline and execution resources as follows:

   •   1 thread running in a core: full resources
   •   2 threads running in a core: half resources
   •   3 or 4 threads running in a core: a quarter of the resources

The level-2 cache is shared between two cores, i.e. up to eight threads.

It is no advantage to run multiple threads in each core for CPU-intensive tasks where the
performance is limited by instruction fetch, decoding, or execution resources.

The only situations where it is advantageous to run multiple threads in each core are when
the performance is limited by memory access, branch mispredictions, or long dependency
chains.

Unfortunately, it is difficult to control the number of threads per core in a multi-user or multi-
process environment. A large number of low priority threads can easily consume most of the
CPU resources so that high priority threads are running at a quarter of the possible speed.
Current operating systems are not good at preventing this problem. The best solution in
such cases may be to turn off hyper-threading in the BIOS setup.

 18.11 Bottlenecks in Knights Landing

Instruction fetch and decoding
Decoding is definitely the weakest part of the design. The throughput of the decoders is less
than the maximum throughput of the execution units. This is likely to be the limiting
bottleneck in CPU-intensive code.

Microcode
Instructions that generate more than one µop are implemented in microcode, except for the
pop register instruction. All microcoded instructions take 7 clock cycles or more to decode. It
is important to avoid microcoded instructions in critical code. For example, it is
recommended to replace a call with a memory operand (function pointer) with a load of the
memory operand into a register, followed by a call to the register.

Some microcoded instructions are very inefficient. See manual 4 "Instruction tables". It is
important to avoid the most inefficient instructions in critical code.

Execution ports and execution units
The vector execution units have full 512 bit bandwidth. It is advantageous to use 512-bit
vector instructions.

All instructions in the floating point/vector unit have latencies of 2 clock cycles or more,
while simple instructions on general purpose registers have latencies of 1 clock.
The performance of legacy x87-style floating point code is poor. Shuffle and permute
instructions have poor performance - some of them very poor.

The VZEROUPPER and VZEROALL instructions take 36 clock cycles. This is a problem
because previous AVX code contains lots of these instructions. The ABI recommendations
for the use of these instructions have to be revised.

Out of order execution
The Knights Landing can execute instructions out of order, but the buffers used for
reordering instructions are much smaller than on current desktop processors. It will not be
able to handle long dependency chains optimally unless these are divided into multiple
threads.

Branch prediction
The size of the branch target buffer is unknown. The prediction rate is fair. The
misprediction penalty is relatively low.

Branches in vector code can be avoided by using masks.

Memory access
The processor can do two memory reads into vector registers per clock cycle, but only one
read per clock cycle into general purpose registers. Store forwarding works only in simple
cases. Memory operations are scheduled in order, even if they are executed out of order.

Cache performance is good.

Multithreading
The processor can run four threads in each core. However, this is no advantage for CPU
intensive code because the decoders are not even big enough to keep the execution units
busy on a single thread. It is a serious problem that critical or high-priority threads will run at
a quarter of the maximum speed if low priority threads are running in the same cores. This
can be difficult to avoid in a multi-user or multi-process environment unless hyper-threading
is turned off in the BIOS setup.

Literature
Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual. 2016.

Avinash Sodani: "Knights Landing (KNL): 2nd Generation Intel® Xeon Phi™ Processor".
Hot Chips: A Symposium on High Performance Chips. Cupertino, CA, August 23-25, 2015

James Jeffers, James Reinders, and Avinash Sodani: Intel Xeon Phi Coprocessor High-
Performance Programming. Knights Landing Edition. 2nd ed. Elsevier, 2016.

