20 AMD K8 and K10 pipeline
 20.1 The pipeline in AMD K8 and K10 processors
The AMD microprocessors are based on the same principles of out-of-order execution and
register renaming as Intel desktop processors.

Instructions are split up as little as possible and as late as possible in the pipeline. Each
read-modify macro-instruction is split into a read and a modify micro-instruction in the
execution stage and joined together into the macro-operation before retirement. A macro-
operation in AMD terminology is somewhat similar to a fused micro-operation in Intel
terminology. The K8 microarchitecture has no execution units bigger than 64 or 80 bits,
while the K10 microarchitecture has 128-bit execution units in the floating point pipeline so
that 128-bit XMM instructions can be handled in a single macro-instruction.

The most important difference from Intel's microarchitecture is that the AMD micro-
architecture contains three parallel pipelines. The instructions are distributed between the
three pipelines right after the fetch stage. In simple cases, the instructions stay in each their
pipeline all the way to retirement.

The exact length of the pipelines is not known but it can be inferred that it has approximately
twelve stages, based on the fact that the branch misprediction penalty is measured to 12
clock cycles.

The following list of stages is based on publications from AMD as well as an independent
analysis published by Chip Architect.

   1. Instruction fetch 1. 32 bytes per clock cycle on K10, 16 bytes on K7 and K8.

   2. Instruction fetch 2 and branch prediction.

   3. Pick/Scan. Can buffer up to 7 instructions. Distributes three instructions into the
      three decoder pipelines. The following stages are all split into three parallel pipes.

   4. Decode 1. Splits the instruction codes into their components.

   5. Decode 2. Determines input and output registers.

   6. Pack. Up to six macro-operations generated from the decoders are arranged into
      lines of three macro-operations for the three execution pipelines.

   7. Pack/Decode. Register renaming. Integer registers are read from the "Integer Future
      File and Register File". Submits integer macro-operations to the three integer pipes.
      Submits floating point macro-operations to the floating point pipes.

       Integer pipes:

   8. Dispatch. Sends macro-operations to a reservation station with 3x8 entries.

   9. Schedule. Schedules macro-operations out of order. Read-modify and read-modify-
      write macro-operations are split into micro-operations which are submitted to the
      arithmetic logic units (ALU), the address generation units (AGU), and the load/store
      units.

   10. Execution units and address generation units. Each of the three integer pipes has
       one ALU and one AGU. Integer arithmetic, logic and shift operations are executed in
       this stage. Integer multiplication can only be handled in pipe 0. All other integer
       instructions can be handled by any of the three integer pipes.

   11. Data cache access. Submits a read or write request to the data cache.

   12. Data cache response. The data cache returns a hit or miss response for read
       operations.

   13. Retirement. Macro-operations are retired in order. The data cache stages are
       skipped if there is no memory operation.

       Floating point pipes:

   8. Stack map. Maps floating point stack registers to virtual registers.

   9. Register renaming.

   10. Dispatch. Scheduler write.

   11. Scheduler. Uses a reservation station with 3x12 entries to schedule instructions out
       of order. Micro-operations are targeted for one of the three floating point execution
       units.

   12. Register read. Reads source operand register values.

   13. Execution units. The three execution units in the floating point pipes are named
       FADD, FMUL and FMISC. These units are specialized for each their purpose. The
       floating point execution units are fully pipelined in three stages to handle floating
       point operations with latencies longer than one. Integer vector operations are
       handled by the floating point units, not the integer ALU's.

   14. - 16. The processes of address generation, cache access and retirement are
       probably shared with the integer pipelines.

The floating point pipeline is longer than the integer pipeline because of the extra stages for
stack map, register renaming, and register read. The minimum measured latency of floating
point instructions is 2 clock cycles because of the extra register read stage. The maximum
latency of floating point instructions is 4 clock cycles.

The length of the floating point pipeline is difficult to measure, because the branch
misprediction penalty measures only the length of the integer pipeline.

You may think of the pipeline structure as consisting of an in-order front end, an out-of-order
execution core, and an in-order retirement unit. However, the linear picture of the pipeline
as sketched above is somewhat misleading, because some processes take place in
parallel, more or less independently of each other. Address generation takes several clock
cycles and may start before the ALU operation. Read-modify and read-modify-write macro-
operations are split into micro-operations that go to different units and at different times in
the out-of-order core. The in-order front end, the branch prediction unit, address-generation
units, load-store units, integer arithmetic-logic units, and floating point units are all separate
structures with each their pipeline. The integer ALU units and the floating point units can do
operations out of order. The load-store units are doing all memory reads in order and all
memory writes in order, while a read can be executed before a subsequent write. The other
units are doing all operations in order.

The time it takes to calculate an address and read from that address in the level-1 cache is
3 clock cycles if the segment base is zero and 4 clock cycles if the segment base is
nonzero, according to my measurements. Modern operating systems use paging rather than
segmentation to organize memory. You can therefore assume that the segment base is
zero in 32-bit and 64-bit operating systems (except for the thread information block which is
accessed through FS or GS). The segment base is almost always nonzero in 16-bit systems
in protected mode as well as real mode.

Complex instructions that require more than two macro-operations are so-called vector path
instructions. These instructions make exclusive use of all three slots in a decode line, a
reorder buffer line, etc. so that no other instructions can go in parallel. The macro-
operations are generated from microcode ROM in stage 3 - 5 in the pipeline.

The K7 processor does not have double instructions. It uses the vector path process for all
instructions that require more than one macro-operation. Otherwise, the microarchitecture of
the K7 processor is very similar to the 64-bit architecture of K8 and K10, as outlined above.
Earlier AMD processors have a different microarchitecture which will not be treated here.

Literature:
AMD Athlon™ Processor x86 Code Optimization Guide, Feb. 2002.
AMD Software Optimization Guide for AMD64 Processors, 2005, 2008.
Fred Weber: AMD’s Next Generation Microprocessor Architecture. Oct. 2001.
Hans de Vries: Understanding the detailed Architecture of AMD's 64 bit Core, 2003.
www.chip-architect.com.
Yury Malich: AMD K10 Micro-Architecture. 2007. www.xbitlabs.com.

The research on the AMD pipeline has been carried out with the help of Andreas Kaiser and
Xucheng Tang.

 20.2 Instruction fetch
The instruction fetcher can fetch 32 bytes of code per clock cycle from the level-1 code
cache on K10. On K7 and K8, it can fetch 16 bytes of code per clock cycle into a 32 bytes
buffer. Instruction fetching can therefore be a bottleneck on the older processors if the code
contains many long instructions or many jumps. The delivery bandwidth of code from the
level-2 cache has been measured to 4.22 bytes per clock on average for K10, and 2.56
bytes per clock on K8.

The fetched packets are aligned by 32 on K10 and by 16 on K7 and K8. This has
implications for code alignment. Critical subroutine entries and loop entries should not start
near the end of a 16 byte block. You may align critical entries by 16 or at least make sure
there is no 16-byte boundary in the first three instructions after a critical label.

Branch information stored in the code cache and the branch target buffer is used for
fetching code after predicted branches. The throughput for jumps and taken branches is one
jump per two clock cycles. I take this as an indication that the fetch buffer can only contain
contiguous code. It cannot span across a predicted branch.

 20.3 Predecoding and instruction length decoding
An instruction can have any length from 1 to 15 bytes. The instruction boundaries are
marked in the code cache and copied into the level-2 cache. Instruction length decoding is
therefore rarely a bottleneck, even though the instruction length decoder can handle only
one instruction per clock cycle.

The level-1 code cache contains a considerable amount of predecode information. This
includes information about where each instruction ends, where the opcode byte is, as well
as distinctions between single, double and vector path instructions and identification of
jumps and calls. Some of this information is copied to the level-2 cache, but not all. The low
bandwidth for instructions coming from the level-2 cache may be due to the process of
adding more predecode information.
My experiments show that it is possible to decode three instructions in one clock cycle on
K8 even if the third instruction starts more than 16 bytes after the first one, provided that
there are enough bytes left in the 32 byte buffer.

The throughput of the microprocessor is three instructions per clock cycle, even for an
instruction stream that contains predicted jumps. We know that a jump incurs a delay
bubble in the instruction fetch process, but there is a buffer between fetch and decoding
which enables it to catch up after this delay.

A recommendation in some versions of AMD's Optimization Guide says that decoding can
be improved by aligning groups of three instructions by eight. This is done by inserting
dummy prefixes to make each group of three instructions exactly eight bytes long. This
recommendation is obsolete, according to my measurements. The decoders can always
handle three relatively short instructions per clock cycle regardless of alignment. There is no
advantage in making instructions longer. Only in rare cases with relatively long instructions
have I observed an improvement by making instructions longer to make groups of
instructions a multiple of 8 bytes long (regardless of alignment). But making instructions
longer is more likely to have a negative effect.

Each of the instruction decoders can handle three prefixes per clock cycle. This means that
three instructions with three prefixes each can be decoded in the same clock cycle. An
instruction with 4 - 6 prefixes takes an extra clock cycle to decode.

 20.4 Single, double and vector path instructions

   •   Instructions that generate one macro-operation are called direct path single
       instructions.

   •   Instructions that generate two macro-operations are called direct path double
       instructions (K8 only).

   •   Instructions that generate more than two macro-operations are called vector path
       instructions.

The number of macro-operations generated by each instruction is listed in manual 4:
"Instruction tables".

There is no difference in throughput between using one double instruction or two single
instructions, except for the reduction in code size. The throughput is still limited to three
macro-operations per clock cycle, not three instructions per clock cycle. The source of this
bottleneck is most probably the retirement stage. If the bottleneck was in the schedulers
then we would not expect a double instruction in the floating point scheduler to limit the
throughput of the integer schedulers, or vice versa.

Vector path instructions are less efficient than single or double instructions because they
require exclusive access to the decoders and pipelines and do not always reorder optimally.
For example:

    ; Example 20.1. AMD instruction breakdown
    xchg eax, ebx    ; Vector path, 3 ops
    nop              ; Direct path, 1 op
    xchg ecx, edx    ; Vector path, 3 ops
    nop              ; Direct path, 1 op

This sequence takes 4 clock cycles to decode because the vector path instructions must
decode alone.
Most read-modify and read-modify-write instructions generate only one macro-operation.
These instructions are therefore more efficient than using separate read and modify
instructions.

The latency from the memory operand to the result of a read-modify instruction is the same
as the latency of a read plus the latency of the arithmetic operation. For example, the
instruction ADD EAX,[EBX] has a latency of 1 from EAX input to EAX output, and a latency
of 4 from EBX to EAX output in 32 bit mode. An 8-bit or 16-bit memory read behaves like a
read-modify instruction. For example, MOV AX,[EBX] takes one clock cycle more than
MOV EAX,[EBX].

A macro-operation can have any number of input dependencies. This means that
instructions with more than two input dependencies, such as MOV [EAX+EBX],ECX, ADC
EAX,EBX and CMOVBE EAX,EBX, generate only one macro-operation, while they require
two micro-operations on Intel processors.

 20.5 Stack engine
The K10 has a stack engine very similar to the one on Intel processors (p. 96). This makes
stack operations (PUSH, POP, CALL, RET) more efficient on K10 than on earlier processors.

 20.6 Integer execution pipes
Each of the three integer execution pipes has its own ALU (Arithmetic Logic Unit) and its
own AGU (Address Generation Unit). Each of the three ALU's can handle any integer
operation except multiplication. This means that it is possible to do three single integer
instructions in the same clock cycle if they are independent. The three AGU's are used for
memory read, write and complex versions of the LEA instruction. It is possible to do two
memory operations and one LEA in the same clock cycle. It is not possible to do three
memory operations because there are only two ports to the data cache.

The K10 can do a LEA instructions with no more than two operands in the ALU's, even if it
has a SIB byte. A LEA instruction with a scale factor or with both base register, index
register and addend is executed in the AGU. It is unknown whether a LEA with a RIP-
relative address is executed in the AGU. A LEA executed in the AGU has a latency of 2
clock cycles. If the AGU and ALU are at the same stage in the pipeline, as the model
suggests, then the extra latency is most likely explained by assuming that there is no fast
data forwarding path between these two units.

Integer multiplication can only be done in ALU0. A 32 bit integer multiplication takes 3 clock
cycles and is fully pipelined so that a new multiplication can begin every clock cycle. Integer
multiplication instructions with the accumulator as an implicit operand and only one explicit
operand generate a double sized result in DX:AX, EDX:EAX or RDX:RAX. These instructions
use ALU1 for the high part of the result. It is recommended to use multiplication instructions
that do not produce a double sized result in order to free ALU1 and EDX for other purposes.
For example, replace MUL EBX with IMUL EAX,EBX if the result can fit into 32 bits.

 20.7 Floating point execution pipes
The three execution units in the floating point pipes are named FADD, FMUL and FMISC.
FADD can handle floating point addition. FMUL can handle floating point multiplication and
division. FMISC can handle memory writes and type conversions. All three units can handle
memory reads. The floating point units have their own register file and their own 80-bits data
bus.

The latency for floating point addition and multiplication is 4 clock cycles. The units are fully
pipelined so that a new operation can start every clock cycle. Division takes 11 clock cycles
and is not fully pipelined. The latency for move and compare operations is 2 clock cycles.

The 3DNow instructions have the same latency as the XMM instructions. There is hardly
any advantage in using 3DNow instructions rather than XMM instructions unless you need
the approximate reciprocal instruction which is more accurate and efficient in the 3DNow
version than in the XMM version. The 3DNow instruction set is obsolete and not available
on newer microprocessors.

SIMD integer operations in MMX and XMM registers are handled in the floating point
pipelines, not the integer pipelines. The FADD and FMUL pipes both have an integer ALU
that can handle addition, Boolean and shift operations. Integer multiplications are handled
only by FMUL.

The minimum latency for the floating point units is 2 clock cycles. This latency is caused by
the pipeline design, not by lower clock frequency or staggered addition. Most SIMD integer
ALU operations have a latency of 2 clocks. Integer multiplication has a latency of 3 clocks.
The units are fully pipelined so that a new operation can start every clock cycle.

Macro-operations for the floating point units can be divided into five categories according to
which execution unit they are going to. I will designate these categories as follows:

          macro-operation                              Handled by unit
             category                  FADD                FMUL                    FMISC
              FADD                      X
              FMUL                                             X
             FMISC                                                                   X
              FA/M                       X                     X
              FANY                       X                     X                     X
Table 20.1. AMD floating point macro-operation categories

The floating point scheduler sends each macro-operation to a unit that can handle it. A
macro-operation in the FA/M category can go to either the FADD or the FMUL unit. A
macro-operation in the FANY category can go to any of the three units. The categories for
all floating point instructions are listed under "Instruction timings and µop breakdown for
AMD" in manual 4: "Instruction tables".

Unfortunately, the scheduler does not distribute the macro-operations optimally among the
three units. Macro-operations in the FA/M category are scheduled according to the simplest
possible algorithm: FA/M macro-operations go alternately to FADD and FMUL. This
algorithm makes sure that two FA/M macro-operations submitted in the same clock cycle do
not go to the same unit. A status bit is remembering which of the two units was used last,
and this bit can be remembered indefinitely. I have found no way to reset it.

The scheduling algorithm for macro-operations in the FANY category is only slightly more
sophisticated. A macro-operation in the FANY category goes preferentially to the unit that is
determined by which of the three pipelines it happens to come from. The first FANY macro-
operation after a series of integer macro-operations goes to FMISC. A second FANY macro-
operation in the same clock cycle goes to FMUL, and a possible third FANY macro-
operation goes to FADD. If other macro-operations submitted in the same clock cycle need
a particular floating point unit then the FANY macro-operations can be redirected to a
different unit.

The floating point scheduler does not check whether a particular unit is vacant or has a long
queue when deciding where to send a macro-operation of category FA/M or FANY. If, for
example, an instruction stream generates ten macro-operations of category FADD and then
one macro-operation of category FA/M, then there is a 50% probability that the FA/M
macro-operation will go to the FADD unit although it could save a clock cycle by sending it
to FMUL.

This suboptimal scheduling of macro-operations can significantly slow down the execution
of code with many floating point instructions. This problem can be diagnosed by testing a
small critical piece of code with a performance monitor counter set up for each of the three
floating point units. The problem is difficult to solve, however. Sometimes it is possible to
improve the distribution of macro-operations by changing the instruction order, by using
different instructions, or by inserting NOPs. But there is no general and reliable way to solve
the problem.

Another scheduling problem which can have even worse consequences is explained in the
next paragraph.

 20.8 Mixing instructions with different latency
There is a scheduling problem when mixing instructions with different latencies. The floating
point execution units are pipelined so that if a macro-operation with latency 4 starts at
time=0 and finishes at time=3, then a second macro-operation of the same kind can start at
time=1 and end at time=4. However, if the second macro-operation has latency 3 then it
cannot start at time=1 because it would end at time=3, simultaneously with the preceding
macro-operation. There is only one result bus for each execution unit and this prevents
macro-operations from delivering their results simultaneously. The scheduler prevents a
clash between two results by not dispatching a macro-operation to an execution unit if it can
be predicted that the result bus will not be vacant when the macro-operation is finished. It is
not able to redirect the macro-operation to another execution unit.

This problem is illustrated by the following example:

    ; Example 20.2. AMD mixing instruction with different latencies (K8)
                         ; Unit      time op 1  time op 2
    mulpd xmm0, xmm1     ; FMUL         0-3       1-4
    mulpd xmm0, xmm2     ; FMUL         4-7       5-8
    movapd xmm3, xmm4    ; FADD/FMUL    0-1       8-9
    addpd xmm3, xmm5     ; FADD         2-5      10-13
    addpd xmm3, xmm6     ; FADD         6-9      14-17

Each instruction in this example generates two macro-operations, one for each of the 64-bit
parts of the 128-bit register. The first two macro-operations are multiplications with a latency
of 4 clock cycles. They start at time=0 and 1, and end at time=3 and 4, respectively. The
second two multiplication macro-operations need the results of the preceding macro-
operations. Therefore they cannot start until time=4 and 5, and end at time=7 and 8,
respectively. So far so good. The MOVAPD instruction generates two macro-operations of
category FA/M with latency 2. One of these macro-operations goes to the FADD pipe which
is vacant so that this macro-operation can start immediately. The other macro-operation
from MOVAPD goes to the FMUL pipe because macro-operations in the FA/M category
alternate between the two pipes. The FMUL pipe is ready to start executing a new macro-
operation at time=2, but the MOVAPD macro-operation can't start at time=2 because then it
would end at time=3 where the first MULPD macro-operation finishes. It can't start at time=3
because then it would end at time=4 where the second MULPD macro-operation finishes. It
can't start at time=4 or 5 because the next two MULPD macro-operations start there. It can't
start at time=6 or 7 because then the result would clash with the results of the next two
MULPD macro-operations. So time=8 is the first possible start time for this macro-operation.
The consequence is that the subsequent additions, which are dependent on the MOVAPD,
will be delayed 7 clock cycles even though the FADD unit is vacant.

There are two ways to avoid the problem in the above example. The first possibility is to
reorder the instructions and put the MOVAPD before the two MULPD instructions. This would
make the two macro-operations from MOVAPD both start at time=0 in the FADD and the
FMUL unit, respectively. The subsequent multiplications and additions will then run in the
two pipes without interfering with each other.

The second possible solution is to replace XMM4 by a memory operand. The
MOVAPD XMM3,[MEM] instruction generates two macro-operations for the FMISC unit
which is vacant in this example. There is no conflict between macro-operations in different
execution pipes, regardless of differences in latency.

The throughput is of course higher on K10 than on K8, but the deadlock problem can still
occur for all instructions that use floating point registers, MMX registers or XMM registers.
As a general guideline, it can be said that the deadlock can occur when a macro-operation
with latency 2 follows after at least two macro-operations with a longer latency scheduled for
the same floating point execution unit and the macro-operations are independent in the
sense that one doesn't have to wait for the result of another. The deadlock can be avoided
by putting the instructions with short latency first or by using instructions that go to different
execution units.

The latencies and execution units of the most common macro-operations are listed below. A
complete list can be found in manual 4: "Instruction tables". Remember that a 128-bit
instruction typically generates one macro-operation on K10 and two macro-operations on
K8.

   Macro-operation type                Latency                Execution unit
 register-to-register move            2                      FADD/FMUL alternate
 register-to-memory move              2                      FMISC
 memory-to-register 64 bit            4                      any
 memory-to-register 128 bit           4                      FMISC
 integer addition                     2                      FADD/FMUL alternate
 integer Boolean                      2                      FADD/FMUL alternate
 shift, pack, unpack, shuffle         2                      FADD/FMUL alternate
 integer multiplication               3                      FMUL
 floating point addition              4                      FADD
 floating point multiplication        4                      FMUL
 floating point division              11                     FMUL (not pipelined)
 floating point compare               2                      FADD
 floating point max/min               2                      FADD
 floating point reciprocal            3                      FMUL
 floating point Boolean               2                      FMUL
 type conversion                      2-4                    FMISC
Table 20.2. Execution units in AMD

 20.9 64 bit versus 128 bit instructions
It is a big advantage to use 128-bit instructions on K10, but not on K8 because each 128-bit
instruction is split into two 64-bit macro-operations on the K8.

128 bit memory write instructions are handled as two 64-bit macro-operations on K10, while
128 bit memory read is done with a single macro-operation on K10 (2 on K8).

128 bit memory read instructions use only the FMISC unit on K8, but all three units on K10.
It is therefore not advantageous to use XMM registers just for moving blocks of data from
one memory position to another on the k8, but it is advantageous on K10.

 20.10 Data delay between differently typed instructions
XMM instructions come in three different types according to the types of operands they are
intended for:

   1. Integer instructions. Most of these instructions have a name that begins with P for
      Packed, for example POR.

   2. Single precision floating point instructions. These instructions have a name that ends
      with SS (Scalar Single precision) or PS (Packed Single precision), for example ORPS.

   3. Double precision floating point instructions. These instructions have a name that
      ends with SD (Scalar Double precision) or PD (Packed Double precision), for
      example ORPD.

The three instructions POR, ORPS and ORPD are doing exactly the same thing. They can be
used interchangeably, but there is a delay when the output from an integer instruction is
used as input for a floating point instruction, or vice versa. There are two possible
explanations for this delay:

Explanation 1: The XMM registers have some tag bits that are used for remembering
whether floating point values are normal, subnormal or zero. These tag bits have to be set
when the output of an integer instruction is used as input for a single or double precision
floating point instruction. This causes a so-called reformatting delay.

Explanation 2: There is no fast data forwarding path between the integer and floating point
SIMD units. This gives a delay analogously to the delay between execution units on the P4.

Explanation 2 is supported by the fact that there is no delay between single precision and
double precision floating point instructions, but there is a delay from floating point to integer
instructions.

There is no difference in delay after instructions that read from memory and do no
calculation. And there is no delay before instructions that write to memory and do no
calculation. Therefore, you may use the MOVAPS instruction rather than the one byte longer
MOVAPD or MOVDQA instructions for reading and writing memory.

There is often a two clock cycle delay when the output of a memory read instruction
(regardless of type) is used as input to a floating point instruction. This is in favor of
explanation 1.

It does not make sense to use the wrong type of instruction for arithmetic operations, but for
instructions that only move data or do Boolean operations there may be advantages in
using the wrong type in cases where no delay is incurred. The instructions with names
ending in PS are one byte shorter than other equivalent instructions.

 20.11 Partial register access
The processor always keeps the different parts of an integer register together. Thus, AL and
AH are not treated as independent by the out-of-order execution mechanism. This can
cause false dependences in a code that writes to part of a register. For example:

     ; Example 20.3. AMD partial register access
     imul ax, bx
     mov   [mem1], ax
     mov   ax, [mem2]

In this case the third instruction has a false dependence on the first instruction caused by
the high half of EAX. The third instruction writes to the lower 16 bits of EAX (or RAX) and
these 16 bits have to be combined with the rest of EAX before the new value of EAX can be
written. The consequence is that the move to AX has to wait for the preceding multiplication
to finish because it cannot separate the different parts of EAX. This false dependence can
be removed by inserting an XOR EAX,EAX instruction before the move to AX, or by
replacing MOV AX,[MEM2] by MOVZX EAX,[MEM2].

The above example behaves the same regardless of whether it is executed in 16 bit mode,
32 bit mode or 64 bit mode. To remove the false dependence in 64 bit mode it is sufficient to
neutralize EAX. It is not necessary to neutralize the full RAX because a write to the lower 32
bits of a 64 bit register always resets the high half of the 64 bit register. But a write to the
lower 8 or 16 bits of a register does not reset the rest of the register.

This rule does not apply to the XMM registers on K8. Each 128-bit XMM register is stored
as two independent 64-bit registers on K8.

 20.12 Partial flag access
The processor splits the arithmetic flags into at least the following groups:

   1. Zero, Sign, Parity and Auxiliary flags

   2. Carry flag

   3. Overflow flag

   4. Non-arithmetic flags

This means that an instruction that modifies only the carry flag has no false dependence on
the zero flag, but an instruction that modifies only the zero flag has a false dependence on
the sign flag. Examples:

    ; Example 20.4. AMD partial flags access
    add eax,1       ; Modifies all arithmetic flags
    inc ebx         ; Modifies all except carry flag. No false dependence
    jc   L          ; No false dependence on EBX
    bsr ecx,edx     ; Modifies only zero flag. False depend. on sign flag
    sahf            ; Modifies all except overflow flag
    seto al         ; No false dependence on AH

 20.13 Store forwarding stalls
There is a penalty for reading from a memory position immediately after writing to the same
position if the read is larger than the write, because the store-to-load forwarding mechanism
doesn't work in this case. Examples:

    ; Example 20.5. AMD store forwarding
    mov    [esi],eax    ; Write 32 bits
    mov    bx,[esi]     ; Read 16 bits. No stall
    movq   mm0,[esi]    ; Read 64 bits. Stall
    movq   [esi],mm1    ; Write after read. No stall

There is also a penalty if the read doesn't start at the same address as the write:

    ; Example 20.6. Store forwarding stall
    mov    [esi],eax    ; Write 32 bits
    mov    bl,[esi]     ; Read part of data from same address. No stall

    mov       cl,[esi+1]      ; Read part of data from different address. Stall

There is also a penalty if the write originates from AH, BH, CH or DH:

    ; Example 20.7. Store forwarding stall for AH
    mov    [esi],al     ; Write 8 bits
    mov    bl,[esi]     ; Read 8 bits. No stall
    mov    [edi],ah     ; Write from high 8-bit register
    mov    cl,[edi]     ; Read from same address. Stall

 20.14 Loops
The branch prediction mechanism for the AMD K8 and K10 processors is described on
page 33.

The speed of small loops is often limited by instruction fetching on the AMD. A small loop
with no more than 6 macro-operations can execute in 2 clock cycles per iteration if it
contains no more than one jump and no 32-byte boundary on K10 or 16-byte boundary on
K8. It will take one clock extra per iteration if there is a 32-byte boundary in the code
because it needs to fetch an extra 32-byte block on K10, or 16-byte boundary on K7 or K8.

The maximum fetching speed can be generalized by the following rule:

          The minimum execution time per iteration for a loop is approximately equal to the
          number of 32-byte boundaries on K10, or 16-byte boundaries on K8, in the code
          plus 2 times the number of taken branches and jumps.

Example:

    ; Example 20.8. AMD branch inside loop
         mov ecx,1000
    L1: test bl,1
         jz L2
         add eax,1000
    L2: dec ecx
         jnz L1

Assume that there is a 32-byte boundary at the JNZ L1 instruction. Then the loop will take
3 clocks if the JZ L2 doesn't jump, and 5 clocks if the JZ jumps. In this case, we can
improve the code by inserting a NOP before L1 so that the 32-byte boundary is moved to L2.
Then the loop will take 3 and 4 clocks respectively. We are saving one clock count in the
case where JZ L2 jumps because the 32-byte boundary has been moved into the code that
we are bypassing.

These considerations are only important if instruction fetching is the bottleneck. If something
else in the loop takes more time than the computed fetching time then there is no reason to
optimize instruction fetching.

 20.15 Cache
The level-1 code cache and the level-1 data cache are both 64 Kbytes, 2 way set
associative and a line size of 64 bytes. The data cache has two ports which can be used for
either read or write. This means that it can do two reads or two writes or one read and one
write in the same clock cycle. Each read port is 128 bits wide on K10, 64 bits on K8. The
write ports are 64 bits on both K8 and K10. This means that a 128-bit write operation
requires two macro-operations.

Each 64 byte line in the code cache line is split into 4 blocks of 16 bytes each. Each 64 byte
line in the data cache is split into 8 banks of 8 bytes each. The data cache cannot do two
memory operations in the same clock cycle if they use the same bank, except for two reads
from the same cache line:

    ; Example 20.9. AMD cache bank conflicts
    mov eax,[esi]      ; Assume ESI is divisible by 40H
    mov ebx,[esi+40h] ; Same cache bank as EAX. Delayed 1 clock
    mov ecx,[esi+48h] ; Different cache bank

    mov eax,[esi]            ; Assume ESI is divisible by 40H
    mov ebx,[esi+4h]         ; Read from same cache line as EAX. No delay

    mov [esi],eax            ; Assume ESI is divisible by 40H
    mov [esi+4h],ebx         ; Write to same cache line as EAX. Delay

(See Hans de Vries: Understanding the detailed Architecture of AMD's 64 bit Core, Chip
Architect, Sept. 21, 2003. www.chip-architect.com. Dmitry Besedin: Platform Benchmarking
with Right Mark Memory Analyzer, Part 1: AMD K7/K8 Platforms. www.digit-life.com.)

Operations with memory access are executed with the use three different units with each
their pipeline: (1) An Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU) or one of the floating point units, (2) an
Address Generation Unit (AGU), (3) a Load Store Unit (LSU). The ALU is used for read-
modify and read-modify-write instructions, but not for instructions that only read or write. The
AGU and LSU are used for all memory instructions. The LSU is used twice for read-modify-
write instructions. While the ALU and AGU micro-operations can be executed out of order,
the LSU micro-operations are processed in order in most cases. The rules are as follows, as
far as I am informed:

   1. Level-1 data cache hit reads are processed in order.

   2. Level-1 data cache miss reads proceed in any order.

   3. Writes must proceed in order.

   4. A read can go before a preceding write to a different address.

   5. A read depending on a prior write to the same address can proceed as soon as the
      forwarded data is available.

   6. No read or write can proceed until the addresses of all prior read and write
      operations are known.

It is recommended to load or calculate the values of pointer and index registers as early as
possible in the code in order to prevent the delaying of subsequent memory operations.

The fact that memory operations must wait until the addresses of all prior memory
operations are known can cause false dependences, for example:

    ; Example 20.10. AMD memory operation delayed by prior memory
    operation
    imul eax, ebx       ; Multiplication takes 3 clocks
    mov ecx, [esi+eax] ; Must wait for EAX
    mov edx, [edi]      ; Read must wait for above

This code can be improved by reading EDX before ECX so that the reading of EDX doesn't
have to wait for the slow multiplication.

There is a stall of one clock cycle for misaligned memory references if the data crosses an
8-bytes boundary. The misalignment also prevents store-to-load forwarding. Example:

    ; Example 20.11. AMD misaligned memory access
    mov [ds:10001h],eax ; No penalty for misalignment
    mov [ds:10005h],ebx ; 1 clock penalty when crossing 8-byte boundary
    mov ecx,[ds:10005h] ; 9 clock penalty for store-to-load forwarding

Level-2 cache
The level-2 cache has a size of 512 Kbytes or more, 16 ways set-associative with a line size
of 64 bytes and a bus size of 16 bytes. Lines are evicted by a pseudo-LRU scheme.

Data streams can be prefetched automatically with positive or negative strides. Data are
prefetched only to the level-2 cache, not to the level-1 cache.

The level-2 cache includes bits for automatic error correction when used for data, but not
when used for code. The code is read-only and can therefore be reloaded from RAM in
case of parity errors. The bits that have been saved by not using error correction for code
are used instead for copying the information about instruction boundaries and branch
prediction from the level-1 cache.

Level-3 cache
The K10 has a level-3 cache of 2 MB. It is likely that versions with different level-3 cache
sizes will become available. The level-3 cache is shared between all cores, while each core
has its own level-1 and level-2 caches.

 20.16 Bottlenecks in AMD K8 and K10
It is important, when optimizing a piece of code, to find the limiting factor that controls
execution speed. Tuning the wrong factor is unlikely to have any beneficial effect. In the
following paragraphs, I will explain each of the possible limiting factors in the AMD
microarchitecture.

Instruction fetch
The instruction fetch is limited to 16 bytes of code per clock cycle on K8 and earlier
processors. This can be a bottleneck when the rest of the pipeline can handle three
instructions per clock cycle. Instruction fetch is unlikely to be a bottleneck on K10.

The throughput for taken jumps is one jump per two clock cycles. Instruction fetch after a
jump is delayed even more if there is a 16-byte boundary in the first three instructions after
the jump. It is recommended to align the most critical subroutine entries and loop entries by
16 or at least make sure the critical jump targets are not near the end of an aligned 16-byte
block. The number of jumps and 16-byte boundaries in small loops should be kept as small
as possible. See above, page 217.

Out-of-order scheduling
The maximum reordering depth is 24 integer macro-operations plus 36 floating point macro-
operations. Memory operations cannot be scheduled out of order.

Execution units
The execution units have a much larger capacity than it is possible to utilize. It is alleged
that the nine execution units can execute nine micro-operations simultaneously, but it is
virtually impossible to verify this claim experimentally since the retirement is limited to three
macro-operations per clock cycle. All three integer pipelines can handle all integer
operations except multiplication. The integer execution units can therefore not be a
bottleneck except in code with an extraordinary high number of multiplications.

