A throughput of 3 macro-operations per clock cycle can be obtained when no execution unit
receives more than one third of the macro-operations. For floating point code, it is difficult to
obtain a perfectly equal distribution of macro-operations between the three floating point
units. Therefore, it is recommended to mix floating point instructions with integer
instructions.

The floating point scheduler does not distribute macro-operations optimally between the
three floating point execution units. A macro-operation may go to a unit with a long queue
while another unit is vacant. See page 212.

All floating point units are pipelined for a throughput of one macro-operation per clock cycle,
except for division and a few other complex instructions.

Mixed latencies
Mixing macro-operations with different latencies scheduled for the same floating point unit
can seriously prevent out-of-order execution. See page 213.

Dependency chains
Avoid long dependency chains and avoid memory intermediates in dependency chains. A
false dependence can be broken by writing to a register or by the following instructions on
the register with itself: XOR, SUB, SBB, PXOR, XORPS, XORPD. For example, XOR EAX,EAX,
PXOR XMM0,XMM0, but not XOR AX,AX, PANDN XMM0,XMM0, PSUBD XMM0,XMM0 or
compare instructions. Note that SBB has a dependence on the carry flag.

Accessing part of a register causes a false dependence on the rest of the register, see page
215. Accessing part of the flag register does not cause a false dependence, except in rare
cases, see page 216.

Jumps and branches
Jumps and branches have a throughput of one taken branch every two clock cycles. The
throughput is lower if there are 16-byte boundaries shortly after the jump targets. See page
217.

The branch prediction mechanism allows no more than three taken branches for every
aligned 16-byte block of code. Jumps and branches that always go the same way are
predicted very well if this rule is obeyed. See page 33.

Dynamic branch prediction is based on a history of only 8 or 12 bits. Furthermore, the
pattern recognition often fails for unknown reasons. Branches that always go the same way
do not pollute the branch history register.

Retirement
The retirement process is limited to 3 macro-operations per clock cycle. This is likely to be a
bottleneck if any instructions generate more than one macro-operation.

21 AMD Bulldozer, Piledriver, Steamroller, and Excavator
   pipeline
 21.1 The pipeline in AMD Bulldozer, Piledriver, Steamroller and Excavator
The AMD Bulldozer, Piledriver, Steamroller and Excavator processors can have from one to
eight compute units with two execution cores per unit. It can run one thread per core or two
threads per unit.

Instruction cache and fetching is shared between the two cores in an execution unit. The
instruction decoder is also shared between two cores in Bulldozer, Piledriver, and
Excavator, while the Steamroller has one decoder for each core.

Integer execution units and level-1 data cache is separate for each core. The floating point
and vector execution units and level-2 cache are also shared between the two cores of an
execution unit. A possible level-3 cache is shared between all compute units. Some
versions have an integrated graphics processing unit.

Each core contains four parallel pipelines and can execute up to four instructions per clock
cycle. Instructions are split up as little as possible and as late as possible in the pipeline. A
read-modify or read-modify-write instruction generates only one macro-operation at the
decode stage. The length of the pipeline is not known.

The design has more focus on power saving than previous designs. It saves power quite
aggressively by slowing down the clock speed most of the time. Some versions also lower
the voltage to the CPU when the clock speed is reduced. The maximum clock speed is only
obtained after a long sequence of CPU-intensive code.

 21.2 Instruction fetch
The instruction fetcher is shared between the two cores of an execution unit. The instruction
fetcher can fetch 32 aligned bytes of code per clock cycle from the level-1 code cache. The
measured fetch rate was up to 16 bytes per clock per core when two cores were active, and
up to 21 bytes per clock in linear code when only one core was active. The fetch rate is
lower than these maximum values when instructions are misaligned.

Critical subroutine entries and loop entries should not start near the end of a 32-bytes block.
You may align critical entries by 16 or at least make sure there is no 16-bytes boundary in
the first four instructions after a critical label.

 21.3 Instruction decoding
Instruction boundaries are marked in the code cache. Each decoder can handle four
instructions per clock cycle. The Bulldozer, Piledriver and Excavator have one decoder in
each unit, which is shared between two cores. When both cores are active, the decoders
serve each core every second clock cycle, so that the maximum decode rate is two
instructions per clock cycle per core. Instructions that belong to different cores cannot be
decoded in the same clock cycle. The decode rate is four instructions per clock cycle when
only one thread is running in each execution unit.

The Steamroller has one decoder per core so that it can decode four instructions per core
per clock, even when running two threads in each unit. Therefore, the bottleneck is most
likely to be instruction fetching rather than decoding on the Steamroller.

Instructions that generate two macro-ops are called double instructions. The decoders in the
Piledriver, Steamroller, and Excavator can handle four single instructions (1-1-1-1) or one
double instruction and two single instructions (2-1-1) or two double instructions (2-2) in one
clock cycle. The Bulldozer can handle (1-1-1-1) and (2-1-1), but not (2-2).

Instructions that generate more than two macro-ops are using microcode. The decoders
cannot do anything else while microcode is generated. This means that a decoder can stop
decoding for several clock cycles after meeting an instruction that generates more than two
macro-ops. On the Steamroller, this will affect only the thread that has the complex
instruction, but on the other models it will delay both threads in a unit because they share
the same decoder. The number of macro-ops generated by each instruction is listed in
manual 4: "Instruction tables".
Instructions with up to three prefixes can be decoded in one clock cycle. There is a very
large penalty for instructions with more than three prefixes. Instructions with 4-7 prefixes
take 14-15 clock cycles extra to decode. Instructions with 8-11 prefixes take 20-22 clock
cycles extra, and instructions with 12-14 prefixes take 27 - 28 clock cycles extra. It is
therefore not recommended to make NOP instructions longer with more than three prefixes.
The prefix count for this rule includes operand size, address size, segment, repeat, lock,
REX and XOP prefixes. A three-bytes VEX prefix counts as one, while a two-bytes VEX
prefix does not count. Escape codes (0F, 0F38, 0F3A) do not count.

 21.4 Loop buffer
The Steamroller and Excavator have a queue of decoded macro-ops after the decoder.
There is one queue for each core. The queue can hold up to 40 macro-ops, though
sometimes a little less. Small loops can bypass the decoder and run from the macro-op
queue. This saves power and removes the bottleneck of instruction fetching for tiny loops. A
loop with no more than 4 instructions can execute in just one clock cycle per iteration on
these processors because it bypasses the decoder.

 21.5 Instruction fusion
A CMP or TEST instruction immediately followed by a conditional jump can be fused into a
single macro-op. This applies to all versions of the CMP and TEST instructions and all
conditional jumps except if the CMP or TEST has a rip-relative address or both a
displacement and an immediate operand. Examples:

    ; Example 21.1. Instruction fusion on Bulldozer
    test eax,4
    jnz L1                 ; fused into one op
    cmp [Mydata],eax       ; rip-relative address in 64 bit mode
    jb L2                  ; not fused if rip-relative address
    cmp dword [rsi+8],2    ; both displacement and immediate operand
    jl L3                  ; not fused
    cmp [Mydata+rbx*4],eax ; 32-bit absolute address + scaled index
    jg L3                  ; fused
    dec ecx
    jnz L4                 ; not fused. Only cmp and test can fuse

(The AMD software optimization guide 3.06, Jan 2012 is inaccurate here)

No other ALU instruction can fuse with a conditional jump. The maximum decode rate is not
increased by instruction fusion.

 21.6 Stack engine
The processor has an efficient stack engine that renames the stack pointer, but we do not
know exactly where it is placed in the pipeline.

Push, pop and return instructions use only a single macro-op. These instructions have zero
latency with respect to the stack pointer, so that subsequent instructions that depend on the
stack pointer, either as operand or as pointer, are not delayed. No extra stack synchro-
nization µops of the type seen in Intel processors have been observed.

 21.7 Out-of-order schedulers
Each core has an out-of-order Integer scheduler with 40 entries and a physical register file
of 96 registers of 64-bit.

The shared floating point unit has its own out-of-order scheduler with 60 entries and a
physical register file of 160 registers of 128-bit.

These numbers may be bigger for the Steamroller and Excavator, but exact details are not
available.

 21.8 Integer execution pipes
There are four integer execution pipes:

  Integer pipe             Used for
 EX0                      Most ALU operations, division
 EX1                      Most ALU operations, multiplication, jump
 AGLU0                    Memory read
 AGLU1                    Memory read
Table 21.1. Integer execution pipes

The execution pipes EX0 and EX1 are used for most integer and general purpose
instructions. Memory read instructions use AGLU0 and AGLU1. Memory write instructions
use both AGLU0/1 and EX0/1 simultaneously. AGLU0 and 1 can also handle simple
register-to-register moves with 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers, except on early
versions of Bulldozer. AGLU0 and 1 can also handle the most common integer operations
such as addition and logical operations on Excavator. AGLU0 and 1 cannot handle register
move instructions with 8-bit or 16-bit registers or an immediate operand on Bulldozer,
Piledriver and Steamroller.

LEA instructions are executed as ALU operations in EX0 and EX1. Simple LEA instructions
take one clock cycle. If shifting or more than one addition is involved then it takes two
clocks. If the operand size or address size is 16 bits then it takes an extra clock.

Integer multiplication of operands up to 32 bits takes 4 clock cycles with a throughput or one
multiplication per 2 clocks. Integer division is not pipelined.

 21.9 Floating point execution pipes
There are four floating point/vector execution pipes on Bulldozer and Piledriver, but only
three on Steamroller and Excavator.

  Floating point pipe       Used for
 P0                       f.p. addition, multiplication, division,
                          integer vector multiplication
 P1                       f.p. addition, multiplication, division,
                          shuffle, shift, pack
 P2                       integer vector addition, boolean, move
 P3                       integer vector addition, boolean, move,
                          store
Table 21.2. Bulldozer and Piledriver floating point execution pipes

  Floating point pipe       Used for
 P0                       f.p. addition, multiplication, division, boolean,
                          integer vector addition, multiplication
 P1                       f.p. addition, multiplication, division,
                          shuffle, shift, pack
 P2                       integer vector addition,
                          vector boolean,
                          store
Table 21.3. Steamroller and Excavator floating point execution pipes

All these units can handle 128-bit operands. 256-bit operations are split into two macro-ops.

All floating point additions and multiplications take 5 clock cycles on Bulldozer, Piledriver
and Steamroller if the next dependent instruction is also an addition or multiplication,
otherwise possibly 6 clock cycles. A fused multiply-and-add instruction also takes 5 or 6
clock cycles. It is unknown how the execution unit saves one clock cycle when the result is
used in the same unit. It might be due to a shorter data path, or it might be that the
execution unit can save one pipeline stage of normalization, formatting or categorization of
the floating point number. Floating point latencies are one clock shorter on Excavator.

The latency for move and compare operations and for simple integer vector instructions is 2
clock cycles.

Most execution units are doubled, as table 21.2 and 21.3 show, so that the throughput is
two 128-bit operations or one 256-bit operation per clock cycle. Normally, a macro-op goes
to the unit that is vacant first.

The store unit is not doubled, and 256-bit stores always take more than one clock cycle.
The Bulldozer has a throughput of at most one 256-bit store per 3 clock cycles if aligned,
and one per 10 clock cycles if unaligned. The Piledriver is particularly bad on 256-bit stores
with a throughput of one aligned 256-bit store per 17 clock cycles in my measurements. The
Steamroller and Excavator are much better, with a throughput of one 256-bit store per 2
clock cycles if aligned, 4 clock cycles if unaligned.

The Steamroller has lower throughput than expected for floating point addition. The
throughput is only one 128-bit vector per clock cycle in single-threaded applications, even
though there are two 128-bit execution units for floating point addition. It is sometimes
possible to use both add units simultaneously when running two threads.

Mixing instructions with different latency on the same pipe rarely causes problems.

The 3DNow instructions are no longer supported, except for the prefetch instructions.

Subnormal operands
The Bulldozer and Piledriver have a penalty of approximately 175 extra clock cycles when
the result of a floating point operation is a subnormal or underflow, unless the flush-to-zero
mode is activated. There is no penalty for overflow. The Steamroller and Excavator have
none of these penalties.

Fused multiply and add
The floating point units can do fused multiply-and-add (FMA) instructions of the type
d = a * b + c. The Bulldozer supports FMA4 instructions, where the four operands can be
different registers. The Piledriver, Steamroller and Excavator support both FMA3 and FMA4.
The FMA3 instructions have three operands, where the destination d must use the same
register as one of the input operands a, b or c. The Piledriver has only half the expected
throughput for FMA3, namely one 128-bit vector per clock, but full throughput for FMA4, i.e.
two 128-bit vectors per clock. The Steamroller and Excavator have full throughput for both
FMA3 and FMA4.

 21.10 AVX instructions
The throughput of 256-bit AVX instructions is generally one 256-bit vector per clock cycle
while the throughput of 128-bit instructions is two 128-bit vectors per clock cycle for the
most common instructions. Therefore, the overall throughput is roughly the same regardless
of whether we are using 128-bit or 256-bit instructions. The Bulldozer, Piledriver, and
Steamroller support the AVX instruction set, which contains 256-bit floating point
instructions. The Excavator also supports the AVX2 instruction set, which contains 256-bit
integer instructions.

There are a few disadvantages of using 256-bit instructions on Bulldozer and Piledriver:

   •   The instruction decoders cannot handle two double instructions per clock cycle on
       the Bulldozer.
   •   The throughput of 256-bit store instructions is less than half the throughput of 128-bit
       store instructions on Bulldozer and Piledriver. It is particularly bad on the Piledriver,
       which has a throughput of one 256-bit store per 17 - 20 clock cycles.
   •   128-bit register-to-register moves have zero latency, while 256-bit register-to-register
       moves have a latency of 2 clocks plus a penalty of 2-3 clocks for using a different
       domain (see below) on Bulldozer and Piledriver. Register-to-register moves can be
       avoided in most cases thanks to the non-destructive 3-operand instructions.

Therefore, there is no advantage in using 256-bit instructions on Bulldozer and Piledriver
when the bottleneck is execution unit throughput or instruction decoding. The poor
throughput of 256-bit stores makes it a disadvantage to use 256-bit registers on the
Piledriver. These problems have been fixed on the Steamroller and Excavator.

While Intel processors have a large penalty for mixing 256-bit AVX instructions with non-
AVX XMM instructions due to a mode switch (see page 135), there is no such penalty and
apparently no mode switch on these AMD processors.

The AVX instruction set gives three-operand versions of most XMM instructions, both
integer and floating point. This has the advantage that no operand register is overwritten so
that most register-to-register moves can be avoided. There is no disadvantage of using the
three-operand instructions other than incompatibility with older processors.

 21.11 Data delay between different execution domains
There is often a delay when output data from one execution unit is used as input in another
execution unit. The different execution units can be divided into six domains, where there is
a transport delay when data are moved from one domain to another:

   1. int domain. This includes all operations on general purpose registers.
   2. ivec domain. This includes all integer vector operations as well as floating point
      move, pack, shuffle, blend and boolean operations.
   3. fma domain. This includes all floating point add, subtract and multiply operations,
      including fused multiply-and-add instructions.
   4. fp domain. This includes other floating point instructions, such as division, square
      root, round, etc.
   5. load. This includes all memory read instructions.
   6. store. This includes memory write instructions.

The transport delays between these domains have been measured as follows:

  From                                             To domain
  domain               int            ivec             fp            fma            store
  int                  0            (8-10)            n.a.           n.a.            (4)
  ivec               (7-8)             0               1              1              (5)
  fp                  n.a.             1               0              0             1(+5)
  fma                 n.a.             1               0              -1            1(+5)
  load                (4)             (6)             (6)            (6)             n.a.
Table 21.4. Data transport delays, clock cycles. Numbers in parenthesis are included in the
 latency counts listed in manual 4: "Instruction tables".

Note that many floating point instructions belong to the integer vector (ivec) domain. For
example, there are no special floating point versions of the boolean instructions. The POR,
ORPS and ORPD instructions are all identical. Example:

    ; Example 21.2a. Data transport delays on Bulldozer
    movaps xmm0, [mem1] ; 6     clock
    mulps   xmm0, xmm1    ; 6+1 clock
    xorps   xmm0, xmm2    ; 2+1 clock
    addps   xmm0, xmm3    ; 6+1 clock
    movaps [mem2], xmm0 ; 5     clock
                          ; 28 clock total

This can be improved by reordering the instructions so that the number of transitions
between domains is reduced (the xorps instruction is used for changing sign here, so that
this reordering is allowed).

    ; Example 21.2b. Data transport delays on Bulldozer, improved
    movaps xmm0, [mem1] ; 6     clock
    xorps   xmm0, xmm2    ; 2+1 clock
    mulps   xmm0, xmm1    ; 6-1   clock
    addps   xmm0, xmm3    ; 6+1 clock
    movaps [mem2], xmm0 ; 5     clock
                          ; 26 clock total

The transport delays between the integer unit and the floating point/vector unit are much
longer in my measurements than specified in AMD's Software Optimization Guide.
Nevertheless, I cannot confirm that it is faster to move data from a general purpose register
to a vector register through a memory intermediate, as recommended in that guide.

There is a large penalty when the output of a floating point calculation is input to a floating
point calculation with a different precision, for example if the output of a double precision
floating point addition is input to a single precision addition. This has hardly any practical
significance since such a sequence is most likely to be a programming error, but it indicates
that the processor stores extra information about floating point numbers beyond the 128 bits
in an XMM register. This effect is not seen on Intel processors.

 21.12 Instructions that use no execution units
The NOP, FNOP and FWAIT instructions are resolved without being sent to any execution
unit. They have a throughput of 4 instructions per clock cycle.

128 bit register-to-register moves are implemented as register renaming without being sent
to any execution unit. Therefore, they have a latency of zero and a throughput of four
instructions per clock cycle. The same register can even be moved/renamed four times in
one clock cycle. The instructions MOVDQA, MOVDQU, MOVAPS, MOVUPS, MOVAPD and MOVUPD
are all identical when used with register operands.

256 bit register-to-register moves are different. The low half of the YMM register is renamed
in the same way as with 128-bit register moves with zero latency, but the high half is moved
by an execution unit with a latency of 2 clock cycles. In addition to this latency comes a
possible transport delay in floating point code because the move is executed in the integer
vector domain (see table 21.4). Example:

    ; Example 21.3a. YMM move with transport delays on Bulldozer
    vaddps ymm0, ymm0, ymm1    ; 6   clock
    vmovaps ymm2, ymm0         ; 2+2 clock
    vmulps ymm2, ymm2, ymm3    ; 6   clock
                               ; 16 clock total

Here, we can eliminate the move and save 5 clock cycles by taking advantage of the non-
destructive 3-operand instructions:

    ; Example 21.3b. YMM move eliminated
    vaddps ymm0, ymm0, ymm1    ; 6-1 clock
    vmulps ymm2, ymm0, ymm3    ; 6   clock
                               ; 11 clock total

The x87 floating point instructions FINCSTP, FDECSTP and FFREE are also resolved by
renaming without using any execution unit. The FXCH instruction is only partly resolved by
renaming: It has zero latency, but uses an execution unit at pipe P0 or P1.

All other register moves use execution units, including general purpose register moves.

 21.13 Partial register access
The processor always keeps the different parts of an integer register together. For example,
AL and AH are not treated as independent by the out-of-order execution mechanism. An
instruction that writes to part of a register will therefore have a false dependence on any
previous write to the same register or any part of it.

An instruction that writes to a 32-bit register will not have any false dependence on the
corresponding 64-bit register because the upper part of the 64-bit register is set to zero.

A write to a part of an XMM register has a false dependence on the whole register, but this
does not apply to the two halves of a YMM registers. A 256 bit YMM register is treated as
two independent 128 bit XMM registers. However, this rarely has any practical
consequences because the instructions VEXTRACTF128 and VINSERTF128 are treated by
the sequencer as if they read/write both halves of the register.

The processor treats certain parts of the arithmetic flags as independent. For example, an
instruction that modifies only the carry flag has no false dependence on the zero flag.

 21.14 Dependency-breaking instructions
A common way of setting a register to zero is XOR EAX,EAX or SUB EBX,EBX. The
processor recognizes that certain instructions are independent of the prior value of the
register if the two input registers are the same. The following instructions are recognized as
independent of the input when both operands are the same register:
XOR, SUB, SBB (depends on carry flag only), CMP, PXOR, PANDN, PSUBx, PCMPEQB,
PCMPEQW, PCMPEQD, PCMPGTB, PCMPGTW, PCMPGTD, XORPS, XORPD, ANDNPS, ANDNPD.

This does not work with 8-bit and 16-bit registers due to the treatment of partial registers,
but it works with 32-bit registers and larger.

The instructions PCMPEQQ, PCMPGTQ are recognized as independent on Steamroller and
Excavator, but not on Bulldozer and Piledriver.

Floating point subtractions and compares are never recognized as independent because
they have to treat special cases such as NAN and INF.

The XOP instructions VPCOMB, VPCOMW, VPCOMD, VPCOMQ are recognized as independent
of the input only when the immediate operand is 6 (set to 0) or 7 (set to all 1s).

The zeroing instructions are using the same execution units as when the two operands are
different.

 21.15 Branches and loops
The branch prediction mechanism is described on page 36. There is no longer any
restriction on the number of branches per 16 bytes of code that can be predicted efficiently.
The misprediction penalty is quite high because of a long pipeline.

The speed of small loops is most often limited by instruction fetching. On Bulldozer and
Piledriver, a small loop takes at least 2 clock cycles per iteration if it contains no more than
one taken jump and no 32-bytes boundary. Larger loops are limited by the instruction fetch
rate or by the instructions they contain.

Tiny loops with up to four instructions can execute in just 1 clock cycle per iteration on the
Steamroller and Excavator.

 21.16 Cache and memory access

  Cache      Bulldozer             Piledriver            Steamroller            Excavator
 Level 1    64 kB, 2-way, 64      64 kB, 2-way, 64      96 kB, 3-way, 64       96 kB, 3-way, 64
 code       B line size, shared   B line size, shared   B line size, shared    B line size, shared
            between two           between two           between two            between two
            cores.                cores.                cores.                 cores.
 Level 1    16 kB, 4-way, 64      16 kB, 4-way, 64      16 kB, 4-way, 64       32 kB, 8-way, 64
 data       B line size, per      B line size, per      B line size, per       B line size, per
            core. Latency 3-4     core. Latency 3-4     core. Latency 3-4      core. Latency 3
            clocks.               clocks.               clocks.                clocks.
 Level 2    1 - 2 MB, 16-way,     2 MB, 16-way, 64      2 MB, 16-way, 64       1 MB, 16-way, 64
            64 B line size,       B line size, shared   B line size, shared    B line size, shared
            shared between        between two           between two            between two
            two cores.            cores. Latency 20     cores. Latency 19      cores. Latency 17
            Latency 21 clocks.    clocks. Read          clocks.                clocks.
            Read throughput       throughput 1 per 4    Read throughput        Read throughput
            1 per 4 clock.        clock. Write          1 per 4 clock.         1 per 4 clock.
            Write throughput 1    throughput 1 per      Write throughput 1     Write throughput 1
            per 12 clock.         12 clock.             per 6 clock.           per 6 clock.
 Level 3    0 - 8 MB, 64-way,     0 - 8 MB, 64-way,     None                   None
            64 B line size,       64 B line size,
            shared between        shared between
            all cores. Latency    all cores. Latency
            87 clock. Read        87 clock. Read
            throughput 1 per      throughput 1 per
            15 clock. Write       15 clock. Write
            throughput 1 per      throughput 1 per
            21 clock.             21 clock.
Table 21.5. Cache sizes on AMD Bulldozer, Piledriver, Steamroller and Excavator
The data cache has two 128-bit ports which can be used for either read or write. This
means that it can do two reads or one read and one write in the same clock cycle.

The measured throughput is two reads or one read and one write per clock cycle when only
one thread is active. We would not expect the throughput to be less when multiple threads
are active because each core has separate load/store units and level-1 data cache. But my
measurements indicate that level-1 cache throughput is several times lower when multiple
threads are running, even if the threads are running in different units that do not share any
level-1 or level-2 cache. This phenomenon is seen on both Bulldozer, Piledriver, Steamroller
and Excavator. No explanation for this effect has been found. Level-2 cache throughput is
shared between two threads running in the same unit, but not affected by threads running in
different units.

Unaligned reads and writes have a throughput of one read or write per clock cycle. The
throughput is one read or write in 2 or 3 clock cycles when a cache line boundary is
crossed, and one in 21 clock cycles when a memory page boundary is crossed.

The processor can do a read before a pending write to a different address.

The level-2 cache has a disappointingly poor performance on the Bulldozer in certain
benchmark tests for unknown reasons. The Piledriver, Steamroller and Excavator has a
much more efficient cache system. The Steamroller and Excavator appear to have more
write buffers than the previous models.

The level-1 data cache is organized as 16 or 32 banks of 16 bytes each. The data cache
cannot do two memory operations in the same clock cycle if they use banks that are spaced
by a multiple of 0x100 bytes, except for two reads from the same cache line. This kind of
cache bank conflict occurs very often:

    ; Example 21.4. Cache bank conflicts
    mov eax,[rsi]      ; Assume rsi is divisible by 100H
    mov ebx,[rsi+200h] ; Cache bank conflict. Delayed 1 clock

    mov eax,[rsi]      ; Assume rsi is divisible by 100H
    mov ebx,[rsi+210h] ; Different cache bank, no conflict

    mov eax,[rsi]            ; Assume rsi is divisible by 100H
    mov ebx,[rsi+10h]        ; Same cache line, no conflict

There is a false dependence when the address of a memory read is spaced a multiple of
0x1000 bytes from a preceding write:

    ; Example 21.5. False memory dependence
    mov [rsi],eax
    mov ebx,[rsi+2000h] ; False dependence on previous write
    mov ecx,[rsi+2004h] ; No false dependence

 21.17 Store forwarding stalls
There is a penalty of 25-26 clock cycles for reading from a memory position immediately
after writing to the same position if the read is larger than the write, because the store-to-
load forwarding mechanism doesn't work in this case. Examples:

    ; Example 21.6. AMD store forwarding
    mov     [esi],eax    ; Write 32 bits
    mov     bx,[esi]     ; Read 16 bits. No stall
    movq    mm0,[esi]    ; Read 64 bits. Stall
    movq    [esi],mm1    ; Write after read. No stall

On Bulldozer and Piledriver, there is a similar penalty if the read doesn't start at the same
address as the write:

    ; Example 21.7. Bulldozer and Piledriver store forwarding stall
    mov     [esi],eax    ; Write 32 bits
    mov     bl,[esi]     ; Read part of data from same address. No stall
    mov     cl,[esi+1]   ; Read part of data from different address. Stall

On the Steamroller and Excavator, there is no penalty for reading part of the address written
to:

    ; Example 21.8. Steamroller store forwarding stall
    movdqa [esi],xmm0    ; Write 128 bits
    mov     eax,[esi+8] ; Read part of the data. No stall
    vmovaps [esi],ymm0   ; Write 256 bits as 2*128 bits
    vmovaps xmm1,[esi+8] ; Crossing between two 128 bit writes. Stall

 21.18 Bottlenecks in AMD Bulldozer, Piledriver, Steamroller and Excavator
The AMD Bulldozer is a major redesign of previous microarchitectures. Some of the most
important improvements are:

   •   Four pipelines giving a maximum throughput of 4 instructions per clock cycle.
   •   Improved floating point unit with high throughput
   •   Better scheduling of macro-ops to the first vacant execution unit
   •   Some register-to-register moves are translated into register renaming
   •   Branch prediction is no longer tied to the code cache and there is no limitation on the
       number of branches per code cache line
   •   AVX instruction set with non-destructive 3-operand instructions
   •   Efficient fused multiply-and-add instructions

The Piledriver, Steamroller and Excavator are similar, with some improvements. Various
possible bottlenecks are discussed in the following paragraphs.

Power saving
The power saving features are reducing the clock frequency most of the time. This often
gives inconsistent results in performance tests because the clock frequency is varying. It is
sometimes necessary to turn off the power saving features or put a long sequence of CPU-
intensive code before the code under test in order to measure the maximum performance.

Shared resources
The instruction fetch is shared between the two cores that make a compute unit. The branch
predictor and the floating point units are also shared. The instruction decoder is shared on
the Bulldozer, Piledriver and Excavator, while the Steamroller has one decoder per thread.
Some operating systems do not have enough information about resource sharing so that
they may put two threads into the same compute unit while another compute unit is idle.

Instruction fetch
The shared instruction fetch unit can fetch up to approximately 20 bytes per clock in single-
threaded applications and 16 bytes per clock in multi-threaded applications. This is very
likely to be a bottleneck when the average instruction length is more than 4 bytes or when
frequent jumps produce bubbles in the pipeline.

Instruction decoding
On Bulldozer, Piledriver and Excavator, the shared decode unit can handle four instructions
per clock cycle. It is alternating between the two threads so that each thread gets up to four
instructions every second clock cycle, or two instructions per clock cycle on average. This is
a serious bottleneck because the rest of the pipeline can handle up to four instructions per
clock.

The situation gets even worse for instructions that generate more than one macro-op each.
All instructions that generate more than two macro-ops are handled with microcode. The
microcode sequencer blocks the decoders for several clock cycles so that the other thread
is stalled in the meantime.

Out-of-order scheduling
On Bulldozer and Piledriver, the integer out-of-order scheduler has 40 entries, the shared
floating point scheduler probably has somewhat more. This is a significant improvement
over previous designs. The Steamroller and Excavator have more entries and physical
registers, according to some rumors, but this has not been independently confirmed.

Execution units
The integer execution units are poorly distributed between the four pipes on Bulldozer and
Piledriver. Two of the pipes have all the integer execution units while the other two pipes are
used only for memory read instructions and address generation (not LEA). The Steamroller
has two additional units for simple register moves, while the Excavator has four units for the
most common integer ALU operations. This means that the Bulldozer and Piledriver can
execute only two integer ALU instructions per clock cycle, where previous models can
execute three. This is a likely bottleneck for pure integer code. The single-core throughput
for integer code can actually be doubled by doing half of the instructions in vector registers,
even if only one element of each vector is used.

The floating point execution units are better distributed so that all three or four pipes can be
used. The most commonly used units are all doubled, including floating point addition,
multiplication and division, as well as integer addition and boolean operations. All units are
128 bits wide. This gives a high throughput for 128-bit vector code which is likely sufficient
to serve two threads simultaneously in many cases. All 256-bit vector instructions are split
into two 128-bit operations so that there is generally no advantage in using 256-bit vectors.
Bulldozer and Piledriver have four pipes for floating point and vector operations, while
Steamroller and Excavator have only three.

The fused multiply-and-add instructions are very efficient. They are doing one addition and
one multiplication in the same time that it otherwise takes to do one addition or one
multiplication. This effectively doubles the throughput of floating point code that has an
equal number of additions and multiplications. The incompatibility of the Bulldozer's FMA4
instructions with Intel's FMA3 instructions is actually not AMD's fault, as discussed on my
blog.

256-bit memory writes
256-bit memory write operations are exceptionally slow on the Piledriver. So slow, indeed,
that it is better to not use 256-bit registers at all on the Piledriver. This problem has been
fixed in the Steamroller and Excavator.

Mixed latencies
Mixing operations with different latencies will cause less problems than on previous
processors.

Dependency chains
Latencies for floating point instructions and integer vector instructions are relatively long.
Long dependency chains should therefore be avoided. Accessing part of a register causes a
false dependence on the rest of the register.

