Jumps and branches
Jumps and branches have a throughput of one taken branch every two clock cycles. The
throughput is lower if there are 32-byte boundaries shortly after the jump targets. Branch
prediction is reasonably good, even for indirect jumps. The branch misprediction penalty is
quite high because of a long pipeline.

Memory and cache access
The level-2 cache has rather poor performance on the Bulldozer, while it is much better on
the Piledriver, Steamroller and Excavator. Cache bank conflicts are very frequent and often
impossible to avoid. Cache bank conflicts turned out to be a serious bottleneck in some of
my tests. The code cache has only two or three ways which is quite low when we consider
that it has to service two threads.

Retirement
There is no evidence that retirement can be a bottleneck.

 21.19 Literature
Software Optimization Guide for AMD Family 15h Processors. AMD, January 2012.

David Kanter: AMD's Bulldozer Microarchitecture. Real World Technologies, 2010.

M. Golden, S. Arekapudi and J. Vinh: 40-Entry unified out-of-order scheduler and integer
execution unit for the AMD Bulldozer x86–64 core. Solid-State Circuits Conference Digest of
Technical Papers (ISSCC), 2011 IEEE International.

D. Weiss, et. al.: An 8MB level-3 cache in 32nm SOI with column-select aliasing. Solid-State
Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers (ISSCC), 2011 IEEE International.

22 AMD Zen 1-2 pipeline
 22.1 The pipeline in AMD Ryzen
The Zen microarchitecture is a complete redesign of the AMD processor, and a quite
successful one. The first generation with the Zen architecture is the Ryzen 1000 series. It
has four or eight cores which can run two threads each.

The second generation, Zen+ or Ryzen 2000, has not been tested here.

The third generation, Zen 2 or Ryzen 3000, is an improvement of the previous generations.
It has from 4 to 64 cores capable of running two threads each.

 22.2 Instruction fetch
The instruction fetcher can fetch 32 aligned bytes of code per clock cycle from the level-1
code cache, according to AMD documents, but the maximum measured throughput is only
16 bytes per clock for a single thread. The bottleneck is probably an "instruction byte queue"
between the fetch unit and the decoder.

The maximum measured fetch rate for two threads per core is 12 bytes per clock per
thread. This maximum is obtained when all instructions are 8 bytes long. The fetch rate is
lower for other instruction sizes.

 22.3 Instruction decoding
Instruction boundaries are not marked in the code cache, unlike in previous AMD proces-
sors. The decoders can handle four instructions per clock cycle, including instructions that
generate two µops each. The rest of the pipeline can handle five or six µops per clock cycle.

The maximum throughput of six µops per clock cycle can be obtained only if half of the
instructions generate two µops each.

Instructions that generate more than two µops are using microcode. These instructions take
at least two clock cycles to decode so that the throughput can be no higher than one
complex instruction every two clock cycles. The number of µops generated by each
instruction is listed in manual 4: "Instruction tables".

There is no penalty for decoding instructions with many prefixes. This includes all kinds of
prefixes.

 22.4 Instruction fusion
A CMP or TEST instruction immediately followed by a conditional jump can be fused into a
single µop. This applies to all versions of the CMP and TEST instructions and all conditional
jumps, except if the CMP or TEST instruction has a rip-relative address or both a displace-
ment and an immediate operand. See example 21.1 page 222. No other ALU instruction
can fuse with a conditional jump.

The fused branch instructions can execute at a throughput of two such branches per clock
cycle if they are not taken, or one branch per two clock cycles if taken.

 22.5 µop cache
The processor has an extra cache for decoded instructions. The size is indicated as 2048
µops for Zen 1 and 4096 µops for Zen 2, with a line size of 8 µops, but the effective size
was measured to only slightly more than half or this number when running a single thread.
The effective size is almost doubled when running two threads in the same core. The size of
the µop cache is big enough for holding most critical loops.

The measured throughput is 5 instructions per clock cycle for loops that fit into the µop
cache when running a single thread. Double instructions can still be delivered from the µop
cache at this throughput so that it is possible to execute µops at a throughput of 6 µops per
clock, which is the limit of the µop queue. Double instructions probably use only one entry in
the µop cache in Zen 1 if the two µops are similar.

 22.6 µop queue
A queue of unknown size is placed before the register rename and scheduler. The queue
receives decoded µops from either the µop cache or directly from the decoder.

 22.7 Stack engine
The processor has an efficient stack engine that renames the stack pointer. It is placed after
the µop queue.

Push, pop and return instructions use only a single µop. These instructions have zero
latency with respect to the stack pointer, so that subsequent instructions that depend on the
stack pointer, either as operand or as pointer, are not delayed. No extra stack synchro-
nization µops of the type seen in Intel processors have been observed.

 22.8 Register renaming and out-of-order schedulers
The µops are separated into two units after the µop queue. An integer unit handling
instructions on general purpose registers, and a floating point unit handling floating point
and vector instructions. Each of these units has its own register file with register renaming,
scheduling, and several execution units.

The integer register file has 168 physical registers of 64 bits each for Zen 1 and 180
registers for Zen 2. The floating point register file has 160 vector registers of 128 bits each
in Zen 1 and 256 bits each in Zen 2.

The schedulers can hold a total of 192 or 224 µops in flight for Zen 1 and Zen 2,
respectively, according to AMD documentation. Eight µops can retire in one clock cycle.

 22.9 Integer execution pipes
The integer unit has four ALUs so that it can execute four integer instructions per clock
cycle. Simple integer instructions can be handled by any of these four ALUs, while some of
the more costly operations such as multiplication and division can only be handled by one of
the ALUs.

The integer unit has two address generation units on Zen 1, and three on Zen 2.
Instructions with a memory operand use an AGU in addition to the ALU. Read-modify and
read-modify-write instructions are not split into multiple µops, but the same µop goes to both
the ALU and the AGU.

The Zen 1 can do two memory read operations or one read and one write operation, but not
two write operations, in the same clock cycle. The Zen 2 can do two memory read and one
write operation per clock cycle.

 22.10 Floating point execution pipes
There are four floating point/vector execution pipes. Each of these pipes contain execution
units for the following purposes:

  Operation                                            P0        P1      P2       P3
 Integer addition                                      x         x                x
 Integer multiplication                                x
 Floating point addition                                                 x        x
 Floating point multiplication and FMA                 x         x
 Floating point division and square root                                          x
 Boolean logic                                         x         x       x        x
 Shift                                                           x       x
 Pack, permute                                                   x       x
 Blend                                                 x         x                x
 Encryption                                            x         x
 Conversion                                                                       x
 Memory write                                                            x
Table 22.1. Zen 1-2 floating point and vector execution pipes

Simple integer vector instructions such as addition, shift, and boolean operations, have a
latency of only one clock cycle, versus two clock cycles on previous AMD processors.
Floating point addition has a latency of 3. Multiplication latency is 3 in Zen 2. Zen 1 has a
multiplication latency of 3 for single precision and 4 for double precision. Fused multiply-
and-add (FMA) has a latency of 5 clocks.

The throughput is two vector additions and two multiplications per clock cycle. The FMA
instructions use the same pipes as multiplication instructions and they also partially occupy
the addition units.

The execution units have 128 bit width on Zen 1 and 256 bits in Zen 2. This means that a
typical 256-bit vector instruction generates two µops on Zen 1, but only one µop on Zen 2.
Most instructions have two or more execution pipes to choose between, as table 22.1
shows, so that most 256-bit instructions can execute with a throughput of at least one
instruction per clock cycle on Zen 1. The Zen 2 doubles this throughput for 256-bit vectors.

There is one store unit of 128 bits on Zen 1 and 256 bits on Zen 2. Therefore, the Zen 2 has
a memory write throughput of one 256-bit vector per clock, while the Zen 1 has only half this
throughput.

The FMA4, XOP, TBM, and 3DNow instructions are no longer supported. The FMA4
instructions actually work correctly on Zen 1 (but not on Zen 2) though they are not officially
supported and not reported by the CPUID instruction.

Subnormal operands
Floating point operations that give a subnormal result may take a few clock cycles extra.
The same is the case when a multiplication or division underflows to zero. This is far less
than the high penalty on the Bulldozer and Piledriver. There is no penalty when flush-to-zero
mode and denormals-are-zero mode are both on.

 22.11 AVX instructions
256-bit vector instructions are implemented differently on Zen 1 and Zen 2:

Zen 1: 256-bit AVX and AVX2 instructions are split into two µops that do 128 bits each. It is
still more efficient to use 256-bit vector instructions than 128-bit instructions on Zen 1, due
to efficient fetch and decoding.

There is no penalty for mixing AVX and non-AVX vector instructions on the Zen 1 because
256-bit registers are split into two 128-bit registers.

Zen 2: The Zen 2 has full 256-bit execution units and data paths. This effectively doubles
the throughput for 256-bit vector instructions on Zen 2 over Zen 1.

The Zen 2 has penalties similar to the Intel Sandy Bridge processor when mixing 256-bit
VEX instructions with 128-bit non-VEX code as explained on page 135. The transitions from
modified to saved state, saved to modified state, or modified to clean state, take approxi-
mately 130 clock cycles each. It is important to obey the rules for using VZEROUPPER or
VZEROALL to avoid these penalties.

 22.12 Data delay between different execution domains
The execution units in the vector unit are divided into two domains, an integer vector
domain and a floating point vector domain. There is an extra latency of one clock cycle
when the output of a µop in the integer vector domain goes to the input of a µop in the
floating point domain, or vice versa.

For example, there is an extra delay of one clock cycle if the output of an ADDPS instruction
goes to the input of a POR instruction. This delay can be avoided by replacing the POR
instruction with the otherwise identical ORPS instruction. Most floating point instructions
reside in the floating point domain, with the exception of shuffle instructions, etc.

See manual 4: "Instruction tables" for information about the domain of each instruction.
 22.13 Instructions with no latency
Register-to-register move instructions are resolved at the register rename stage without
using any execution units. These instructions have zero latency. It is possible to do six such
register renamings per clock cycle, and it is even possible to rename the same register
several times in one clock cycle.

The following instructions have zero latency when used with register operands: MOV, XCHG,
FXCH, (V)MOVDQA, (V)MOVDQU, (V)MOVAPS, (V)MOVUPS, (V)MOVAPD, and (V)MOVUPD.

This applies to 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers and 128-bit xmm registers. It also
works for 256-bit ymm registers on Zen 2. The Zen 1 will rename only the lower half of a
256-bit register, while the upper part uses an execution unit for the move. The zero latency
move does not work with 8-bit and 16-bit partial registers and mmx registers.

The processor always keeps the different parts of an integer register together. For example,
AL and AH are not treated as independent by the out-of-order execution mechanism. An
instruction that writes to part of a register will therefore have a false dependence on any
previous write to the same register or any part of it.

An instruction that writes to a 32-bit register will not have any false dependence on the
corresponding 64-bit register because the upper part of the 64-bit register is set to zero.

A write to a part of an XMM register has a false dependence on the whole register, but this
does not apply to the two halves of a YMM register in the Zen 1.

The processor treats certain parts of the arithmetic flags as independent. For example, an
instruction that modifies only the carry flag has no false dependence on the zero flag.

 22.14 Dependency-breaking instructions
A common way of setting a register to zero is XOR EAX,EAX or SUB EBX,EBX. The
processor recognizes that certain instructions are independent of the prior value of the
register if the two input registers are the same. The following instructions are recognized as
independent of the input when both input operands are the same register:
XOR, SUB, SBB (depends on carry flag only), CMP, PXOR, PANDN, PSUBx, PCMPEQx,
PCMPGTx, XORPS, XORPD, ANDNPS, ANDNPD, but not ANDN.

This does not work with 8-bit and 16-bit registers due to the treatment of partial registers,
but it works with 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers, as well as vector registers of all
sizes.

Floating point subtractions and compares of a register with itself are never recognized as
independent of the input because the result depends on whether the input is NAN.

 22.15 Branches and loops
The branch prediction mechanism is described on page 36. There is no restriction on the
number of branches per 16 bytes of code that can be predicted efficiently.

Jumps generally have a throughput of one taken jump per two clock cycles. This includes
direct jumps, indirect jumps, calls, returns, and taken branches. However, tiny loops with a
maximum of five instructions and no 64-bytes boundary in the loop can execute in a single
clock cycle per iteration. Fused compare and branch instructions count as one here.

Branches that are not taken have a throughput of two not taken branches per clock cycle.

 22.16 Cache and memory access

  Cache                 Zen 1
 µop                   2k, 8 way, 32 sets, 8 µop line size, per core
 Level 1 code          64 kB, 4 way, 256 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 4 clocks
 Level 1 data          32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 4 clocks
 Level 2               512 kB, 8 way, 1024 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 17
                       clocks
 Level 3               16 MB, 16 way, 8192 sets, 64 B line size, one per 4 cores. Latency
                       40 - 90 clocks
Table 22.2. Cache sizes on AMD Zen 1

 Cache              Zen 2
 µop                4k, 8 way, 32 sets, 8 µop line size. per core
 Level 1 code       32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core.
 Level 1 data       32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 4 clocks
 Level 2            512 kB, 8 way, 1024 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 12 clocks
 Level 3            4 - 32 MB, 16 - 24 way, 64 B line size, one per 4 cores. Latency 40
                    clocks
Table 22.3. Cache sizes on AMD Zen 2

The data cache an Zen 1 has two 128-bit ports which can be used for either read or write. It
can do two reads or one read and one write in the same clock cycle. The data bandwidth is
256 bits (32 bytes) to all cache levels. There are 72 read buffers and 44 write buffers.

The data cache an Zen 2 has two 256-bit read ports and one 256-bit write port. It can do
two reads and one write in the same clock cycle. The data bandwidth is 256 bits (32 bytes)
to all cache levels. There are 44 read buffers and 48 write buffers.

There is a false dependence when the address of a memory read is spaced a multiple of
0x1000 bytes from a preceding write. This effect is rarely seen on Zen 2, possibly because
of an extra read port.

Automatic hardware prefetching is more efficient than explicit software prefetching in most
cases.

 22.17 Store forwarding
Store forwarding of a write to a subsequent read works very well in all cases, including
reads from a part of the written data. There is little or no penalty for unaligned reads and
writes, except when crossing a memory page boundary. A read that has a partial overlap
with a preceding write has a penalty of 6-7 clock cycles.

 22.18 Mirroring memory operands
The Zen 2 can mirror memory operands inside the CPU so that memory operands have no
latency at all in some cases. The following example illustrates this:

    ; Example 22.1. Mirroring memory operand in Zen 2
    mov dword [rsi], eax
    add dword [rsi], 5
    mov ebx, dword [rsi]

This sequence of three instructions has a total latency of only two clock cycles on Zen 2
versus 15 clock on Zen 1. This mechanism is currently not documented by AMD, but it
works under the following conditions, according to my experiments:

   •   The instructions must use general purpose registers.
   •   The memory operands must have the same address.
   •   The operand size must be 32 or 64 bits.
   •   You may have a 32 bit read after a 64 bit write to the same address, but not vice
       versa.
   •   The memory operand cannot have an absolute address or rip-relative address.
   •   The address must have a base pointer. The memory address may have an index
       register, a scale factor, and an offset.
   •   The offset must be in the range -128 to +127 to fit into an 8-bit signed integer. The
       offset must be divisible by 4 in 32 bit mode, and by 8 in 64 bit mode. The final
       address does not have to be aligned.
   •   The memory operand must be specified in exactly the same way with the same
       unmodified pointer and index registers in all the instructions involved. For example,
       [rax+rbx] and [rbx+rax] are not recognized as the same address.
   •   The instructions can be simple MOV instructions, read-modify instructions, or read-
       modify-write instructions. It also works with PUSH and POP instructions.
   •   Complex instructions with multiple µops cannot be used.

The performance is down to normal if these conditions are not satisfied. For example, the
code in example 22.1 takes 15 clock cycles when the operand size is changed to 8 or 16
bits. While the latency of memory operations is improved by this mechanism, the throughput
is still limited to one instruction per clock because there is only one memory write port.

This mechanism is useful in situations where there are not enough registers to store all local
variables. The mechanism is coupled with the stack engine so that it can trace addresses
on the stack. This is useful when function parameters are transferred on the stack, as in this
example:

    ; Example 22.2. Tracing stack parameters in Zen 2
    push eax     ; push function parameter on stack
    call SomeFunction
    pop ecx
    ...

    SomeFunction:
    mov eax, [esp+4] ; read the parameter from the stack
    ret

    ; This also works:
    sub esp, 4
    mov [esp], eax
    call SomeFunction
    add esp, 4

This feature is useful in 32-bit mode where function parameters are normally transferred on
the stack. It is less useful in 64-bit mode where function parameters are mostly transferred
in registers. The tracing of stack addresses works when the following conditions are
satisfied:

   •   Variables can be written and read with push and pop or with addresses relative to
       the stack pointer.
   •   The system compensates for changes in the stack pointer by push, pop, call, and
       return instructions.

   •   The stack pointer is not modified by anything else than push, pop, call, and return
       between a write and a subsequent read from the same address. It does not work if
       you set up a stack frame by subtracting the frame size from the stack pointer.
   •   The system does not work if you copy the stack pointer to a frame pointer (EBP or
       RBP) and use the frame pointer for addressing.
   •   Addresses on the stack can be expressed as stack pointer plus an offset. The offset
       must be in the range -128 to +127 to fit into an 8-bit signed integer.

You may read the stack parameters before setting up a stack frame, but it is rarely
necessary to make special efforts to make this mechanism work in a big function with a
stack frame because the time it takes to call the function and set up the stack frame may be
sufficient to allow access to the parameters in the data cache anyway.

The ability to mirror memory operands in the Zen 2 is an impressive feature, but it also has
a downside. It tries to predict whether memory addresses are the same before the
addresses have actually been calculated. Memory addresses are recognized as the same
only under the conditions listed above. Addresses that are coded in different ways are
assumed to be different. Pointer aliasing can cause serious problems if the code is writing to
same address by two instructions that are falsely assumed to have different addresses, as
this example illustrates:

    ; Example 22.3. Memory operand with pointer aliasing in Zen 2
    mov rdi, rsi         ; copy pointer register
    mov [rsi], eax       ; store through first pointer
    mov [rdi], ebx       ; store through second pointer
    mov ecx, [rsi]       ; false forwarding from mov [rsi],eax

The code in example 22.3 takes 20 clock cycles in my test. The CPU makes the false
assumption that [rsi] and [rdi] are different addresses, and makes a bypass from mov
[rsi],eax to mov ecx,[rsi]. After detecting that the assumption was wrong, it has to
undo the operations and redo the right operations. The correction takes a long time because
it is using microcode. To avoid this penalty, do not make multiple writes to the same
address using different pointers or different addressing modes if there is a read from the
same address shortly after. Read-modify-write instructions can have this penalty both on the
read side and the write side.

Another quirk is that the CPU ignores scale factors when checking whether addresses look
the same. For example, it assumes that [rsi+rcx*2] and [rsi+rcx*4] are identical
addresses. This causes a penalty if rcx is not zero. This situation is unlikely to occur in
compiler-generated code, but it gives a hint about how the mechanism works.

A description of how this mechanism works is given in a Wikichips article:

       "A temporary register is assigned to each store. When the store is later executed,
       the data is copied into this register as well as being sent to the store queue. Loads
       are compared to recorded stores. A load predicted to match a previous store is
       modified to speculatively read the data from the store's temporary register."

The speculative loads are active as long as the store is in the store queue, which has 48
entries in Zen 2. A store operation can stay in the store queue for a considerable number of
clock cycles if it is executed speculatively due to preceding branch prediction or potential
floating point traps.

This feature for mirroring memory operands is probably quite expensive in terms of
hardware resources. It is not implemented in the successor, Zen 3, but in Zen 4 and 5.

 22.19 Simultaneous multithreading
The processor can run two threads in each core. This makes sense because the throughput
of each core is so high that it will rarely be fully utilized by a single thread.

In general, each thread will get half of the resources when two threads are running in the
same core. The queueing of µops is equally distributed between the two threads so that
each thread gets half of the maximum throughput. The caches, branch predictors, execution
units, and most other resources are shared competitively between the two threads.

The CPU cores are organized into subunits of four cores each, called CPU complexes or
core complex dies. Inter-thread communication is faster within the same core complex than
between core complexes.

 22.20 Power saving and frequency boosting
The Zen processor is aggressively saving power by clock gating execution units that are not
in use. The clock frequency is varied automatically depending on the work load and the chip
temperature. The clock frequency was often as low as 8% of the nominal frequency in my
tests when disk access was the limiting factor. The clock frequency was increased to as
much as 114% on Zen 1 and 120 % on Zen 2 after a very long sequence of CPU-intensive
code in my tests. The maximum clock frequency cannot be maintained when all cores are
active because of the increased temperature.

It is difficult to get consistent performance measurements because the clock frequency is
varying so dramatically. It helps to warm up the processor with a long sequence of dummy
calculations, but the clock counts are still somewhat inaccurate. The Time Stamp Counter
(TSC), which is used for measuring the execution time of small pieces of code, is counting
at the nominal frequency. The processor has another counter called Actual Performance
Frequency Clock Counter (APERF) which is similar to the Core Clock Counter in Intel
processors. Unfortunately, the APERF counter can only be read in kernel mode, unlike the
TSC which is accessible to the test program running in user mode. The present report is
based on clock counts calculated in the following way: The TSC and APERF counters are
both read in a device driver immediately before and after a run of the test sequence. The
ratio between the TSC count and the APERF count obtained in this way is then used as a
correction factor which is applied to all TSC counts obtained during the running of the test
sequence. This method is awkward, but the results appear to be quite precise, except in the
cases where the frequency is varying considerably during the test sequence. The clock
counts listed in manual 4: "Instruction tables" were obtained in the same way. The test
program used for this is available at www.agner.org/optimize/#testp.

 22.21 Bottlenecks in AMD Zen
The maximum throughput of each core in the Zen microarchitecture is higher than on any
previous AMD or Intel x86 processor when measured as µops per clock cycle, while the
clock frequency is around 4 GHz.

Code that does not fit into the µop cache can have a throughput of four instructions or
approximately 16 bytes of code per clock cycle, whichever is smaller.

Loops that fit into the µop cache can have a throughput of five instructions per clock cycle.

The throughput can be up to 6 µops per clock cycle if some instructions generate two µops
each.

The execution units have a maximum throughput of four general purpose register µops and
four vector µops per clock. It is impossible to keep all execution units busy for any period of
time because this would imply a total throughput of 8 µops per clock. Most instructions are
supported by two, three, or four execution units so that it is possible to execute multiple
instructions of the same kind simultaneously. This means that execution unit throughput is
rarely a bottleneck.

Execution unit latency is a potential bottleneck in code with long dependency chains, but the
latencies are generally low. The latency of floating point vector addition or multiplication is 3
clock cycles (4 for double precision multiplication on Zen 1). Integer vector addition has a
latency of 1 clock cycle.

The maximum throughput of 6 µops per clock may be obtained with 256-bit vectors on Zen
1 where each 256-bit vector instruction generates two µops. The same code on Zen 2 will
generate fewer µops because there are few 2-µop instructions on Zen 2. In other words, the
Zen 2 has larger execution units than Zen 1, but they are less likely to be utilized to their
maximum possible throughput. We may speculate that a future model with AVX512 support
may split each 512-bit vector instruction into two 256-bit µops so that the 6 µop throughput
again becomes useful.

The limiting fetch rate of up to 16 bytes per clock is a very likely bottleneck for CPU-
intensive code with large loops. Short loops that fit into the µop cache are limited to 5
instructions per clock. This is still a more likely bottleneck than execution unit throughput.

The utilization of the execution units can hardly be increased by running two threads in each
execution unit because the decode and fetch resources are shared between the two threads
so that each thread gets half the throughput on average. Inter-thread communication should
be kept within the same 4-core core complex if possible. It may be useful to turn off
simultaneous multithreading in the Zen processor if running CPU-intensive code or if the
processor has more cores than the software can utilize.

The very high throughput of the Zen core places an extra burden on the programmer and
the compiler if you want optimal performance. Obviously, you cannot execute two instruc-
tions simultaneously if the second instruction depends on the output of the first one. It is
important to avoid long dependency chains if you want to even get close to the maximum
throughput of five instructions or six µops per clock cycle.

The caches are fairly big with a high throughput. This is a significant advantage because
cache and memory access is the most likely bottleneck in data intensive code.

The Zen 2 has a new advanced feature that has never been seen before: the ability to
mirror a memory operand inside the CPU as explained on page 237. This can speed up
execution when a general purpose register is stored to a memory operand and read back
shortly after. This is most useful in 32-bit code where there are only 7 general purpose
registers available. Some local variables may be stored in memory if there are not enough
registers. These memory variables may be almost as efficient as register variables on the
Zen 2 if they are accessed through the same pointer all the time. This may be a stack
pointer, frame pointer, structure pointer, or 'this' pointer. Function parameters are mostly
stored on the stack in 32-bit mode. These parameters can be read back into registers in the
called function with zero latency in small functions without a stack frame. The feature gives
less advantage in 64-bit mode because there are 15 available general purpose registers so
that there is less need for short-term storage in memory operands. Function parameters are
mostly transferred in registers rather than on the stack in 64-bit mode so that they can be
accessed without delay without the need for the new feature.

The conclusion for the Zen 1 and Zen 2 microarchitecture is that this is a quite efficient
design with big caches, a big µop cache, and large execution units with a high throughput
and low latencies. This is a good choice of microprocessor, except when running software
that is utilizing the AVX512 instruction set.

