Literature
Mike Clark: "AMD and the new “Zen” High Performance x86 Core". Hot Chips Symposium,
California. August 23, 2016.

Ken Mitchell & Elliot Kim: "AMD Ryzen™ CPU Optimization". Game Developers Confe-
rence. San Francisco, March 2017.

AMD: "Software Optimization Guide for AMD Family 17h Models 30h and Greater
Processors", 2020.

Anonymous: "Zen 2 - Microarchitectures - AMD", WikiChip, n.d.
https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/amd/microarchitectures/zen_2

23 AMD Zen 3 pipeline
 23.1 The pipeline in AMD Zen 3
The Zen 3 microarchitecture is an extension of Zen 1 and Zen 2 with more execution units,
higher throughput and improved caches.

The Zen 3 or Ryzen 5000 has from 4 to 16 cores capable of running two threads each.

 23.2 Instruction fetch
The instruction fetch rate is measured to 16 bytes per clock for a single thread and also 16
bytes per clock per thread when running two threads in the same core.

 23.3 Instruction decoding
Instruction boundaries are not marked in the code cache. The decoders can handle four
instructions per clock cycle. The rest of the pipeline can handle six µops per clock cycle.

The number of µops generated by each instruction is listed in manual 4: "Instruction tables".
Most instructions generate one µop only. The information in the AMD optimization guide that
instructions with complex addressing modes generate two µops cannot be confirmed, and
no degradation in throughput for such instructions has been measured.

There is no penalty for decoding instructions with many prefixes. This includes all kinds of
prefixes.

 23.4 Instruction fusion
An arithmetic or logic instruction immediately followed by a conditional jump can be fused
into a single µop. This applies to CMP, TEST, ADD, SUB, AND, OR, XOR, INC, DEC and
all conditional jumps, except if the arithmetic or logic instruction has a rip-relative address or
both an address displacement and an immediate operand.

The fused branch instructions can execute at a throughput of two such branches per clock
cycle if they are not taken, or one branch per clock cycle if taken.

 23.5 µop cache
The processor has an extra cache for decoded instructions. The size is 4096 µops. The µop
cache can deliver up to 8 µops per clock cycle, but the throughput is limited to 6 µops per

clock in the subsequent dispatcher. The size of the µop cache is big enough for holding
most critical loops.

The µop cache is shared between threads when two threads are running in the same core.
If two threads are running the same code in the same core, they can both use the same
entries in the µop cache, but they only get a throughput of 3 µops per clock each.

 23.6 µop queue
A queue of unknown size is placed before the register rename and scheduler. The queue
receives decoded µops from either the µop cache or directly from the decoder.

 23.7 Stack engine
The processor has an efficient stack engine that renames the stack pointer. It is placed after
the µop queue.

Push and pop instructions use only a single µop. These instructions have zero latency with
respect to the stack pointer, so that subsequent instructions that depend on the stack
pointer, either as operand or as pointer, are not delayed.

 23.8 Register renaming and out-of-order schedulers
The µops are separated into two units after the µop queue. An integer unit handling
instructions on general purpose registers, and a floating point unit handling floating point
and vector instructions. Each of these units has its own register file with register renaming,
scheduling, and several execution units.

The integer register file has 192 physical registers of 64 bits each. The floating point register
file has probably 160 vector registers of 256 bits each.

The schedulers include a reorder buffer of 256 µops, according to AMD documentation.
Eight integer µops and six floating point/vector µops can be scheduled per clock cycle.

 23.9 Integer execution pipes
The integer unit has four ALUs, two branch units, and three address generation units.
Simple integer instructions can be handled by any of the four ALUs, while some of the more
costly operations such as multiplication and division can only be handled by one of the
ALUs.

It is possible to execute six integer instructions per clock cycle on average as long as they
are different types.

Instructions with a memory operand use an AGU in addition to the ALU. Read-modify and
read-modify-write instructions are not split into multiple µops, but the same µop goes to both
the ALU and the AGU.

The Zen 3 can do three memory operations per clock cycle, with at most two memory
writes, i.e. three reads, or two reads and one write, or one read and two writes. This
includes instructions with complex addressing modes.

 23.10 Floating point execution pipes
There are six floating point/vector execution pipes, including two multiply/add pipes and two
further add pipes. It is possible to execute six vector instructions per clock cycle, for
example two additions, two multiplications, and two memory operations.

Simple integer vector instructions such as addition, shift, and boolean operations have a
latency of only one clock cycle. Floating point addition has a latency of 3. Integer or floating
point multiplication latency is 3. Fused multiply-and-add (FMA) has a latency of 4 clocks.
The throughput is two floating point vector additions and two multiplications or FMA
instructions per clock cycle. Simple integer vector instructions have a throughput of four
instructions per clock cycle.

There are two address generation units in the floating point/vector pipelines. These are
capable of two vector reads or one vector read and one vector write per clock cycle. It is not
possible to do an integer write and a vector write in the same clock cycle, and it is not
possible to do more than three memory operations per clock cycle by mixing integer and
vector instructions.

The FMA4, XOP, TBM, and 3DNow instructions are no longer supported.

Subnormal operands
Floating point operations that give a subnormal result may take a few clock cycles extra.
The same is the case when a multiplication or division underflows to zero. This is far less
than the high penalty on the Bulldozer and Piledriver. There is no penalty when flush-to-zero
mode and denormals-are-zero mode are both on.

 23.11 AVX instructions
The Zen 3 has full 256-bit execution units and data paths so that 256-bit vector instructions
are not slower than 128-bit instructions.

The Zen 3 has penalties similar to the Intel Sandy Bridge processor when mixing 256-bit
VEX instructions with 128-bit non-VEX code as explained on page 135. The transitions from
modified to saved state, saved to modified state, or modified to clean state, take approxi-
mately 130 clock cycles each. It is important to obey the rules for using VZEROUPPER or
VZEROALL to avoid these penalties.

 23.12 Data delay between different execution domains
The execution units in the vector unit are divided into two domains, an integer vector
domain and a floating point vector domain. There is an extra latency of one clock cycle
when the output of a µop in the integer vector domain goes to the input of a µop in the
floating point domain, or vice versa.

For example, there is an extra delay of one clock cycle if the output of an ADDPS instruction
goes to the input of a POR instruction. This delay can be avoided by replacing the POR
instruction with the otherwise identical ORPS instruction. Most floating point instructions
reside in the floating point domain, with the exception of shuffle instructions, etc.

See manual 4: "Instruction tables" for information about the domain of each instruction.

 23.13 Instructions with no latency
Register-to-register move instructions are resolved at the register rename stage without
using any execution units. These instructions have zero latency. It is possible to do six such
register renamings per clock cycle, and it is even possible to rename the same register
multiple times in one clock cycle.
The following instructions have zero latency when used with register operands: MOV,
XCHG, FXCH, (V)MOVDQA, (V)MOVDQU, (V)MOVAPS, (V)MOVUPS, (V)MOVAPD, and
(V)MOVUPD.

This applies to 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers, 128-bit xmm registers, and 256-
bit ymm registers, but not to 64-bit mmx registers.

The processor always keeps the different parts of an integer register together. For example,
AL and AH are not treated as independent by the out-of-order execution mechanism. An
instruction that writes to part of a register will therefore have a false dependence on any
previous write to the same register or any part of it.

An instruction that writes to a 32-bit register will not have any false dependence on the
corresponding 64-bit register because the upper part of the 64-bit register is set to zero.

A write to a part of a vector register has a false dependence on the whole register.

The processor treats certain parts of the arithmetic flags as independent. For example, an
instruction that modifies only the carry flag has no false dependence on the zero flag.

 23.14 Dependency-breaking instructions
A common way of setting a register to zero is XOR EAX,EAX or SUB EBX,EBX. The
processor recognizes that certain instructions are independent of the prior value of the
register if the two input registers are the same. The following instructions are recognized as
independent of the input when both input operands are the same register:
XOR, SUB, SBB (depends on carry flag only), CMP, PXOR, PANDN, PSUBx, PCMPEQx,
PCMPGTx, XORPS, XORPD, ANDNPS, ANDNPD, but not ANDN.

This does not work with 8-bit and 16-bit registers due to the treatment of partial registers,
but it works with 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers, as well as vector registers of all
sizes.

Floating point subtractions and compares of a register with itself are never recognized as
independent of the input because the result depends on whether the input is NAN.

 23.15 Branches and loops
The behavior of jumps and branches in Zen 3 is different from the previous Zen designs.
The throughput for jumps and taken branches is now one taken jump per clock where
previous AMD processors had one taken jump per two clocks in most cases. The
throughput for predicted not taken branches is two not taken branches per clock cycle. The
throughput for calls and returns is one call or return per two clocks.

The performance is inferior if there is more than two jump instructions or taken branches in
an aligned 16 bytes block of code. This is similar to the old K10 and earlier AMD
processors. The average throughput is measured to 3 clocks per jump if there are three
jumps or taken branches in an aligned 16-bytes block of code. The delay per jump is
increased to 4 clocks per jump if there are 4 - 6 jumps in 16 bytes of code, and 10 - 12
clocks in case of the maximum density of one jump per 2 bytes of code. These numbers are
approximately the same for unconditional jumps and taken conditional jumps.

Branch prediction is quite good. Long and complicated repetitive patterns can be predicted
after a certain learning period. Loops with a count of up to 64 can be fully predicted. Indirect
jumps can be predicted.

The branch prediction mechanism is described on page 36.

 23.16 Cache and memory access

 Cache              Zen 3
 µop                4k, 8 way, 64 sets, 8 µop line size, per core
 Level 1 code       32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 4 clocks
 Level 1 data       32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 4 clocks
 Level 2            512 kB, 8 way, 1024 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 14 clocks
 Level 3            8 - 32 MB, 16 way, 32k sets, 64 B line size, one per 8 cores. Latency
                    47 clocks
Table 23.1. Cache sizes on AMD Zen 3

There is a false dependence when the address of a memory read is spaced a multiple of
0x1000 bytes from a preceding write.

Automatic hardware prefetching is more efficient than explicit software prefetching in most
cases.

Instructions with complex addressing modes have a latency that is one clock cycle longer.

 23.17 Store forwarding
Store forwarding of a write to a subsequent read works very well in all cases, including
reads from a part of the written data. There is little or no penalty for unaligned reads and
writes, except when crossing a memory page boundary. A read that has a partial overlap
with a preceding write has a penalty of approximately 10 clock cycles.

 23.18 Simultaneous multithreading
The processor can run two threads in each core. This makes sense because the throughput
of each core is so high that it will rarely be fully utilized by a single thread.

In general, each thread will get half of the resources when two threads are running in the
same core. The queueing of µops is equally distributed between the two threads so that
each thread gets half of the maximum throughput. The caches, branch predictors, execution
units, and most other resources are shared competitively between the two threads.
Simultaneous multithreading is not advantageous if a shared resource is a bottleneck that
limits performance, for example instruction decoding or cache.

The CPU cores are organized into subunits of eight cores each, called core complex dies.
Inter-thread communication is faster within the same core complex than between core
complexes.

 23.19 Power saving and frequency boosting
The Zen processor is aggressively saving power by clock gating execution units that are not
in use. The clock frequency is varied automatically depending on the work load and the chip
temperature. The maximum clock frequency is close to 5 GHz.

It is difficult to get consistent performance measurements because the clock frequency is
varying so dramatically, as explained on page 240.

 23.20 Bottlenecks in AMD Zen 3
The maximum throughput of each core in the Zen 3 microarchitecture is higher than on any
previous AMD or Intel x86 processor when measured as µops per clock cycle, while the
clock frequency is around 4 - 5 GHz.

Code that does not fit into the µop cache can have a maximum throughput of four
instructions or 16 bytes of code per clock cycle, whichever is smaller.

Loops that fit into the µop cache can have a throughput of six instructions per clock cycle. A
fused arithmetic and branch instruction counts as one.

The execution units have a maximum average throughput of six general purpose register
µops or six vector µops per clock or any mixture of these. It is impossible to keep all
execution units busy for any period of time because this would exceed the maximum total
average throughput. Most common instructions are supported by two, three, or four
execution units so that it is possible to execute multiple instructions of the same kind
simultaneously. This means that execution unit throughput is rarely a bottleneck.

Execution unit latency is a potential bottleneck in code with long dependency chains, but the
latencies are generally low. The latency of floating point vector addition or multiplication is 3
clock cycles. Integer vector addition has a latency of 1 clock cycle.

The limiting fetch rate of up to 16 bytes per clock is a very likely bottleneck for CPU-
intensive code with large loops. Smaller loops that fit into the µop cache can execute up to
six instructions per clock.

The utilization of the execution units can hardly be increased by running two threads in each
execution unit if instruction fetch and decoding is a bottleneck because these resources are
shared between the two threads so that each thread gets half the throughput on average.

Inter-thread communication should be kept within the same 8-core core complex if possible.
It may be useful to turn off simultaneous multithreading in the processor if running CPU-
intensive code or if the processor has more cores than the software can utilize.

The very high throughput of the Zen 3 core places an extra burden on the programmer and
the compiler if you want optimal performance. Obviously, you cannot execute two instruc-
tions simultaneously if the second instruction depends on the output of the first one. It is
important to avoid long dependency chains if you want to even get close to the maximum
throughput of six instructions per clock cycle.

The caches are fairly big with a high throughput. This is a significant advantage because
cache and memory access is the most likely bottleneck in data intensive code.

The advanced feature of mirroring memory operands inside the CPU that we saw in the Zen
2 (page 237) is no longer implemented in the Zen 3. This feature was probably very
expensive in terms of hardware complexity and temporary registers. The feature was mostly
useful in 32-bit mode where memory operands are more common. It is less valuable in 64-
bit mode where temporary variables and function parameters are mostly stored in registers.
Therefore, it makes sense to prioritize the hardware budget for other improvements instead.

The conclusion for the Zen microarchitecture is that this is a quite efficient design with big
caches, a big µop cache, and large execution units with a very high throughput and low
latencies. This may be the most efficient microprocessor of its time, except when running
software that can utilize the AVX512 instruction set, which is not supported in this AMD
processor.

Literature

