AMD: AMD "Zen 3" Core Architecture, 2021. https://www.amd.com/en/technologies/zen-
core-3

Ian Cutress and Andrei Frumusanu: AMD Zen Ryzen Deep Dive Review. Anandtech, 2020.
https://www.anandtech.com/show/16214/amd-zen-3-ryzen-deep-dive-review-5950x-5900x-
5800x-and-5700x-tested

AMD: Software Optimization Guide for AMD Family 19h Processors, 2020.
https://developer.amd.com/resources/developer-guides-manuals/

J. B. Kotra and J. Kalamatianos: Improving the Utilization of Micro-operation
Caches in x86 Processors. 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture, Athens, Greece, 2020.

24 AMD Zen 4 pipeline
 24.1 The pipeline in AMD Zen 4
The Zen 4 microarchitecture is an extension of Zen 3 with various improvements. It is
produced with a 5 nm process which enables it to run at clock frequencies from 4.5 to 5.7
GHz. The Zen 4 or Ryzen 7000 has from 6 to 16 cores capable of running two threads
each.

The Zen 4 is the first AMD processor to support the AVX512 instruction set. The following
extensions are also supported: AVX512F, BW, DQ, VL, CD, VBMI, VBMI2, IFMA, VNNI,
BITALG, POPCNTDQ, BF16, GFNI.

 24.2 Instruction fetch
The instruction fetch rate is measured to 16 bytes per clock for a single thread and 8 - 10
bytes per clock per thread when running two threads in the same core.

 24.3 Instruction decoding
Instruction boundaries are not marked in the code cache. The decoders can handle four
instructions per clock cycle.

The number of µops generated by each instruction is listed in manual 4: "Instruction tables".
Most instructions generate one µop only.

There is no penalty for decoding instructions with many prefixes. This includes all kinds of
prefixes.

 24.4 Instruction fusion
An arithmetic or logic instruction immediately followed by a conditional jump can be fused
into a single µop. This applies to CMP, TEST, ADD, SUB, AND, OR, XOR, INC, DEC and
all conditional jumps, except if the arithmetic or logic instruction has a memory operand with
a rip-relative address or both an address displacement and an immediate operand.

The fused branch instructions can execute at a throughput of two such branches per clock
cycle if they are predicted not taken, or one branch per clock cycle if taken.

A NOP can fuse with a preceding instruction so that it consumes no resources in the rest of
the pipeline. The preceding instruction must be an instruction that uses general purpose
registers and produces no more than 1 µop. A NOP can also fuse with a preceding NOP. A
long sequence of NOPs will fuse together into pairs and generate 1 µop for every two
NOPs. The throughput of a sequence of NOPs is 6 µops corresponding to 12 NOPs per
clock cycle. This includes long NOPs.

 24.5 µop cache
The processor has an extra cache for decoded instructions. The size is 6912 µops. The µop
cache can deliver up to 9 µops per clock cycle, but the throughput is limited to 6 µops per
clock in the subsequent pipeline. The size of the µop cache is big enough for holding most
critical loops.

The µop cache is shared between threads when two threads are running in the same core.
If two threads are running the same code in the same core, they can both use the same
entries in the µop cache, but they only get a throughput of 3 µops per clock each.

 24.6 µop queue
A queue of unknown size is placed before the register rename and scheduler. The queue
receives decoded µops from either the µop cache or directly from the decoder.

 24.7 Stack engine
The processor has an efficient stack engine that renames the stack pointer. It is placed after
the µop queue.

Push and pop instructions use only a single µop. These instructions have zero latency with
respect to the stack pointer, so that subsequent instructions that depend on the stack
pointer, either as operand or as pointer, are not delayed.

The return stack buffer has 32 entries.

 24.8 Register renaming and out-of-order schedulers
The µops are separated into two units after the µop queue. An integer unit handling
instructions on general purpose registers, and a floating point unit handling floating point
and vector instructions. Each of these units has its own register file with register renaming,
scheduling, and several execution units.

The integer register file has 224 physical registers of 64 bits each. The floating point register
file has 192 vector registers of probably 256 bits each.

The schedulers include a reorder buffer of 320 µops. Eight integer µops and six floating
point/vector µops can be scheduled in the same clock cycle.

 24.9 Integer execution pipes
The integer unit has four ALUs, two branch units, and three address generation units.
Simple integer instructions can be handled by any of the four ALUs, while some of the more
costly operations such as multiplication and division can only be handled by one of the
ALUs.

It is possible to execute six integer instructions per clock cycle on average as long as they
are different types.

Instructions with a memory operand use an AGU in addition to the ALU. Read-modify and
read-modify-write instructions are not split into multiple µops, but the same µop goes to both
the ALU and the AGU.

The Zen 4 can do up to three memory operations per clock cycle with the following limits.
The maximum read throughput is three memory reads of general purpose registers up to 64
bits, or two vector reads of up to 256 bits each, or one read of 512 bits. The write throughput
is two writes of general purpose up to 64 bits, or one vector write of up to 256 bits per clock
cycle. 512-bit writes have a throughput of one write per two clock cycles. The maximum
throughput of mixed read and write operations is two reads and one write of 256 bits each
per clock cycle. This includes instructions with complex addressing modes.

 24.10 Floating point execution pipes
There are six floating point/vector execution pipes: two multiply pipes, two add pipes, and
two memory read/write pipes. The multiply pipes can also handle simple integer
instructions. It is possible to execute six vector instructions per clock cycle, for example two
additions, two multiplications, and two memory operations. Each pipe can handle 256 bits.

512-bit vector instructions are executed with a single µop using two 256-bit pipes
simultaneously.

The throughput for vector instructions of 256 bits or less is two floating point vector additions
and two multiplications or FMA (fused multiply-and-add) instructions per clock cycle. Simple
integer vector instructions have a throughput of four instructions per clock cycle. The
throughput for 512-bit vector instructions is half of this, i.e. one multiplication or FMA and
one floating point addition per clock cycle, or two integer additions per clock cycle.

Simple integer vector instructions such as addition, shift, and boolean operations have a
latency of one clock cycle. Floating point addition has a latency of 3. Integer or floating point
multiplication latency is 3. Fused multiply-and-add (FMA) has a latency of 4 clocks.

There are two address generation and read/write units in the floating point/vector pipelines.
These are capable of two 256-bit vector reads or one vector read and one vector write per
clock cycle. The throughput for 512-bit vectors is half of this: one 512-bit read per clock
cycle and one 512-bit write per two clock cycles.

It is not possible to do an integer write and a vector write in the same clock cycle, and it is
not possible to do more than three memory operations per clock cycle by mixing integer and
vector instructions.

The AVX512 vector compare instructions are storing the result in a mask register. These
compare instructions have latencies of 3, 4, and 5 clock cycles for 128, 256, and 512 bit
vectors, respectively. The legacy SSE and AVX2 compare instructions have lower latencies
of 1 clock for integer compare and 2 clock for floating point compare.

AMD’s FMA4, XOP, TBM, and 3DNow instructions are no longer supported.

Subnormal operands
Floating point operations that give a subnormal result may take a few clock cycles extra.
The same is the case when a multiplication or division underflows to zero. This is far less
than the high penalty on the Bulldozer and Piledriver. There is no penalty when flush-to-zero
mode and denormals-are-zero mode are both on.

 24.11 AVX instructions
The Zen 4 has little or no transition penalty when mixing VEX and non-VEX code, unlike
previous AMD processors (see page 135). Instead, non-VEX vector instructions have a
false dependence on the upper part of a vector register if it is not in the clean state. This is
similar to the Intel Ice Lake (see page 168).

It is recommended to obey the rules for using VZEROUPPER or VZEROALL to assure
optimal execution.

 24.12 Data delay between different execution domains
Unlike previous processors, the Zen 4 has no extra delay when the output of a µop in the
integer vector domain goes to the input of a µop in the floating point domain, or vice versa.

 24.13 Instructions with no latency
Register-to-register move instructions are resolved at the register rename stage without
using any execution units. These instructions have zero latency. It is possible to do six such
register renamings per clock cycle, and it is even possible to rename the same register
multiple times in one clock cycle.

The following instructions have zero latency when used with register operands: MOV,
XCHG, FXCH, (V)MOVDQA, (V)MOVDQU, (V)MOVAPS, (V)MOVUPS, (V)MOVAPD,
(V)MOVUPD, and the AVX512 versions VMOVDQA32/64 etc.

This applies to 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers, 128-bit xmm registers, 256-bit
ymm registers, and 512-bit zmm registers. It does not apply to 64-bit mmx registers and to
8-bit and 16-bit registers.

The processor always keeps the different parts of an integer register together. For example,
AL and AH are not treated as independent by the out-of-order execution mechanism. An
instruction that writes to part of a register will therefore have a false dependence on any
previous write to the same register or any part of it.

An instruction that writes to a 32-bit register will not have a false dependence on the
corresponding 64-bit register because the upper part of the 64-bit register is set to zero.

A write to a part of a vector register has a false dependence on the whole register.

The processor treats certain parts of the arithmetic flags as independent. For example, an
instruction that modifies only the carry flag has no false dependence on the zero flag.

 24.14 Dependency-breaking instructions
A common way of setting a register to zero is XOR EAX,EAX or SUB EBX,EBX. The
processor recognizes that certain instructions are independent of the prior value of the
register if the two input registers are the same. The following instructions are recognized as
independent of the input when both input operands are the same register:
XOR, SUB, SBB (depends on carry flag only), CMP, PXOR, PANDN, PSUBx, PCMPEQx,
PCMPGTx, XORPS, XORPD, ANDNPS, ANDNPD, but not ANDN.

This does not work with 8-bit and 16-bit registers due to the treatment of partial registers,
but it works with 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers, as well as mask registers and
vector registers of all sizes.

Floating point subtractions and compares of a register with itself are never recognized as
independent of the input because the result depends on whether the input is NAN.
 24.15 Branches and loops
The throughput for jumps and taken branches is one taken jump per clock. The throughput
for predicted not taken branches is two not taken branches per clock cycle. The throughput
for calls and returns is one call or return per two clocks.

The performance is inferior if there are more than three jump instructions or taken branches
in an aligned 16 bytes block of code. The average throughput is approximately 2 clocks per
jump if there are more than three jumps or taken branches in an aligned 16-bytes block of
code. This is somewhat better than previous AMD processors.

Branch prediction is quite good. Long and complicated repetitive patterns can be predicted
after a certain learning period. Loops with a count of up to 64 can be fully predicted. Indirect
jumps can be predicted.

The branch prediction mechanism is described on page 36.

 24.16 Cache and memory access

 Cache              Zen 4
 µop                6912 µops, 9 µop line size?, per core
 Level 1 code       32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 4 clocks
 Level 1 data       32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 4 clocks
 Level 2            1 MB, 8 way, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 14 clocks
 Level 3            32 - 64 MB, 24 way, 64 B line size, one per 8 cores. Latency 47
                    clocks
Table 24.1. Cache sizes on AMD Zen 4

There is a false dependence when the address of a memory read is spaced a multiple of
1024 bytes from a preceding write.

Automatic hardware prefetching is more efficient than explicit software prefetching in most
cases.

Instructions with complex addressing modes have a latency that is one clock cycle longer.

 24.17 Store forwarding
A memory write can be forwarded to a subsequent read of the same size or a smaller size
with the same start address. The combined latency of the write and subsequent read is 8
clock cycles for general purpose registers and 9 for vector registers.

There is a delay of one or a few clock cycles when an unaligned memory write-to-read
forwarding is crossing a 32-bytes boundary for data sizes up to 256 bits. For 512-bits data
sizes, there is often a delay of one clock cycle when unaligned.

A read that has a partial overlap with a preceding write has a penalty of approximately 11
clock cycles. The same applies to a read that is larger than a preceding write.

A read that is smaller than a preceding write and fully contained within the address range of
the write has a penalty of 11 clock cycles only if unaligned.

 24.18 Mirroring memory operands
The Zen 4 can mirror memory operands inside the CPU so that memory operands have no
latency at all in some cases. See page 237 for a detailed description of this feature in Zen 2.

This feature was introduced in Zen 2, but absent in Zen 3. Now it has returned in Zen 4 with
some improvements. It works now with addressing modes that have a pointer and a 32-bit
offset, where Zen 2 allowed only 8-bit offsets. Some cases of false dependence have also
been removed, but not all.

 24.19 Simultaneous multithreading
The processor can run two threads in each core. This makes sense because the throughput
of each core is so high that it will rarely be fully utilized by a single thread.

In general, each thread will get half of the resources when two threads are running in the
same core. The queueing of µops is equally distributed between the two threads so that
each thread gets half of the maximum throughput. The caches, branch predictors, execution
units, and most other resources are shared competitively between the two threads.
Simultaneous multithreading is not advantageous if a shared resource is a bottleneck that
limits performance, for example instruction decoding or cache.

The CPU cores are organized into subunits of eight cores each, called core complex dies.
Inter-thread communication is faster within the same core complex than between core
complexes.

 24.20 Power saving and frequency boosting
The Zen processor is aggressively saving power by clock gating execution units that are not
in use. The clock frequency is varied automatically depending on the work load and the chip
temperature. The maximum clock frequency varies by model from 3.0 to 5.7 GHz.

It is difficult to get consistent performance measurements because the clock frequency is
varying, as explained on page 240.

 24.21 Bottlenecks in AMD Zen 4
The maximum average throughput of each core in the Zen 4 microarchitecture is 6 µops per
clock cycle, while the clock frequency varies between 4.5 and 5.7 GHz.

Code that does not fit into the µop cache can have a maximum throughput of four
instructions or 16 bytes of code per clock cycle, whichever is smaller.

Loops that fit into the µop cache can have a maximum average throughput of six
instructions per clock cycle. A fused arithmetic and branch instruction counts as one.

There are eight execution units for general purpose register instructions and six units for
floating point and vector instructions, but it is impossible to keep all execution units busy for
any period of time because the average throughput is limited by the pipeline structure. Most
common instructions are supported by two, three, or four execution units so that it is
possible to execute multiple instructions of the same kind simultaneously. This means that
execution unit throughput is rarely a bottleneck.

Execution unit latency is a potential bottleneck in code with long dependency chains, but the
latencies are generally low. The latency of floating point vector addition or multiplication is 3
clock cycles. Integer vector addition has a latency of 1 clock cycle.

