The limiting fetch rate of up to 16 bytes per clock is a very likely bottleneck for CPU-
intensive code with large loops. Smaller loops that fit into the µop cache can execute up to
six instructions per clock.

The utilization of the execution units can hardly be increased by running two threads in each
execution unit if instruction fetch and decoding is a bottleneck because these resources are
shared between the two threads so that each thread gets half the throughput on average.

Inter-thread communication should be kept within the same 8-core core complex if possible.
It may be useful to turn off simultaneous multithreading in the processor if running CPU-
intensive code or if the processor has more cores than the software can utilize.

The very high throughput of the Zen 4 core places an extra burden on the programmer and
the compiler if you want optimal performance. Obviously, you cannot execute two instruc-
tions simultaneously if the second instruction depends on the output of the first one. It is
important to avoid long dependency chains if you want to even get close to the maximum
throughput of six instructions per clock cycle.

The Zen 4 is the first AMD processor to support the AVX512 instruction set with 512-bit
vector registers. The maximum throughput for 512-bit vector instructions is one floating
point vector addition and one floating point vector multiplication per clock cycle, or two
integer vector instructions per clock cycle. This throughput is doubled for vectors of 256 bits
or less. It is still advantageous to use 512-bit instructions in most cases because the
bottleneck often lies elsewhere. A 512-bit vector instruction is generating only a single µop.
This makes 512-bit instructions advantageous if the throughput is limited by the 6 µop per
clock pipeline bottleneck or the 4 instructions per clock decoder throughput.

The AVX512 vector compare instructions have longer latencies than the legacy SSE and
AVX2 compare instructions.

The caches are fairly big with a high throughput. This is a significant advantage because
cache and memory access is the most likely bottleneck in data intensive code.

The advanced feature of mirroring memory operands inside the CPU that we saw in the Zen
2 (page 237) was absent in the Zen 3, but it has come back in the Zen 4. This feature is
mostly useful in 32-bit mode where function parameters are stored in memory.

The conclusion for the Zen 4 microarchitecture is that this is a very efficient design with big
caches, a big µop cache, and large execution units with a very high throughput and low
latencies.

Literature
Smith, R. & Bonshor, G.: AMD Zen 4 Ryzen 9 7950X and Ryzen 5 7600X Review: Retaking
The High-End. Anandtech, Sept. 2022.

25 AMD Zen 5 pipeline
 25.1 The pipeline in AMD Zen 5
The Zen 5 microarchitecture is an improvement over previous models with several features
to increase the throughput. The theoretical maximum throughput is 8 instructions per clock
cycle, though most of my tests showed throughputs no higher than 6 instructions per clock
cycle when running one thread per core and half of that when running two threads per core.

The Zen 5 or Ryzen 9000 series is available with different number of cores. Mobile versions
have 6 – 12 cores, desktop versions have 6 – 16 cores, and server versions are available
with up to 128 cores. Each core can run two threads.

Desktop and server versions have full 512 bit data width in all vector execution units, except
memory write instructions which have 256 bit width. Mobile processors have 256 bits data
width so that 512 bit vector instructions execute at half the throughput on mobile
processors.

The branch unit can decode two sides of a branch simultaneously and it can look two
branches ahead. The branch prediction rate is very good, and the throughput is two
predicted taken branches per clock cycle.

 25.2 Instruction decoding
The Zen 5 has two decoders which can be used for decoding both sides of a two-way
branch simultaneously. Each of the two decoders can fetch 32 bytes of code per clock cycle
and decode 4 instructions per clock cycle. Previous microprocessor models from both AMD
and Intel have a bottleneck of 16 bytes of code per clock cycle.

The throughputs are halved when running two threads per core.

Instruction boundaries are not marked in the code cache.

The number of µops generated by each instruction is listed in manual 4: "Instruction tables".
Most instructions generate one µop only.

There is no penalty for decoding instructions with many prefixes. This includes all kinds of
prefixes.

 25.3 Instruction fusion
An arithmetic or logic instruction immediately followed by a conditional jump can be fused
into a single µop. This applies to CMP, TEST, ADD, SUB, AND, OR, XOR, INC, or DEC
combined with all conditional jumps, except if the arithmetic or logic instruction has a
memory operand with a rip-relative address or both an address displacement and an
immediate operand.

The fused branch instructions can execute at a throughput of two such branches per clock
cycle if they are predicted taken, or three branch instructions per clock cycle if predicted not
taken.

Unlike the Zen 4, the Zen 5 cannot fuse NOP instructions.

 25.4 µop cache
The processor has an extra cache for decoded instructions. The size is 6144 decoded
instructions (16 ways). The µop cache can deliver up to 6 µops per clock cycle per branch.
The size of the µop cache is big enough for holding most critical loops.

 25.5 µop queue
The queues before the schedulers can hold 88 integer instructions and 96 floating point or
vector instructions. The queues receive decoded instructions from either the µop cache or
directly from the decoders.

 25.6 Stack engine
The processor has an efficient stack engine that renames the stack pointer. It is placed after
the µop queue.

Push and pop instructions use only a single µop. These instructions have zero latency with
respect to the stack pointer, so that subsequent instructions that depend on the stack
pointer, either as operand or as pointer, are not delayed.

The return stack buffer has 52 entries.

 25.7 Register renaming and out-of-order schedulers
The decoded instructions are separated into two units with each their queue. An integer unit
handling instructions on general purpose registers, and a floating point unit handling floating
point and vector instructions. Each of these units has its own register file with register
renaming, scheduling, and several execution units. The schedulers and rename units can
handle up to 8 integer instructions and 6 floating point or vector instructions per clock cycle.

The integer register file has 240 physical registers of 64 bits each. The floating point register
file has 384 vector registers of 512 bits each.

 25.8 Integer execution units
The integer unit has six ALUs, three branch units, and four address generation units.
Simple integer instructions can be handled by any of the six ALUs, multiplication can be
handled by three units, and branching can be handled by three units. It is possible to
execute up to six integer instructions per clock cycle.

Instructions with a memory operand use an AGU in addition to an ALU. Read-modify and
read-modify-write instructions are not split into multiple µops, but the same µop goes to both
the ALU and the AGU. The maximum throughput of memory operations per clock cycle is 4
integer reads, 2 integer writes, 2 vector reads of up to 512 bits, or two vector writes of up to
256 bits. The total number of memory operations cannot exceed four read or write
instructions per clock cycle. A 512-bits write operation is executed as two 256 bit
operations.

 25.9 Floating point execution units
There are six floating point/vector execution units: two multiply units, two add units, and two
memory read/write units. Both the multiply and the add units can do simple integer vector
instructions including integer addition, boolean, and simple permutation instructions. It is
possible to execute up to six vector instructions per clock cycle, for example two additions,
two multiplications, and two memory operations. All vector units have full 512 bits data
width, except the write unit, which is 256 bits wide.

The latency of simple integer vector instructions is listed as 1 clock cycle in AMD’s
documents, but there is a penalty of an extra clock cycle when the scheduler is full. Since
the scheduler is almost always full when latency counts in a dependency chain, I have listed
these latencies as 2 clock cycles. Therefore, the Zen 5 has no vector instructions with an
effective 1 clock latency. Vector move instructions have zero latency, however.

The latency of floating point addition has been reduced from 3 to 2 clock cycles. Floating
point multiplication has a latency of 3 clocks, and fused multiply-add takes 4 clocks. Integer
vector instructions now have the same effective latencies as the corresponding floating
point instructions.

The AVX512 vector compare instructions are storing the result in a mask register. These
compare instructions have latencies of 3, 4, and 6 clock cycles for 128, 256, and 512 bit
vectors, respectively. The legacy SSE and AVX2 compare instructions have lower latencies
of 2 clock cycles.

AMD’s FMA4, XOP, TBM, and 3DNow instructions are no longer supported.

 25.10 Subnormal operands
Floating point operations that give a subnormal result may take a few clock cycles extra.
The same is the case when a multiplication or division underflows to zero. This is far less
than the high penalties on the Bulldozer and Piledriver. There is no penalty for a subnormal
result or underflow when the flush-to-zero mode is on.

 25.11 AVX instructions
The Zen 5 has little or no transition penalty when mixing VEX and non-VEX code, unlike
early AMD processors (see page 135). Instead, non-VEX vector instructions have a false
dependence on the upper part of a vector register if it is not in the clean state. This is similar
to the Intel Ice Lake (see page 168).

It is recommended to obey the rules for using VZEROUPPER or VZEROALL to assure
optimal execution.

 25.12 Data delay between different execution domains
The Zen 5 sometimes has a 1 clock delay when the output of a µop in the integer vector
domain goes to the input of a µop in the floating point domain, or vice versa. For example,
when the output of a vector permutation instruction goes to the input of a floating point add
instruction.

 25.13 Instructions with no latency
Register-to-register move instructions are resolved at the register rename stage without
using any execution units. These instructions have zero latency. It is possible to do six such
register renamings per clock cycle, and it is even possible to rename the same register
multiple times in one clock cycle.

The following instructions have zero latency when used with register operands: MOV,
XCHG, FXCH, (V)MOVDQA, (V)MOVDQU, (V)MOVAPS, (V)MOVUPS, (V)MOVAPD,
(V)MOVUPD, and the AVX512 versions VMOVDQA32/64 etc. This applies to 32-bit and 64-
bit general purpose registers, 128-bit xmm registers, 256-bit ymm registers, and 512-bit
zmm registers. It does not apply to 64-bit mmx registers, 8-bit and 16-bit integer registers,
and mask registers.

The processor always keeps the different parts of an integer register together. For example,
AL and AH are not treated as independent by the out-of-order execution mechanism. An
instruction that writes to part of a register will therefore have a false dependence on any
previous write to the full register or any other part of it.

An instruction that writes to a 32-bit register will not have a false dependence on the
corresponding 64-bit register because the upper part of the 64-bit register is set to zero.

A write to a part of a vector register has a false dependence on the whole register.

The processor treats certain parts of the arithmetic flags as independent. For example, an
instruction that modifies only the carry flag has no false dependence on the zero flag.
 25.14 Dependency-breaking instructions
A common way of setting a register to zero is XOR EAX,EAX or SUB EBX,EBX. The
processor recognizes that certain instructions are independent of the prior value of the
register if the two input registers are the same. The following instructions are recognized as
independent of the input when both input operands are the same register:
XOR, SUB, SBB (depends on carry flag only), CMP, PXOR, PANDN, PSUBx, PCMPEQx,
PCMPGTx, XORPS, XORPD, ANDNPS, ANDNPD, but not ANDN.

This does not work with 8-bit and 16-bit registers due to the treatment of partial registers,
but it works with 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose registers, as well as mask registers and
vector registers of all sizes.

Floating point subtractions and compares of a register with itself are never recognized as
independent of the input because the result depends on whether the input is NAN.

 25.15 Branches and loops
The throughput for jumps and taken branches is two taken jumps per clock. The throughput
for predicted not taken branches is three not taken branches per clock cycle. The
throughput for calls and returns is one call or return per two clocks.

The performance is inferior if there are more than four jump instructions or taken branches
in an aligned 16-bytes block of code.

Branch prediction is very good. The branch predictor can look two branches ahead, and it
can decode both sides of a two-way branch simultaneously. Long and complicated
repetitive branch patterns can be predicted after a certain learning period. Loops with a
count of up to 128 can be fully predicted. Indirect jumps can be predicted.

The branch prediction mechanism is described on page 36.

 25.16 Cache and memory access

 Cache              Zen 5
 µop                6k µops, 6 µop line size, 16 way, per core
 Level 1 code       32 kB, 8 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 4 clocks
 Level 1 data       48 kB, 12 way, 64 sets, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 4 clocks
 Level 2            1 MB, 16 way, 64 B line size, per core. Latency 14 clocks
 Level 3            96 MB, 24 way, 64 B line size, one per 8 cores. Latency ~55 clocks
 Table 25.1. Cache sizes on AMD Zen 5

There is a false dependence when the address of a memory read is spaced a multiple of
1024 bytes from a preceding write.

Instructions with 3-element addressing modes have a latency that is one clock cycle longer.

Automatic hardware prefetching is more efficient than explicit software prefetching in most
cases.

 25.17 Store forwarding
A memory write can be forwarded to a subsequent read of the same size or a smaller size
with the same start address. The combined latency of the write and subsequent read is 2

clock cycles for general purpose registers, 9 for vector registers up to 256 bits, and 11 for
512 bit vector registers. One extra clock cycle is added if the operand is unaligned.

There is an extra delay of one clock cycle when an unaligned memory write-to-read
forwarding is crossing a 64-bytes boundary.

A read that has a partial overlap with a preceding write has a penalty of approximately 12
clock cycles. The same applies to a read that is larger than a preceding write.

A read that is smaller than a preceding write and offset, but fully contained within the
address range of the write has a penalty of up to 28 clock cycles if unaligned.

 25.18 Mirroring memory operands
The Zen 5 can mirror memory operands with a temporary register inside the CPU so that
memory operands have no latency at all under certain conditions. There is no latency from a
memory write to a subsequent read, read-modify, or read-modify-write instruction with the
same memory operand.

This feature was present in Zen 2 and Zen 4, but not Zen 3. See page 237 for a detailed
description of this feature in Zen 2.

This feature in Zen 5 differs from Zen 2 and Zen 4 in the following respects:

   •   The throughput is increased to two read-modify-write instructions per clock cycle.
   •   Works for 8, 16, 32, and 64 bit integer registers.
   •   Cannot trace function parameters on the stack.
   •   Works with addressing modes with a base register, scaled index, and offset of any
       size. The offset must be divisible by the operand size. Does not work with absolute
       or RIP-relative addressing.
   •   The scale factor is not ignored.

 25.19 Simultaneous multithreading
The processor can run two threads in each core. This is useful if the throughput of each
core is so high that it will rarely be fully utilized by a single thread.

In general, each thread will get half of the resources when two threads are running in the
same core. The fetching and queueing of instructions is equally distributed between the two
threads so that each thread gets half of the maximum throughput. The caches, branch
predictors, execution units, and most other resources are shared competitively between the
two threads. Simultaneous multithreading is not advantageous if a shared resource is a
bottleneck that limits performance, for example instruction decoding or cache.

The CPU cores are organized into subunits of eight cores each, called core complex dies.
Inter-thread communication is faster within the same core complex than between core
complexes. Therefore, threads belonging to the same task should preferably be placed in
the same core complex.

 25.20 Power saving and frequency boosting
The Zen processor is saving power by clock gating execution units that are not in use. The
clock frequency is varied automatically depending on the work load and the chip
temperature. The maximum clock frequency varies by model from 3.7 to 5.7 GHz.

It is difficult to get consistent performance measurements because the clock frequency is
varying, as explained on page 240.
 25.21 Bottlenecks in AMD Zen 5
The throughput of everything in Zen 5 has generally been increased over previous
processors. The maximum throughput of each core in the Zen 5 microarchitecture is 8
instructions per clock cycle. While such a high throughput is rarely obtained in practice, it
may be possible to obtain around 6 instructions per clock cycle if they are distributed
between different units and there are no long dependency chains. The clock frequency
varies between 3.8 and 5.7 GHz for the desktop model.

Preceding processors from both Intel and AMD have a serious bottleneck in the instruction
fetch and decoding hardware. Previous processors have a general limit of 16 bytes of code
or 4 instructions fetched and decoded per clock cycle. This was a serious bottleneck
because x86 instructions can have any length from 1 to 15 bytes. AVX512 instructions have
lengths ranging from 6 to 11 bytes. Thus, the throughput of 4 instructions per clock cycle
could only be reached when instructions were small or when a loop fits into the µop cache.
The Zen 5 breaks this long-standing bottleneck for the first time with a fetch rate of 32 bytes
per clock and a decoding rate of 6 instructions per clock. This fetch and decode rate applies
to each side of a 2-way branch when the two branches are decoded simultaneously.

Loops that fit into the µop cache can have a maximum throughput of eight instructions per
clock cycle. A fused arithmetic and branch instruction counts as one.

A high throughput of the execution units is obtained with six integer ALUs, four address
generation units, three branch units, four vector ALUs, and two vector read/write units.

All common instructions are supported by two, three, four, or six execution units so that it is
possible to execute multiple instructions of the same kind simultaneously. This means that
execution unit throughput is rarely a bottleneck.

Integer vector instructions and floating point instructions now have the same latencies. The
latency of integer vector addition has been increased from 1 to 2 clock cycles, while floating
point addition latency has been reduced from 3 to 2 clock cycles compared to previous
models. I assume that this simplifies the hardware design. The throughputs have not been
fully standardized, though. Integer vector addition has a throughput of 4 vector operations
per clock, while floating point addition has a throughput of 2 per clock.

The high throughput of the execution units means that the performance is likely to be limited
by the latencies rather than the throughputs of the execution units. Therefore, it is important
to avoid long dependency chains in the code. The number of temporary registers for out-of-
order execution is so high that the processor can execute several iterations of a loop
simultaneously, but this requires that there are no loop-carried dependency chains and that
the loop condition is determined by a simple counter with a preknown limit. This puts an
extra burden on the programmer if you want optimal performance.

All vector instructions now have full 512 bit data width so that it is optimal to use 512 bit
vector instructions for parallel data processing when possible. The only exception is
memory write. 512-bit vector writes execute at half the throughput of 256-bit writes. The
maximum throughput is two floating point vector additions, two vector multiplications, and
two vector memory reads per clock cycle.

The AVX512 vector compare instructions using mask registers have longer latencies than
the legacy SSE and AVX2 compare instructions that return their results in vector registers.

The advanced feature of mirroring memory operands inside the CPU has been redesigned
in the Zen 5. It now covers more cases of memory operands than before, but unlike the Zen
2 and Zen 4, the Zen 5 cannot trace function parameters on the stack. Function parameters
are generally stored on the stack in 32-bit mode, but in registers in 64-bit mode. Therefore,
