the mirroring of function parameters is less important today where 64-bit mode is more
common.

Branch prediction is improved over previous models. The predictor can look two branches
ahead and it can fetch and decode both sides of a two-way branch simultaneously.
Branches can now be executed with an unprecedented throughput of two taken branches or
three non-taken branches per clock cycle, provided that they are all predicted correctly.

Inter-thread communication is faster within the same 8-core core complex than between
core complexes.

The throughput per thread for most resources is half when two threads are sharing the
same core and competing for the same resources. It may be useful to turn off simultaneous
multithreading in the processor if running CPU-intensive code.

All in all, a lot of features have been improved in the Zen 5: Bigger and more efficient
caches, higher fetch and decode rate, higher pipeline throughput, more execution units,
improved branch prediction, higher branch throughput, higher write throughput, more
temporary registers, and full 512 bit data paths in vector units. All these improvements
mean that RAM access and disk access are now the most likely bottlenecks.

Literature
Software Optimization Guide for the AMD Zen5 Microarchitecture. AMD, 2024.

Michael Larabel: “AMD Reveals More Zen 5 CPU Core Details”. Phoronix, July 2024.

AMD: “5th gen AMD Epyc processor architecture”. AMD, 2025.

Hilbert Hagedoorn: “AMD ZEN5 - A Deeper Dive Into Architecture”. Guru3D, 2024.

Wizzard: “AMD Zen 5 Technical Deep Dive”. TechPowerUp, 2024.

Gavin Bonshor: “The AMD Zen 5 Microarchitecture: Powering Ryzen AI 300 Series For
Mobile and Ryzen 9000 for Desktop”. AnandTech, 2024.

George Cozma and Camacho: “Zen 5’s 2-Ahead Branch Predictor Unit: How a 30 Year Old
Idea Allows for New Tricks”. Chips and Cheese, 2024.

26 AMD Bobcat and Jaguar pipeline
The Bobcat and Jaguar are smaller microprocessors with low clock frequency and with
focus on low power consumption. It saves power quite aggressively by slowing down the
clock speed most of the time. In my tests on the Bobcat, the full speed was seen only after
millions of instructions of CPU intensive code. This power saving feature ("CoolNQuiet") can
be turned off in the BIOS setup when higher speed is desired.

The Bobcat has two cores while the successor Jaguar currently has up to four cores, and
with plans about future 8-core versions. No execution resources are shared between the
cores, and the cores do not interfere with each other unless they both access the same
memory address.

The Jaguar supports the AVX instruction set, but not AMDs XOP instruction set. The AMD
3DNow instruction set is no longer supported, and may be regarded as obsolete. The
PREFETCH instruction is still supported, though.

 26.1 The pipeline in AMD Bobcat and Jaguar
The pipeline is designed for a throughput of 2 instructions or µops per clock cycle with two
integer ALUs, two floating point/vector units, and two AGUs for load and store, respectively.
The pipeline has schedulers for out-of-order execution. There are two separate pairs of
pipelines, one for general purpose integer instructions and one for floating point and vector
instructions. The general purpose integer unit has the two integer ALUs, the load unit and
the store unit. The floating point and vector unit has two pipes.

The design has two physical register files, one for integer registers and one for floating point
and vector registers. The size of the physical register files is stated as 64 entries on the
Bobcat, which probably means 64 entries for each of the two physical register files.
Temporary register values are not moved or shifted down the pipeline but stored in the
physical register files while only an index or pointer to the physical register is stored in the
pipeline. The physical registers can be renamed.

The Bobcat has 64-bit physical registers and uses two such registers to save a 128-bit
vector. The Jaguar supports the AVX instruction set with 256-bit vectors. It has 128-bit
physical registers and uses two such registers to save a 256-bit vector.

 26.2 Instruction fetch
The instruction fetch rate is stated as "up to 32 bytes per cycle", but this is not confirmed by
my measurements which consistently show a maximum of 16 bytes per clock cycle on
average for both Bobcat and Jaguar. Some reports say that the Jaguar has a loop buffer,
but I cannot detect any improvement in performance for tiny loops.

 26.3 Instruction decoding
Unlike previous AMD designs, the Bobcat and Jaguar do not mark instruction boundaries in
the code cache. It decodes two instructions per clock cycle. There is no penalty for multiple
prefixes or length-changing prefixes. There is no fusion of branch instruction.

 26.4 Single, double and complex instructions
The most common integer instructions generate only one µop, including read-modify-write,
push and pop instructions. Call instructions generate two µops.

The Bobcat has 64-bit execution units and it splits all 128-bit vector instructions into at least
two independent 64-bit µops. The Jaguar has 128-bit execution units and splits all 256-bit
vector instructions into two independent 128-bit µops. (The Bobcat does not support the
256-bit AVX instructions). Instructions that generate more than two µops are generated from
microcode ROM.

 26.5 Integer execution pipes
There are two execution pipelines for integer µops with two almost identical ALUs. A few
integer instructions, including multiplication, division, and some versions of LEA, can only be
handled by integer pipe 0, other instructions can be handled by either pipe. Integer division
uses the floating point division circuit with a large extra delay on Bobcat. Integer division is
much faster on Jaguar.

There is one load unit and one store unit, both 64 bits wide on Bobcat and 128 bits wide on
Jaguar.

The Bobcat reorder buffer has 56 entries, though the measured reordering capacity is
generally less than 56 µops.

 26.6 Floating point execution pipes
There are two floating point execution pipelines, which are also used for integer vector
operations. Both pipelines can handle move, integer addition, and Boolean operations.
Floating point pipe 0, here called FP0, handles integer multiplication and floating point
addition. FP1 handles floating point multiplication and division. The division circuit is not
pipelined and has no early out feature, hence the latency for division is independent of the
values of the operands.

Memory read and write operations use the integer load/store unit with an extra delay of one
or more clock cycles.

The penalty for underflow and subnormal operands is between 150 and 200 clock cycles on
Bobcat. The Jaguar has penalties of 40 clock cycles for addition of subnormal numbers and
170 - 210 clock cycles when a multiplication gives a subnormal result or underflow.

While Intel processors have a large penalty for mixing 256-bit AVX instructions with non-
AVX XMM instructions due to a mode switch (see page 135), there is no such penalty the
AMD Jaguar.

 26.7 Mixing instructions with different latency
There is little or no measurable penalty for mixing µops with different latency on the same
execution pipeline.

 26.8 Dependency-breaking instructions
A common way of setting a register to zero is XOR EAX,EAX or SUB EBX,EBX. The
Bobcat processor recognizes that certain instructions are independent of the prior value of
the register if the two input registers are the same. The following instructions are recognized
as independent of the input when both operands are the same register:
XOR, SUB, SBB (depends on carry flag only), CMP, PXOR, PANDN, PSUBx, PCMPEQx,
PCMPGTx, XORPS, XORPD. The instructions ANDNPS and ANDNPD are recognized so on
Jaguar but not on Bobcat.

The Jaguar can eliminate a move from a 128-bit register that has been zeroed in this way
(or by VZEROALL), for example:

    ; Example 26.1. Propagation of zero on Jaguar
    pxor   xmm0,xmm0    ; set to zero
    movdqa xmm1,xmm0    ; move eliminated
    movdqa xmm2,xmm1    ; move eliminated
    movdqa xmm3,xmm2    ; move eliminated

No other case of move elimination is supported.

 26.9 Data delay between differently typed instructions
There is an extra delay of 1 clock cycle when output from an integer vector instruction is
used as input for a floating point vector instruction, or vice versa. For example, there is a
penalty for using MOVAPS in connection with integer vector instructions, or MOVDQA in
connection with floating point instructions.

There is a penalty of 40 clock cycles when the output of a floating point calculation is input
to a floating point calculation with a different precision, for example if the output of a double
precision floating point addition is input to a single precision addition. This has hardly any
practical significance since such a sequence is most likely to be a programming error, but it
indicates that the processor stores extra information about floating point numbers beyond
the 128 bits in an XMM register.

 26.10 Partial register access
The processor always keeps the different parts of a register smaller than 128 bits together.
For example, AL and AH are not treated as independent by the out-of-order execution
mechanism. But the high and low 64 bits of a 128 bit register are treated as independent on
Bobcat, and the high and low 128 bits of a 256 bit register are treated as independent on
Jaguar.

 26.11 Cache
The cores have separate level-1 caches. The level-2 cache is separate for each core on
Bobcat, but shared between up to four cores on Jaguar. Future Jaguar processors with
eight cores are expected to have two level-2 caches, each shared between four cores.

  Cache                 Bobcat                                 Jaguar
 Level 1 code         32 kB, 2 way, 64 B line size,          32 kB, 2 way, 64 B line size,
                      latency 3, per core                    latency 3, per core
 Level 1 data         32 kB, 8 way, 64 B line size,          32 kB, 8 way, 64 B line size,
                      latency 3, per core                    latency 3, per core
 Level 2              512 kB, 16 way, 64 B line size,        Up to 2 MB, 16 way, 64 B line
                      half clock frequency, per core.        size, half clock frequency,
                                                             latency 26, shared between four
                                                             cores.
 Table 26.1. Cache sizes on Bobcat and Jaguar

The bandwidth is one read and one write per clock cycle to the level-1 data cache. The
reads and writes are up to 64 bits wide on Bobcat, and 128 bits wide on Jaguar.

There is a penalty of typically 3 clock cycles for misaligned memory read or write that
crosses a 16 bytes boundary.

 26.12 Store forwarding stalls
Forwarding of data from a memory write to a subsequent read works well when the read is
the same size or smaller than the write unless it is crossing a 16 bytes boundary. The
combined latency of the read and subsequent write is at least 8 clock cycles for integer
registers and 11 clock cycles for vector registers. The penalty for a failed store forwarding is
4-11 clock cycles.

Store forwarding is particularly fast on Jaguar for 32-bit and 64-bit general purpose
registers.

  Register size           Bobcat                    Jaguar
          8                        8                         8
         16                        8                         8
         32                        8                         3
       64 g.p                      8                         3
      64 mmx                       11                        7
        128                        12                        7
        256                       n.a.                       7
 Table 26.2. Store forwarding times on Bobcat and Jaguar
 Values are clock cycles, best case

