 26.13 Bottlenecks in Bobcat and Jaguar
The Bobcat and Jaguar have a well balanced pipeline design with no obvious bottlenecks
other than what is obvious from the low power design.

Power saving is quite aggressive on the Bobcat so that the full speed is obtained only when
the CPU load is heavy. The maximum throughput is two instructions per clock cycle, similar
to the Intel Atom and VIA Nano processors.

The level-1 code cache has only 2-way associativity. This can slow down noncontiguous
code. Integer division is slower than floating point division on Bobcat. Memory store
forwarding is somewhat slow on Bobcat, but much higher on Jaguar. A store forwarding
time of just 3 clock cycles for general purpose registers on the Jaguar is faster then the
bigger processors from both AMD and Intel.

Integer vector instructions are generally faster on Jaguar than on Bobcat due to the larger
size of internal registers (See manual 4: Instruction tables). All 128-bit instructions are split
into two 64-bit µops on Bobcat which gives half the throughput. Similarly, all 256-bit
instructions are split into two 128-bit µops on Jaguar.

The MASKMOVQ and MASKMOVDQU instructions are very slow, partially due to the fact that
these instructions require uncached writes. The VMASKMOVPS instruction with a memory
source operand takes more than 300 clock cycles on the Jaguar when the mask is zero, in
which case the instruction should do nothing. This appears to be a design flaw.

The PALIGNR instruction is quite slow on the Bobcat. This instruction is used in many
implementations of the memcpy (memory copying) function.

Prefetch instructions are very slow on the Jaguar, but not on Bobcat.

 26.14 Literature:
Brad Burgess, et. al.: Bobcat: AMD's Low-Power x86 Processor. IEEE Micro, March/April
2011, pp. 16-25.

Anand Lal Shimpi: AMD’s Jaguar Architecture: The CPU Powering Xbox One, PlayStation
4, Kabini & Temash. May 2013. www.anandtech.com.

27 Comparison of microarchitectures
The state-of-the-art microprocessors that have been investigated here represent different
microarchitecture kernels: the AMD, the Pentium 4 (NetBurst), the Pentium M, and the Intel
Core 2 kernel. I will now discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each of these
microarchitectures. I am not discussing differences in memory bandwidth because this
depends partly on external hardware and on cache sizes. Each of the four microprocessor
types is available in different variants with different cache sizes. The comparison of
microarchitectures is therefore mostly relevant to CPU-intensive applications and less
relevant to memory-intensive applications.

 27.1 The AMD K8 and K10 kernel
This AMD microarchitecture is somewhat simpler than the microarchitecture of Intel
processors. This has certain advantages because the processor spends less resources on
complicated logistics. It also has drawbacks in terms of suboptimal out-of-order scheduling.
The throughput of 3 macro-operations per clock cycle is obtained simply by having a 3-way
pipeline all the way through. The ability to move macro-operations from one of the three
pipelines to another is limited.

The execution units are less specialized than in Intel processors. All of the three integer
execution units can handle almost any integer operation, including even the most obscure
and seldom used instructions. Only the integer multiplication unit has been too expensive to
make in three copies. This generality makes the logistics simple at the cost of bigger
execution units.

The three floating point execution units are more specialized. Only the simplest operations
are supported by more than one of these units. The distribution of macro-operations
between the three floating point units is far from optimal. There is certainly room for
improvement here.

The floating point execution units also have a problem with mixing macro-operations with
different latencies. This problem is handled in a rather complicated and inefficient way by
blocking the dispatch of a macro-operation with a short latency if it can be predicted that it
would need the result bus simultaneously with a preceding macro-operation with a longer
latency. A simpler and more efficient solution would be to keep the result of a short-latency
macro-operation in the pipeline until the result bus is ready. This would solve the problem
that a macro-operation with a short latency can be postponed for a long time if the pipeline
is dominated by long-latency macro-operations, and it would get rid of the complicated logic
for predicting when the result bus will be vacant.

All execution units have fairly short latencies and are fully pipelined so that they can receive
a new macro-operation every clock cycle.

It is alleged that the nine execution units (three integer ALU's, three address generation
units, and three floating point units) can execute nine micro-operations in the same clock
cycle. Unfortunately, it is virtually impossible to verify this claim experimentally because the
retirement stage is limited to three macro-operations per clock cycle. In other words, the
AMD has ample execution resources which are never fully utilized. If the bottleneck in the
retirement stage were widened then it would be possible to execute more macro-operations
per clock cycle.

The AMD generates quite few macro-operations per instruction. Even read-modify and
read-modify-write instructions generate only one macro-operation which is split into micro-
operations only in the execute stage in the pipeline. This is similar to a fused micro-
operation in the PM and Core2 design. The AMD K8 design has no execution units bigger
than 64 bytes, so that 128-bit XMM instructions generate two macro-operations in the AMD
K8. The subsequent AMD K10 processors have 128 bit units in the floating point pipeline to
handle vector instructions in a single macro-operation.

The AMD design has no strict limitation to the number of input dependencies on a single
macro-operation. Thus, instructions like ADC EAX,EBX, CMOVBE EAX,EBX, and MOV
[EAX+EBX],ECX are implemented with a single macro-operation. The same instructions
have to be split up into at least two micro-operations on comparable Intel processors where
a micro-operation can have no more than two input dependencies, including the condition
flags.

The throughput for instruction fetching has been increased from 16 to 32 bytes per clock
cycle on K10. There is still a lower throughput after taken jumps. Instruction fetching from
the level-2 cache is particularly slow.

Instruction decoding seems to be quite efficient. It can decode at least three instructions per
clock cycle.
Branch prediction is good for branches that always go the same way because branch
prediction information is stored both in the level-1 and the level-2 cache. But the mechanism
for predicting regular branch patterns has a lower prediction rate than on Intel processors.

The cache system can make two memory reads per clock cycle, while Intel processors prior
to Sandy Bridge could do only one read per clock cycle.

 27.2 The AMD Bulldozer, Piledriver and Steamroller kernel
The Bulldozer microarchitecture is a significant improvement over previous models.

The Bulldozer has two to eight compute units which have two CPU cores each. The code
cache, instruction fetcher, branch prediction, and floating point units are shared between the
two cores of each compute unit. The design allows a throughput of up to four instructions
per clock cycle when only one core in a compute unit is used, or two instructions per clock
cycle when both cores are used.

Most execution units are doubled so that most instructions can execute at a throughput of
two instructions per clock cycle.

The latencies for floating point instructions and integer vector instructions are often
somewhat longer than in Intel's Sandy Bridge.

The single-thread throughput for floating point operations is two 128-bit operations per clock
cycle, which can be addition, multiplication or fused multiply-and-add.

The AMD design has no strict limitation to the number of input dependencies on a single
µop. Thus, instructions like ADC EAX,EBX, CMOVBE EAX,EBX, and MOV
[EAX+EBX],ECX are implemented with a single µop. The same instructions have to be
split up into at least two µops on Intel processors where a µop can have no more than two
input dependencies, including the condition flags, except for fused multiply-and-add
instructions.

The instruction decoders can handle four instructions per clock cycle. The Bulldozer and
Piledriver have one decoder per unit, shared between two threads, while the Steamroller
has one decoder for each thread. The maximum throughput of four instructions per clock
cycle is best obtained by mixing integer instructions and vector instructions.

The cache system is poor in Bulldozer, better in Piledriver, and still better in Steamroller.

 27.3 The AMD Zen kernel
The Zen processor family puts AMD back in the game after they had lagged behind Intel for
several years. The Zen kernel has a throughput of five or six instructions per clock cycle,
which is the record so far. The throughput is particularly high for vector code. The Zen 2, 3,
and 4 can calculate four 256-bit floating point vectors per clock cycle.
The high throughput places a higher burden on programmers and compilers to utilize the
increased instruction level parallelism in single threaded applications. The core throughput
is so high that it may be useful to run two threads per core, unlike some other processors
with less core throughput. However, instruction fetch and decoding is still a very likely
bottleneck which can limit performance when running two threads.

The new µop cache is an important improvement which removes the bottleneck of
instruction fetching and decoding in most of the critical loops.

The large caches at all levels is a particularly important improvement. The cache bandwidth
is 32 bytes per clock on Zen 1 and 64 bytes per clock on Zen 2, 3, and 4.

 27.4 The Pentium 4 kernel
The Intel Pentium 4 (NetBurst) kernel has been designed with a very one-sided focus on
clock speed. Leading the clock frequency race surely has advantages in terms of marketing
and prestige, but it also has considerable costs in terms of the design considerations that
are needed in order to make the high clock frequency possible. A long pipeline is needed
because the circuits can do less work per pipeline stage. Some pipeline stages in the P4
microarchitecture are used simply for transporting data from one part of the chip to another.
Physical distances really matter at these high frequencies. The long pipeline means a high
branch misprediction penalty.

Each of the execution units is kept as small as possible. Not only because physical
distances matter but also because heat dissipation is a limiting factor. The smaller units are
more specialized and can handle fewer different operations. This means that all but the
simplest instructions require more than one µop, and some instructions require many µops.

The level-1 data cache is also quite small (8 or 16 kb), but access to the level-2 cache is
fast.

The P4 doesn't have a code cache as other processors do, but a trace cache. The trace
cache runs at half clock frequency, possibly because of its size. The trace cache doesn't
store raw code but decoded µops. These µops are very similar to RISC instructions so that
the kernel can use RISC technology. Decoding instructions into RISC-like µops before they
are cached is a logical thing to do when decoding is a bottleneck. The P4 surely performs
better in some cases where instruction decoding or predecoding is a bottleneck on other
processors.

But the trace cache is not as advantageous as it first looks. For example, a PUSH or POP
instruction takes only a single byte in a code cache, but 16 bytes in the P4E trace cache.
This means that it can cache less code on the same chip area. Furthermore, the same code
may appear in more than one trace in the trace cache. The consequence is less code in the
cache when cache size is limited by physical factors. The 32-bit P4 has some data
compression in the trace cache, but this goes against the idea of making decoding simple
and efficient. Arranging code into traces eliminates the fetching delay when jumping to
another part of the code, but there is still a delay when jumping to a different trace, and this
delay is higher because the trace cache runs at half clock speed. Whether to store the same
code in multiple traces or not is a tradeoff between eliminating jumps and putting more code
into the trace cache.

Anyway, I seriously doubt that the trace cache makes the design simpler. I don't know how it
keeps track of the traces, mapping physical addresses to multiple trace cache addresses,
deciding whether to jump to another trace or extend the existing trace on a branch
instruction, and deciding when to rearrange traces. This looks like a logistical nightmare to
me.

The instruction decoder can only handle one instruction per clock cycle, while other designs
can decode three or more instructions per clock cycle. Obviously, the decoder has got a low
priority because it is used only when building new traces from the level-2 cache.

The P4 has two execution ports for ALU and other calculations (port 0 and 1) and two
additional ports for memory operations and address calculation (port 2 and 3). Each
execution port has one or more execution units. It is not possible to dispatch two µops
simultaneously to two different execution units if they are using the same execution port.
These ports are therefore a bottleneck. The execution units are not optimally distributed

between port 0 and 1. All floating point and SIMD (vector) operations, except simple moves,
go through port 1. This makes port 1 a serious bottleneck in floating point and SIMD code.

Two small integer ALU's run at double clock speed. The 32-bit P4 can do staggered
additions with a virtual latency of only a half clock cycle. The latency for the condition flags
is longer. The 64-bit P4E still uses double-speed ALU's, but with a latency of a full clock
cycle. The throughput is four µops per clock for those instructions that can be handled by
both ALU's. The double speed ALU's are specialized to handle only the most common
operations such as move and addition on general purpose registers.

The other execution units have longer latencies, sometimes much longer. The most
ridiculous example is a 7 clock latency for a floating point register-to-register move on P4E.
There is also an additional latency of one clock cycle when a result from one execution unit
is needed as input in another execution unit.

A 128-bit XMM instruction is handled by a single µop, but the execution units can handle
only 64 bits at a time so the throughput is only 64 bits per clock cycle. Only memory reads
have a throughput of 128 bits per clock cycle. This makes the P4/P4E an efficient
microprocessor for memory-intensive applications that can use 128-bit operands.

The branch prediction algorithm is reasonably good, but the misprediction penalty is
unusually high for two reasons. The first reason is obviously that the pipeline is long (20 or
more stages). The second reason is that bogus µops in a mispredicted branch are not
discarded before they retire. A misprediction typically involves 45 µops. If these µops are
divisions or other time-consuming operations then the misprediction can be extremely
costly. Other microprocessors can discard µops as soon as the misprediction is detected so
that they don't use execution resources unnecessarily.

The same problem applies to bogus reads of a store-forwarded memory operand that is not
ready. The P4 will keep re-playing the read, as well as subsequent µops that depend on it,
until the memory operand is ready. This can waste a lot of execution resources in a read-
after-write memory dependence. This typically occurs when parameters are transferred on
the stack to a subroutine. There is also an excessive replaying of µops after cache misses
and other events. The amount of resources that are wasted on executing bogus µops is so
high that it is a serious performance problem.

The retirement is limited to slightly less than 3 µops per clock cycle.

 27.5 The Pentium M kernel
The PM is a modification of the old Pentium Pro kernel with the main focus on saving
power. A lot of effort has been put into turning off parts of the execution units and buses
when they are not used. The lowered power consumption has a beneficial side effect. A low
power consumption means that the clock frequency can be increased without overheating
the chip.

Instruction decoding is limited by the 4-1-1 rule (page 92). Software must be tuned
specifically to the 4-1-1 rule in order to optimize instruction decoding. Unfortunately, the
4-1-1 pattern is broken by instruction fetch boundaries, which are difficult to predict for the
programmer or compiler maker. This problem reduces the instruction fetch rate to less than
16 bytes per clock cycle and the decode rate to less than three instructions per clock cycle
(page 92). Instruction fetch and decoding is definitely a weak link in the PM design.

The execution units are clustered around five execution ports in a design very similar to the
P4. Port 0 and 1 are for ALU and other calculations, while port 2, 3 and 4 are for memory
operations and address calculation. The execution units are more evenly distributed
between port 0 and 1, and many µops can go to any of these two ports. This makes it easier
to keep both ports busy than in the P4 design.
SIMD integer instructions are quite efficient with an ALU on each of the two execution ports
and a latency of only one clock cycle. Floating point latencies are also quite low.

The PM generates fewer µops per instruction than the P4. While both designs have a
throughput of 3 µops per clock, the PM gets more instructions executed per clock cycle
because of the lower number of µops. The low number of µops is partially due to µop fusion
(page 94) and a dedicated adder for the stack pointer (page 96). Unfortunately, the µop
fusion mechanism doesn't work for XMM registers. This makes the PM more efficient for
MMX registers and floating point registers than for XMM registers.

The PM has a limitation of three register reads per clock cycle from the permanent register
file. This can very well be a bottleneck.

The PM has an advanced branch prediction mechanism. The loop counter is something that
we have been wishing for several years. But this doesn't make up for the very small branch
target buffer of probably only 128 entries. The improved ability to predict indirect jumps is
probably what has made it necessary to reduce the size of the BTB.

The PM doesn't support the 64-bit instruction set.

The throughput of the retirement stage is exactly as in P4. While both designs are limited to
3 µops per clock cycle, the PM has fewer µops per instruction and shorter latencies in the
execution units. This makes the PM so efficient that it may run CPU-intensive code faster
than the P4 even though the latter has a 50% higher clock frequency.

 27.6 Intel Core 2 and Nehalem microarchitecture
This design takes the successful philosophy of the PM even further with a high focus on
saving power. The low power consumption makes it possible to increase the clock
frequency.

The pipeline and execution units are extended to allow a throughput of four µops per clock
cycle. The throughput is further increased by issuing fewer µops per instruction and by
extending the data busses and execution units to 128 bits. Cache and memory bandwidth
have also been improved.

The Core2 and Nehalem have so many execution units and execution ports that the
execution stage will rarely be a bottleneck. Most execution units and internal data busses
have been extended to 128 bits unlike previous x86 processors from Intel and AMD, which
have only 64-bit execution units.

A few weak spots in the design remain, however. I want to point out three areas in the
design that do not match the performance of the rest of the pipeline, and these weak spots
are likely to be bottlenecks:

   1. Instruction predecoding. The mechanism of instruction fetch and predecoding has
      been improved, but the bandwidth is still limited to 16 bytes of code per clock cycle.
      This is a very likely bottleneck in CPU-intensive code.

   2. Register read ports. The design can read no more than two or three registers from
      the permanent register file per clock cycle. This is likely to be insufficient in many
      cases.

   3. Branch history pattern table. The branch history pattern table is so small that it may
      compromise the otherwise quite advanced branch prediction mechanism.

   4. Read ports. The Core2 can read one memory operand per clock cycle, where AMD
      processors can read two. The read port cannot always match the high throughput of
      the execution units.

 27.7 Intel Sandy Bridge and later microarchitectures
This new design is a significant improvement. Many of the bottlenecks of previous designs
have been dealt with in the Sandy Bridge.

Instruction fetch and predecoding has been a serious bottleneck in Intel designs for many
years. In the NetBurst architecture they tried to fix this problem by caching decoded µops,
without much success. In the Sandy Bridge design, they are caching instructions both
before and after decoding. The limited size of the µop cache is therefore less problematic,
and the µop cache appears to be very efficient.

The limited number of register read ports has been a serious, and often neglected,
bottleneck since the old Pentium Pro. This bottleneck has now finally been removed in the
Sandy Bridge.

Previous Intel processors have only one memory read port where AMD processors have
two. This was a bottleneck in many math applications. The Sandy Bridge has two read
ports, whereby this bottleneck is removed.

The branch prediction has been improved by having bigger buffers and a shorter
misprediction penalty, but it has no loop predictor, and mispredictions are still quite
common.

The AVX instruction set is an important improvement. The throughput of floating point
addition and multiplication is doubled when the new 256-bit YMM registers are used. The
new non-destructive three-operand instructions are quite convenient for reducing register
pressure and avoiding register move instructions. There is, however, a serious performance
penalty for mixing vector instructions with and without the VEX prefix. This penalty is easily
avoided if the programming guidelines are followed, but it is a common programming error
to inadvertently mix VEX and non-VEX instructions, and such errors are difficult to detect.

Whenever the narrowest bottleneck is removed from a system, the next less narrow
bottleneck will become the limiting factor. The new bottlenecks that require attention in the
Sandy Bridge are the following:

   1. The µop cache. This cache can ideally hold up to 1536 µops. The effective utilization
      will be much less in most cases. The programmer should pay attention to make sure
      the most critical inner loops fit into the µop cache.

   2. Instruction fetch and decoding. The fetch/decode rate has not been improved over
      previous processors and is still a potential bottleneck for code that doesn't fit into the
      µop cache.

   3. Data cache bank conflicts. The increased memory read bandwidth means that the
      frequency of cache conflicts will increase. Cache bank conflicts are almost
      unavoidable in programs that utilize the memory ports to their maximum capacity.
      This problem has been removed in the Haswell processor.

   4. Branch prediction. While the branch history buffer and branch target buffers are
      probably bigger than in previous designs, mispredictions are still quite common.

   5. Sharing of resources between threads. Many of the critical resources are shared
      between the two threads of a core when simultaneous multithreading

