       (hyperthreading) is on. It may be wise to turn off simultaneous multithreading when
       multiple threads depend on the same execution resources.

28 Comparison of low power microarchitectures
Intel Atom, Silvermont, Goldmont, Tremont, etc., AMD Bobcat and Jaguar, VIA Nano, etc.
are all small processors designed for low power consumption. These processors have lower
performance than the more powerful processors but are sufficient for ordinary office
applications, embedded applications, and even low-traffic servers. The low price and low
power consumption makes these processors suitable for less demanding applications.

 28.1 Intel Atom microarchitecture
The Intel Atom is a small low-power processor with lower performance than the Core brand.
The original Atom processor had only in-order execution. The Silvermont has some out-of-
order execution, and the Goldmont has full out-of-order capabilities. The performance of the
latter is sufficient for most lightweight applications.

Some versions have simultaneous multithreading. This is of limited use because the
resources that are shared between two threads are quite small, even for single-threaded
use. Some versions have multiple cores capable of running one or two threads each.

 28.2 VIA Nano microarchitecture
The VIA Nano is a small low-power processor targeted at the same type of applications as
the Intel Atom. The Nano has a quite advanced out-of-order pipeline and powerful execution
units. In some respects, the performance of the execution units is similar to that of the much
bigger desktop processors from Intel and AMD. The floating point performance is
particularly good.

The Nano has longer latencies than the desktop processors for memory access and for
jumps, but very low latencies for integer and floating point calculations. The versions with
two or more independent cores give good performance in multitasking environments.

 28.3 AMD Bobcat microarchitecture
The AMD Bobcat has an efficient out-of-order pipeline with good performance and no
obvious bottlenecks. The execution units are only 64 bits wide, which gives a lower
throughput for vector instructions. The Bobcat has two independent cores, which gives it a
good performance in multitasking environments.

 28.4 Conclusion
The AMD, P4 and Intel Core designs can all execute instructions out of order with a
maximum throughput of 3 µops per clock cycle. The Core2, Nehalem and Sandy bridge can
do 4 µops per clock cycle. AMD Bulldozer and later designs can execute four µops per clock
cycle when there is a good mixing of integer and vector instructions.

The NetBurst (Pentium 4) design has a higher clock frequency which means more µops per
second. But each instruction generates more µops on NetBurst than on other processors,
which means fewer instructions per clock cycle. A further disadvantage of the high clock
frequency is a long pipeline and thus a high branch misprediction penalty. The NetBurst
microarchitecture has so many inherent performance problems that it has been
discontinued.

The PM, Core and the AMD designs all use the opposite strategy of a lower clock frequency
but fewer µops per instruction. This strategy appears to give the best performance for CPU-
intensive applications. The NetBurst has longer latencies than other processors for many
instructions. This makes it inferior for code with long dependency chains.

All these designs have a RISC-like execution core that works on simple µops rather than on
complex instructions. The NetBurst and Sandy Bridge designs have pushed the RISC
philosophy even further by caching µops rather than instructions. The NetBurst design is not
convincing since it reduces the amount of information per cache area and the management
of the trace cache has become no less time consuming than a CISC decoder. The Sandy
Bridge uses the compromise of caching instructions both before and after decoding. The
result appears to be quite successful.

AMD uses the different strategy of marking instruction boundaries in the code cache,
whereby the bottleneck of instruction length decoding is removed. Intel did the same in the
Pentium MMX, and I don't understand why they have left this strategy. Instruction length
decoding continues to be a serious bottleneck in Intel processors. The problem has been
reduced by caching decoded instructions, but the capacity of the NetBurst trace cache and
the Sandy Bridge µop cache is still limited because µops take more cache space than CISC
instructions.

For many years, the RISC philosophy has been considered the best way to high
performance. The Intel Core microarchitecture as well as the AMD design indicates a new
trend away from RISC and back to the CISC principle. The RISC-like design of the P4 with
its very long pipeline and long execution latencies was not convincing, and the trace cache
appears to have been inefficient. The advantages of going back to CISC design are
threefold:

   1. The compact CISC code gives better utilization of the limited code cache area.

   2. Fewer µops per instruction gives higher bandwidth in the pipeline.

   3. Fewer µops per instruction gives lower power consumption.

The main disadvantage of a CISC design is that instruction decoding becomes a bottleneck.
The AMD processor has a higher decoding bandwidth than the Intel design because of the
technique of storing instruction boundaries in the code cache. The Intel design is still limited
to a decoding rate of 16 bytes of code per clock cycle, which is insufficient in many cases.

The initial RISC philosophy required that all instructions should have the same latency in
order to provide a smooth pipelining. However, this principle soon proved untenable
because multiplication, division and floating point addition take longer time than integer
addition. This problem is partially solved in the Intel microarchitecture by sending micro-
operations with different latencies to different execution ports (see table 8.1 page 115).

The increased focus on power-saving features in the Intel Core and later designs makes it
possible to use a relatively high clock frequency despite a design that does more work per
pipeline stage than the NetBurst.

The AMD also uses a CISC design with few µops per clock cycle. Early versions were kept
as simple as possible in order to reduce the necessary amount of logistics overhead. This,
however, reduced the out-of-order capabilities and the optimal utilization of execution units.

The Intel Core and AMD K10 processors have full 128-bit execution units. The earlier
processors use a 64-bit unit twice when computing a 128-bit result. It is therefore not
possible to take full advantage of the 128-bit XMM instructions in these processors. The
Sandy Bridge has full 256-bit execution units, except for memory read and write operations.
It is likely that we will see processors from AMD or VIA with AVX support that use 128-bit
