units twice to compute a 256-bit vector result. The same may happen with future extensions
of the vector size to 512 bits or more.

The throughput of 3 µops per clock cycle in both AMD, P4 and PM is increased to 4 µops in
the Core2 and later designs, but I do not expect this number to increase much further in the
future because the advantage of a higher throughput cannot be fully utilized unless the code
has a high degree of inherent parallelism.

Instead, the trend goes towards multiple execution cores. Unfortunately, we need multi-
threaded programs to take full advantage of multiple cores in single-user systems.
Calculation tasks that cannot be divided into multiple threads cannot take much advantage
of multiple cores or multiple processors.

Many microprocessors have multiple cores. A half-way solution was introduced in the
NetBurst and again in the Nehalem and Sandy Bridge with simultaneous multithreading
(hyperthreading) technology. The microprocessor has two logical processors sharing the
same execution core. The advantage of this is limited if the two threads compete for the
same resources, but simultaneous multithreading can be quite advantageous if the
performance is limited by something else, such as memory access. Some processors are
sharing all resources between the two threads, while other processors share only some of
the resources. This makes it quite complicated for the programmer to determine whether
simultaneous multithreading is advantageous for a particular program running on a
particular microprocessor.

The extension of the 32 bit architecture to 64 bits has been a logical and necessary thing to
do. Intel came before AMD with their advanced Itanium RISC architecture, but it lacks the
backwards compatibility that the market demands. The AMD 64-bit architecture, which has
doubled the number of registers and still retained backwards compatibility, has turned out to
be a commercial success which Intel had to copy. All x86 processors produced today
support the x64 instruction set.

Table 28.1 below compares execution latencies for various operations on the three designs.
A table comparing cache sizes etc. is provided in manual 4: "Instruction tables".

  Execution latencies, typical                AMD             P4E            Core2          Sandy
                                                                             45 nm          Bridge
 integer addition                              1               1               1              1
 integer multiplication                        3               10              3              3
 integer division, 32 bits                     40              79             23             28
 packed integer move                           2               7               1              1
 packed integer addition                       2               2               1              1
 packed integer multiplication                 3               8               3              3
 floating point move                           2               7              1-3             1
 floating point addition                       4               6               3              3
 floating point division, double               20              45             21             22
 floating point vector addition                4               5               3              3
 floating point vector multiplication          4               7               5              5
 Table 28.1. Comparison of instruction latencies

29 Development trends
The high clock frequency in the NetBurst design turned out to be too costly in terms of
energy consumption and chip heating. This led to a change of focus away from the
gigahertz race. Since then, there has been an increasing focus on energy efficiency, and

this factor will become no less important in the future since small battery-operated
computers are becoming very popular.

The speed and computing power of execution units is growing faster than the speed of
memory access. We can therefore expect an intense focus on improving caching and
memory bandwidth in the future. Three-level caching and wider data paths are already
common.

Branch misprediction is very costly in present microprocessors because of the long
pipelines. We are now seeing more advanced multilevel branch prediction algorithms and
bigger branch target buffers and history tables. The future may bring decoding and
speculative execution of multiple branches simultaneously, as well as predicated integer
instructions in future processors in order to reduce the cost of mispredictions. We have not
yet seen radically shorter pipelines as a means of reducing misprediction penalties.

Instruction length decoding is a very serious bottleneck in many CISC computers. Both Intel
and AMD processors have a limitation of 16 bytes or 4 instructions per clock cycle in the
fetch and decode units. This bottleneck has existed through many generations of
microprocessors and is due mainly to the complicated detection of instruction length.

A transition to a RISC instruction set is prevented by the requirement for backwards
compatibility. Dual instruction set computers is a possible solution, but quite costly. The
caching of decoded µops was not a very successful solution in the Intel NetBurst
architecture, but more successful in later processors from Intel and later also AMD. A
disadvantage of the µop cache is that it takes much more die space per instruction than a
traditional code cache.

More focus on improving the instruction length decoders is possibly a more efficient
solution. Another likely possibility is multiple levels of µop caching. The AVX and later
instructions are using the VEX coding scheme which includes information on the instruction
length. This opens the possibility for a compromise where the decoders have a higher
throughput for instructions with VEX and EVEX encoding than for the most complicated
non-VEX encodings.

An alternative to caching µops is to mark instruction boundaries in the instruction cache.
This relieves the critical bottleneck of instruction length decoding. Many AMD processors
and a few Intel processors have used this method, but it is not used in the latest processors
from Intel and AMD.

There is a remarkable convergence between the Intel and AMD microarchitectures thanks
to a patent sharing agreement between the two companies. Intel's stack engine and the
mechanism for predicting indirect branches have been copied by AMD.

There is unfortunately not always convergence on the instruction set extensions. Intel's
SSE4.1 and SSE4.2 instruction sets are very different from AMD's SSE4.A and XOP
(formerly known as SSE5), and the intersection between these two sets is quite small. Intel
has never copied AMD's 3DNow and XOP instruction sets which are now obsolete, but they
have copied the successful x64 extension from AMD and a few other instructions. AMD has
traditionally copied all Intel instructions, but sometimes with a lag of several years.
Fortunately, AMD has revised their proposed SSE5 instruction set to make it compatible
with the AVX coding scheme (as I have previously argued that it would be wise of them to
do). The AMD Zen processors now support Intel's AVX2 instruction set, including the 256-bit
YMM vector registers, but not yet AVX512. It often takes several years for the software
industry to utilize new instruction set extensions. Therefore, it makes economic sense for
AMD to lag behind Intel in the race for new instruction set extensions and longer vector
registers. AMD have focused on improving throughput while Intel have focused on
increasing the vector length.

The incompatible fused multiply-and-add instructions is a pathetic story as discussed on my
blog. Fortunately, Intel's Haswell and AMD's Piledriver and later processors support the
FMA3 instructions, and AMD has dropped the FMA4 instructions, originally specified by
Intel.

The transition to three- and four-operand instructions has been easier for AMD than for Intel
because, for many generations, the Intel microarchitecture has not allowed a µop to have
more than two input dependencies, while AMD has never had such a limitation. The
limitation on input dependencies was first broken in the Haswell with the fused multiply-and-
add (FMA) instructions.

The amount of parallelism in CPU pipelines will not grow much beyond the six µops per
clock cycle because dependency chains in the software is likely to prevent further
parallelism. Instead, we are seeing an increasing number of cores. Even small low-power
processors now have multiple cores. This puts a high demand on software developers to
make multithreaded applications. Both Intel and AMD are making hybrid solutions where
some or all of the execution units are shared between two processor cores (hyperthreading
in Intel terminology).

Lower instruction latencies is one way to higher performance that we have yet seen only in
low power processors. AMD's Bulldozer was the first processor to translate register-to-
register moves to register renaming with zero latency, but Intel soon followed. Another way
to reduce latencies is instruction fusion. The store-to-load forwarding mechanism may also
be improved to reduce latency, as we have seen in AMD Zen 2 (but not in Zen 3).

The extension of the 128-bit XMM registers to 256 bits (YMM) was realized in the Intel
Sandy Bridge processor in January 2011, and AMDs Bulldozer later in the same year. The
next extension to 512 bits first appeared in Intel's Knights Landing and Skylake-X and later
in AMD Zen 4. Later extension to 1024 bits have not yet been announced. Apparently, there
are no plans of vector registers bigger than 1024 bits. Software use of AVX512 is still low
because few programmers want to make multiple versions of their software for different
processors.

There are two different versions of the instruction set for 512-bit vectors. The Intel MIC/Xeon
Phi Coprocessor uses a 4-bytes prefix called MVEX to increase the vector size, double the
number of vector registers to 32 and allow various extra attributes to be added to each
instruction, such as masked operations, type conversion, broadcast, permutation, cache
eviction hint, rounding mode, and suppression of exceptions. The AVX-512 instruction set
uses an almost identical prefix called EVEX. The EVEX prefix does not allow type
conversion and permutation, but includes bits for specifying vector size instead. The MVEX
and EVEX instruction sets are not compatible with each other. They differ by a single bit in
the prefix, even for otherwise identical instructions. The MVEX and EVEX instruction sets
are both backwards compatible with previous instruction sets, though. I expect the AVX-512
instruction set with the EVEX prefix to be the standard for future x86 processors, while
MVEX can now be regarded as obsolete.

Strangely, the MIC/Xeon Phi processors also support the old x87 floating point instructions,
which appear to be obsolete. It does not look like we are getting completely rid of the x87
instructions in a foreseeable future even though they are expensive to implement in
hardware.

The x86 instruction set now has more than a two thousand logically different instructions,
including specialized instructions for text processing, graphics, cryptography, CRC check,
and complex numbers. The instruction set is likely to be increased with every new processor
generation, at least for marketing reasons. We may see more application-specific in the
future.

An ever-increasing number of instructions may not be optimal from a technical point of view
because it increases the die area of the execution units whereby the clock frequency is
limited. A more viable solution might be user-definable instructions. We are already seeing
FPGA chips that combine a dedicated microprocessor core with programmable logic. A
similar technology may be implemented in PC processors as well. Such a processor will
have logical arrays similar to FPGAs that can be programmed in a hardware definition
language to implement application-specific microprocessor instructions. Each processor
core will have a cache for the hardware definition code in addition to the code cache and the
data cache. The cost of task switching will increase, of course, but it will be easier to reduce
the number of task switches when the number of cores is increased.

The drive towards ever-increasing CPU speed according to Moore's law has a downside in
terms of power consumption, size and price. We are now seeing an alternative trend of
smaller low-power processors for mobile devices. These lightweight processors are as fast
as the desktop processors were a few years earlier, yet smaller, cheaper and with much
lower power consumption. We will see these small processors replace the big and power-
hungry processors in a lot of applications where we have previously paid for more CPU
power than we need.

The x86 instruction set bears a heavy burden of obsolete instructions and complicated
coding schemes due to a long history of short-sighted patches and marketing conside-
rations. On the other hand, it has the advantage of more work done per instruction
compared with RISC designs.

The processors could be made significantly more efficient if we were not limited by the
requirements for backward compatibility with legacy software. To showcase how a more
efficient design could look, I have developed a new instruction set architecture called
ForwardCom. The ForwardCom instruction set combines the fast decoding of RISC
processors with the more work done per instruction of CISC processors. Furthermore, it has
variable-length vector registers which eliminates the need for different software versions for
microprocessors with different vector length. See www.forwardcom.info for details.

It is a paradox that we still have many software products with frustratingly long response
times while microprocessor performance has grown exponentially for decades. In most
cases, the reason for unsatisfactory performance is not poor microprocessor design, but
poor software design. All too often, the culprit is extremely wasteful software development
tools, frameworks, virtual machines, script languages, and abstract many-layer software
designs. The growth in hardware performance according to Moore's law is slowing down as
we are approaching the limits of what is physically possible. Instead, Wirth's law claims
jokingly that software speed is decreasing more quickly than hardware speed is increasing.

In this situation, software developers should be advised to pick the low-hanging fruits rather
than relying on still faster microprocessors: Avoid the most wasteful software tools and
frameworks, and avoid feature bloat. Reducing the level of abstraction in software
development will actually make it easier to understand the performance consequences of
different code constructs. Good advice can be found in manual 1: "Optimizing software in
C++".

