Preface
Back around 2016, I was surprised at the lack of published material for learning how to use CMake.
The official reference documentation was a useful resource for those willing to go exploring, but as
a way of learning CMake in a progressive, structured manner, it was not ideal. There were some
wikis and personal websites that had some useful contents, but there were also many that
contained out-of-date or questionable advice and examples. There was a distinct gap, which meant
those new to CMake had a hard time learning good practices, leading to many becoming
overwhelmed or frustrated.

At the time, I had been writing some blog articles to do something more productive with my spare
time and to deepen my own technical knowledge around software development. I frequently wrote
about areas that came up in my interaction with colleagues at work or in my own development
activities and I found this to be both rewarding and useful to others. As that pattern repeated itself,
the idea of writing a book was born. Fast-forward two and a half years and the result is this book.

Along the way, there was a classic pivotal moment which I now look back on with some degree of
amusement. A colleague bemoaned a particular feature that he wished CMake had. It burrowed its
way into my brain and sat there for a few months until one day I decided to explore how hard it
would be to add that feature myself. That culminated in the test fixtures feature that is now a part
of CMake. More importantly though, I was really struck by the positive experience I had while
making that contribution. The people, the tools and the processes in place made working on the
project truly a pleasure. From there, I became more deeply involved and now fulfill the role of
volunteer co-maintainer.

Acknowledgments
It is only when you come to thank all those who have contributed to the process of getting your
book released that you realize just how many people have been involved. A work like this doesn’t
happen without the generosity, patience and insight of others, nor does it succeed without being
challenged, tested and reworked. It relies on those who were kind enough to (sometimes
unknowingly!) get involved in these activities as much as it does on the author. I cannot thank these
people enough for their kindness and wisdom.

The CMake community wouldn’t be as strong and as vibrant as it is today without the ongoing
support of Kitware and its staff, both past and present. I’d like to make special mention of Brad
King, the CMake project leader, who through his inclusive and encouraging approach to handling
new CMake contributors has made people like myself very welcome and feel empowered to get
involved. I have personally learned much from him just by observing the way he interacts with
developers and users, providing strong leadership and fostering an environment of respect for
others. It also goes without saying that the many contributors to CMake over the years also deserve
much praise for their efforts, often made on a purely voluntary basis. I’m humbled by the scale of
contributions that have been made by so many and by the positive impact on the world of software
development.

A number of people generously agreed to review the material in this book, without whom both
technical accuracy and readability would have suffered. Any remaining errors and deficiencies are
squarely my own. Fellow CMake developers Gregor Jasny and Christian Pfeiffer were valuable

contributors throughout the review process for the first publication. I am truly grateful for their
suggestions and insights. Thanks also to Nils Gladitz for his input, especially at such short notice
before the first publication. I’d also like to thank my past colleagues, Matt Bolger and Lachlan
Hetherton, both of whom provided constructive feedback and reminded me of the importance of a
fresh set of eyes.

A number of people have generously reviewed chapters for subsequent editions. Many of these
people are also CMake contributors or maintainers, and I am grateful for both their time reviewing
this book and in improving CMake itself. Thanks to Cristian Adam for reviewing Chapter 35, Build
Performance and Chapter 36, Working With Qt, and to Tobias Hunger, Alexandru Croitor, Joerg
Bornemann, Sebastian Holtermann and Burkhard Stubert, all of whom also reviewed the material
on Qt at various stages. Alex Turbov provided valuable comments and suggestions for new and
updated material in the 7th edition. Marc Chevrier was kind enough to review material for the 7th
and 13th editions. Adriaan de Groot, Nagy-Egri Máté Ferenc, Michael Platings and Luis Caro
Campos all provided feedback on the 13th edition at short notice, for which I am very thankful.

The helpful feedback received from readers is also much appreciated. I’d like to make particular
mention of the efforts of Declan Moran and Ganesh A. Hegde, both of whom highlighted a number
of improvements and corrections.

A special mention is deserved for my past colleague Mike Wake. Much of the material in this book
was thrashed out and tested in real, actively developed production projects. There have been
wrong turns and many technical discussions on how to improve things from both a usability and
robustness perspective. His support in giving the space and encouragement to work through these
things and his willingness to wear some short-term (and sometimes not-so-short-term) pain have
been an instrumental part of distilling many processes and techniques down to what works in
practice. I am also very grateful for the timely words of advice and encouragement delivered at just
the right time during some of the more stressful and exhausting periods around the earlier
editions.

I would also like to express my gratitude to the people behind Asciidoctor, the software used to
compile and prepare this book. Despite the size, complexity and technical nature of the material, I
have been constantly amazed at how it has made self-publishing not just a viable option, but also
an enjoyable experience with surprisingly few practical limitations. The path from author to reader
is now so much shorter and simpler than when I initially began work on this book. Thanks for the
awesome tool!

The book’s cover and some supporting material on the website are the result of a better eye and
understanding of graphical design than my own. To my friend and designer, V, the way you
somehow managed to make sense of my random, disconnected ideas and conflicting snippets still
baffles me. I don’t understand how you do it, but I do like the end result!

In every book’s acknowledgments section, the author invariably thanks family members and
spouses, and there’s good reason for that. It takes a huge amount of understanding and sacrifice to
tolerate your tiredness, your unavailability to do many of the things ordinary people get to do and
your unreasonable decision to devote more time to a project than to them. I truly cannot express
the depth of my gratitude to my wife for the way she has managed to be so supportive and patient
throughout the process of getting this book written, published and regularly updated. I am indeed a
very fortunate human being.

