Chapter 1. Introduction
Whether a seasoned developer or just starting out in a software career, one cannot avoid the
process of becoming familiar with a range of tools in order to turn a project’s source code into
something an end user can actually use. Compilers, linkers, testing frameworks, packaging systems
and more all contribute to the complexity of deploying high quality, robust software. While some
platforms have a dominant IDE environment that simplifies some aspects of this (e.g. Xcode and
Visual Studio), projects that need to support multiple platforms cannot always make use of their
features. Having to support multiple platforms adds more complications that can affect everything
from the set of available tools through to the different capabilities available and restrictions
enforced. A typical developer could be forgiven for losing at least some of their sanity trying to keep
on top of the whole picture.

Fortunately, there are tools that make taming the process more manageable. CMake is one such
tool, or more accurately, CMake is a suite of tools which covers everything from setting up a build
right through to producing packages ready for distribution. Not only does it cover the process from
start to end, it also supports a wide range of platforms, tools and languages. When working with
CMake, it helps to understand its view of the world. Loosely speaking, the start to end process
according to CMake looks something like this:

                   CMake                                             CTest               CPack

         Project File Generation

                                                  Build              Test               Package
       Configure            Generate

The first stage takes a generic project description and generates platform-specific project files
suitable for use with the developer’s regular build tool of choice (e.g. make, Xcode, Visual Studio,
etc.). While this setup stage is what CMake is best known for, the CMake suite of tools also includes
CTest and CPack for managing the later testing and packaging stages respectively. The entire
process from start to finish can be driven from CMake itself, with the testing and packaging steps
available simply as additional targets in the build. Even the build tool can be invoked by CMake.

Before jumping in and getting their hands dirty with CMake, developers will first need to ensure
CMake is installed on their system. Some platforms may typically come with CMake already
installed (eg most Linux distributions have CMake available through their package manager), but
these versions are often quite old. Where possible, it is recommended that developers work with a
recent CMake release. This is particularly true when developing for Apple platforms where tools
like Xcode and its SDKs change rapidly and where app store requirements evolve over time. The
official CMake packages can be downloaded and unpacked to a directory on the developer’s
machine without interfering with any system-wide CMake install. Developers are encouraged to
take advantage of this and remain relatively close to the most recent stable CMake release.

These days, CMake also comes with fairly extensive reference documentation which is accessible
from the official CMake site. This useful resource is very helpful for looking up the various
commands, options, keywords, etc. and developers will likely want to bookmark it for quick
reference. The CMake forum is also a great source of advice and is the recommended place for
asking CMake-related questions where the documentation doesn’t provide sufficient guidance.

