Chapter 2. Setting Up A Project
Without a build system, a project is just a collection of files. CMake brings some order to this,
starting with a human-readable file called CMakeLists.txt that defines what should be built and how,
what tests to run and what package(s) to create. This file is a platform-independent description of
the whole project, which CMake then turns into platform specific build tool project files. As its
name suggests, it is just an ordinary text file which developers edit in their favorite text editor or
development environment. The contents of this file are covered in great detail in subsequent
chapters, but for now, it is enough to know that this is what controls everything that CMake will do
in setting up and performing the build.

A fundamental part of CMake is the concept of a project having both a source directory and a
binary directory. The source directory is where the CMakeLists.txt file is located and the project’s
source files and all other files needed for the build are organized under that location. The source
directory is frequently under version control with a tool like git, subversion, or similar.

The binary directory is where everything produced by the build is created. It is often also called the
build directory. For reasons that will become clear in later chapters, CMake generally uses the term
binary directory, but among developers, the term build directory tends to be in more common use.
This book tends to prefer the latter term since it is generally more intuitive. CMake, the chosen
build tool (e.g. make, Visual Studio, etc.), CTest and CPack will all create various files within the build
directory and subdirectories below it. Executables, libraries, test output and packages are all
created within the build directory. CMake also creates a special file called CMakeCache.txt in the build
directory to store various information for reuse on subsequent runs. Developers won’t normally
need to concern themselves with the CMakeCache.txt file, but later chapters will discuss situations
where this file is relevant. The build tool’s project files (e.g. Xcode or Visual Studio project files,
Makefiles, etc.) are also created in the build directory and are not intended to be put under version
control. The CMakeLists.txt files are the canonical description of the project and the generated
project files should be considered part of the build output.

When a developer commences work on a project, they must decide where they want their build
directory to be in relation to their source directory. There are essentially two approaches: in-source
and out-of-source builds.

2.1. In-source Builds
It is possible, though discouraged, for the source and build directories to be the same. This
arrangement is called an in-source build. Developers at the beginning of their career often start out
using this approach because of the perceived simplicity. The main difficulty with in-source builds,
however, is that all the build outputs are intermixed with the source files. This lack of separation
causes directories to become cluttered with all sorts of files and subdirectories, making it harder to
manage the project sources and running the risk of build outputs overwriting source files. It also
makes working with version control systems more difficult, since there are lots of files created by
the build which either the source control tool has to know to ignore or the developer has to
manually exclude during commits. One other drawback to in-source builds is that it can be non-
trivial to clear out all build output and start again with a clean source tree. For these reasons,
developers are discouraged from using in-source builds where possible, even for simple projects.

2.2. Out-of-source Builds
The more preferable arrangement is for the source and build directories to be different, which is
called an out-of-source build. This keeps the sources and the build outputs completely separate from
each other, thus avoiding the intermixing problems experienced with in-source builds. Out-of-
source builds also have the advantage that the developer can create multiple build directories for
the same source directory, which allows builds to be set up with different sets of options, such as
debug and release versions, etc.

This book will always use out-of-source builds and will follow the pattern of the source and build
directories being under a common parent. The build directory will be called build, or some
variation thereof. For example:

A variation on this used by some developers is to make the build directory a subdirectory of the
source directory. This offers most of the advantages of an out-of-source build, but it does still carry
with it some of the disadvantages of an in-source arrangement. Unless there is a good reason to
structure things that way, keeping the build directory completely outside of the source tree instead
is recommended.

2.3. Generating Project Files
Once the choice of directory structure has been made, the developer runs CMake, which reads in
the CMakeLists.txt file and creates project files in the build directory. The developer selects the type
of project file to be created by choosing a particular project file generator. A range of different
generators are supported, with the more commonly used ones listed in the table below.

         Category                       Generator Examples                         Multi-config

       Visual Studio                     Visual Studio 17 2022                          Yes

                                         Visual Studio 16 2019
                                                   ⋮

           Xcode                                Xcode                                   Yes

           Ninja                                 Ninja                                  No

                                          Ninja Multi-Config                            Yes

         Makefiles                          Unix Makefiles                              No

                                           MSYS Makefiles

                                          MinGW Makefiles

                                           NMake Makefiles

Some generators produce projects which support multiple configurations (e.g. Debug, Release, etc.).
These allow the developer to choose between different build configurations without having to re-
run CMake, which is more suitable for generators creating projects for use in IDE environments like
Xcode and Visual Studio. For generators which do not support multiple configurations, the
developer has to re-run CMake to switch the build between Debug, Release, etc. These are simpler
and often have good support in IDE environments not so closely associated with a particular
compiler (CLion, Qt Creator, KDevelop, etc.).

The most basic way to run CMake is via the cmake command line utility. The simplest way to invoke
it is to change to the build directory and pass options to cmake for the generator type and location of
the source tree. For example:

    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake -G "Unix Makefiles" ../source

If the -G option is omitted, CMake will choose a default generator type based on the host platform. If
using CMake 3.15 or later, this default can be overridden by setting the CMAKE_GENERATOR environment
variable to the desired default instead. For all generator types, CMake will carry out a series of tests
to determine how to set up the project files. This includes things like verifying that the compilers
work, determining the set of supported compiler features and various other tasks. A variety of
information will be logged before CMake finishes with lines like the following upon success:

    -- Configuring done
    -- Generating done
    -- Build files have been written to: /some/path/build

The above highlights that project file creation actually involves two steps; configuring and
generating. During the configuring phase, CMake reads in the CMakeLists.txt file and builds up an
internal representation of the entire project. After this is done, the generation phase creates the
project files. The distinction between configuring and generating doesn’t matter so much for basic
CMake usage, but in later chapters the separation of configuration and generation becomes
important. This is covered in more detail in Chapter 10, Generator Expressions.

When CMake has completed its run, it will have saved a CMakeCache.txt file in the build directory.
CMake uses this file to save details so that if it is run again, it can re-use information computed the
first time and speed up the project generation. As covered in later chapters, it also allows developer
options to be saved between runs. A GUI application, cmake-gui, is available as an alternative to
running the cmake command line tool, but the introduction of the GUI application is deferred to
Chapter 5, Variables where its usefulness is more clearly evident.

2.4. Running The Build Tool
At this point, with project files now available, the developer can use their selected build tool in the
way to which they are accustomed. The build directory will contain the necessary project files
which can be loaded into an IDE, read by command line tools, etc. Alternatively, cmake can invoke
the build tool on the developer’s behalf like so:

  cmake --build /pathTo/build --config Debug --target MyApp

This works even for project types the developer may be more accustomed to using through an IDE
like Xcode or Visual Studio. The --build option points to the build directory used by the CMake
project generation step. For multi configuration generators, the --config option specifies which
configuration to build, whereas single configuration generators will ignore the --config option and
rely instead on information provided when the CMake project generation step was performed.
Specifying the build configuration is covered in depth in Chapter 14, Build Type. The --target option
can be used to tell the build tool what to build, or if omitted, the default target will be built. With
CMake 3.15 or later, multiple targets can be listed after the --target option, separated by spaces.

While developers will typically invoke their selected build tool directly in day-to-day development,
invoking it via the cmake command as shown above can be more useful in scripts driving an
automated build. Using this approach, a simple scripted build might look something like this:

  mkdir build
  cd build
  cmake -G "Unix Makefiles" ../source
  cmake --build . --config Release --target MyApp

If the developer wishes to experiment with different generators, all that needs to be done is change
the argument given to the -G CMake option and the correct build tool will be automatically invoked.
The build tool doesn’t even have to be on the user’s PATH for cmake --build to work (although it may
need to be for the initial configuration step when cmake is first invoked).

2.5. Recommended Practices
Even when first starting out using CMake, it is advisable to make a habit of keeping the build
directory completely separate from the source tree. A good way to get early experience of the
benefits of such an arrangement is to set up two or more different builds for the same source
directory. One build could be configured with Debug settings, the other for a Release build. Another
option is to use different project generators for the different build directories, such as Unix
Makefiles and Xcode. This can help to catch any unintended dependencies on a particular build tool
or to check for differing compiler settings between generator types.

It can be tempting to focus on using one particular type of project generator in the early stages of a
project, especially if the developer is not accustomed to writing cross-platform software. Projects
do, however, have a habit of growing beyond their initial scope and it is relatively common to need
to support additional platforms and generator types. Periodically checking the build with a
different project generator than the one a developer usually uses can save considerable future pain
by discouraging generator-specific code where it isn’t required. This also has the benefit of making
the project well placed to take advantage of any new generator type in the future. A good strategy is
to ensure the project builds with the default generator type on each platform of interest, plus one
other type. The Ninja generator is an excellent choice for the latter, since it has the broadest
platform support of all the generators and it also creates very efficient builds. If the project is being
scripted, invoke the build tool via cmake --build instead of invoking the build tool directly. This
allows the script to easily switch between generator types without having to be modified.

