Chapter 3. A Minimal Project
All CMake projects start with a file called CMakeLists.txt and it is expected to be placed at the top of
the source tree. Think of it as the CMake project file, defining everything about the build from
sources and targets through to testing, packaging and other custom tasks. It can be as simple as a
few lines or it can be quite complex and pull in more files from other directories. CMakeLists.txt is
just an ordinary text file and is usually edited directly, just like any other source file in the project.

Continuing the analogy with sources, CMake defines its own language which has many things a
programmer would be familiar with, such as variables, functions, macros, conditional logic,
looping, code comments and so on. These various concepts and features are covered in the next few
chapters, but for now, the goal is just to get a simple build working as a starting point. The following
is a minimal, well-formed CMakeLists.txt file producing a basic executable.

  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.2)
  project(MyApp)
  add_executable(MyExe main.cpp)

Each line in the above example executes a built-in CMake command. In CMake, commands are
similar to other languages’ function calls, except that while they support arguments, they do not
return values directly (but a later chapter shows how to pass values back to the caller in other
ways). Arguments are separated from each other by spaces and may be split across multiple lines:

  add_executable(MyExe
      main.cpp
      src1.cpp
      src2.cpp
  )

Command names are also case insensitive, so the following are all equivalent:

  add_executable(MyExe main.cpp)
  ADD_EXECUTABLE(MyExe main.cpp)
  Add_Executable(MyExe main.cpp)

Typical style varies, but the more common convention these days is to use all lowercase for
command names (this is also the convention followed by the CMake documentation for built-in
commands).

3.1. Managing CMake Versions
CMake is continually updated and extended to add support for new tools, platforms and features.
The developers behind CMake are very careful to maintain backwards compatibility with each new
release, so when users update to a newer version of CMake, projects should continue to build as
they did before. Sometimes, a particular CMake behavior needs to change or more stringent checks
and warnings may be introduced in newer versions. Rather than requiring all projects to

immediately deal with this, CMake provides policy mechanisms which allow the project to say
“Behave like CMake version X.Y.Z”. This allows CMake to fix bugs internally and introduce new
features, but still maintain the expected behavior of any particular past release.

The primary way a project specifies details about its expected CMake version behavior is with the
cmake_minimum_required() command. This should be the first line of the CMakeLists.txt file so that the
project’s requirements are checked and established before anything else. This command does two
things:

 • It specifies the minimum version of CMake the project needs. If the CMakeLists.txt file is
   processed with a CMake version older than the one specified, it will halt immediately with an
   error. This ensures that a particular minimum set of CMake functionality is available before
   proceeding.

 • It enforces policy settings to match CMake behavior to the specified version.

Using this command is so important that CMake will issue a warning if the CMakeLists.txt file does
not call cmake_minimum_required() before any other command. It needs to know how to set up the
policy behavior for all subsequent processing. For most projects, it is enough to treat
cmake_minimum_required() as simply specifying the minimum required CMake version, as its name
suggests. The fact that it also implies CMake should behave the same as that particular version can
be considered a useful side benefit. Chapter 12, Policies discusses policy settings in more detail and
explains how to tailor this behavior as needed.

The typical form of the cmake_minimum_required() command is straightforward:

  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION major.minor[.patch[.tweak]])

The VERSION keyword must always be present and the version details provided must have at least
the major.minor part. In most projects, specifying the patch and tweak parts is not necessary, since
new features typically only appear in minor version updates (this is the official CMake behavior
from version 3.0 onward). Only if a specific bug fix is needed should a project specify a patch part.
Furthermore, since no CMake release in the 3.x series has used a tweak number, projects should not
need to specify one either.

Developers should think carefully about what minimum CMake version their project should
require. Version 3.2 is perhaps the oldest any new project should consider, since it provides a
reasonably complete feature set for modern CMake techniques. Version 2.8.12 has a reduced
feature coverage, lacking a number of useful features but it may be workable for older projects.
Versions before that lack substantial features that would make using many modern CMake
techniques impossible. If working with fast-moving platforms such as iOS, quite recent versions of
CMake may be needed in order to support the latest OS releases, etc.

As a general rule of thumb, choose the most recent CMake version that won’t present significant
problems for those building the project. The greatest difficulty is typically experienced by projects
that need to support older platforms where the system-provided version of CMake may be quite
old. For such cases, if at all possible, developers should consider installing a more recent release
rather than restricting themselves to very old CMake versions. On the other hand, if the project will
itself be a dependency for other projects, then choosing a more recent CMake version may present

a hurdle for adoption. In such cases, it may be beneficial to instead require the oldest CMake
version that still provides the minimum CMake features needed, but make use of features from
later CMake versions if available (Chapter 12, Policies presents techniques for achieving this). This
will prevent other projects from being forced to require a more recent version than their target
environment typically allows or provides. Dependent projects can always require a more recent
version if they so wish, but they cannot require an older one. The main disadvantage of using the
oldest workable version is that it may result in more deprecation warnings, since newer CMake
versions will warn about older behaviors to encourage projects to update themselves.

3.2. The project() Command
Every CMake project should contain a project() command and it should appear after
cmake_minimum_required() has been called. The command with its most common options has the
following form:

  project(projectName
          [VERSION major[.minor[.patch[.tweak]]]]
          [LANGUAGES languageName ...]
  )

The projectName is required and may only contain letters, numbers, underscores (_) and hyphens (-),
although typically only letters and perhaps underscores are used in practice. Since spaces are not
permitted, the project name does not have to be surrounded by quotes. This name is used for the
top level of a project with some project generators (eg Xcode and Visual Studio) and it is also used
in various other parts of the project, such as to act as defaults for packaging and documentation
metadata, to provide project-specific variables and so on. The name is the only mandatory
argument for the project() command.

The optional VERSION details are only supported in CMake 3.0 and later. Like the projectName, the
version details are used by CMake to populate some variables and as default package metadata, but
other than that, the version details don’t have any other significance. Nonetheless, a good habit to
establish is to define the project’s version here so that other parts of the project can refer to it.
Chapter 21, Specifying Version Details covers this in depth and explains how to refer to this version
information later in the CMakeLists.txt file.

The optional LANGUAGES argument defines the programming languages that should be enabled for the
project. Supported values include C, CXX, Fortran, ASM, CUDA and others. If specifying multiple
languages, separate each with a space. In some special situations, projects may want to indicate that
no languages are used, which can be done using LANGUAGES NONE. Techniques introduced in later
chapters take advantage of this particular form. If no LANGUAGES option is provided, CMake will
default to C and CXX. CMake versions prior to 3.0 do not support the LANGUAGES keyword, but
languages can still be specified after the project name using the older form of the command like so:

  project(MyProj C CXX)

New projects are encouraged to specify a minimum CMake version of at least 3.0 and use the new
form with the LANGUAGES keyword instead.

The project() command does much more than just populate a few variables. One of its important
responsibilities is to check the compilers for each enabled language and ensure they are able to
compile and link successfully. Problems with the compiler and linker setup are then caught very
early. Once these checks have passed, CMake sets up a number of variables and properties which
control the build for the enabled languages. Chapter 23, Toolchains And Cross Compiling discusses
this area in much greater detail, including the various ways to influence toolchain selection and
configuration. Chapter 7, Using Subdirectories also discusses additional considerations and
requirements that affect the use of the project() command.

When the compiler and linker checks performed by CMake are successful, their results are cached
so that they do not have to be repeated in subsequent CMake runs. These cached details are stored
in the build directory in the CMakeCache.txt file. Additional details about the checks can be found in
subdirectories within the build area, but developers would typically only need to look there if
working with a new or unusual compiler or when setting up toolchain files for cross-compiling.

3.3. Building A Basic Executable
To complete our minimal example, the add_executable() command tells CMake to create an
executable from a set of source files. The basic form of this command is:

  add_executable(targetName source1 [source2 ...])

This creates an executable which can be referred to within the CMake project as targetName. This
name may contain letters, numbers, underscores and hyphens. When the project is built, an
executable will be created in the build directory with a platform-dependent name, the default name
being based on the target name. Consider the following simple example command:

  add_executable(MyApp main.cpp)

By default, the name of the executable would be MyApp.exe on Windows and MyApp on Unix-based
platforms like macOS, Linux, etc. The executable name can be customized with target properties, a
CMake feature introduced in Chapter 9, Properties. Multiple executables can also be defined within
the one CMakeLists.txt file by calling add_executable() multiple times with different target names. If
the same target name is used in more than one add_executable() command, CMake will fail and
highlight the error.

3.4. Commenting
Before leaving this chapter, it will be useful to demonstrate how to add comments to a
CMakeLists.txt file. Comments are used extensively throughout this book and developers are
encouraged to also get into the habit of commenting their projects just as they would for ordinary
source code. CMake follows similar commenting conventions as Unix shell scripts. Any line
beginning with a # character is treated as a comment. Except within a quoted string, anything after
a # on a line within a CMakeLists.txt file is also treated as a comment. The following shows a few
comment examples and brings together the concepts introduced in this chapter:

  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.2)

  # We don't use the C++ compiler, so don't let project()
  # test for it in case the platform doesn't have one
  project(MyApp VERSION 4.7.2 LANGUAGES C)

  # Primary tool for this project
  add_executable(MainTool
      main.c
      debug.c # Optimized away for release builds
  )

  # Helpful diagnostic tool for development and testing
  add_executable(TestTool testTool.c)

3.5. Recommended Practices
Ensure every CMake project has a cmake_minimum_required() command as the first line of its top level
CMakeLists.txt file. When deciding the minimum required version number to specify, keep in mind
that the later the version, the more CMake features the project will be able to use. It will also mean
the project is likely to be better placed to adapt to new platform or operating system releases, which
inevitably introduce new things for build systems to deal with. Conversely, if creating a project
intended to be built and distributed as part of the operating system itself (common for Linux), the
minimum CMake version is likely to be dictated by the version of CMake provided by that same
distribution.

If the project can require CMake 3.0 or later, it is also good to force thinking about project version
numbers early and start incorporating version numbering into the project() command as soon as
possible. It can be very hard to overcome the inertia of existing processes and change how version
numbers are handled later in the life of a project. Consider popular practices such as Semantic
Versioning when deciding on a versioning strategy.

