Chapter 4. Building Simple Targets
As shown in the previous chapter, it is relatively straightforward to define a simple executable in
CMake. The simple example given previously required defining a target name for the executable
and listing the source files to be compiled:

  add_executable(MyApp main.cpp)

This assumes the developer wants a basic console executable to be built, but CMake also allows the
developer to define other types of executables, such as app bundles on Apple platforms and
Windows GUI applications. This chapter discusses additional options which can be given to
add_executable() to specify these details.

In addition to executables, developers also frequently need to build and link libraries. CMake
supports a few different kinds of libraries, including static, shared, modules and frameworks.
CMake also offers very powerful features for managing dependencies between targets and how
libraries are linked. This whole area of libraries and how to work with them in CMake forms the
bulk of this chapter. The concepts covered here are used extensively throughout the remainder of
this book. Some very basic use of variables and properties are also given to provide a flavor for
how these CMake features relate to libraries and targets in general.

4.1. Executables
The more complete form of the basic add_executable() command is as follows:

  add_executable(targetName [WIN32] [MACOSX_BUNDLE]
                 [EXCLUDE_FROM_ALL]
                 source1 [source2 ...]
  )

The only differences to the form shown previously are the new optional keywords.

WIN32
   When building the executable on a Windows platform, this option instructs CMake to build the
   executable as a Windows GUI application. In practice, this means it will be created with a
   WinMain() entry point instead of just main() and it will be linked with the /SUBSYSTEM:WINDOWS
   option. On all other platforms, the WIN32 option is ignored.

MACOSX_BUNDLE
   When present, this option directs CMake to build an app bundle when building on an Apple
   platform. Contrary to what the option name suggests, it applies not just to macOS, but also to
   other Apple platforms like iOS as well. The exact effects of this option vary somewhat between
   platforms. For example, on macOS, the app bundle layout has a very specific directory structure,
   whereas on iOS, the directory structure is flattened. CMake will also generate a basic Info.plist
   file for bundles. These and other details are covered in more detail in Section 24.2, “Application
   Bundles”. On non-Apple platforms, the MACOSX_BUNDLE keyword is ignored.

EXCLUDE_FROM_ALL
     Sometimes, a project defines a number of targets, but by default only some of them should be
     built. When no target is specified at build time, the default ALL target is built (depending on the
     CMake generator being used, the name may be slightly different, such as ALL_BUILD for Xcode). If
     an executable is defined with the EXCLUDE_FROM_ALL option, it will not be included in that default
     ALL target. The executable will then only be built if it is explicitly requested by the build
     command or if it is a dependency for another target that is part of the default ALL build. A
     common situation where it can be useful to exclude a target from ALL is where the executable is
     a developer tool that is only needed occasionally.

In addition to the above, there are other forms of the add_executable() command which produce a
kind of reference to an existing executable or target rather than defining a new one to be built.
These alias executables are covered in detail in Chapter 18, Target Types.

4.2. Defining Libraries
Creating simple executables is a fundamental need of any build system. For many larger projects,
the ability to create and work with libraries is also essential to keep the project manageable. CMake
supports building a variety of different kinds of libraries, taking care of many of the platform
differences, but still supporting the native idiosyncrasies of each. Library targets are defined using
the add_library() command, of which there are a number of forms. The most basic of these is the
following:

  add_library(targetName [STATIC | SHARED | MODULE]
              [EXCLUDE_FROM_ALL]
              source1 [source2 ...]
  )

This form is analogous to how add_executable() is used to define a simple executable. The targetName
is used within the CMakeLists.txt file to refer to the library, with the name of the built library on the
file system being derived from this name by default. The EXCLUDE_FROM_ALL keyword has exactly the
same effect as it does for add_executable(), namely to prevent the library from being included in the
default ALL target. The type of library to be built is specified by one of the remaining three keywords
STATIC, SHARED or MODULE.

STATIC
     Specifies a static library or archive. On Windows, the default library name would be
     targetName.lib, while on Unix-like platforms, it would typically be libtargetName.a.

SHARED
     Specifies a shared or dynamically linked library. On Windows, the default library name would
     be targetName.dll, on Apple platforms it would be libtargetName.dylib and on other Unix-like
     platforms it would typically be libtargetName.so. On Apple platforms, shared libraries can also be
     marked as frameworks, a topic covered in Section 24.3, “Frameworks”.

MODULE
     Specifies a library that is somewhat like a shared library, but is intended to be loaded

   dynamically at run-time rather than being linked directly to a library or executable. These are
   typically plugins or optional components the user may choose to be loaded or not. On Windows
   platforms, no import library is created for the DLL.

It is possible to omit the keyword defining what type of library to build. Unless the project
specifically requires a particular type of library, the preferred practice is to not specify it and leave
the choice up to the developer when building the project. In such cases, the library will be either
STATIC or SHARED, with the choice determined by the value of a CMake variable called
BUILD_SHARED_LIBS. If BUILD_SHARED_LIBS has been set to true, the library target will be a shared library,
otherwise it will be static. Working with variables is covered in detail in Chapter 5, Variables, but
for now, one way to set this variable is by including a -D option on the cmake command line like so:

  cmake -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=YES /path/to/source

It could be set in the CMakeLists.txt file instead with the following placed before any add_library()
commands, but that would then require developers to modify it if they wanted to change it (i.e. it
would be less flexible):

  set(BUILD_SHARED_LIBS YES)

Just as for executables, library targets can also be defined to refer to some existing binary or target
rather than being built by the project. Another type of pseudo-library is also supported for
collecting together object files without going as far as creating a static library. These are all
discussed in detail in Chapter 18, Target Types.

4.3. Linking Targets
When considering the targets that make up a project, developers are typically used to thinking in
terms of library A needing library B, so A is linked to B. This is the traditional way of looking at
library handling, where the idea of one library needing another is very simplistic. In reality,
however, there are a few different types of dependency relationships that can exist between
libraries:

PRIVATE
   Private dependencies specify that library A uses library B in its own internal implementation.
   Anything else that links to library A doesn’t need to know about B because it is an internal
   implementation detail of A.

PUBLIC
   Public dependencies specify that not only does library A use library B internally, it also uses B in
   its interface. This means that A cannot be used without B, so anything that uses A will also have
   a direct dependency on B. An example of this would be a function defined in library A which has
   at least one parameter of a type defined and implemented in library B, so code cannot call the
   function from A without providing a parameter whose type comes from B.

INTERFACE
     Interface dependencies specify that in order to use library A, parts of library B must also be
     used. This differs from a public dependency in that library A doesn’t require B internally, it only
     uses B in its interface. An example of where this is useful is when working with library targets
     defined using the INTERFACE form of add_library(), such as when using a target to represent a
     header-only library’s dependencies (see Section 18.2.4, “Interface Libraries”).

CMake captures this richer set of dependency relationships with its target_link_libraries()
command, not just the simplistic idea of needing to link. The general form of the command is:

  target_link_libraries(targetName
       <PRIVATE|PUBLIC|INTERFACE> item1 [item2 ...]
      [<PRIVATE|PUBLIC|INTERFACE> item3 [item4 ...]]
      ...
  )

This allows projects to precisely define how one library depends on others. CMake then takes care
of managing the dependencies throughout the chain of libraries linked in this fashion. For example,
consider the following:

  add_library(Collector src1.cpp)
  add_library(Algo src2.cpp)
  add_library(Engine src3.cpp)
  add_library(Ui src4.cpp)
  add_executable(MyApp main.cpp)

  target_link_libraries(Collector
      PUBLIC Ui
      PRIVATE Algo Engine
  )
  target_link_libraries(MyApp PRIVATE Collector)

In this example, the Ui library is linked to the Collector library as PUBLIC, so even though MyApp only
directly links to Collector, MyApp will also be linked to Ui because of that PUBLIC relationship. The Algo
and Engine libraries, on the other hand, are linked to Collector as PRIVATE, so MyApp will not be
directly linked to them. Section 18.2, “Libraries” discusses additional behaviors for static libraries
which may result in further linking to satisfy dependency relationships, including cyclic
dependencies.

Later chapters present a few other target_…() commands which further enhance the dependency
information carried between targets. These allow compiler/linker flags and header search paths to
also carry through from one target to another when they are connected by target_link_libraries().
These features were added progressively from CMake 2.8.11 through to 3.2 and lead to considerably
simpler and more robust CMakeLists.txt files.

Later chapters also discuss the use of more complex source directory hierarchies. In such cases, if
using CMake 3.12 or earlier, the targetName used with target_link_libraries() must have been
defined by an add_executable() or add_library() command in the same directory from which
target_link_libraries() is being called (this restriction was removed in CMake 3.13).

4.4. Linking Non-targets
In the preceding section, all the items being linked to were existing CMake targets, but the
target_link_libraries() command is more flexible than that. In addition to CMake targets, the
following things can also be specified as items in a target_link_libraries() command:

Full path to a library file
   CMake will add the library file to the linker command. If the library file changes, CMake will
   detect that change and re-link the target. Note that from CMake version 3.3, the linker command
   always uses the full path specified, but prior to version 3.3, there were some situations where
   CMake may ask the linker to search for the library instead (e.g. replace /usr/lib/libfoo.so with
   -lfoo). The reasoning and details of the pre-3.3 behavior are non-trivial and are largely
   historical, but for the interested reader, the full set of information is available in the CMake
   documentation under the CMP0060 policy.

Plain library name
   If just the name of the library is given with no path, the linker command will search for that
   library (e.g. foo becomes -lfoo or foo.lib, depending on the platform). This would be common for
   libraries provided by the system.

Link flag
   As a special case, items starting with a hyphen other than -l or -framework will be treated as flags
   to be added to the linker command. The CMake documentation warns that these should only be
   used for PRIVATE items, since they would be carried through to other targets if defined as PUBLIC
   or INTERFACE and this may not always be safe.

4.5. Old-style CMake
For historical reasons, any link item specified in target_link_libraries() may be preceded by one of
the keywords debug, optimized or general. The effect of these keywords is to further refine when the
item following it should be included based on whether the build is configured as a debug build (see
Chapter 14, Build Type). If an item is preceded by the debug keyword, then it will only be added if the
build is a debug build. If an item is preceded by the optimized keyword, it will only be added if the
build is not a debug build. The general keyword specifies that the item should be added for all build
configurations, which is the default behavior anyway if no keyword is used. The debug, optimized
and general keywords should be avoided for new projects as there are clearer, more flexible and
more robust ways to achieve the same thing with today’s CMake features.

The target_link_libraries() command also has a few other forms, some of which have been part of
CMake from well before version 2.8.11. These forms are discussed here for the benefit of
understanding older CMake projects, but their use is generally discouraged for new projects. The
full form shown previously with PRIVATE, PUBLIC and INTERFACE sections should be preferred, as it
expresses the nature of dependencies with more accuracy.

  target_link_libraries(targetName item [item...])

The above form is generally equivalent to the items being defined as PUBLIC, but in certain
situations, they may instead be treated as PRIVATE. In particular, if a project defines a chain of
library dependencies with a mix of both old and new forms of the command, the old-style form will
generally be treated as PRIVATE.

Another supported but deprecated form is the following:

  target_link_libraries(targetName
      LINK_INTERFACE_LIBRARIES item [item...]
  )

This is a pre-cursor to the INTERFACE keyword of the newer form covered above, but its use is
discouraged by the CMake documentation. Its behavior can affect different target properties, with
the policy settings controlling that behavior. This is a potential source of confusion for developers
which can be avoided by using the newer INTERFACE form instead.

  target_link_libraries(targetName
      <LINK_PRIVATE|LINK_PUBLIC> lib [lib...]
     [<LINK_PRIVATE|LINK_PUBLIC> lib [lib...]]
  )

Similar to the previous old-style form, this one is a pre-cursor to the PRIVATE and PUBLIC keyword
versions of the newer form. Again, the old-style form has the same confusion over which target
properties it affects and the PRIVATE/PUBLIC keyword form should be preferred for new projects.

4.6. Recommended Practices
Target names need not be related to the project name. It is common to see tutorials and examples
use a variable for the project name and reuse that variable for the name of an executable target:

  # Poor practice, but very common
  set(projectName MyExample)
  project(${projectName})
  add_executable(${projectName} ...)

This only works for the most basic of projects and encourages a number of bad habits. Consider the
project name and executable name as being separate, even if initially they start out the same. Set
the project name directly rather than via a variable, choose a target name according to what the
target does rather than the project it is part of and assume the project will eventually need to define
more than one target. This reinforces better habits which will be important when working on more
complex multi-target projects.

When naming targets for libraries, resist the temptation to start or end the name with lib. On many
platforms (i.e. just about all except Windows), a leading lib will be prefixed automatically when
constructing the actual library name to make it conform to the platform’s usual convention. If the
target name already begins with lib, the library file names end up with the form liblibsomething….,
which people often assume to be a mistake.

Unless there are strong reasons to do so, try to avoid specifying the STATIC or SHARED keyword for a
library until it is known to be needed. This allows greater flexibility in choosing between static or
dynamic libraries as an overall project-wide strategy. The BUILD_SHARED_LIBS variable can be used to
change the default in one place instead of having to modify every call to add_library().

Aim   to   always   specify   PRIVATE,   PUBLIC   and/or   INTERFACE   keywords   when     calling   the
target_link_libraries() command rather than following the old-style CMake syntax which assumed
everything was PUBLIC. As a project grows in complexity, these three keywords have a stronger
impact on how inter-target dependencies are handled. Using them from the beginning of a project
also forces developers to think about the dependencies between targets, which can help to highlight
structural problems within the project much earlier.

