Chapter 9. Properties
Properties affect just about all aspects of the build process, from how a source file is compiled into
an object file, right through to the install location of built binaries in a packaged installer. They are
always attached to a specific entity, whether that be a directory, target, source file, test case, cache
variable or even the overall build process itself. Rather than holding a standalone value like a
variable does, a property provides information specific to the entity it is attached to.

For those new to CMake, properties are sometimes confused with variables. Though both may
initially seem similar in terms of function and features, properties serve a very different purpose. A
variable is not attached to any particular entity and it is very common for projects to define and use
their own variables. Compare this with properties which are typically well defined and
documented by CMake and which always apply to a specific entity. A likely contributor to the
confusion between the two is that a property’s default value is sometimes provided by a variable.
The names CMake uses for related properties and variables usually follow the same pattern, with
the variable name being the property name with CMAKE_ prepended.

9.1. General Property Commands
CMake provides a number of commands for manipulating properties. The most generic of these,
set_property() and get_property(), allow setting and getting any property on any type of entity.

  set_property(entitySpecific
      [APPEND | APPEND_STRING]
      PROPERTY propertyName values...
  )

entitySpecific defines the entity whose property is being set. It must be one of the following:

  GLOBAL
  DIRECTORY [dir]
  TARGET    targets...
  SOURCE    sources...   # Additional options with CMake 3.18
  INSTALL   files...
  TEST      tests...
  CACHE     vars...

The first word of each of the above defines the type of entity whose property is being set. GLOBAL
means the build itself, so there is no specific entity name required. For DIRECTORY, if no dir is named,
the current source directory is used. For all the other types of entities, any number of items of that
type can be listed. The SOURCE entity type also supports some additional options when using CMake
3.18 or later, which are discussed in Section 9.5, “Source Properties”.

The PROPERTY keyword marks all remaining arguments as defining the property name and its
value(s). The propertyName would normally match one of the properties defined in the CMake
documentation, a number of which are discussed in later chapters. The meaning of the value(s) are
property specific.

In addition to the properties defined by CMake, a project may also set its own custom properties. It
is up to the project what such properties mean and how they affect the build. If choosing to do this,
it would be wise for projects to use a project-specific prefix on the property name to avoid potential
name clashes with properties defined by CMake or other third party packages.

  set_property(TARGET MyApp1 MyApp2
      PROPERTY MYPROJ_CUSTOM_PROP val1 val2 val3
  )

The above example defines a custom MYPROJ_CUSTOM_PROP property which will have the list
val1;val2;val3 as its value. It also demonstrates how to set a property for multiple targets at once.

The APPEND and APPEND_STRING keywords can be used to control how the named property is updated if
it already has a value. With neither keyword specified, the value(s) given replace any previous
value. The APPEND keyword changes the behavior to append the value(s) to the existing one, forming
a list, whereas the APPEND_STRING keyword takes the existing value and appends the new value(s) by
concatenating the two as strings rather than as a list (see also the special note for inherited
properties further below). The following table demonstrates the differences.

Previous Value(s)       New Value(s)         No Keyword             APPEND          APPEND_STRING
        foo                  bar                   bar               foo;bar              foobar
        a;b                  c;d                   c;d               a;b;c;d              a;bc;d

The get_property() command follows a similar form:

  get_property(resultVar entitySpecific
      PROPERTY propertyName
      [DEFINED | SET | BRIEF_DOCS | FULL_DOCS]
  )

The PROPERTY keyword and propertyName are always required. The entitySpecific part is similar to
that for set_property() and must be one of the following:

  GLOBAL
  DIRECTORY [dir]
  TARGET    target
  SOURCE    source   # Additional options with CMake 3.18
  INSTALL   file
  TEST      test
  CACHE     var
  VARIABLE

As before, GLOBAL refers to the build as a whole and therefore requires no specific entity to be
named. DIRECTORY can be used with or without specifying a particular directory, with the current
source directory being assumed if no directory is provided. For most of the other scopes, the
particular entity within that scope must be named. Again, the SOURCE entity type supports additional
options when using CMake 3.18 or later and these are covered in Section 9.5, “Source Properties”.

The VARIABLE type is a bit different, with the variable name being specified as the propertyName rather
than being attached to the VARIABLE keyword. This can seem somewhat unintuitive, but consider the
situation if the variable was named as the entity along with the VARIABLE keyword, just like for the
other entity type keywords. In that situation, there would be nothing to specify for the property
name. It may help to think of VARIABLE as specifying the current scope, then the property of interest
is the variable named by propertyName. When understood this way, VARIABLE is consistent with how
the other entity types are handled.

If none of the optional keywords are given, the value of the property is stored in the variable
named by resultVar. This is the typical usage of the get_property() command. For the VARIABLE scope,
variable values can and should be obtained more directly with the ${} syntax instead. The optional
keywords can be used to retrieve other details about a property:

DEFINED
   The result of the retrieval will be a boolean value indicating whether the named property has
   been defined. In the case of VARIABLE scope queries, the result will only be true if the named
   variable has been explicitly defined with the define_property() command (see below).

SET
   The result of the retrieval will be a boolean value indicating whether the named property has
   been set. It differs from DEFINED in that it queries whether the named property has actually been
   set to some value (the value itself is irrelevant), whereas DEFINED is more about describing what
   the property means. SET is usually what projects need rather than DEFINED in most scenarios. Note
   also that a property can return true for DEFINED and false for SET, or vice versa.

BRIEF_DOCS
   Retrieves the brief documentation string for the named property. If no brief documentation has
   been defined for the property, the result will be the string NOTFOUND.

FULL_DOCS
   Retrieves the full documentation for the named property. If no full documentation has been
   defined for the property, the result will be the string NOTFOUND.

Of the optional keywords, all but SET have little value unless the project has explicitly called
define_property() to populate the requested information for the entity:

  define_property(entityType
      PROPERTY propertyName
      [INHERITED]

      # Mandatory for CMake 3.22 and earlier
      [BRIEF_DOCS briefDoc [moreBriefDocs...]]
      [FULL_DOCS fullDoc [moreFullDocs...]]

      # Requires CMake 3.23 or later
      [INITIALIZE_FROM_VARIABLE variableName]
  )

The define_property() command does not set the property’s value. Rather, it controls how that
property is initialized or inherited, and potentially provides documentation. CMake 3.22 and earlier
require BRIEF_DOCS and FULL_DOCS to be present, but they are unused by CMake other than providing
them back to the project via get_property(). It is likely these documentation options will be
deprecated in a future version of CMake due to their lack of usefulness.

The entityType must be one of GLOBAL, DIRECTORY, TARGET, SOURCE, TEST, VARIABLE or CACHED_VARIABLE. The
propertyName specifies the property being defined. No entity is specified, although like for the
get_property() command, in the case of VARIABLE, the variable name is specified as propertyName.

If the INHERITED option is given, the get_property() command will chain up to the parent scope if that
property is not set in the named scope. For example, if a DIRECTORY property is requested, but is not
set for the directory specified, the parent directory scope is queried recursively up the directory
scope hierarchy until the property is found or the top level of the source tree is reached. If still not
found at the top level directory, then the GLOBAL scope will be searched. Similarly, if a TARGET, SOURCE
or TEST property is requested, but is not set for the specified entity, the DIRECTORY scope will be
searched (including recursively up the directory hierarchy and ultimately to the GLOBAL scope if
necessary). No such chaining functionality is provided for VARIABLE or CACHE, since these already
chain to the parent variable scope by design.

The inheriting behavior of INHERITED properties only applies to the get_property() command and its
analogous get_… functions for specific property types (covered in the sections below). When calling
set_property() with APPEND or APPEND_STRING options, only the immediate value of the property is
considered (i.e. no inheriting occurs when working out the value to append to).

CMake 3.23 added support for the INITIALIZE_FROM_VARIABLE keyword, which specifies a variable to
be used to initialize the named property. It can only be used with target properties and only affects
targets created after the call to define_property(). The variable name must end with the name of the
property and cannot begin with CMAKE_ or _CMAKE_. This feature is a particularly useful way of
providing a default value for a custom property defined by the project. With that in mind, the
property name must also contain at least one underscore. This constraint exists to encourage
projects to name their custom properties with a project-specific prefix.

  # Example of setting the variable, but it could instead be set by the user,
  # or even left unset to initialize the property with an empty value
  set(MYPROJ_SOMETOOL_OPTIONS --verbose)

  define_property(TARGET PROPERTY MYPROJ_SOMETOOL_OPTIONS
      INITIALIZE_FROM_VARIABLE MYPROJ_SOMETOOL_OPTIONS
  )

CMake has a large number of pre-defined properties of each type. Developers should consult the
CMake reference documentation for the available properties and their intended purpose. In later
chapters, many of these properties are discussed and their relationship to other CMake commands,
variables and features are explored.

9.2. Global Properties
Global properties relate to the overall build as a whole. They are typically used for things like
modifying how build tools are launched or other aspects of tool behavior, for defining aspects of
how project files are structured and for providing some degree of build-level information.

In addition to the generic set_property() and get_property() commands, CMake also provides
get_cmake_property() for querying global entities. It is more than just shorthand for get_property(),
although it can be used simply to retrieve the value of any global property.

  get_cmake_property(resultVar property)

Just like for get_property(), resultVar is the name of a variable in which the value of the requested
property will be stored when the command returns. The property argument can be the name of any
global property or one of the following pseudo properties:

VARIABLES
   Return a list of all regular (i.e. non-cache) variables.

CACHE_VARIABLES
   Return a list of all cache variables.

COMMANDS
   Return a list of all defined commands, functions and macros. Commands are pre-defined by
   CMake, whereas functions and macros can be defined either by CMake (typically through
   modules) or by projects themselves. Some of the returned names may correspond to
   undocumented or internal entities not intended for projects to use directly. The names may be
   returned with different upper/lower case than the way they were originally defined.

MACROS
   Return a list of just the defined macros. This will be a subset of what the COMMANDS pseudo
   property would return, but note that the upper/lower case of the names can be different to what
   the COMMANDS pseudo property reports.

COMPONENTS
   Return a list of all components defined by install() commands, which is covered in Chapter 27,
   Installing.

These read-only pseudo properties are technically not global properties (they cannot be retrieved
using get_property(), for example), but they are notionally very similar. They can only be retrieved
via get_cmake_property().

9.3. Directory Properties
Directories also support their own set of properties. Logically, directory properties sit somewhere
between global properties which apply everywhere and target properties which only affect
individual targets. As such, directory properties mostly focus on setting defaults for target

properties and overriding global properties or defaults for the current directory. A few read-only
directory properties also provide a degree of introspection, holding information about how the
build reached the directory, what things have been defined at that point, etc.

For convenience, CMake provides dedicated commands for setting and getting directory properties
which are a little more concise than their generic counterparts:

  set_directory_properties(PROPERTIES prop1 val1 [prop2 val2] ...)

  get_directory_property(resultVar [DIRECTORY dir] property)
  get_directory_property(resultVar [DIRECTORY dir] DEFINITION varName)

While being a little more concise, this directory-specific setter command lacks any APPEND or
APPEND_STRING option. This means it can only be used to set or replace a property, it cannot be used to
add to an existing property directly. A further restriction of this command compared to the more
generic set_property() is that it always applies to the current directory. Projects may choose to use
this more specific form where it is convenient and use the generic form elsewhere, or for
consistency the more generic form may be used everywhere. Neither approach is more correct, it’s
more a matter of preference.

The directory-specific getter command has two forms. The first form is used to get the value of a
property from a particular directory or from the current directory if the DIRECTORY argument is not
used. The second form retrieves the value of a variable, which may not seem all that useful, but it
provides a means of obtaining a variable’s value from a different directory scope other than the
current one (when the DIRECTORY argument is used). In practice, this second form should rarely be
needed and its use should be avoided for scenarios other than debugging the build or similar
temporary tasks.

For either form of the get_directory_property() command, if the DIRECTORY argument is used, the
named directory must have already been processed by CMake. It is not possible for CMake to know
the properties of a directory scope it has not yet encountered.

9.4. Target Properties
Few things in CMake have such a strong and direct influence on how targets are built as target
properties. They control and provide information about everything from the flags used to compile
source files through to the type and location of the built binaries and intermediate files. Some
target properties affect how targets are presented in the developer’s IDE project, while others affect
the tools used when compiling/linking. In short, target properties are where most of the details
about how to actually turn source files into binaries are collected and applied.

A number of methods have evolved in CMake for manipulating target properties. In addition to the
generic set_property() and get_property() commands, CMake also provides some target-specific
equivalents for convenience:

  set_target_properties(target1 [target2...]
      PROPERTIES
          propertyName1 value1
          [propertyName2 value2] ...
  )
  get_target_property(resultVar target propertyName)

As for the set_directory_properties() command, set_target_properties() lacks the full flexibility of
set_property() but provides a simpler syntax for common cases. The set_target_properties()
command does not support appending to existing property values and if a list value needs to be
provided for a given property, the set_target_properties() command requires that value to be
specified in string form, e.g. "this;is;a;list".

The get_target_property() command is the simplified version of get_property(). It focuses purely on
providing a simple way to obtain the value of a target property and is basically just a shorthand
version of the generic command.

In addition to the generic and target-specific property getters and setters, CMake also has a number
of other commands which modify target properties. In particular, the family of target_…()
commands are a critical part of CMake and all but the most trivial of projects would typically use
them. These commands define not only properties for a particular target, they also define how that
information might be propagated to other targets that link to it. Chapter 15, Compiler And Linker
Essentials covers those commands and how they relate to target properties in depth.

9.5. Source Properties
CMake also supports properties on individual source files. These enable fine-grained manipulation
of compiler flags on a file-by-file basis rather than for all of a target’s sources. They also allow
additional information about the source file to be provided to modify how CMake or build tools
treat the file. For example, they may indicate whether the file is generated as part of the build, what
compiler to use with it, options for non-compiler tools working with the file and so on.

Projects should rarely need to query or modify source file properties, but for those situations that
require it, CMake provides dedicated setter and getter commands to make the task easier. These
follow a similar pattern to the other property-specific setter and getter commands:

  set_source_files_properties(file1 [file2...]
      PROPERTIES
          propertyName1 value1
          [propertyName2 value2] ...
  )
  get_source_file_property(resultVar sourceFile propertyName)

Again, no APPEND functionality is provided for the setter, while the getter is really just syntax
shorthand for the generic get_property() command and offers no new functionality. The following
example shows how to set a property on a source file, in this case to prevent it from being
combined with other sources in a unity build (discussed in Section 35.1, “Unity Builds”):

  add_executable(MyApp small.cpp big.cpp tall.cpp thin.cpp)

  set_source_files_properties(big.cpp PROPERTIES SKIP_UNITY_BUILD_INCLUSION YES)

With CMake 3.17 and earlier, source properties are only visible to targets defined in the same
directory scope. If the setting of a source property occurs in a different directory scope, the target
will not see that property change and therefore the compilation, etc. of that source file will not be
affected. With CMake 3.18 or later, additional options are available to specify the directory scope in
which the source file properties should be searched or applied. The following shows the full set of
options available for setting source file properties with CMake 3.18 or later:

  set_property(SOURCE sources...
      [DIRECTORY dirs...]
      [TARGET_DIRECTORY targets...]
      [APPEND | APPEND_STRING]
      PROPERTY propertyName values...
  )

  set_source_files_properties(sources...
      [DIRECTORY dirs...]
      [TARGET_DIRECTORY targets...]
      PROPERTIES
          propertyName1 value1
          [propertyName2 value2] ...
  )

The DIRECTORY option can be used to specify one or more directories in which the source properties
should be set. Any targets created in those directories will be aware of the source properties. These
directories must have already been added to the build by an earlier call to add_subdirectory(). Any
relative paths will be treated as relative to the current source directory.

The TARGET_DIRECTORY option is similar, except it is followed by the names of targets. For each target
listed, the directory in which that target was created (i.e. its source directory) will be treated as
though it had been specified with the DIRECTORY option. Note that this means all targets defined in
that directory will be aware of the source property, not just the target specified.

CMake 3.18 also added analogous options for retrieving source file properties:

  get_property(resultVar SOURCE source
      [DIRECTORY dir | TARGET_DIRECTORY target]
      PROPERTY propertyName
      [DEFINED | SET | BRIEF_DOCS | FULL_DOCS]
  )

  get_source_file_property(resultVar source
      [DIRECTORY dir | TARGET_DIRECTORY target]
      propertyName
  )

When retrieving source file properties, at most one target or directory can be listed to identify the
directory scope from which to retrieve the property. The current source directory is assumed if
neither DIRECTORY nor TARGET_DIRECTORY is given.

Whether DIRECTORY or TARGET_DIRECTORY options are specified or not, note that it is possible for a
source file to be compiled into multiple targets. Therefore, in each of the directory scopes where the
source properties are set, the properties should make sense for all targets using those files.

Developers should be aware of an implementation detail which may present a strong deterrent to
their use in some situations. For some CMake generators (notably the Unix Makefiles generator), the
dependencies between sources and source properties are stronger than one might expect. If source
properties are used to modify the compiler flags for specific source files rather than for a whole
target, changing the source’s compiler flags will still result in all of the target’s sources being
rebuilt, not just the affected source file. This is a limitation of how the dependency details are
handled in the Makefile, where testing whether each individual source’s compiler flags have
changed brings with it a prohibitively big performance hit. The relevant Makefile dependencies
were implemented at the target level instead to avoid that problem.

A typical scenario where projects may be tempted to use source properties is to pass version details
to just one or two sources as compiler definitions. As discussed in Section 21.2, “Source Code Access
To Version Details”, there are better alternatives to source properties which do not suffer from the
sort of build performance problems mentioned above. Setting some source properties can also
reduce build performance by preventing those sources from participating in unity builds (see
Section 35.1, “Unity Builds”).

The Xcode generator also has a limitation in its support for source properties which prevents it
from handling configuration-specific property values. See Section 15.6, “Language-specific Compiler
Flags” for a scenario of where this limitation can be important.

9.6. Cache Variable Properties
Properties on cache variables are a little different in purpose to other property types. For the most
part, cache variable properties are aimed more at how the cache variables are handled in the
CMake GUI and the console-based ccmake tool rather than affecting the build in any tangible way.
There are also no extra commands provided for manipulating them, so the generic set_property()
and get_property() commands must be used with the CACHE keyword

In Section 5.3, “Cache Variables”, a number of aspects of cache variables were discussed which are
ultimately reflected in the cache variable properties.

 • Each cache variable has a type, which must be one of BOOL, FILEPATH, PATH, STRING or INTERNAL. This
   type can be obtained using get_property() with the property name TYPE. The type affects how the
   CMake GUI and ccmake present that cache variable in the UI and what kind of widget is used for
   editing its value. Any variable with type INTERNAL will not be shown at all.

 • A cache variable can be marked as advanced with the mark_as_advanced() command, which is
   really just setting the boolean ADVANCED cache variable property. The CMake GUI and the ccmake
   tool both provide an option to show or hide advanced cache variables. The user can then choose
   whether to focus on just the main basic variables or to see the full list.

 • The help string of a cache variable is typically set as part of a call to the set() command, but it
      can also be modified or read using the HELPSTRING cache variable property. This help string is
      used as the tooltip in the CMake GUI and as a one-line help tip in the ccmake tool.

 • If a cache variable is of type STRING, then CMake GUI will look for a cache variable property
      named STRINGS. If not empty, it is expected to be a list of valid values for the variable and CMake
      GUI will then present that variable as a combo box of those values rather than an arbitrary text
      entry widget. In the case of ccmake, pressing enter on that cache variable will cycle through the
      values provided. Note that CMake does not enforce that the cache variable must be one of the
      values from the STRINGS property, it is only a convenience for the CMake GUI and ccmake tools.
      When CMake runs its configure step, it still treats the cache variable as an arbitrary string, so it
      is still possible to give the cache variable any value either at the cmake command line or via set()
      commands in the project.

9.7. Other Property Types
CMake also supports properties on individual tests and it provides the usual test-specific versions of
the property setter and getter commands:

  set_tests_properties(test1 [test2...]
      PROPERTIES
          propertyName1 value1
          [propertyName2 value2] ...
  )
  get_test_property(resultVar test propertyName)

Like their equivalent counterparts, these are just slightly more concise versions of the generic
commands which lack APPEND functionality but may be more convenient in some circumstances.
Tests are discussed in detail in Chapter 26, Testing.

The other type of property CMake supports is for installed files. These properties are specific to the
type of packaging being used and are typically not needed by most projects.

9.8. Recommended Practices
Properties are a crucial part of CMake. A range of commands have the ability to set, modify or
query the various types of properties, some of which have further implications for dependencies
between projects.

 • All but the special global pseudo properties can be fully manipulated using the generic
      set_property() command, making it predictable for developers and offering flexible APPEND
      functionality where needed. The property-specific setters may be more convenient in some
      situations, such as allowing multiple properties to be set at once, but their lack of APPEND
      functionality may steer some projects towards just using set_property(). Neither is right or
      wrong, although a common mistake is to use the property-specific commands to replace a
      property value instead of appending to it.

 • For target properties, use of the various target_…() commands is strongly recommended over
      manipulating the associated target properties directly. These commands not only manipulate

 the properties on specific targets, they also set up dependency relationships between targets so
 that CMake can propagate some properties automatically. Chapter 15, Compiler And Linker
 Essentials discusses a range of topics which highlight the strong preference for the target_…()
 commands.

• Source properties offer a fine granularity on the level of control of compiler options, etc. These
 do, however, have the potential for undesirable negative impacts on the build behavior of a
 project. In particular, some CMake generators may rebuild more than should be necessary
 when compile options for only a few source files change. The Xcode generator also has
 limitations which prevent it from supporting configuration-specific source file properties.
 Projects should consider using other alternatives to source properties where available, such as
 the techniques given in Section 21.2, “Source Code Access To Version Details”.

