Chapter 12. Policies
CMake has evolved over a long period, introducing new functionality, fixing bugs and changing the
behavior of certain features to address shortcomings or introduce improvements. While the
introduction of new capabilities is unlikely to cause problems for existing projects built with
CMake, any change in behavior has the potential to break projects if they are relying on the old
behavior. For this reason, the CMake developers are careful to ensure that changes are
implemented in such a way as to preserve backward compatibility and to provide a
straightforward, controlled migration path for projects to be updated to the new behavior.

This control over whether old or new behavior should be used is done through CMake’s policy
mechanisms. In general, policies are not something that developers are exposed to all that often,
mostly just when CMake issues a warning about the project relying on an older version’s behavior.
When developers move to a more recent CMake release, the newer CMake version will sometimes
issue such warnings to highlight how the project should be updated to use a new behavior.

12.1. Policy Control
CMake’s policy functionality is closely tied to the cmake_minimum_required() command, which was
introduced back in Chapter 3, A Minimal Project. Not only does this command specify the minimum
CMake version a project requires, it also sets CMake’s behavior to match that of the version given.
Thus, when a project starts with cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.2), it says that at least CMake 3.2
is needed and also that the project expects CMake to behave like the 3.2 release. This gives projects
confidence that developers should be able to update to any newer version of CMake at their
convenience and the project will still build as it did before.

Sometimes,    however,      a   project   may   want    more     fine-grained    control    than   what    the
cmake_minimum_required() command provides. Consider the following scenarios:

 • A project wants to set a low minimum CMake version, but it also wants to take advantage of
   newer behavior if it is available.

 • A part of the project cannot be modified (e.g. it might come from an external read-only code
   repository), and it relies on old behavior which has been changed in newer CMake versions. The
   rest of the project, however, wants to move to the new behavior.

 • A project relies heavily on some old behavior which would require a non-trivial amount of
   work to update. Some parts of the project want to make use of recent CMake features, but the
   old behavior for that particular change needs to be preserved until time can be set aside to
   update the project.

These   are   some    common       examples     where   the    high   level     control    provided   by   the
cmake_minimum_required() command alone is not enough. More specific control over policies is
enabled through the cmake_policy() command, which has a number of forms acting at different
degrees of granularity. The form acting at the coarsest level is a close relative to
cmake_minimum_required():

  cmake_policy(VERSION major[.minor[.patch[.tweak]]])

In this form, the command changes CMake’s behavior to match that of the specified version. The
cmake_minimum_required() command implicitly calls this form to set CMake’s behavior. The two are
largely interchangeable except for the top of the project where a call to cmake_minimum_required() is
mandatory to enforce a minimum CMake version. Apart from the start of the top level
CMakeLists.txt file, using cmake_policy() generally communicates the intent more clearly when a
project needs to enforce a particular version’s behavior for a section of the project, as
demonstrated by the following example:

  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.7)
  project(WithLegacy)

  # Uses recent CMake features
  add_subdirectory(modernDir)

  # Imported from another project, relies on old behavior
  cmake_policy(VERSION 2.8.11)
  add_subdirectory(legacyDir)

CMake 3.12 extends this capability in a backward-compatible way by optionally allowing the
project to specify a version range rather than a single version to either cmake_minimum_required() or
cmake_policy(VERSION). The range is specified using three dots ... between the minimum and
maximum version with no spaces. The range indicates that the CMake version in use must be at
least the minimum, and the behavior should match that of the lowest of the specified maximum
and the running CMake version. This allows the project to effectively say "I need at least CMake X,
but I am safe to use with policies from up to CMake Y". The following example shows two ways for a
project to require only CMake 3.7, but still support the newer behavior for all policies up to CMake
3.12 if the running CMake version supports them:

  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.7...3.12)
  cmake_policy(VERSION 3.7...3.12)

CMake versions before 3.12 would effectively see just a single version number and would ignore
the ...3.12 part, whereas 3.12 and later would understand it to mean a range.

CMake also provides the ability to control each behavior change individually with the SET form:

  cmake_policy(SET CMPxxxx NEW)
  cmake_policy(SET CMPxxxx OLD)

Each individual behavior change is given its own policy number of the form CMPxxxx, where xxxx is
always four digits. By specifying NEW or OLD, a project tells CMake to use the new or old behavior for
that particular policy. The CMake documentation provides the full list of policies, along with an
explanation of the OLD and NEW behavior of each one.

As an example, before version 3.0, CMake allowed a project to call get_target_property() with the
name of a target that didn’t exist. In such a case, the value of the property was returned as -NOTFOUND
rather than issuing an error, but in all likelihood, the project probably contained incorrect logic.
Therefore, from version 3.0 onward, CMake halts with an error if such a situation is encountered.

In the event that a project was relying on the old behavior, it could continue to do so using policy
CMP0045 like so:

  # Allow non-existent target with get_target_property()
  cmake_policy(SET CMP0045 OLD)

  # Would halt with an error without the above policy change
  get_target_property(outVar doesNotExist COMPILE_DEFINITIONS)

The need for setting a policy to NEW is less common. One situation is where a project wants to set a
low minimum CMake version, but still take advantage of later features if a later version is used. For
example, in CMake 3.2, policy CMP0055 was introduced to provide strict checking on usage of the
break() command. If the project still wanted to support being built with earlier CMake versions,
then the additional checks would have to be explicitly enabled when run with later CMake
versions.

  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.0)
  project(PolicyExample)

  if(CMAKE_VERSION VERSION_GREATER 3.1)
      # Enable stronger checking of break() command usage
      cmake_policy(SET CMP0055 NEW)
  endif()

Testing the CMAKE_VERSION variable is one way of determining whether a policy is available, but the
if() command provides a more direct way using the if(POLICY…) form. The above could
alternatively be implemented like so:

  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.0)
  project(PolicyExample)

  # Only set the policy if the version of CMake being used
  # knows about that policy number
  if(POLICY CMP0055)
      cmake_policy(SET CMP0055 NEW)
  endif()

It is also possible to get the current state of a particular policy. The main situation where the
current policy setting may need to be read is in a module file, which may be one provided by CMake
itself or by the project. It would be unusual, however, for a project module to change its behavior
based on a policy setting.

  cmake_policy(GET CMPxxxx outVar)

The value stored in outVar will be OLD, NEW or an empty string. The cmake_minimum_required(VERSION…)
and cmake_policy(VERSION…) commands reset the state of all policies. Those policies introduced at
the specified CMake version or earlier are reset to NEW. Those policies that were added after the
specified version will effectively be reset to empty.

If CMake detects that the project is doing something that either relies on the old behavior, conflicts
with the new behavior or whose behavior is ambiguous, it may warn if the relevant policy is unset.
These warnings are the most common way developers are exposed to CMake’s policy functionality.
They are designed to be noisy but informative, encouraging developers to update the project to the
new behavior. In some cases, a deprecation warning may be issued even if the policy has been
explicitly set, but this is typically only for a policy that has already been documented as deprecated
for a long time (many releases).

Sometimes the policy warnings cannot be addressed immediately, but the warnings could be
undesirable. The preferred way to handle this is to explicitly set the policy to the desired behavior
(OLD or NEW), which stops the warning. This isn’t always possible though, such as when a deeper part
of the project issues its own call to cmake_minimum_required(VERSION…) or cmake_policy(VERSION…),
thereby resetting the policy states. As a temporary way to work around such situations, CMake
provides the CMAKE_POLICY_DEFAULT_CMPxxxx and CMAKE_POLICY_WARNING_CMPxxxx variables where xxxx is
the usual four-digit policy number. These are not intended to be set by the project, but rather by the
developer as a cache variable temporarily to enable/disable a warning or to check whether the
project issues warnings with a particular policy enabled. Ultimately, the long term solution is to
address the underlying problem highlighted by the warning. Nevertheless, it may occasionally be
appropriate for a project to set one of these variables to silence a warning known to not be harmful.

12.2. Policy Scope
Sometimes a policy setting only needs to be applied to a specific section of a file. Rather than
requiring a project to manually save the existing value of any policies it wants to change
temporarily, CMake provides a policy stack which can be used to simplify this process. Pushing onto
the policy stack essentially creates a copy of the current settings and allows the project to operate
on that copy. Popping the stack discards the current policy settings and reverts to the previous
settings on the stack.

Two methods are available for saving and restoring (pushing and popping) the policy stack:

  # Requires CMake 3.25 or later
  block(SCOPE_FOR POLICIES)
      # Make changes to policies here. Policy settings outside
      # the block are not affected.
  endblock()

  # Works with any CMake version
  cmake_policy(PUSH)
      # Make changes to policies here. Policy changes apply
      # up until the policy stack is popped (see below).
  cmake_policy(POP)

Of the two methods, the first using block() is more robust. Regardless of how control flow leaves the
block, the policies are restored to their previous state from before the block was entered. This
means commands like return(), break() and continue() can be used freely within the block.

The second method using cmake_policy() is more fragile because it relies on the project ensuring it
calls cmake_policy(POP) exactly once for each cmake_policy(PUSH). This can be challenging when
pushing and popping policy state across many lines. A common source of error is pushing policies
at the start of a long file and popping at the end, but returning early somewhere in the middle of
the file without popping the policy stack. This often happens when the file originally had no
return() statements at the time the policy push-pop was added, but a return() was added later.
Module files are one of the more common places where the policy stack might be manipulated like
this and where this sort of error frequently occurs.

  cmake_policy(PUSH)
  cmake_policy(SET CMP0085 NEW)

  # ...

  if("Foo" IN_LIST SomeList)
      # ERROR: Returns without popping the policy stack
      return()
  endif()

  # ...

  cmake_policy(POP)

Replacing the above with block() instead avoids the problem:

  block(SCOPE_FOR POLICIES)
  cmake_policy(SET CMP0085 NEW)

  # ...

  if("Foo" IN_LIST SomeList)
      # OK: No manual policy pop needed
      return()
  endif()

  # ...

  endblock()

Some commands implicitly push a new policy state onto the stack and pop it again before returning
to the caller. The add_subdirectory(), include() and find_package() commands are important
examples of this. The include() and find_package() commands also support a NO_POLICY_SCOPE option
which prevents the automatic push-pop of the policy stack (add_subdirectory() has no such option).
In very early versions of CMake, include() and find_package() did not automatically push and pop
an entry on the policy stack. The NO_POLICY_SCOPE option was added as a way for projects using later
CMake versions to revert back to the old behavior for specific parts of the project, but its use is
discouraged and should be unnecessary for new projects.

12.3. Recommended Practices
Where possible, projects should prefer to work with policies at the CMake version level rather than
manipulating specific policies. Setting policies to match a particular CMake release’s behavior
makes the project easier to understand and update, whereas changes to individual policies can be
harder to trace through multiple directory levels, especially because of their interaction with
version-level policy changes where they are always reset.

When choosing how to specify the CMake version to conform to, the choice between
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION) and cmake_policy(VERSION) would usually fall to the latter. The two
main exceptions to this are at the start of the project’s top level CMakeLists.txt file and at the top of a
module file that could be re-used across multiple projects. For the latter case, it is preferable to use
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION) because the projects using the module may enforce their own
minimum CMake version, but the module may have specific minimum version requirements of its
own. Aside from these cases, cmake_policy(VERSION) usually expresses the intent more clearly, but
both commands will effectively achieve the same thing from a policy perspective.

In cases where a project does need to manipulate a specific policy, it should check whether the
policy is available using if(POLICY…) rather than testing the CMAKE_VERSION variable. This leads to
greater consistency of the code. Compare the following two ways of setting policy behavior and
note how the check and the enforcement use a consistent approach:

  # Version-level policy enforcement
  if(NOT CMAKE_VERSION VERSION_LESS 3.4)
      cmake_policy(VERSION 3.4)
  endif()

  # Individual policy-level enforcement
  if(POLICY CMP0055)
      cmake_policy(SET CMP0055 NEW)
  endif()

If a project needs to manipulate multiple individual policies locally, surround that section with calls
to block(SCOPE_FOR POLICIES) and endblock(). If CMake 3.24 or early must be supported, use
cmake_policy(PUSH) and cmake_policy(POP) instead. Surrounding the code with either command pair
ensures that the rest of the scope is isolated from the changes. If using cmake_policy() to define these
regions, pay special attention to any possible return(), break() or continue() statements that exit that
section of code and ensure no push is left without a corresponding pop.

Note also that add_subdirectory(), include() and find_package() all push and pop an entry on the
policy stack automatically. No explicit block or push-pop is needed to isolate their policy changes
from the calling scope. Projects should avoid the NO_POLICY_SCOPE keyword of these commands, as it
is intended only for addressing a change in behavior of very early CMake versions. NO_POLICY_SCOPE
is rarely appropriate for new projects.

Aim to avoid modifying policy settings inside a function unless using an appropriate block() or
cmake_policy() push-pop within the function body. Since functions do not introduce a new policy
scope, a policy change can affect the caller if the change is not properly isolated using the
appropriate logic. Furthermore, the policy settings for the function implementation are taken from

the scope in which the function was defined, not the one from which it is called. Therefore, prefer to
adjust any policy settings in the scope that defines the function rather than within the function
itself.

As a last resort, the CMAKE_POLICY_DEFAULT_CMPxxxx and CMAKE_POLICY_WARNING_CMPxxxx variables may
allow a developer or project to work around some specific policy-related situations. Developers
may use these to temporarily change the default for a specific policy setting, or to prevent warnings
about a particular policy. Projects should generally avoid setting these variables so that developers
have control locally. Nonetheless, in certain situations, they can be used to ensure the behavior or
warning about a particular policy persists even through calls to cmake_minimum_required() or
cmake_policy(VERSION). Where possible, projects should instead try to update to the newer behavior
rather than relying on these variables.

