Chapter 18. Target Types
CMake supports a wide variety of target types, not just the simple executables and libraries
introduced back in Chapter 4, Building Simple Targets. Different target types can be defined that act
as a reference to other entities rather than being built themselves. They can be used to collect
together transitive properties and dependencies without actually producing their own binaries, or
they can even be a kind of library that is simply a collection of object files rather than a traditional
static or shared library. Many things can be abstracted away as a target to hide the complexities of
platform differences, locations in the filesystem, file names and so on. This chapter covers all of
these various target types and discusses their uses.

Another category of target is the utility or custom target. These can be used to execute arbitrary
commands and define custom build rules, allowing projects to implement just about any sort of
behavior needed. They have their own dedicated commands and unique behaviors and are covered
in depth in the next chapter.

18.1. Executables
The add_executable() command has more than just the form introduced back in Chapter 4, Building
Simple Targets. Two other forms also exist which can be used to define executable targets that
reference other things. The full set of supported forms are:

  add_executable(targetName
      [WIN32] [MACOSX_BUNDLE]
      [EXCLUDE_FROM_ALL]
      source1 [source2 ...]
  )
  add_executable(targetName IMPORTED [GLOBAL])
  add_executable(aliasName ALIAS targetName)

The IMPORTED form can be used to create a CMake target for an existing executable rather than one
built by the project. By creating a target to represent the executable, other parts of the project can
treat it just like it would any other executable target that the project built itself (with some
restrictions). The most significant benefit is that it can be used in contexts where CMake
automatically replaces a target name with its location on disk, such as when executing commands
for tests or custom tasks (both covered in later chapters). One of the few differences compared to a
regular target is that imported targets cannot be installed, a topic covered in Chapter 27, Installing.

When defining an imported executable target, certain target properties need to be set before it can
be useful. Most of the relevant properties for any imported target have names beginning with
IMPORTED, but for executables, IMPORTED_LOCATION and IMPORTED_LOCATION_<CONFIG> are the most
important. When the location of the imported executable is needed, CMake will first look at the
configuration-specific property and only if that is not set will it look at the more generic
IMPORTED_LOCATION property. Typically, the location doesn’t need to be configuration-specific, so it is
very common for only IMPORTED_LOCATION to be set.

When defined without the GLOBAL keyword, an imported target will only be visible in the current
directory scope and below, but adding GLOBAL makes the target visible everywhere. In contrast,
regular executable targets built by the project are always global. The reasons for this and some of
the associated implications of reduced target visibility are covered in Section 18.3, “Promoting
Imported Targets” further below.

An ALIAS target is a read-only way to refer to another target within CMake. It can be used to read
properties of the target it aliases and it may be used in custom commands and test commands just
like the aliased target (see Section 19.1, “Custom Targets” and Section 26.1, “Defining And Executing
A Simple Test” respectively). An alias does not create a new build target with the alias name. There
are limitations to defining and using aliases:

 • Aliases cannot be installed or exported (both covered in Chapter 27, Installing).

 • An alias of an alias is not supported.

 • Prior to CMake 3.11, imported targets could not be aliased at all.

 • From CMake 3.11, imported targets with global visibility can be aliased.

 • From CMake 3.18, an alias of a non-global imported target can be created and that alias will also
   be non-global. The alias cannot later be promoted to global visibility, even if the imported target
   it aliases is promoted (see Section 18.3, “Promoting Imported Targets”).

18.2. Libraries
The add_library() command also has a number of different forms. The details for libraries are more
involved than for executables, which is a consequence of the variety of roles that libraries can take
in a project.

18.2.1. Basic Library Types

The basic form introduced back in Chapter 4, Building Simple Targets can be used to define the
common types of libraries most developers are familiar with:

  add_library(targetName
      [STATIC | SHARED | MODULE]
      [EXCLUDE_FROM_ALL]
      source1 [source2 ...]
  )

If no STATIC, SHARED or MODULE keyword is given, the library will be either STATIC or SHARED. The choice
is determined by the value of the BUILD_SHARED_LIBS variable (see Section 22.1, “Build Basics”).

18.2.2. Object Libraries

The add_library() command can also be used to define object libraries. These are a collection of
object files that are not combined into a single archive or shared library:

  add_library(targetName OBJECT
      [EXCLUDE_FROM_ALL]
      source1 [source2 ...]
  )

With CMake 3.11 or earlier, object libraries cannot be linked like other library types (i.e. they
cannot be used with target_link_libraries()). They require using a generator expression of the form
$<TARGET_OBJECTS:objLib> as part of the list of sources of another executable or library target.
Because they cannot be linked, they therefore do not provide transitive dependencies to the targets
they are added to as objects/sources. This can make them less convenient than the other library
types, since header search paths, compiler defines, etc. have to be manually carried across to the
targets they are added to.

CMake 3.12 introduced features that make object libraries behave more like other types of libraries,
but with some caveats. From CMake 3.12, object libraries can be used with target_link_libraries(),
either as the target being added to (i.e. the first argument to the command) or as one of the libraries
being added. But because they add object files rather than actual libraries, their transitive nature is
more restricted to prevent object files from being added multiple times to consuming targets. A
simplistic explanation is that object files are only added to a target that links directly to the object
library, not transitively beyond that. The object library’s usage requirements do, however,
propagate transitively exactly like an ordinary library would.

               The propagation of an object library’s own link library dependencies initially
               contained an implementation bug which was not fixed until CMake 3.14.0. Projects
              should set their minimum CMake version to 3.14 or later if they intend to link to
               object libraries.

Some developers may find object libraries more natural if coming from a background where non-
CMake projects defined their targets based on sources or object files rather than a related set of
static libraries. In general, however, where there is a choice, static libraries will typically be the
more convenient choice in CMake projects. Before relying on the expanded features available for
object libraries in CMake 3.12 and later, consider whether an ordinary static library is more
appropriate and ultimately easier to use.

18.2.3. Imported Libraries

Just like executables, libraries may also be defined as imported targets. These are heavily used by
config files created during packaging or by Find module implementations (covered in Chapter 25,
Finding Things and Chapter 27, Installing), but have limited use outside of those contexts. They don’t
define a library to be built by the project, rather they act as a reference to a library that is provided
externally (e.g. it already exists on the system, is built by some process outside of the current CMake
project or is provided by the package that a config file is part of).

  add_library(targetName
      (STATIC | SHARED | MODULE | OBJECT | UNKNOWN)
      IMPORTED [GLOBAL]
  )

The library type must be given immediately after the targetName. If the type of library that the new
target will refer to is known, it should be specified as such. This will allow CMake to treat the
imported target just like a regular library target of the named type in various situations. The type
can only be set to OBJECT with CMake 3.9 or later (imported object libraries were not supported
before that version). If the library type is not known, the UNKNOWN type should be given, in which case
CMake will simply use the full path to the library without further interpretation in places like linker
command lines. This will mean fewer checks and in the case of Windows builds, no handling of
DLL import libraries.

Except for OBJECT libraries, the location on the filesystem that the imported target represents needs
to be specified by the IMPORTED_LOCATION and/or IMPORTED_LOCATION_<CONFIG> properties (i.e. the same as
for imported executables). In the case of Windows platforms, two properties should be set:
IMPORTED_LOCATION should hold the location of the DLL and IMPORTED_IMPLIB should hold the location of
the associated import library, which usually has a .lib file extension (the …_<CONFIG> variants of
these properties can also be set and will take precedence). For object libraries, instead of the above
location properties, the IMPORTED_OBJECTS property must be set to a list of object files that the
imported target represents.

Imported libraries also support a number of other target properties, most of which can typically be
left alone or are automatically set by CMake. Developers who need to manually write config
packages should refer to the CMake reference documentation to understand the other IMPORTED_…
target properties which may be relevant to their situation. Most projects will rely on CMake
generating such files for them though, so the need to do this should be fairly uncommon.

By default, imported libraries are defined as local targets, meaning they are only visible in the
current directory scope and below. The GLOBAL keyword can be given to make them have global
visibility instead, just like other regular targets. A library may initially be created without the GLOBAL
keyword but later promoted to global visibility, a topic covered in detail in Section 18.3, “Promoting
Imported Targets” further below.

  # Windows-specific example of imported library
  add_library(MyWindowsLib SHARED IMPORTED)

  set_target_properties(MyWindowsLib PROPERTIES
      IMPORTED_LOCATION /some/path/bin/foo.dll
      IMPORTED_IMPLIB   /some/path/lib/foo.lib
  )

  # Assume FOO_LIB holds the location of the library but its type is unknown
  add_library(MysteryLib UNKNOWN IMPORTED)

  set_target_properties(MysteryLib PROPERTIES
      IMPORTED_LOCATION ${FOO_LIB}
  )

  # Imported object library, Windows example shown
  add_library(MyObjLib OBJECT IMPORTED)

  set_property(TARGET MyObjLib PROPERTY
      # These .obj files would be .o on most other platforms
      IMPORTED_OBJECTS /some/path/obj1.obj
                       /some/path/obj2.obj
  )

  # Regular executable target using imported object library.
  # Platform differences assumed to be handled by MyObjLib.
  add_executable(MyExe $<TARGET_OBJECTS:MyObjLib>)

18.2.4. Interface Libraries

Another form of the add_library() command allows interface libraries to be defined. These do not
usually represent a physical library, instead they primarily serve to collect usage requirements and
dependencies to be applied to anything that links to them. A popular example of their use is for
header-only libraries where there is no physical library that needs to be linked, but header search
paths, compiler definitions, etc. need to be carried forward to anything using the headers.

  add_library(targetName INTERFACE)

All the various target_…() commands can be used with their INTERFACE keywords to define the usage
requirements the interface library will carry. One can also set the relevant INTERFACE_… properties
directly with set_property() or set_target_properties(), but the target_…() commands are safer and
easier to use.

  add_library(MyHeaderOnlyToolkit INTERFACE)
  target_include_directories(MyHeaderOnlyToolkit
      INTERFACE /some/path/include
  )
  target_compile_definitions(MyHeaderOnlyToolkit
      INTERFACE COOL_FEATURE=1
                $<$<COMPILE_FEATURES:cxx_std_11>:HAVE_CXX11>
  )

  add_executable(MyApp ...)
  target_link_libraries(MyApp PRIVATE MyHeaderOnlyToolkit)

In the above example, the MyApp target links against the MyHeaderOnlyToolkit interface library. When
the MyApp sources are compiled, they will have /some/path/include as a header search path and will
also have a compiler definition COOL_FEATURE=1 provided on the compiler command line. If the MyApp
target is being built with C++11 support enabled, it will also have the symbol HAVE_CXX11 defined. The
headers in MyHeaderOnlyToolkit can then use this symbol to determine what things they declare and
define rather than relying on the __cplusplus symbol provided by the C++ standard, the value of
which is often unreliable for a range of compilers.

Ordinarily, an interface library would not have any sources, but in some cases it can make sense.
Header-only libraries are one such example. The headers are likely to be of interest to developers
and they may want the headers to show up in their IDE. Since the headers are not part of any other
target, they normally wouldn’t appear. By adding them to the interface library as sources, IDEs
usually have enough information to be able to show the headers under one or more targets.

A special sub-case of the above example is when one or more headers in a header-only library are
generated as part of the build (a topic covered in Section 19.3, “Commands That Generate Files”).
With CMake 3.18 or earlier, if nothing in the project actually uses the interface library, the project
needs to create a separate custom target to ensure that the headers will be generated. Another
limitation with CMake 3.18 and earlier is that sources cannot be added to the interface library in
the add_library() call. A separate call to target_sources() has to be used instead (see Section 15.2.6,
“Source Files”). The resultant code would take the following form:

  # Defines how to generate the header
  add_custom_command(OUTPUT someHeader.h COMMAND ...)

  # Required for CMake <= 3.18 to ensure header is generated
  add_custom_target(GenerateSomeHeader ALL
      DEPENDS ${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/someHeader.h
  )

  # CMake <= 3.18 doesn't allow sources to be added to an
  # INTERFACE target directly in the add_library() call
  add_library(MyHeaderOnly INTERFACE)
  target_sources(MyHeaderOnly
      INTERFACE
          ${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/someHeader.h
  )

From CMake 3.19, both of the above-mentioned restrictions have been removed. Sources can be
listed directly in the add_library() call for interface libraries and they will be treated as private
sources. This means that unlike the example above, the headers will not be added to targets that
link to the interface library. Instead, they will remain associated only with the interface library
itself and therefore will only show up in IDEs under that library instead of in all of its consumers.
CMake will also create a build system target for the interface library if any sources are added to it.
Bringing that build system target up to date like any other target will then ensure that its generated
sources are created. The end result is both more concise and produces a better result in IDEs:

  add_custom_command(OUTPUT someHeader.h COMMAND ...)

  # Requires CMake 3.19 or later
  add_library(MyHeaderOnly INTERFACE
      ${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/someHeader.h
  )

Another use of interface libraries is to provide a convenience for linking in a larger set of libraries,
possibly encapsulating logic that selects which libraries should be in the set. For example:

  # Regular library targets
  add_library(Algo_Fast ...)
  add_library(Algo_Accurate ...)
  add_library(Algo_Beta ...)

  # Convenience interface library
  add_library(Algo_All INTERFACE)
  target_link_libraries(Algo_All INTERFACE
      Algo_Fast
      Algo_Accurate
      $<$<BOOL:${ENABLE_ALGO_BETA}>:Algo_Beta>
  )

  # Other targets link to the interface library
  # instead of each of the real libraries
  add_executable(MyApp ...)
  target_link_libraries(MyApp PRIVATE Algo_All)

The above will only include Algo_Beta in the list of libraries to link if the CMake option variable
ENABLE_ALGO_BETA is true. Other targets then simply link to Algo_All and the conditional linking of
Algo_Beta is handled by the interface library. This is an example of using an interface library to
abstract away details of what is actually going to be linked, defined, etc. so that the targets linking
against them don’t have to implement those details for themselves. This can be exploited to do
things like abstract away completely different library structures on different platforms, switch
library implementations based on some condition (variables, generator expressions, etc.), provide
an old library target name where the library structure has been refactored (e.g. split up into
separate libraries) and so on.

18.2.5. Interface Imported Libraries

  add_library(targetName INTERFACE IMPORTED [GLOBAL])

While the use cases for INTERFACE libraries are generally well understood, the addition of the
IMPORTED keyword to yield an INTERFACE IMPORTED library can sometimes be a cause of confusion. This
combination usually arises when an INTERFACE library is exported or installed for use outside the
project. It still serves the purpose of an INTERFACE library when consumed by another project, but
the IMPORTED part is added to indicate the library came from somewhere else. The effect is to restrict
the default visibility of the library to the current directory scope instead of global. With minor
exceptions discussed below, adding the GLOBAL keyword to yield the keyword combination INTERFACE
IMPORTED GLOBAL results in a library with little practical difference to INTERFACE alone.

An INTERFACE IMPORTED library is not required to (and indeed is prohibited from) setting an
IMPORTED_LOCATION. Instead, one can set its IMPORTED_LIBNAME property, if desired. The IMPORTED_LIBNAME
is intended for representing libraries provided by the toolchain or platform, but whose location
isn’t known. The IMPORTED_LIBNAME specifies the name to include on the linker command line. It is not
permitted to specify any path, only a bare library name. Section 16.1, “Require Targets For Linking”
includes an example where its use is required.

Before CMake 3.11, none of the target_…() commands could be used to set INTERFACE_… properties
on any kind of IMPORTED library. These properties could, however, be set using set_property() or
set_target_properties(). CMake 3.11 removed the restriction on using target_…() commands to set
these properties, so whereas INTERFACE IMPORTED used to be very similar to plain IMPORTED libraries,
with CMake 3.11 they are now much closer to plain INTERFACE libraries in terms of their set of
restrictions.

The following table summarizes what the various keyword combinations support:

     Keywords                    Visibility    IMPORTED_    IMPORTED_         Set       Installable
                                                LOCATION     LIBNAME     Interface
                                                                         Properties
     INTERFACE                     Global      Prohibited   Prohibited   Any method        Yes
     IMPORTED                                                                       *
                                   Local       Required     Prohibited   Restricted         No
     IMPORTED GLOBAL                                                                *
                                   Global      Required     Prohibited   Restricted         No
     INTERFACE IMPORTED                                                             *
                                   Local       Prohibited   Permitted    Restricted         No
     INTERFACE IMPORTED GLOBAL                                                      *
                                   Global      Prohibited   Permitted    Restricted         No

*
    The various target_…() commands can be used to set INTERFACE_… properties with CMake 3.11 or
later. The set_property() or set_target_properties() commands can be used with any CMake version.

One could be forgiven for thinking that the number of different interface and imported library
combinations is overly complicated and confusing. For most developers, however, imported targets
are generally created for them behind the scenes and they appear to act more or less like regular
targets. Of all the combinations in the above table, only plain INTERFACE targets would typically be
defined by a project directly. Chapter 27, Installing covers much of the motivation and mechanics of
the other combinations.

18.2.6. Library Aliases

The last form of the add_library() command is for defining a library alias:

    add_library(aliasName ALIAS otherTarget)

A library alias is mostly analogous to an executable alias. It acts as a read-only way to refer to
another library, but does not create a new build target. Library aliases cannot be installed and they
cannot be defined as an alias of another alias. Before CMake 3.11, a library alias could not be
created for imported targets, but as with other changes made for imported targets in CMake 3.11,
this restriction was relaxed and it has become possible to create aliases for globally visible
imported targets. CMake 3.18 relaxed that restriction further to allow non-global aliases to be
created for non-global imported targets.

There is a particularly common use of library aliases that relates to an important feature
introduced in CMake 3.0. For each library that will be installed or packaged, a common pattern is to
also create a matching library alias with a name of the form projNamespace::targetName. All such
aliases within a project would typically share the same projNamespace. For example:

  # Any sort of real library (SHARED, STATIC, MODULE or possibly OBJECT)
  add_library(MyRealThings SHARED src1.cpp ...)
  add_library(OtherThings STATIC srcA.cpp ...)

  # Aliases to the above with special names
  add_library(BagOfBeans::MyRealThings ALIAS MyRealThings)
  add_library(BagOfBeans::OtherThings ALIAS OtherThings)

Within the project itself, other targets would link to either the real targets or the namespaced
targets (both have the same effect). The motivation for the aliases comes from when the project is
installed and something else links to the imported targets created by the installed/packaged config
files. Those config files would define imported libraries with the namespaced names rather than
the bare original names (see Section 27.3, “Installing Exports”). The consuming project would then
link against the namespaced names. For example:

  # Pull in imported targets from an installed package
  find_package(BagOfBeans REQUIRED)    ①

  # Define an executable that links to the imported library from the installed package
  add_executable(EatLunch main.cpp ...)
  target_link_libraries(EatLunch PRIVATE
      BagOfBeans::MyRealThings
  )

① The find_package() command is discussed in Chapter 25, Finding Things.

If at some point the above project wanted to incorporate the BagOfBeans project directly into its own
build instead of finding an installed package, it could do so without changing its linking
relationship because the BagOfBeans project provided an alias for the namespaced name:

  # Add BagOfBeans directly to this project, making all of its targets directly available
  add_subdirectory(BagOfBeans)

  # Same definition of linking relationship still works
  add_executable(EatLunch main.cpp ...)
  target_link_libraries(EatLunch PRIVATE
      BagOfBeans::MyRealThings
  )

Another important aspect of names having a double-colon (::) is that CMake will always treat them
as the name of an alias or imported target. Any attempt to use such a name for a different target
type will result in an error. Perhaps more usefully though, when the target name is used as part of
a target_link_library() call, if CMake doesn’t know of a target by that name, it will issue an error at
generation time. Compare this to an ordinary name which CMake will treat as a library assumed to
be provided by the system if it doesn’t know of a target by that name. This can lead to the error only
becoming apparent much later at build time.

  add_executable(Main main.cpp)
  add_library(Bar STATIC ...)
  add_library(Foo::Bar ALIAS Bar)

  # Typo in name being linked to, CMake will assume a library called "Bart"
  # will be provided by the system at link time and won't issue an error.
  target_link_libraries(Main PRIVATE Bart)

  # Typo in name being linked to, CMake flags an error at generation time
  # because a namespaced name must be a CMake target.
  target_link_libraries(Main PRIVATE Foo::Bart)

It is therefore more robust to link to namespaced names where they are available. Projects are
strongly encouraged to define namespaced aliases at least for all targets that are intended to be
installed/packaged. Such namespaced aliases can even be used within the project itself, not just by
other projects consuming it as a pre-built package or child project. Section 27.3, “Installing Exports”
also discusses how to change the name used for the targetName part of a namespaced name, which
can allow an original target like MyProj_Algo to have a namespaced name like MyProj::Algo instead of
the more verbose and repetitive MyProj::MyProj_Algo.

18.3. Promoting Imported Targets
When defined without the GLOBAL keyword, imported targets are only visible in the directory scope
in which they are created or below. This behavior stems from their main intended use, which is as
part of a Find module or package config file. Anything defined by a Find module or package config
file is generally expected to have local visibility, so they shouldn’t generally add globally visible
targets. This allows different parts of a project hierarchy to pull in the same packages and modules
with different settings, yet not interfere with each other.

Nevertheless, there are situations where imported targets need to be created with global visibility,
such as to ensure that the same version or instance of a particular package is used consistently
throughout the whole project. Adding the GLOBAL keyword when creating the imported library
achieves this, but the project may not be in control of the command that does the creation. To
provide projects with a way to address this situation, CMake 3.11 introduced the ability to promote
an imported target to global visibility by setting the target’s IMPORTED_GLOBAL property to true. Note
that this is a one-way transition, it is not possible to demote a global target back to local visibility.

  # Imported library created with local visibility. This could be in an external file
  # brought in by an include() call rather than in the same file as the lines further below.
  add_library(BuiltElsewhere STATIC IMPORTED)
  set_target_properties(BuiltElsewhere PROPERTIES
      IMPORTED_LOCATION /path/to/libSomething.a
  )

  # Promote the imported target to global visibility
  set_target_properties(BuiltElsewhere PROPERTIES
      IMPORTED_GLOBAL TRUE
  )

Also note that an imported target can only be promoted if it is defined in exactly the same scope as
the promotion. An imported target defined in a parent or child scope cannot be promoted. The
include() command does not introduce a new directory scope and neither does a find_package() call,
so imported targets defined by files brought into the build that way can be promoted. In fact, this is
the main use case for which the ability to promote imported targets was created.

Promoting an imported target does not promote any aliases already pointing to that target. An alias
to an imported target always has the visibility that the imported target had when the alias was
created. Aliases do not support promotion to global visibility.

  add_library(Original STATIC IMPORTED)

  # Local alias (requires CMake 3.18 or later)
  add_library(LocalAlias ALIAS Original)

  # Promote imported target to global visibility,
  # but LocalAlias remains with local visibility
  set_target_properties(Original PROPERTIES
      IMPORTED_GLOBAL TRUE
  )

  # Global alias (requires CMake 3.11 or later)
  add_library(GlobalAlias ALIAS Original)

In practice, aliases to imported targets should rarely be needed. INTERFACE IMPORTED libraries can
largely achieve the same thing and they work for a wider range of CMake versions. INTERFACE
IMPORTED libraries don’t support reading the underlying properties of the real library target, but they
do carry all the linking and transitive properties.

  add_library(Original STATIC IMPORTED)
  add_library(OtherName INTERFACE IMPORTED Original)
  target_link_libraries(OtherName INTERFACE Original)

An added advantage of INTERFACE IMPORTED libraries is that they can be promoted to global visibility
if required, whereas aliases cannot.

18.4. Recommended Practices
Version 3.0 of CMake brought with it a significant change to the recommended way projects should
manage dependencies and requirements between targets. Instead of specifying most things through
variables which then had to be managed manually by the project, or by directory level commands
that would apply to all targets in a directory and below without much discrimination, each target
gained the ability to carry all the necessary information in its own properties. This shift in focus to
a target-centric model has also led to a family of pseudo target types that facilitate expressing inter-
target relationships more flexibly and accurately.

Developers should become familiar with interface libraries in particular. They open up a range of
techniques for capturing and expressing relationships without needing to create or refer to a
physical file. They can be useful for representing the details of header-only libraries, collections of

resources and many other scenarios and should be strongly preferred over trying to achieve the
same result with variables or directory-level commands alone.

Imported targets are encountered frequently once projects start using externally built packages or
they refer to tools from the file system that are found through Find modules. Developers should be
comfortable using imported targets, but understanding all the ins and outs of how they are defined
is not usually necessary unless writing Find modules or manually creating config files for a
package. Some specific cases are discussed in Chapter 27, Installing where developers may come up
against certain limitations of imported targets, but such scenarios are not very common.

A number of older CMake modules used to provide only variables to refer to imported entities.
Starting with CMake 3.0, these modules are progressively being updated to also provide imported
targets where appropriate. For those situations where a project needs to refer to an external tool or
library, prefer to do so through an imported target if one is available. These typically do a better job
of abstracting away things like platform differences, option-dependent tool selection and so on, but
more importantly the usage requirements are then robustly handled by CMake. If there is a choice
between using an imported library or a variable to refer to the same thing, prefer to use the
imported library wherever possible.

Prefer defining static libraries over object libraries. Static libraries are simpler, have more
complete and robust support from earlier CMake versions and they are well understood by most
developers. Object libraries have their uses, but they are also less flexible than static libraries. In
particular, object libraries cannot be linked at all prior to CMake 3.12 and not robustly before
CMake 3.14. Without such linking, they don’t support transitive dependencies, which forces projects
to manually apply the dependencies themselves. This increases the opportunity for errors and
omissions. It also reduces the encapsulation that a library target would normally provide. Even the
name itself can cause some confusion among developers, since an object library is not a true
library, but rather just a set of uncombined object files, yet developers still sometimes expect it to
behave like a real library. The changes with CMake 3.12 blur that distinction, but the remaining
differences still leave room for unexpected results, as evidenced by the number of queries relating
to object libraries and their transitive behavior on the CMake mailing list and issue tracker.

Avoid using target names that are too generic. Globally visible target names must be unique and
names may clash with targets from other projects when used in a larger hierarchical arrangement.
In addition, consider adding an alias namespace::… target for each target that is not private to the
project (i.e. every target that may end up being installed or packaged). This allows consuming
projects to link to the namespaced target name instead of the real target name, which enables a
consuming project to switch between building the child project themselves or using a pre-built
installed project relatively easily. While this may initially seem like extra work for not much gain, it
is emerging as an expected standard practice among the CMake community, especially for those
projects that take a non-trivial amount of time to build. This pattern is discussed further in Section
27.3, “Installing Exports” and Section 31.1, “Use Project-specific Names”.

Inevitably, at some point it may become desirable to rename or refactor a library, but there may be
external projects which expect the existing library targets to be available to link to. In these
situations, use an interface target to provide an old name for a renamed target so that those
external projects can continue to build and be updated at their convenience. When splitting up a
library, define an interface library with the old target name and have it define link dependencies to
the new split out libraries. For example:

  # Old library previously defined like this:
  add_library(DeepCompute SHARED ...)

Now change DeepCompute to an INTERFACE library that links to the new refactored libraries to preserve
backward compatibility:

  # Now refactored into two separate libraries
  add_library(ComputeAlgoA SHARED ...)
  add_library(ComputeAlgoB SHARED ...)

  # Forwarding interface library keeps old projects working
  add_library(DeepCompute INTERFACE)
  target_link_libraries(DeepCompute INTERFACE
      ComputeAlgoA
      ComputeAlgoB
  )

