Part III: The Bigger Picture
For the lucky few, a project may be independent of anything else and only needs to satisfy mild
quality constraints or perhaps none at all for throw-away experiments. The more likely scenario is
that, at some point, the project needs to move beyond its own isolated existence and interact with
external entities. This occurs in two directions:

Dependencies
   The project may depend on other externally provided files, libraries, executables, packages and
   so on.

Consumers
   Other projects may wish to consume the project in a variety of ways. Some may want to
   incorporate it at the source level, others may expect a pre-built binary package to be available.
   Another possibility is the assumption that the project is installed somewhere on the system.

Making a project available either as a standalone package or for consumption by other projects also
brings an expectation of a certain level of quality. Automated testing is usually a critical part of any
robust software delivery strategy, which means it must be easy to define and execute tests and also
to report on the results.

The CMake suite of tools provides assistance with all of the above. It provides commands that
operate at a lower level for finding individual files, libraries, etc. It also provides features that give
a higher level entry point for dependency management. The CTest framework provides a rich set of
automated testing capabilities, while CPack considerably eases the process of creating packages in
various formats. This part of the book covers these externally focused topics, showing how to get
the most out of what CMake offers while also highlighting common mistakes and pitfalls.

As projects grow in size, so does the complexity of configuring, building and testing for different
scenarios. CMake presets are an important tool for managing this complexity, both for developers
and for things like continuous integration builds. The essentials of how to use presets effectively are
covered in their own dedicated chapter.

Towards the end of this part of the book, two chapters bring the reader full circle back to thinking
about how to organize a project. Doing this well requires an appreciation for both the build level
features and how a project will interact with other projects. With the benefit of the knowledge
gained from the earlier chapters of the book, these two chapters show how to structure and define
a project to be flexible, robust and easier for developers to work with. A variety of techniques are
presented which can significantly improve the overall build performance.

The final chapter of the book covers the special topic of using CMake with Qt projects. It draws on
many of the techniques and features introduced throughout the book and covers Qt-specific
features provided by both CMake and Qt.

