# Front Matter

I* I
I '
. I ■.
'II . I
I I I I , I
• I I
.1. I II

Cryptography Engineering
Design Principles and
Practical Applications
Niels Ferguson
Bruce Schneier
Tadayoshi Kohno
WILEY
Wiley Publishing, Inc.

Cryptography Engineering: Design Principles and Practical Applications
Published by
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
10475 Crosspoint Boulevard
Indianapolis, IN 46256
www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2010 by Niels Ferguson, Bruce Schneier, and Tadayoshi Kohno
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
ISBN: 978-0-470-47424-2
Manufactured in the United States of America
10987654321
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108
of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization
through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Ill River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http: //www.wiley. com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including
without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or
promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work
is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional
services. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. Neither
the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or Web site is
referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the
publisher endorses the information the organization or Web site may provide or recommendations it may make. Further,
readers should be aware that Internet Web sites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this
work was written and when it is read.
For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer Care Department within the
United States at (877) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available
in electronic books.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010920648
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its
affiliates, in the United States and other countries, and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks
are the property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned
in this book.

To Denise, who has made me truly happy
—Niels Ferguson
To Karen; still, after all these years.
—Bruce Schneier
To Taryn, for making everything possible.
— Tadayoshi Kohno

Executive Editor
Carol Long
Project Editor
Tom Dinse
Production Editor
Daniel Scribner
Editorial Director
Robyn B. Siesky
Editorial Manager
Mary Beth Wakefield
Production Manager
Tim Tate
Vice President and Executive
Group Publisher
Richard Swadley
Credits
Vice President and Executive
Publisher
Barry Pruett
Associate Publisher
Jim Minatel
Project Coordinator, Cover
Lynsey Stanford
Proofreader
Publication Services, Inc.
Indexer
Robert Swanson
Cover Image
© DSGpro/istockphoto
Cover Designer
Michael E. Trent
vi

About the Authors
Niels Ferguson has spent his entire career working as a cryptographic
engineer. After studying mathematics in Eindhoven, he worked for DigiCash
analyzing, designing, and implementing advanced electronic payment
systems that protect the privacy of the user. Later he worked as a cryptographic
consultant for Counterpane and MacFergus, analyzing hundreds of systems
and designing dozens. He was part of the team that designed the Twofish block
cipher, performed some of the best initial analysis of AES, and co-designed the
encryption system currently used by WiFi. Since 2004 he works at Microsoft
where he helped design and implement the BitLocker disk encryption system.
He currently works in the Windows cryptography team that is
responsible for the cryptographic implementations in Windows and other Microsoft
products.
Bruce Schneier is an internationally renowned security technologist,
referred to by The Economist as a "security guru." He is the author of eight
books—including the best sellers Beyond Fear: Thinking Sensibly about Security
in an Uncertain World, Secrets and Lies, and Applied Cryptography—as well as
hundreds of articles and essays in national and international publications,
and many more academic papers. His influential newsletter Crypto-Gram,
and his blog Schneier on Security, are read by over 250,000 people. He is a
frequent guest on television and radio, and is regularly quoted in the press
on issues surrounding security and privacy. He has testified before Congress
on multiple occasions, and has served on several government technical
committees. Schneier is the Chief Security Technology Officer of BT.
vii

viii About the Authors
Tadayoshi Kohno (Yoshi) is an assistant professor of computer science and
engineering at the University of Washington. His research focuses on
improving the security and privacy properties of current and future technologies. He
conducted the initial security analysis of the Diebold AccuVote-TS electronic
voting machine source code in 2003, and has since turned his attention to
securing emerging technologies ranging from wireless implantable
pacemakers and defibrillators to cloud computing. He is the recipient of a National
Science Foundation CAREER Award and an Alfred P. Sloan Research
Fellowship. In 2007 he was awarded the MIT Technology Review TR-35 Award for
his work in applied cryptography, recognizing him as one of the world's top
innovators under the age of 35. He received his PhD in computer science from
the University of California at San Diego.
Niels, Bruce, and Yoshi are part of the team that designed the Skein hash
function, one of the competitors in NIST's SHA-3 competition.

Acknowledgments for
Cryptography Engineering
We are deeply indebted to the cryptography and security community at
large. This book would not have been possible without all of their efforts in
advancing the field. This book also reflects our knowledge and experience
as cryptographers, and we are deeply grateful to our peers and mentors for
helping shape our understanding of cryptography.
We thank Jon Callas, Ben Greenstein, Gordon Goetz, Alex Halderman,
John Kelsey, Karl Koscher, Jack Lloyd, Gabriel Maganis, Theresa Portzer,
Jesse Walker, Doug Whiting, Zooko Wilcox-O'Hearn, and Hussein Yapit for
providing invaluable feedback on earlier versions of this book.
Part of this book was developed and refined in an undergraduate
computer security course at the University of Washington. We thank all those
students, teaching assistants, and student mentors for the course. We
especially thank Joshua Barr, Jonathan Beall, Iva Dermendjieva, Lisa Glendenning,
Steven Myhre, Erik Turnquist, and Heather Underwood for providing specific
comments and suggestions on the text.
We thank Melody Kadenko and Julie Svendsen for all their administrative
support throughout this process. We are indebted to Beth Friedman for all her
work copyediting this manuscript. Finally, we thank Carol Long, Tom Dinse,
and the entire Wiley team for encouraging us to prepare this book and helping
us all along the way.
We are also indebted to all the other wonderful people in our lives who
worked silently behind the scenes to make this book possible.
ix

Acknowledgments
for Practical Cryptography
(the 1 st Edition)
This book is based on our collective experience over the many years we have
worked in cryptography. We are heavily indebted to all the people we worked
with. They made our work fun and helped us reach the insights that fill
this book. We would also like to thank our customers, both for providing
the funding that enabled us to continue our cryptography research and for
providing the real-world experiences necessary to write this book.
Certain individuals deserve special mention. Beth Friedman conducted an
invaluable copyediting job, and Denise Dick greatly improved our manuscript
by proofreading it. John Kelsey provided valuable feedback on the
cryptographic contents. And the Internet made our collaboration possible. We would
also like to thank Carol Long and the rest of the team at Wiley for bringing our
ideas to reality.
And finally, we would like to thank all of the programmers in the world who
continue to write cryptographic code and make it available, free of charge, to
the world.
x

Contents at a Glance
Preface to Cryptography Engineering
Preface to Practical Cryptography (the 1 st Edition)
Parti
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Part II
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Part III
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Introduction
The Context of Cryptography
Introduction to Cryptography
Message Security
Block Ciphers
Block Cipher Modes
Hash Functions
Message Authentication Codes
The Secure Channel
Implementation Issues (1)
Key Negotiation
Generating Randomness
Primes
Diffie-Hellman
RSA
xxiii
xxvii

xii Contents at a Glance
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Part IV
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Chapter 21
PartV
Chapter 22
Chapter 23
Introduction to Cryptographic Protocols
Key Negotiation
Implementation Issues (II)
Key Management
The Clock
Key Servers
The Dream of PKI
PKI Reality
PKI Practicalities
Storing Secrets
Miscellaneous
Standards and Patents
Involving Experts
Bibliography
Index
