# Preface to Cryptography Engineering

Preface to Cryptography
Engineering
Most books cover what cryptography is—what current cryptographic designs
are and how existing cryptographic protocols, like SSL/TLS, work. Bruce
Schneier's earlier book, Applied Cryptography, is like this. Such books serve
as invaluable references for anyone working with cryptography. But such
books are also one step removed from the needs of cryptography and security
engineers in practice. Cryptography and security engineers need to know
more than how current cryptographic protocols work; they need to know how
to use cryptography.
To know how to use cryptography, one must learn to think like a
cryptographer. This book is designed to help you achieve that goal. We do this
through immersion. Rather than broadly discuss all the protocols one might
encounter in cryptography, we dive deeply into the design and analysis of
specific, concrete protocols. We walk you—hand-in-hand—through how we
go about designing cryptographic protocols. We share with you the reasons
we make certain design decisions over others, and point out potential pitfalls
along the way.
By learning how to think like a cryptographer, you will also learn how to
be a more intelligent user of cryptography. You will be able to look at existing
cryptography toolkits, understand their core functionality, and know how
to use them. You will also better understand the challenges involved with
cryptography, and how to think about and overcome those challenges.
This book also serves as a gateway to learning about computer security.
Computer security is, in many ways, a superset of cryptography. Both
computer security and cryptography are about designing and evaluating objects
(systems or algorithms) intended to behave in certain ways even in the presence
xxiii

of an adversary. In this book, you will learn how to think about the adversary
in the context of cryptography. Once you know how to think like adversaries,
you can apply that mindset to the security of computer systems in general.
History
This book began with Practical Cryptography by Niels Ferguson and Bruce
Schneier, and evolved with the addition of Tadayoshi Kohno—Yoshi—as
an author. Yoshi is a professor of computer science and engineering at the
University of Washington, and also a past colleague of Niels and Bruce. Yoshi
took Practical Cryptography and revised it to be suitable for classroom use and
self-study, while staying true to the goals and themes of Niels's and Bruce's
original book.
Example Syllabi
There are numerous ways to read this book. You can use it as a self-study
guide for applied cryptographic engineering, or you can use it in a course. A
quarter- or semester-long course on computer security might use this book as
the foundation for a 6-week intensive unit on cryptography. This book could
also serve as the foundation for a full quarter- or semester-long course on
cryptography, augmented with additional advanced material if time allows.
To facilitate classroom use, we present several possible syllabi below.
The following syllabus is appropriate for a 6-week intensive unit on
cryptography. For this 6-week unit, we assume that the contents of Chapter 1 are
discussed separately, in the broader context of computer security in general.
■ Week 1: Chapters 2,3, and 4;
■ Week 2: Chapters 5, 6, and 7;
- Week 3: Chapters 8,9, and 10;
- Week 4: Chapters 11,12, and 13;
- Week 5: Chapters 14,15,16, and 17;
- Week 6: Chapters 18,19, 20, and 21.
The following syllabus is for a 10-week quarter on cryptography engineering.
■ Week 1: Chapters 1 and 2;
■ Week 2: Chapters 3 and 4;

■ Week 3: Chapters 5 and 6;
■ Week 4: Chapters 7 and 8;
■ Week 5: Chapters 9 and 10;
■ Week 6: Chapters 11 and 12;
■ Week 7: Chapters 13 and 14;
- Week 8: Chapters 15,16, and 17;
- Week 9: Chapters 18,19, 20;
- Week 10: Chapter 21.
The following syllabus is appropriate for schools with 12-week semesters. It
can also be augmented with advanced materials in cryptography or computer
security for longer semesters.
■ Week 1: Chapters 1 and 2;
■ Week 2: Chapters 3 and 4;
■ Week 3: Chapters 5 and 6;
■ Week 4: Chapter 7;
■ Week 5: Chapters 8 and 9;
■ Week 6: Chapters 9 (continued) and 10;
■ Week 7: Chapters 11 and 12;
■ Week 8: Chapters 13 and 14;
■ Week 9: Chapters 15 and 16;
- Week 10: Chapters 17 and 18;
- Week 11: Chapters 19 and 20;
- Week 12: Chapter 21.
This book has several types of exercises, and we encourage readers to
complete as many of these exercises as possible. There are traditional exercises
designed to test your understanding of the technical properties of
cryptography. However, since our goal is to help you learn how to think about
cryptography in real systems, we have also introduced a set of non-traditional
exercises (see Section 1.12). Cryptography doesn't exist in isolation; rather,
cryptography is only part of a larger ecosystem consisting of other hardware

and software systems, people, economics, ethics, cultural differences, politics,
law, and so on. Our non-traditional exercises are explicitly designed to force
you to think about cryptography in the context of real systems and the
surrounding ecosystem. These exercises will provide you with an opportunity to
directly apply the contents of this book as thought exercises to real systems.
Moreover, by weaving these exercises together throughout this book, you will
be able to see your knowledge grow as you progress from chapter to chapter.
Additional Information
While we strove to make this book as error-free as possible, errors have
undoubtedly crept in. We maintain an online errata list for this book. The
procedure for using this errata list is below.
■ Before reading this book, go to http: //www. schneier.com/ce.html and
download the current list of corrections.
■ If you find an error in the book, please check to see if it is already on the
list.
■ If it is not on the list, please alert US at cryptographyengineering
@schneier. com. We will add the error to the list.
We wish you a wonderful journey through cryptography engineering.
Cryptography is a wonderful and fascinating topic. We hope you learn a great
deal from this book, and come to enjoy cryptography engineering as much as
we do.
October 2009 Niels Ferguson Bruce Schneier
Redmond, Washington Minneapolis, Minnesota
USA USA
niels@ferguson.net schneier@schneier.com
Tadayoshi Kohno
Seattle, Washington
USA
yoshi@cs.Washington.edu
