# Preface to Practical Cryptography (the 1st Edition)

Preface to Practical
Cryptography (the 1 st Edition)
In the past decade, cryptography has done more to damage the security
of digital systems than it has to enhance it. Cryptography burst onto the
world stage in the early 1990s as the securer of the Internet. Some saw
cryptography as a great technological equalizer, a mathematical tool that
would put the lowliest privacy-seeking individual on the same footing as
the greatest national intelligence agencies. Some saw it as the weapon that
would bring about the downfall of nations when governments lost the ability
to police people in cyberspace. Others saw it as the perfect and terrifying
tool of drug dealers, terrorists, and child pornographers, who would be able
to communicate in perfect secrecy. Even those with more realistic attitudes
imagined cryptography as a technology that would enable global commerce
in this new online world.
Ten years later, none of this has come to pass. Despite the prevalence of
cryptography, the Internet's national borders are more apparent than ever.
The ability to detect and eavesdrop on criminal communications has more
to do with politics and human resources than mathematics. Individuals still
don't stand a chance against powerful and well-funded government agencies.
And the rise of global commerce had nothing to do with the prevalence of
cryptography.
For the most part, cryptography has done little more than give Internet users
a false sense of security by promising security but not delivering it. And that's
not good for anyone except the attackers.
The reasons for this have less to do with cryptography as a mathematical
science, and much more to do with cryptography as an engineering discipline.
We have developed, implemented, and fielded cryptographic systems over the
xxvii

past decade. What we've been less effective at is converting the mathematical
promise of cryptographic security into a reality of security. As it turns out, this
is the hard part.
Too many engineers consider cryptography to be a sort of magic security
dust that they can sprinkle over their hardware or software, and which will
imbue those products with the mythical property of "security." Too many
consumers read product claims like "encrypted" and believe in that same
magic security dust. Reviewers are no better, comparing things like key lengths
and on that basis, pronouncing one product to be more secure than another.
Security is only as strong as the weakest link, and the mathematics of
cryptography is almost never the weakest link. The fundamentals of cryptography
are important, but far more important is how those fundamentals are
implemented and used. Arguing about whether a key should be 112 bits or 128
bits long is rather like pounding a huge stake into the ground and hoping the
attacker runs right into it. You can argue whether the stake should be a mile
or a mile-and-a-half high, but the attacker is simply going to walk around the
stake. Security is a broad stockade: it's the things around the cryptography
that make the cryptography effective.
The cryptographic books of the last decade have contributed to that aura of
magic. Book after book extolled the virtues of, say, 112-bit triple-DES without
saying much about how its keys should be generated or used. Book after book
presented complicated protocols for this or that without any mention of the
business and social constraints within which those protocols would have to
work. Book after book explained cryptography as a pure mathematical ideal,
unsullied by real-world constraints and realities. But it's exactly those real-
world constraints and realities that mean the difference between the promise
of cryptographic magic and the reality of digital security.
Practical Cryptography is also a book about cryptography, but it's a book
about sullied cryptography. Our goal is to explicitly describe the real-world
constraints and realities of cryptography, and to talk about how to engineer
secure cryptographic systems. In some ways, this book is a sequel to Bruce
Schneier's first book, Applied Cryptography, which was first published ten years
ago. But while Applied Cryptography gives a broad overview of cryptography
and the myriad possibilities cryptography can offer, this book is narrow and
focused. We don't give you dozens of choices; we give you one option and
tell you how to implement it correctly. Applied Cryptography displays the
wondrous possibilities of cryptography as a mathematical science—what is
possible and what is attainable; Practical Cryptography gives concrete advice to
people who design and implement cryptographic systems.
Practical Cryptography is our attempt to bridge the gap between the promise
of cryptography and the reality of cryptography. It's our attempt to teach
engineers how to use cryptography to increase security.

We're qualified to write this book because we're both seasoned
cryptographers. Bruce is well known from his books Applied Cryptography and Secrets
and Lies, and from his newsletter "Crypto-Gram." Niels Ferguson cut his
cryptographic teeth building cryptographic payment systems at the CWI (Dutch
National Research Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science) in
Amsterdam, and later at a Dutch company called DigiCash. Bruce designed the
Blowfish encryption algorithm, and both of us were on the team that designed
Twofish. Niels's research led to the first example of the current generation of
efficient anonymous payment protocols. Our combined list of academic papers
runs into three digits.
More importantly, we both have extensive experience in designing and
building cryptographic systems. From 1991 to 1999, Bruce's consulting
company Counterpane Systems provided design and analysis services to some
of the largest computer and financial companies in the world. More recently,
Counterpane Internet Security, Inc., has provided Managed Security
Monitoring services to large corporations and government agencies worldwide. Niels
also worked at Counterpane before founding his own consulting company,
MacFergus. We've seen cryptography as it lives and breathes in the real world,
as it flounders against the realities of engineering or even worse, against the
realities of business. We're qualified to write this book because we've had to
write it again and again for our consulting clients.
How to Read this Book
Practical Cryptography is more a narrative than a reference. It follows the
design of a cryptographic system from the specific algorithm choices,
outwards through concentric rings to the infrastructure required to make it work.
We discuss a single cryptographic problem—one of establishing a means for
two people to communicate securely—that's at the heart of almost every
cryptographic application. By focusing on one problem and one design philosophy
for solving that problem, it is our belief that we can teach more about the
realities of cryptographic engineering.
We think cryptography is just about the most fun you can have with
mathematics. We've tried to imbue this book with that feeling of fun, and we
hope you enjoy the results. Thanks for coming along on our ride.
Niels Ferguson
Bruce Schneier
January 2003
