# 3 Block Ciphers

CHAPTER

Block Ciphers
Block ciphers are one of the fundamental building blocks for cryptographic
systems. There is a lot of literature on block ciphers, and they are among the
best-understood parts of cryptography. They are, however, building blocks.
For most applications, you probably don't want to use a block cipher directly.
Instead, you'll want to use a block cipher in what is called a "mode of
operation," which we'll discuss in subsequent chapters. This chapter is designed
to give you a firmer understanding of block ciphers: what they are, how
cryptographers view them, and how to choose between different options.
3.1 What Is a Block Cipher?
A block cipher is an encryption function for fixed-size blocks of data. The current
generation of block ciphers has a block size of 128 bits (16 bytes). These block
ciphers encrypt a 128-bit plaintext and generate a 128-bit ciphertext as the
result. The block cipher is reversible; there is a decryption function that takes
the 128-bit ciphertext and decrypts it to the original 128-bit plaintext. The
plaintext and ciphertext are always the same size, and we call this the block
size of the block cipher.
To encrypt with a block cipher, we need a secret key. Without a secret key,
there is no way to hide the message. Like the plaintext and ciphertext, the key
is also a string of bits. Common key sizes are 128 and 256 bits. We often write
E{K, p) or EK(p) for the encryption of plaintext p with key K and D{K, c) or DK(c)
for the decryption of ciphertext c with key K.

Block ciphers are used for many purposes, most notably to encrypt
information. For security purposes, however, one rarely uses a block cipher
directly. Instead, one should use a block cipher mode, which we will discuss in
Chapter 4.
When using block ciphers, as with any encryption task, we always follow
Kerckhoffs' principle and assume that the algorithms for encryption and
decryption are publicly known. Some people have a hard time accepting this,
and they want to keep the algorithms secret. Don't ever trust a secret block
cipher (or any other secret cryptographic primitive).
It is sometimes useful to look at a block cipher as a very big key-dependent
table. For any fixed key, you could compute a lookup table that maps the
plaintext to the ciphertext. This table would be huge. For a block cipher with
32-bit block size, the table would be 16 GB; for a 64-bit block size, it would be
150 million TB; and for a 128-bit block size it would be 5 • 1039 bytes, a number
so large there is not even a proper name for it. Of course, it is not practical
to build such a table in reality, but this is a useful conceptual model. We also
know that the block cipher is reversible. In other words, no two entries of the
table are the same, or else the decryption function could not possibly decrypt
the ciphertext to a unique plaintext. This big table will therefore contain every
possible ciphertext value exactly once. This is what mathematicians call a
permutation: the table is merely a list of all the possible elements where the
order has been rearranged. A block cipher with a block size of k bits specifies
a permutation on A>bit values for each of the key values.
As a point of clarification, since it is often confused, a block cipher does not
permute the bits of the input plaintext. Rather, it takes all the 2k possible /c-bit
inputs and maps each to a unique /c-bit output. As a toy example, if k = 8, an
input 00000001 might encrypt to 0100000 under a given key but it might also
encrypt to 11011110 under a different key, depending on the design of the
block cipher.
3.2 Types of Attack
Given the definition of a block cipher, the definition of a secure block cipher
seems simple enough: it is a block cipher that keeps the plaintext secret.
Although this certainly is one of the requirements, it is not sufficient. This
definition only requires that the block cipher be secure against ciphertext-only
attacks, in which the attacker gets to see only the ciphertext of a message. There
are a few published attacks of this type [74, 121], but they are rare against
well-known and established block ciphers. Most published attacks are of the
chosen-plaintext type. (See Section 2.6 for an overview of attack types.) All of

these attack types apply to block ciphers, and there are a few more that are
specific to block ciphers.
The first one is the related-key attack. First introduced by Eli Biham in
1993 [13], a related-key attack assumes that the attacker has access to several
encryption functions. These functions all have an unknown key, but their keys
have a relationship that the attacker knows. This sounds very strange, but it
turns out that this type of attack is useful against real systems [70]. There are
real-world systems that use different keys with a known relationship. At least
one proprietary system changes the key for every message by incrementing the
key by one. Consecutive messages are therefore encrypted with consecutively
numbered keys. It turns out that key relationships like this can be used to
attack some block ciphers.
There are even more esoteric attack types. When we designed the Twofish
block cipher (Section 3.5.4), we introduced the concept of a chosen-key attack,
in which the attacker specifies some part of the key and then performs a
related-key attack on the rest of the key [115].l
Why would we even consider far-fetched attack types like related-key
attacks and chosen-key attacks? We have several reasons. First, we have seen
actual systems in which a related-key attack on the block cipher was possible,
so these attacks are not that far-fetched at all. In fact, we have even seen
standardized protocols that required implementations to key a block cipher
with two related keys—one key K that is chosen at random and another key
K' that is equal to K plus a fixed constant.
Second, block ciphers are very useful building blocks. But, as building blocks,
they tend to get abused in every imaginable way. One standard technique
of constructing a hash function from a block cipher is the Davies-Meyer
construction [128]. In a Davies-Meyer hash function, the attacker suddenly
gets to choose the key of the block cipher, which allows related-key and
chosen-key attacks. We talk about hash functions in Chapter 5, but won't go
into the details of the Davies-Meyer construction in this book. It is safe to say,
however, that any definition of block-cipher security that ignores these attack
types, or any other attack type, is incomplete.
The block cipher is a module that should have a simple interface. The
simplest interface is to ensure that it has all the properties that anyone could
reasonably expect the block cipher to have. Allowing imperfections in the block
cipher just adds a lot of complexity, in the form of cross-dependencies, to any
system using the cipher. In short, we want to over-engineer our block ciphers
for security. The challenge is to define the properties that one reasonably
expects from a block cipher.
1 Later analysis showed that this attack does not work on Twofish [50], but it might be successful
against other block ciphers.

3.3 The Ideal Block Cipher
It is actually very hard to define what a block cipher is. It is something
that you know when you see it—but can't quite define. The theoretical
community has crystallized some of these properties into specific definitions,
like pseudorandomness and super-pseudorandomness [6, 86, 94]. The block
cipher community itself, however, uses a much broader definition, covering
things like weak keys and chosen-key attacks. Here we take the approach of
trying to help you understand what the block cipher primitives community
believes a block cipher to be. We call this an "ideal" block cipher.
What would the ideal block cipher look like? It should be a random
permutation. We should be more precise: for each key value, we want the
block cipher to be a random permutation, and the different permutations for
the different key values should be chosen independently. As we mentioned in
Section 3.1, you can think of a 128-bit block cipher (a single permutation on
128-bit values) as a huge lookup table of 2128 elements of 128 bits each. The
ideal block cipher consists of one of these tables for each key value, with each
table chosen randomly from the set of all possible permutations.
Strictly speaking, this definition of the ideal block cipher is incomplete, as
the exact choice of the tables has not been specified. As soon as we specify the
tables, however, the ideal cipher is fixed and no longer random. To formalize
the definition, we cannot talk about a single ideal block cipher, but have to treat
the ideal block cipher as a uniform probability distribution over the set of all
possible block ciphers. Any time that you use the ideal block cipher, you will
have to talk in terms of probabilities. This is a mathematician's delight, but the
added complexity would make our explanations far more complicated—so
we will keep the informal but simpler concept of a randomly chosen block
cipher. We also stress that an ideal block cipher is not something that can be
obtained in practice; it is an abstract concept that we use when discussing
security.
3.4 Definition of Block Cipher Security
As noted above, there are formal definitions of security for block ciphers in
the literature. For our purposes we can use a simpler but informal definition.
Definition 1 A secure block cipher is one for which no attack exists.
This is a bit of a tautology. So now we have to define an attack on a block
cipher.
Definition 2 An attack on a block cipher is a non-generic method of distinguishing
the block cipher from an ideal block cipher.

What do we mean by distinguishing a block cipher from an ideal block
cipher? Given a block cipher X, we compare it to an ideal block cipher with
the same block size and the same key size. A distinguisher is an algorithm that
is given a black-box function that computes either the block cipher X or an
ideal block cipher. (A black-box function is a function that can be evaluated,
but the distinguisher algorithm does not know the internal workings of the
function in the black box.) Both the encryption and decryption functions are
available, and the distinguisher algorithm is free to choose any key for each
of the encryptions and decryptions it performs. The distinguished task is to
figure out whether the black-box function implements the block cipher X or
the ideal cipher. It doesn't have to be a perfect distinguisher, as long as it
provides the correct answer significantly more often than the wrong answer.
There are, of course, generic (and trivial) solutions to this. We could encrypt
the plaintext 0 with the key 0 and see if the result matches what we expect
to get from block cipher X. This is a distinguisher, but to make it an attack,
the distinguisher has to be non-generic. This is where it becomes difficult
to define block cipher security. We cannot formalize the notion of "generic"
and "non-generic." It is a bit like obscenity: we know it when we see it.2
A distinguisher is generic if we can find a similar distinguisher for almost
any block cipher. In the above case, the distinguisher is generic because we
can construct one just like it for any block cipher. This "attack" would even
allow us to distinguish between two ideal block ciphers. Of course, there's no
practical reason for wanting to distinguish between two ideal block ciphers.
Rather, this attack is generic because we could use it to distinguish between
two ideal block ciphers if we wanted to. The attack doesn't exploit any internal
property of the block cipher itself.
We can also create a more advanced generic distinguisher. Encrypt the
plaintext 0 with all keys in the range 1,...,232 and count how often each
value for the first 32 bits of the ciphertext occurs. Suppose we find that for a
cipher X the value t occurs 5 times instead of the expected one time. This is a
property that is unlikely to hold for the ideal cipher, and would allow us to
distinguish X from an ideal cipher. This is still a generic distinguisher, as we
can easily construct something similar for any cipher X. (It is in fact extremely
unlikely that a cipher does not have a suitable value for t.) This attack is generic
since, the way it is described, it is applicable to all block ciphers and doesn't
exploit a specific weakness of X. Such a distinguisher would even allow us to
distinguish between two ideal ciphers.
Things become more complicated if we design a distinguisher as follows:
We make a list of 1000 different statistics that we can compute about a cipher.
We compute each of these for cipher X, and build the distinguisher from the
2In 1964, U.S. Supreme Court judge Potter Stewart used these words to define obscenity: "I shall
not today attempt further to define the kinds of material... but I know it when I see it."

statistic that gives the most significant result. We expect to find a statistic
with a significance level of about 1 in 1000. We can of course apply the same
technique to find distinguishers for any particular cipher, so this is a generic
attack, but the generic nature now depends not only on the distinguisher itself,
but also on how the distinguisher was found. That's why nobody has been
able to formalize a definition of generic attacks and block cipher security. We
would love to give you a clean definition of block cipher security, but the
cryptographic community does not yet know enough about cryptography to
be able to do this in full generality. Instead, existing formal definitions often
limit the capability of an attacker. For example, existing formal definitions
might not allow chosen-key attacks. While these assumptions can hold in
some cases, we try to build block ciphers that are much stronger.
We must not forget to limit the amount of computation allowed in the
distinguisher. We could have done this explicitly in the definition, but that
would have complicated it even further. If the block cipher has an explicit
security level of n bits, then a successful distinguisher should be more efficient
than an exhaustive search on n-bit values. If no explicit design strength is
given, the design strength equals the key size. This formulation is rather
roundabout for a reason. It is tempting to just say that the distinguisher
has to work in less than 2" steps. This is certainly true, but some types of
distinguishers give you only a probabilistic result that is more like a partial
key search. The attack could have a trade-off between the amount of work and
the probability of distinguishing the cipher from the ideal cipher. For example:
an exhaustive search of half the key space requires 2n~l work and provides
the right answer 75% of the time. (If the attacker finds the key, he knows
the answer. If he doesn't find the key, he still has a 50% chance of guessing
right simply by guessing at random. Overall, his chances of getting the right
answer are therefore 0.5 + 0.5 • 0.5 = 0.75.) By comparing the distinguisher to
such partial key-space searches, we take this natural trade-off into account,
and stop such partial key searches from being classified as an attack.
Our definition of block cipher security covers all possible forms of attack.
Ciphertext only, known plaintext, (adaptively) chosen plaintext, related key,
and all other types of attack all implement a non-generic distinguisher. That
is why we will use this informal definition in this book. It also captures the
essence of professional paranoia that we talked about in Chapter 1; we want
to capture anything that could possibly be considered a non-generic attack.
So why spend multiple pages on defining what a secure block cipher is? This
definition is very important because it defines a simple and clean interface
between the block cipher and the rest of the system. This sort of modularization
is a hallmark of good design. In security systems, where complexity is one of
our main enemies, good modularization is even more important than in most
other areas. Once a block cipher satisfies our security definition, you can treat
it as if it were an ideal cipher. After all, if it does not behave as an ideal cipher

in the system, then you have found a distinguisher for the cipher, which means
the cipher is not secure according to our definition. If you use a secure block
cipher, you no longer have to remember any particularities or imperfections;
the cipher will have all the properties that you expect a block cipher to have.
This makes the design of larger systems easier.
Of course, some ciphers that don't meet our stringent definition might be
"good enough" in practice or for a specific application as currently defined,
but why take the risk? Even if the weaknesses of a particular block cipher
under our definition are highly theoretical—such as requiring an unrealistic
amount of work to exploit and thus not being very vulnerable to compromise
in practice—a block cipher that meets our definition is much more attractive.
3.4.1 Parity of a Permutation
Unfortunately, we have one more complication. As we discussed in Section 3.1,
encryption under a single key corresponds to a lookup in a permutation table.
Think about constructing this table in two steps. First you initialize the table
with the identity mapping by giving the element at index i the value i. Then you
create the permutation that you want by repeatedly swapping two elements
in the table. It turns out there are two types of permutations: those that can
be constructed from an even number of swaps (called the even permutations)
and those that can be constructed from an odd number of swaps (called the
odd permutations). It should not surprise you that half of all permutations are
even, and the other half are odd.
Most modern block ciphers have a 128-bit block size, but they operate on
32-bit words. They build the encryption function from many 32-bit operations.
This has proved to be a very successful method, but it has one side effect. It
is rather hard to build an odd permutation from small operations; as a result,
virtually all block ciphers only generate even permutations.
This gives us a simple distinguisher for nearly any block cipher, one which
we call the parity attack. For a given key, extract the permutation by encrypting
all possible plaintexts. If the permutation is odd, we know that we have
an ideal block cipher, because the real block cipher never generates an odd
permutation. If the permutation is even, we claim to have a real block cipher.
This distinguisher will be right 75% of the time. It will produce the wrong
answer only if it is given an ideal cipher that produces an even permutation.
The success rate can be improved by repeating the work for other key values.
This attack has no practical significance whatsoever. To find the parity of
a permutation, you have to compute all but one of the plaintext/ciphertext
pairs of the encryption function. (The last one is trivial to deduce: the sole
remaining plaintext maps to the sole remaining ciphertext.) You should
never allow that many plaintext/ciphertext queries to a block cipher in a real
system, because other types of attacks start to hurt much sooner. In particular,

once the attacker knows most of the plaintext/ciphertext pairs, he no longer
needs a key to decrypt the message, but can simply use a lookup table created
from those pairs.
We could declare the parity attack to be generic by definition, but that seems
disingenuous, since the even parity of block ciphers is a peculiar artifact of
their designs. Rather, we prefer to change the definition of the ideal block
cipher, and limit it to randomly chosen even permutations.
Definition 3 An ideal block cipher implements an independently chosen random
even permutation for each of the key values.
It is a pity to complicate our "ideal" cipher in this way, but the only
alternative is to disqualify nearly all known block ciphers. For the overwhelming
majority of applications, the restriction to even permutations is insignificant.
As long as we never allow all plaintext/ciphertext pairs to be computed, even
and odd permutations are indistinguishable.
If you ever have a block cipher that can generate odd permutations, you
should revert to the original definition of the ideal cipher. In practice, parity
attacks have more effect on the formal definition of security than on real-world
systems, so you can probably forget about this whole issue of parity.
This discussion also serves as another example of how cryptographers think.
It is more important to exhibit professional paranoia and consider a superset
of realistic attacks, and then pare away the unrealistic ones, than to start with
only realistic attacks and try to find new ones.
3.5 Real Block Ciphers
There are hundreds of block ciphers that have been proposed over the years.
It is very easy to design a new block cipher. It is fiendishly hard to design a
good new block cipher. We're not merely talking about security; that a block
cipher has to be secure goes without saying. Building a secure block cipher is a
challenge unto itself. But it becomes even more difficult to create a block cipher
that is efficient in a wide variety of different applications. (We previously said
that we'd give up performance for security. We would. But when possible, we
still prefer both.)
Designing block ciphers can be fun and educational, but one shouldn't use
an unknown cipher in a real system. The cryptographic community doesn't
trust a cipher until it has been reviewed thoroughly by other experts. A basic
prerequisite is that the cipher has been published, but this is not enough. There
are so many ciphers out there that few get any effective peer review. You are
much better off using one of the well-known ciphers that already has been
reviewed for you.
Virtually all block ciphers consist of several repetitions of a weak block
cipher, known as a round. Several of these weak rounds in sequence make a

strong block cipher. This structure is easy to design and implement, and is also
a great help in the analysis. Most attacks on block ciphers begin by attacking
versions with a reduced number of rounds. As the attacks improve, more and
more rounds can be attacked.
We will discuss several block ciphers in more detail, but we won't define
them exhaustively. The full specifications can be found in the references or
on the Internet. We will instead concentrate on the overall structure and the
properties of each cipher.
3.5.1 DES
The venerable workhorse of cryptography, the Data Encryption Standard
(DES) [96] has finally outlived its usefulness. Its restricted key size of 56 bits
and small block size of 64 bits make it unsuitable for today's fast computers
and large amounts of data. It survives in the form of 3DES [99], which is a
block cipher built from three DES encryptions in sequence—encrypt with DES
with one 56-bit key, decrypt with a second 56-bit key, and then encrypt again
either with the first key or a third 56-bit key. This solves the most immediate
problem of the small key size, but there is no known fix for the small block
size. DES is not a particularly fast cipher by current standards, and 3DES is
one-third the speed of DES. You will still find DES in many systems, but we
do not recommend using either DES or 3DES in new designs. It is, however, a
classic design worth studying in its own right.
Figure 3.1 gives an overview of a single round of DES. This is a line diagram
of the DES computations; you will commonly find diagrams like this in
cryptographic literature. Each box computes a particular function, and the
lines show which value is used where. There are a few standard conventions.
The xor or exclusive-or operation, sometimes called bitwise addition or
addition without carry, is shown in formulas as a © operator and in figures as
a large version of the © operator. You might also find drawings that include
integer additions, which often are drawn to look like the ffl operator.
®
Bit shuffle K^KwH Expand
F\
Figure 3.1: Structure of a single round of DES

DES has a 64-bit plaintext, which is split into two 32-bit halves L and
R. This splitting is done by rearranging the bits in a semi-ordered fashion.
Nobody seems to know why the designers bothered to rearrange the bits of
the plaintext—it has no cryptographic effect—but that's how DES is defined.
A similar swapping of bits is implemented at the end of the encryption to
create the 64-bit ciphertext from the two halves L and R.
DES consists of 16 rounds numbered 1 through 16. Each round i uses a
separate 48-bit round key K{. Each round key is formed by selecting 48 bits
from the 56-bit key, and this selection is different for each round key.3 The
algorithm that derives these round keys from the main block cipher key is
called the key schedule.
Round / transforms the (L, R) pair into a new (L, R) pair under control of a
round key K,. Most of the work is done by the round function F, shown in the
dashed box. As shown in the figure, the R value is first processed by an expand
function, which duplicates a number of bits to produce 48 bits of output from
the 32-bit input. The 48-bit result is xoRed with the 48-bit round key JKf. The
result of this is used in the S-box tables. An S-box (the term derives from
substitution box) is basically just a lookup table that is publicly known. As you cannot
build a lookup table with 48 input bits, the S-boxes consist of eight small lookup
tables, each of which maps 6 bits to 4 bits. This brings the result size back to 32
bits. These 32 bits are then swapped around by the bit shuffle function before
being xoRed into the left value L. Finally, the values of L and R are swapped.
This entire computation is repeated 16 times for a single DES encryption.
The basic structure of DES is called the Feistel construction [47]. It is a really
elegant idea. Each round consists of xoidng L with F(K„ R) for some function F,
and then swapping L and R. The beauty of the construction is that decryption
requires exactly the same set of operations as encryption. You need to swap
L and R, and you need to xor L with F(KifR). This makes it much easier to
implement the encryption and decryption functions together. It also means
that you only have to analyze one of the two functions, as they are almost
identical. A final trick used in most Feistel ciphers is to leave out the swap
after the last round, which makes the encryption and decryption functions
identical except for the order of the round keys. This is particularly nice for
hardware implementations, as they can use the same circuit to compute both
encryptions and decryptions.
The different parts of the DES cipher have different functions. The Feistel
structure makes the cipher design simpler and ensures that the two halves L
and R are mixed together. XoRing the key material ensures that the key and
data are mixed, which is the whole point of a cipher. The S-boxes provide
nonlinearity. Without them, the cipher could be written as a bunch of binary
additions, which would allow a very easy mathematical attack based on linear
3There is some structure to this selection, which you can find in the DES specifications [96].

algebra. Finally, the combination of the S-box, expand, and bit shuffle functions
provide diffusion. They ensure that if one bit is changed in the input of F, more
than one bit is changed in the output. In the next round there will be more bit
changes, and even more in the round after that, etc. Without good diffusion, a
small change in the plaintext would lead to a small change in the ciphertext,
which would be very easy to detect.
DES has a number of properties that disqualify it according to our security
definition. Each of the round keys consists purely of some of the bits selected
from the cipher key. If the cipher key is 0, then all the round keys are 0 as
well. In particular, all the round keys are identical. Remember that the only
difference between encryption and decryption is the order of the round keys.
But all round keys are zero here. So encryption with the 0 key is the same
function as decryption with the 0 key. This is a very easy property to detect,
and as an ideal block cipher does not have this property, it leads to an easy
and efficient distinguishing attack.4
DES also has a complementation property that ensures that
E(KfP) = Wy)
for all keys K and plaintexts P, where X is the value obtained by complementing
all the bits in X. In other words, if you encrypt the complement of the plaintext
with the complement of the key, you get the complement of the (original)
ciphertext.
This is rather easy to see. Look at the figure and think about what happens
if you flip all the bits in L, R, and X,. The expand function merely copies bits
around, so all the output bits are also flipped. The xor with the key K, has
both inputs flipped, so the output remains the same. The input to the S-boxes
remains the same, the output of the S-boxes remains the same, so the final xor
has one input that is flipped and one input that is the same. The new L value,
soon to be swapped to the R position, is therefore also flipped. In other words,
if you complement L and R at the beginning of the round and complement K,
as well, then the output is the complement of what you had originally. This
property passes through the entire cipher.
The ideal block cipher would not have this curious property. More
importantly, this particular property can lead to attacks on systems that use DES.
In short, DES does not pass muster anymore. The above properties disqualify
DES according to our security definition. But even ignoring the properties
above, the DES key length is wholly inadequate. There have already been
several successful attempts to find a DES key by simple exhaustive search [44].
3DES has a larger key, but it inherits both the weak keys and the
complementation property from DES, each of which is enough to disqualify the
4There are three other keys that have this property; together, they are called the weak keys of
DES.

cipher by our standards. It is also severely limited by its 64-bit block size,
which imposes severe restrictions on the amount of data we can encrypt with
a single key. (See Section 4.8 for details.) Sometimes you have to use 3DES in a
design for legacy reasons, but be very careful with it because of its small block
size and because it does not behave like an ideal block cipher.
3.5.2 AES
The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) is the U.S. government standard
created to replace DES. Instead of designing or commissioning a cipher, the U.S.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) asked for proposals
from the cryptographic community. A total of 15 proposals were submitted
[98]. Five ciphers were selected as finalists [100], after which Rijndael was
selected to become AES.5 AES became a standard in 2001.
AES uses a different structure than DES. It is not a Feistel cipher. Figure 3.2
shows a single round of AES. The subsequent rounds are similar. The plaintext
comes in as 16 bytes (128 bits) at the very top. The first operation is to xor the
plaintext with 16 bytes of round key. This is shown by the © operators; the key
bytes come into the side of the xors. Each of the 16 bytes is then used as an
index into an S-box table that maps 8-bit inputs to 8-bit outputs. The S-boxes
are all identical. The bytes are then rearranged in a specific order that looks
a bit messy but has a simple structure. Finally, the bytes are mixed in groups
of four using a linear mixing function. The term linear just means that each
output bit of the mixing function is the xor of several of the input bits.
¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥
Figure 3.2: Structure of a single round of AES
5There has been some confusion about the correct pronunciation of "Rijndael." Don't worry; it's
hard to pronounce unless you speak Dutch, so just relax and pronounce it any way you like, or
just call it "AES."

This completes a single round. A full encryption consists of 10-14 rounds,
depending on the size of the key. AES is defined for 128-, 192-, and 256-bit
keys, and uses 10 rounds for 128-bit keys, 12 rounds for 192-bit keys, and 14
rounds for 256-bit keys. Like DES, there is a key schedule that generates the
necessary round keys, but the key schedule uses a very different structure.
The AES structure has advantages and disadvantages. Each step consists
of a number of operations that can be performed in parallel. This parallelism
makes high-speed implementations easy. On the other hand, the decryption
operation is significantly different from the encryption operation. You need
the inverse lookup table of the S-box, and the inverse mixing operation is
different from the original mixing operation.
We can recognize some of the same functional blocks as in DES. The xors
add key material to the data, the S-boxes provide nonlinearity, and the byte
shuffle and mixing functions provide diffusion. AES is a very clean design
with clearly separated tasks for each part of the cipher.
AES has always been a fairly aggressively designed cipher. In the original
presentation, the AES designers showed an attack on 6 rounds. This means
that the designers knew of an attack if AES was defined to have only 6 rounds.
The authors therefore chose 10-14 rounds for the full cipher, depending on
the key size [27].
During the AES selection process, the attacks were improved to handle
7 rounds for 128-bit keys, 8 rounds for 192-bit keys, and 9 rounds for 256-
bit keys [49]. This still left a 3 to 5 round security margin. From a different
perspective: for 128-bit keys, the best attack we knew when Rijndael was
selected as AES covered 70% of the cipher. In other words, the selection of
Rijndael as AES relied on the assumption that future attacks would not give
large improvements.
Will AES stand the test of time? It is, as always, impossible to predict the
future, but sometimes it helps to look at the past. Until recently, the best-
analyzed ciphers were DES, FEAL, and IDEA. In all cases, the attacks were
significantly improved many years after the initial publication. Since then, the
field has progressed, but it still takes a leap of faith to think we know it all and
that no significant improvements in attacks will be found.
In fact, at the time of this writing we are starting to see some pretty amazing
breakthroughs in the cryptanalysis of AES [14, 15, 16]. One attack can break
the full 12 rounds of AES with 192-bit keys using four related keys and 2176
operations, and another attack can break the full 14 rounds of AES with 256-bit
keys using four related keys and 2119 operations [15]. Another attack can break
10 of the 14 rounds of AES with 256-bit keys using two related keys and only
245 operations [14].
These are huge results. They mean we now know AES does not meet our
definition of security for a block cipher. The attacks against the full 192- and
256-bit versions of AES are theoretical—not practical—so we aren't ready to

lose any sleep over them just yet. But they are attacks under our definition, so
192- and 256-bit AES have theoretically been broken. And even better attacks
might be discovered over time.
The community is still trying to come to grips with what these results mean
for the use of AES in a real system. Given all that we know today, using
AES still seems like a reasonable decision. It is the U.S. government standard,
which means a great deal. Using the standard avoids a number of discussions
and problems. But it is important to realize it is still possible that future
cryptanalytic advances may uncover even more serious weaknesses. If you are
developing a system or standardizing a protocol, we recommend building in
some flexibility or extensibility in case you need to replace AES with another
block cipher in the future. We will come back to this in Section 3.5.6.
3.5.3 Serpent
Serpent was another AES finalist [1]. It is built like a tank. Easily the most
conservative of all the AES submissions, Serpent is in many ways the opposite
of AES. Whereas AES puts emphasis on elegance and efficiency, Serpent is
designed for security all the way. The best attack we know of covers only 12 of
the 32 rounds [38]. The disadvantage of Serpent is that it is about one-third the
speed of AES. It can also be difficult to implement efficiently, as the S-boxes
have to be converted to a Boolean formula suitable for the underlying CPU.
In some ways, Serpent has a similar structure to AES. It consists of 32 rounds.
Each round consists of xoidng in a 128-bit round key, applying a linear mixing
function to the 128 bits, and then applying 32 four-bit S-boxes in parallel. In
each round, the 32 S-boxes are identical, but there are eight different S-boxes
that are used each in turn in a round.
Serpent has an especially nice software implementation trick. A
straightforward implementation would be very slow, as each round requires 32 S-box
lookups and there are 32 rounds. In total there are 1024 S-box lookups, and
doing those one by one would be very slow. The trick is to rewrite the S-boxes
as Boolean formulas. Each of the four output bits is written as a Boolean
formula of the four input bits. The CPU then evaluates this Boolean formula
directly, using and, or, and xor instructions. The trick is that a 32-bit CPU can
evaluate 32 S-boxes in parallel, as each bit position in the registers computes
the same function, albeit on different input data. This style of implementation
is called a bitslice implementation. Serpent is specifically designed to be
implemented in this way. The mixing phase is relatively easy to compute in a bitslice
implementation.
If Serpent had been as fast as Rijndael (now AES), it would almost certainly
have been chosen as AES because of its conservative design. But speed is

always a relative thing. When measured per encrypted byte, Serpent is nearly
as fast as DES and much faster than 3DES. It is only when Serpent is compared
to the other AES finalists that it seems slow.
3.5.4 Twofish
Twofish was an AES finalist as well. It can be seen as a compromise between
AES and Serpent. It is nearly as fast as AES, but it has a larger security margin.
The best attack we know of is on 8 of the 16 rounds. The biggest disadvantage
of Twofish is that it can be rather expensive to change the encryption key, as
Twofish is best implemented with a lot of precomputation on the key.
Twofish uses the same Feistel structure as DES. An overview is given in
Figure 3.3.6 Twofish splits the 128-bit plaintext into four 32-bit values, and
most operations are on 32-bit values. You can see the Feistel structure of
Twofish, with F being the round function. The round function consists of two
copies of the g function, a function called the PHT, and a key addition. The
result of the F function is xoRed into the right half (the two vertical lines on
the right). The boxes with <<g: or ^> symbols in them denote rotations of the
32-bit value by the specified number of bit positions.
Each g function consists of four S-boxes followed by a linear mixing function
that is very similar to the AES mixing function. The S-boxes are somewhat
different. In contrast to all the other block ciphers we have seen in this book,
these S-boxes are not constant; rather, their contents depend on the key. There
is an algorithm that computes the S-box tables from the key material. The
motivation for this design is that key-dependent S-boxes are much harder for
an attacker to analyze. This is also why Twofish implementations often do
precomputations for each key. They precompute the S-boxes and store the
result in memory.
The PHT function mixes the two results of the g functions using 32-bit
addition operations. The last part of the F function is where the key material
is added. Note that addition is shown as EB and exclusive or as ©.
Twofish also uses whitening. At both the start and the end of the cipher,
additional key material is added to the data. This makes the cipher harder to
attack for most types of attacks, and it costs very little.
As with the other ciphers, Twofish has a key schedule to derive the round
keys and the two additional keys at the start and end from the actual cipher
key.
6There is a reason why this figure is so much larger and detailed than the others. Two of
us were on the Twofish design team, so we could lift this figure straight from our Twofish
book [115].

^b *Cp CD* ^i
v
input
whitening
one
round
| 15
J roi
more
rounds
undo last
swap
*-4<H>3B
whitening
Figure 3-3: Structure of Twofish
© 1999, Niels Ferguson, John Wiley and Sons. Used with permission.
3.5.5 Other AES Finalists
We have discussed three of the five AES finalists in some detail. There were
two more: RC6 [108] and MARS [22].
RC6 is an interesting design that uses 32-bit multiplications in the cipher.
During the AES competition, the best attack broke a 17-round version of RC6,
compared to 20 rounds of the full RC6. MARS is a design with a nonuniform
structure. It uses a large number of different operations and is therefore more
expensive to implement than the other AES finalists.
Both RC6 and MARS were selected as AES finalists for a reason: They are
both probably good block ciphers. Details about their internal operations are
in their respective specifications.

3.5.6 Which Block Cipher Should I Choose?
The recent cryptanalytic advances against AES make this a tough choice.
Despite these cryptanalytic advances, AES is still what we recommend. It is fast.
All known attacks are theoretical, not practical. Even though AES is now broken
academically, these breaks do not imply a significant security degradation of
real systems in practice. It is also the official standard, sanctioned by the U.S.
government. And everybody else is using it. They used to say "Nobody gets
fired for buying IBM." Similarly, nobody will fire you for choosing AES.
AES has other advantages. It is relatively easy to use and implement. All
cryptography libraries support it, and customers like it, because it is "the
standard."
There are probably circumstances in which 3DES still is the best solution. If
you have to be backward-compatible, or are locked into a 64-bit block size by
other parts of the system, then 3DES is still your best choice. However, keep
in mind that 3DES has some unique properties that cause it to not satisfy our
security criteria; and be especially careful with the small 64-bit block size.
If you are really concerned about future cryptanalytic advances, you could
always double encrypt—first with AES and then with Serpent or Twofish.
If you do this, remember to use different, independent keys for each block
cipher. Or use AES with an increased number of rounds—say, 16 rounds for
AES with 128-bit keys, 20 rounds for AES with 192-bit keys, and 28 rounds for
AES with 256-bit keys.
Further, remember that the recent cryptanalytic advances against AES are
only just coming out as we finalize this book. It is too early to tell exactly
how the community will respond. Keep an eye out for a general consensus or
shift in direction from the community. Perhaps NIST will issue some specific
recommendations for how to address the recent discoveries against AES. If
NIST makes recommendations on how to respond to the new attacks against
AES, or if there is a clear shift in the consensus of the community, no one will
fault you for following those recommendations or that shift.
We also need to return to one other issue with AES. We haven't talked much
about side-channel or timing attacks yet (we'll talk about these in Sections 8.5
and 15.3). It turns out that even though there are no known practical attacks
against the mathematics of AES, it is possible to implement AES poorly. For
example, it is possible to implement AES such that the time it takes to perform
an operation depends on its inputs—on some inputs it will take more time
and on other inputs it will take less time. If an attacker can measure the
time a system takes to perform an AES operation, she might be able to learn
bits of the key. If you use AES, you should be careful to use a constant-
time implementation, or to otherwise conceal the timing information from an
attacker.

3.5.7 What Key Size Should I Use?
All of the AES finalists (Rijndael, Serpent, Twofish, RC6, and MARS), and
hence AES, support keys of 128,192, and 256 bits. For almost all applications,
a 128-bit security level is enough. However, to achieve 128 bits of security, we
suggest keys longer than 128 bits.
A 128-bit key would be great, except for one problem: collision attacks. Time
and time again, we find systems that can be attacked—at least theoretically, if
not practically—by a birthday attack or a meet-in-the-middle attack. We know
these attacks exist. Sometimes designers just ignore them, and sometimes they
think they are safe, but somebody finds a new, clever way of using them. Most
block cipher modes allow meet-in-the-middle attacks of some form. We've
had enough of this race, so here is our recommendation: For a security level of
n bits, every cryptographic value should be at least 2n bits long.
Following this recommendation makes any type of collision attack useless.
In real life, it is hard to keep strictly to this rule. For 128-bit security, we really
want to use a block cipher with a block size of 256 bits, but all the common
block ciphers have a block size of 128 bits. This is more serious than it sounds.
There are quite a number of collision attacks on block cipher modes, which we
will learn about later.
Still, at least we can use the large keys that all AES candidate block ciphers
support. Therefore: use 256-bit keys! We are not saying that 128-bit keys are
insecure per se; we are saying that 256-bit keys provide a better safety margin,
assuming that the block cipher is secure.
Note that we advocate the use of 256-bit keys for systems with a design
strength of 128 bits. In other words, these systems are designed to withstand
attackers that can perform 2128 operations in their attack. Just remember to use
the design strength (128 bits), not the key length of 256 bits, for sizing the rest
of the system.
Finally, let's come back to the recent cryptanalytic results against AES. These
results show that AES with 192- and 256-bit keys are not secure. Moreover,
the attacks against AES with 192- and 256-bit keys exploit weaknesses in the
AES key schedule algorithm. This is why the known attacks against AES with
256-bit keys are more efficient than the attacks against AES with 192-bit keys.
This is also why we don't yet know of attacks against AES with 128-bit keys.
So, while in general we'd prefer a block cipher with 256-bit keys over a block
cipher with 128-bit keys, assuming the block cipher is secure, the situation is a
bit more murky for AES. To emphasize our desire for 128 bits of security, and
thus our quest for a secure block cipher with 256-bit keys, we will use AES
with 256-bit keys throughout the rest of this book. But once there is a clear
consensus of how to respond to the new cryptanalytic results against AES, we
will likely replace AES with another block cipher with 256-bit keys.

3.6 Exercises
Exercise 3.1 How much space would be required to store a table for an entire
idealized block cipher that operates on 64-bit blocks and that has 80-bit keys?
Exercise 3.2 How many rounds are in DES? How many bits are in a DES
key? What is the DES block size? How does 3DES work as a function of DES?
Exercise 3.3 What are the possible lengths for AES keys? For each key length,
how many rounds are in AES? What is the AES block size?
Exercise 3.4 Under what situations might you choose 3DES over AES? Under
what situations might you chose AES over 3DES?
Exercise 3.5 Suppose you have a processor that can perform a single DES
encryption or decryption operation in 2"26 seconds. Suppose you also have a
large number of plaintext-ciphertext pairs for DES under a single, unknown
key. How many hours would it take, on average, to find that DES key, using an
exhaustive search approach and a single processor? How many hours would
it take, on average, to find that DES key, using an exhaustive search approach
and a collection of 214 processors?
Exercise 3.6 Consider a new block cipher, DES2, that consists only of two
rounds of the DES block cipher. DES2 has the same block and key size as
DES. For this question you should consider the DES F function as a black box
that takes two inputs, a 32-bit data segment and a 48-bit round key, and that
produces a 32-bit output.
Suppose you have a large number of plaintext-ciphertext pairs for DES2
under a single, unknown key. Give an algorithm for recovering the 48-bit round
key for round 1 and the 48-bit round key for round 2. Your algorithm should
require fewer operations than an exhaustive search for an entire 56-bit DES key.
Can your algorithm be converted into a distinguishing attack against DES2?
Exercise 3.7 Describe an example system that uses DES but is insecure
because of the DES complementation property. Specifically, describe the
system, and then present an attack against that system; the attack should
utilize the DES complementation property.
Exercise 3.8 Familiarize yourself with a cryptographic software development
package for your computer. A popular open source package is OpenSSL,
though there are numerous other alternatives.
Using an existing cryptography library, decrypt the following ciphertext (in
hex)
53 9B 33 3B 39 70 6D 14 90 28 CF El D9 D4 A4 07

with the following 256-bit key (also in hex)
80 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 01
using AES.
Exercise 3.9 Using an existing cryptography library, encrypt the following
plaintext (in hex)
29 6C 93 FD F4 99 AA EB 41 94 BA BC 2E 63 56 ID
with the following 256-bit key (also in hex)
80 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 01
using AES.
Exercise 3.10 Write a program that experimentally demonstrates the
complementation property for DES. This program should take as input a key K and
a plaintext P and demonstrate that the DES complementation property holds
for this key and plaintext. You may use an existing cryptography library for
this exercise.
