# 5 Hash Functions

CHAPTER

Hash Functions
A hash function is a function that takes as input an arbitrarily long string of bits
(or bytes) and produces a fixed-size result. A typical use of a hash function
is digital signatures. Given a message m, you could sign the message itself.
However, the public-key operations of most digital signature schemes are
fairly expensive in computational terms. So instead of signing m itself, you
apply a hash function h and sign h(m) instead. The result of h is typically
between 128 and 1024 bits, compared to multiple thousands or millions of bits
for the message m itself. Signing h(m) is therefore much faster than signing m
directly. For this construction to be secure, it must be infeasible to construct
two messages mx and m2 that hash to the same value. We'll discuss the details
of the security properties of hash functions below.
Hash functions are sometimes called message digest functions, and the hash
result is also known as the digest, or the fingerprint. We prefer the more common
name hash function, as hash functions have many other uses besides digesting
messages. We must warn you about one possible confusion: the term "hash
function" is also used for the mapping function used in accessing hash tables,
a data structure used in many algorithms. These so-called hash functions
have similar properties to cryptographic hash functions, but there is a huge
difference between the two. The hash functions we use in cryptography have
specific security properties. The hash-table mapping-function has far weaker
requirements. Be careful not to confuse the two. When we talk about hash
functions in this book, we always mean cryptographic hash functions.
Hash functions have many applications in cryptography. They make a great
glue between different parts of a cryptographic system. Many times when

you have a variable-sized value, you can use a hash function to map it to a
fixed-size value. Hash functions can be used in cryptographic pseudorandom
number generators to generate several keys from a single shared secret. And
they have a one-way property that isolates different parts of a system, ensuring
that even if an attacker learns one value, she doesn't learn the others.
Even though hash functions are used in almost every system, we as a
community currently know less about hash functions than we do about block
ciphers. Until recently, much less research had been done on hash functions
than block ciphers, and there were not very many practical proposals to choose
from. This situation is changing. NIST is now in the process of selecting a new
hash function standard, to be called SHA-3. The SHA-3 hash function selection
process is proving to be very similar to the process that selected the AES as
the new block cipher standard.
5.1 Security of Hash Functions
As we mentioned above, a hash function maps an input m to a fixed-size
output h(m). Typical output sizes are 128-1024 bits. There might be a limit
on the input length, but for all practical purposes the input can be arbitrarily
long. There are several requirements for a hash function. The simplest one is
that it must be a one-way function: given a message m it is easy to compute
h{m), but given a value x it is not possible to find an m such that h(m) = x. In
other words, a one-way function is a function that can be computed but that
cannot be inverted—hence its name.
Of the many properties that a good hash function should have, the one that
is mentioned most often is collision resistance. A collision is two different inputs
mx and ra2 for which h(mi) = h(m2). Of course, every hash function has an
infinite number of these collisions. (There are an infinite number of possible
input values, and only a finite number of possible output values.) Thus, a hash
function is never collision-free. The collision-resistance requirement merely
states that, although collisions exist, they cannot be found.
Collision resistance is the property that makes hash functions suitable for
use in signature schemes. However, there are collision-resistant hash functions
that are utterly unsuitable for many other applications, such as key derivation,
one-way functions, etc. In practice, cryptographic designers expect a hash
function to be a random mapping. Therefore, we require that a hash function
be indistinguishable from a random mapping. Any other definition leads to
a situation in which the designer can no longer treat the hash function as
an idealized black box, but instead has to consider how the hash function
properties interact with the system around it. (We number our definitions
globally throughout this book.)

Definition 4 The ideal hash function behaves like a random mapping from all
possible input values to the set of all possible output values.
Like our definition of the ideal block cipher (Section 3.3), this is an incomplete
definition. Strictly speaking, there is no such thing as a random mapping; you
can only talk about a probability distribution over all possible mappings.
However, for our purposes this definition is good enough.
We can now define what an attack on a hash function is.
Definition 5 An attack on a hash function is a non-generic method of distinguishing
the hash function from an ideal hash function.
Here the ideal hash function must obviously have the same output size as the
hash function we are attacking. As with the block ciphers, the "non-generic"
requirement takes care of all the generic attacks. Our remarks about generic
attacks on block ciphers carry over to this situation. For example, if an attack
could be used to distinguish between two ideal hash functions, then it doesn't
exploit any property of the hash function itself and it is a generic attack.
The one remaining question is how much work the distinguisher is allowed
to perform. Unlike the block cipher, the hash function has no key, and there is
no generic attack like the exhaustive key search. The one interesting parameter
is the size of the output. One generic attack on a hash function is the birthday
attack, which generates collisions. For a hash function with an n-bit output,
this requires about 2n/1 steps. But collisions are only relevant for certain uses
of hash functions. In other situations, the goal is to find a pre-image (given
x, find an m with h(m) = x), or to find some kind of structure in the hash
outputs. The generic pre-image attack requires about 2" steps. We're not going
to discuss at length here which attacks are relevant and how much work would
be reasonable for the distinguisher to use for a particular style of attack. To be
sensible, a distinguisher has to be more efficient than a generic attack that yields
similar results. We know this is not an exact definition, but—as with block
ciphers—we don't have an exact definition. If somebody claims an attack,
simply ask yourself if you could get a similar or better result from a generic
attack that does not rely on the specifics of the hash function. If the answer is
yes, the distinguisher is useless. If the answer is no, the distinguisher is real.
As with block ciphers, we allow a reduced security level if it is specified. We
can imagine a 512-bit hash function that specifies a security level of 128 bits.
In that case, distinguishers are limited to 2128 steps.
5.2 Real Hash Functions
There are very few good hash functions out there. At this moment, you are
pretty much stuck with the existing SHA family: SHA-1, SHA-224, SHA-
256, SHA-384, and SHA-512. There are other published proposals, including

submissions for the new SHA-3 standard, but these all need to receive more
attention before we can fully trust them. Even the existing functions in the
SHA family have not been analyzed nearly enough, but at least they have been
standardized by NIST, and they were developed by the NSA.1
Almost all real-life hash functions, and all the ones we will discuss, are
iterative hash functions. Iterative hash functions split the input into a sequence
of fixed-size blocks m\,..., mk, using a padding rule to fill out the last block. A
typical block length is 512 bits, and the last block will typically contain a string
representing the length of the input. The message blocks are then processed in
order, using a compression function and a fixed-size intermediate state. This
process starts with a fixed value H0, and defines H, = ^(H^^m,). The final
value Hk is the result of the hash function.
Such an iterative design has significant practical advantages. First of all,
it is easy to specify and implement, compared to a function that handles
variable-length inputs directly. Furthermore, this structure allows you to start
computing the hash of a message as soon as you have the first part of it. So
in applications where a stream of data is to be hashed, the message can be
hashed on the fly without ever storing the data.
As with block ciphers, we will not spend our time explaining the various
hash functions in great detail. The full specifications contain many details that
are not relevant to the main goals of this book.
5.2.1 A Simple But Insecure Hash Function
Before discussing real hash functions, however, we will begin by giving an
example of a trivially insecure iterative hash function. This example will help
clarify the definition of a generic attack. This hash function is built from AES
with a 256-bit key. Let K be a 256-bit key set to all zeros. To hash the message
m, first pad it in some way and break it into 128-bit blocks m^.. .,mk; the
details of the padding scheme aren't important here. Set H0 to a 128-bit block
of all zeros. And now compute H, = AESk(H;_! © m,). Let Hk be the result of
the hash function.
Is this a secure hash function? Is it collision resistant? Before reading further,
try to see if you can find a way of breaking this hash function yourself.
Now here's a non-generic attack. Pick a message m such that after padding
it splits into two blocks mx and m2. Let H\ and H2 denote the values computed
as part of the hash function's internal processing; H2 is also the output of the
hash function. Now let m\ = m2®H\ and let ra2 = H2 © m2 © Hl7 and let m'
be the message that splits into m\ and m2 after padding. Due to properties
of the hash function's construction, m' also hashes to H2; you can verify this
in the exercises at the end of this chapter. And with very high probability, m
and w! are different strings. That's right—m and m' are two distinct messages
1 Whatever you may think about the NSA, so far the cryptography it has published has been
quite decent.

that produce a collision when hashed with this hash function. To convert this
into a distinguishing attack, simply try to mount this attack against the hash
function. If the attack works, the hash function is the weak one we described
here; otherwise, the hash function is the ideal one. This attack exploits a specific
weakness in how this hash function was designed, and hence this attack is
non-generic.
5.2.2 MD5
Let's now turn to some real hash function proposals, beginning with MD5.
MD5 is a 128-bit hash function developed by Ron Rivest [104]. It is a further
development of a hash function called MD4 [106] with additional strengthening
against attacks. Its predecessor MD4 is very fast, but also broken [36]. MD5
has now been broken too. You will still hear people talk about MD5, however,
and it is still in use in some real systems.
The first step in computing MD5 is to split the message into blocks of 512
bits. The last block is padded and the length of the message is included as
well. MD5 has a 128-bit state that is split into four words of 32 bits each. The
compression function h' has four rounds, and in each round the message block
and the state are mixed. The mixing consists of a combination of addition, xor,
and, or, and rotation operations on 32-bit words. (For details, see [104].) Each
round mixes the entire message block into the state, so each message word is
in fact used four times. After the four rounds of the h! function, the input state
and result are added together to produce the output of h'.
This structure of operating on 32-bit words is very efficient on 32-bit CPUs.
It was pioneered by MD4, and is now a general feature of many cryptographic
primitives.
For most applications, the 128-bit hash size of MD5 is insufficient. Using the
birthday paradox, we can trivially find collisions on any 128-bit hash function
using 2s4 evaluations of the hash function. This would allow us to find real
collisions against MD5 using only 2s4 MD5 computations. This is insufficient
for modern systems.
But the situation with MD5 is worse than that. MD5's internal structure
makes it vulnerable to more efficient attacks. One of the basic ideas behind
the iterative hash function design is that if h! is collision-resistant, then the
hash function h built from h! is also collision-resistant. After all, any collision
in h can only occur due to a collision in h'. For over a decade now it has been
known that the MD5 compression function h! has collisions [30]. The collisions
for h! don't immediately imply a collision for MD5. But recent cryptanalytic
advances, beginning with Wang and Yu [124], have now shown that it is
actually possible to find collisions for the full MD5 using much fewer than
2M MD5 computations. While the existence of such efficient collision finding
attacks may not immediately break all uses of MD5, it is safe to say that MD5
is very weak and should no longer be used.

5.2.3 SHA-1
The Secure Hash Algorithm was designed by the NSA and standardized by
NIST [97]. The first version was just called SHA (now often called SHA-0). The
NSA found a weakness with SHA-0, and developed a fix that NIST published
as an improved version, called SHA-1. However, they did not release any
details about the weakness. Three years later, Chabaud and Joux published
a weakness of SHA-0 [25]. This is a weakness that is fixed by the improved
SHA-1, so it is reasonable to assume that we now know what the problem was.
SHA-1 is a 160-bit hash function based on MD4. Because of its shared
parentage, it has a number of features in common with MD5, but it is a far
more conservative design. It is also slower than MD5. Unfortunately, despite
its more conservative design, we now know that SHA-1 is also insecure.
SHA-1 has a 160-bit state consisting of five 32-bit words. Like MD5, it has
four rounds that consist of a mixture of elementary 32-bit operations. Instead
of processing each message block four times, SHA-1 uses a linear recurrence
to "stretch" the 16 words of a message block to the 80 words it needs. This
is a generalization of the MD4 technique. In MD5, each bit of the message
is used four times in the mixing function. In SHA-1, the linear recurrence
ensures that each message bit affects the mixing function at least a dozen
times. Interestingly enough, the only change from SHA-0 to SHA-1 was the
addition of a one-bit rotation to this linear recurrence.
Independent of any internal weaknesses, the main problem with SHA-1
is the 160-bit result size. Collisions against any 160-bit hash function can be
generated in only 280 steps, well below the security level of modern block
ciphers with key sizes from 128 to 256 bits. It is also insufficient for our design
security level of 128 bits. Although it took longer for SHA-1 to fall than MD5,
we now know that it is possible to find collisions in SHA-1 using much less
work than 280 SHA-1 computations [123]. Remember that attacks always get
better? It is no longer safe to trust SHA-1.
5.2.4 SHA-224, SHA-256, SHA-384, and SHA-512
In 2001, NIST published a draft standard containing three new hash functions,
and in 2004 they updated this specification to include a fourth hash function
[101]. These hash functions are collectively referred to as the SHA-2 family of
hash functions. These have 224-, 256-, 384-, and 512-bit outputs, respectively.
They are designed to be used with the 128-, 192-, and 256-bit key sizes of AES,
as well as the 112-bit key size of 3DES. Their structure is very similar to SHA-1.
These hash functions are new, which is generally a red flag. However, the
known weaknesses of SHA-1 are much more severe. Further, if you want more
security than SHA-1 can give you, you need a hash function with a larger
result. None of the published designs for larger hash functions have received

much public analysis; at least the SHA-2 family has been vetted by the NSA,
which generally seems to know what it is doing.
SHA-256 is much slower than SHA-1. For long messages, computing a hash
with SHA-256 takes about as much time as encrypting the message with AES
or Twofish, or maybe a little bit more. This is not necessarily bad, and is an
artifact of its conservative design.
5.3 Weaknesses of Hash Functions
Unfortunately, all of these hash functions have some properties that disqualify
them according to our security definition.
5.3.1 Length Extensions
Our greatest concern about all these hash functions is that they have a length-
extension bug that leads to real problems and that could easily have been
avoided. Here is the problem. A message m is split into blocks ml7..., mk and
hashed to a value H. Let's now choose a message m' that splits into the block
mi,...,mk,mk+i. Because the first k blocks of m' are identical to the k blocks
of message m, the hash value h(m) is merely the intermediate hash value
after k blocks in the computation of h(m'). We get h{m') = h'{h{m), mM). When
using MD5 or any hash function from the SHA family, you have to choose m'
carefully to include the padding and length field, but this is not a problem as
the method of constructing these fields is known.
The length extension problem exists because there is no special processing
at the end of the hash function computation. The result is that h(m) provides
direct information about the intermediate state after the first k blocks of m'.
This is certainly a surprising property for a function we want to think
of as a random mapping. In fact, this property immediately disqualifies all
of the mentioned hash functions, according to our security definition. All a
distinguisher has to do is to construct a few suitable pairs (m, m!) and check
for this relationship. You certainly wouldn't find this relationship in an ideal
hash function. This is a non-generic attack that exploits properties of the hash
functions themselves, so this is a valid attack. The attack itself takes only a few
hash computations, so it is very quick.
How could this property be harmful? Imagine a system where Alice sends
a message to Bob and wants to authenticate it by sending h(X \\ m), where X
is a secret known only to Bob and Alice, and m is the message. If h were an
ideal hash function, this would make a decent authentication system. But with
length extensions, Eve can now append text to the message m, and update the
authentication code to match the new message. An authentication system that
allows Eve to modify the message is, of course, of no use to us.

This issue will be resolved in SHA-3; one of the NIST requirements is that
SHA-3 not have length-extension properties.
5.3.2 Partial-Message Collision
A second problem is inherent in the iterative structure of most hash functions.
We'll explain the problem with a specific distinguisher.
The first step of any distinguisher is to specify the setting in which it will
differentiate between the hash function and the ideal hash function. Sometimes
this setting can be very simple: given the hash function, find a collision. Here
we use a slightly more complicated setting. Suppose we have a system that
authenticates a message m with h(m \\ X), where X is the authentication key.
The attacker can choose the message ra, but the system will only authenticate
a single message.2
For a perfect hash function of size n, we expect that this construction has
a security level of n bits. The attacker cannot do any better than to choose
an ra, get the system to authenticate it as h(m \\ X), and then search for X
by exhaustive search. The attacker can do much better with an iterative hash
function. She finds two strings m and ra' that lead to a collision when hashed by
h. This can be done using the birthday attack in only 2"/2 steps or so. She then
gets the system to authenticate ra, and replaces the message with m'. Remember
that h is computed iteratively, so once there is a collision and the rest of the
hash inputs are the same, the hash value stays the same, too. Because hashing
m and ra' leads to the same value, h(m \\ X) = \i(m! || X). Notice that this attack
does not depend on X—the same ra and ra' would work for all values for X.
This is a typical example of a distinguisher. The distinguisher sets its own
"game" (a setting in which it attempts an attack), and then attacks the system.
The object is still to distinguish between the hash function and the ideal hash
function, but that is easy to do here. If the attack succeeds, it is an iterative
hash function; if the attack fails, it is the ideal hash function.
5.4 Fixing the Weaknesses
We want a hash function that we can treat as a random mapping, but all
well-known hash functions fail this property. Will we have to check for length-
extension problems in every place we use a hash function? Do we check for
partial-message collisions everywhere? Are there any other weaknesses we
need to check for?
2Most systems will only allow a limited number of messages to be authenticated; this is just an
extreme case. In real life, many systems include a message number with each message, which
has the same effect on this attack as allowing only a single message to be chosen.

Leaving weaknesses in the hash function is a very bad idea. We can guarantee
that it will be used somewhere in a way that exposes the weakness. Even if you
document the known weaknesses, they will not be checked for in real systems.
Even if you could control the design process that well, you would run into
a complexity problem. Suppose the hash function has three weaknesses, the
block cipher two, the signature scheme four, etc. Before you know it, you will
have to check hundreds of interactions among these weaknesses: a practical
impossibility. We have to fix the hash function.
The new SHA-3 standard will address these weaknesses. In the meantime,
we need short-term fixes.
5.4.1 Toward a Short-term Fix
Here is one potential solution. Ultimately, we'll recommend the fixes in
the subsequent subsections, and this particular proposal has not received
significant review within the community. But this discussion is illustrative, so
we include it here.
Let h be one of the hash functions mentioned above. Instead ofmi-^ h(m), one
could use m h> h(h(m) \\ m) as a hash function.3 Effectively we put h(m) before
the message we are hashing. This ensures that the iterative hash computations
immediately depend on all the bits of the message, and no partial-message or
length-extension attacks can work.
Definition 6 Let h be an iterative hash function. The hash function hDBL is defined
by hDBL(m) := h(h(m) \\ m).
We believe that if h is any of the newer SHA-2 family hash functions, this
construction has a security level of n bits, where n is the size of the hash result.
A disadvantage of this approach is that it is slow. You have to hash the
entire message twice, which takes twice as long. Another disadvantage is that
this approach requires the whole message m to be buffered. You can no longer
compute the hash of a stream of data as it passes by. Some applications depend
on this ability, and using /zDBL would simply not work.
5.4.2 A More Efficient Short-term Fix
So how do we keep the full speed of the original hash function? We cheat,
kind of. Instead of h{m), we can use h(h(Ob \\ mj) as a hash function, and claim
a security level of only n/2 bits. Here b is the block length of the underlying
compression function, so 0b \\ m equates to prepending the message with an
all zero block before hashing. The cheat is that we normally expect an n-bit
3The notation x \-+ f(x) is a way of writing down a function without having to give it a name. For
example: x \-> x2 is a function that squares its input.

hash function to provide a security level of n bits for those situations in which
a collision attack is not possible.4 The partial-message collision attacks all rely
on birthday attacks, so if we reduce the security level to n/2 bits, these attacks
no longer fall within the claimed security level.
In most situations, reducing the security level in this way would be
unacceptable, but we are lucky here. Hash functions are already designed to be
used in situations where collision attacks are possible, so the hash function
sizes are suitably large. If we apply this construction to SHA-256, we get a
hash function with a 128-bit security level, which is exactly what we need.
Some might argue that all n-bit hash functions provide only n/2 bits of
security. That is a valid point of view. Unfortunately, unless you are very
specific about these things, people will abuse the hash function and assume
it provides n bits of security. For example, people want to use SHA-256 to
generate a 256-bit key for AES, assuming that it will provide a security level
of 256 bits. As we explained earlier, we use 256-bit keys to achieve a 128-bit
security level, so this matches perfectly with the reduced security level of
our fixed version of SHA-256. This is not accidental. In both cases the gap
between the size of the cryptographic value and the claimed security level is
due to collision attacks. As we assume collision attacks are always possible,
the different sizes and security levels will fit together nicely.
Here is a more formal definition of this fix.
Definition 7 Let h be an iterative hash function, and let b denote the block
length of the underlying compression function. The hash function hd is defined by
hd(m) := h(h(Ob || rrij), and has a claimed security level ofmm{k,n/2) where k is the
security level ofh and n is the size of the hash result.
We will use this construction mostly in combination with hash functions
from the SHA family. For any hash function SHA-X, where X is 1,224,256,384,
or 512, we define SHA^-X as the function that maps m to SHA-X(SHA-X(Ob ||
m)). SHA<r256 is just the function m h> SHA-256(SHA-256(0512 || m)), for
example.
This particular fix to the SHA family of iterative hash functions, in addition to
being related to our construction in Section 5.4.1, was also described by Coron
et al. [26]. It can be demonstrated that the fixed hash function hd is at least as
strong as the underlying hash function h? HMAC uses a similar hash-it-again
approach to protect against length-extension attacks. Prepending the message
with a block of zeros makes it so that, unless something unusual happens, the
4Even the SHA-256 documentation claims that an w-bit hash function should require 2" steps to
find a pre-image of a given value.
5We're cheating a little bit here. By hashing twice, the range of the function is reduced, and
birthday attacks are a little bit easier. This is a small effect, and it falls well within the margin of
approximation we've used elsewhere.

first block input to the inner hash function in hd is different than the input to
the outer hash function. Both hDBL and hd eliminate the length extension bug
that poses the most danger to real systems. Whether hDBL in fact has a security
level of n bits remains to be seen. We would trust both of them up to n/2 bits
of security, so in practice we would use the more efficient hd construction.
5.4.3 Another Fix
There is another fix to some of these weaknesses with the SHA-2 family of
iterative hash functions: Truncate the output [26]. If a hash function produces
n-bit outputs, only use the first n — s of those bits as the hash value for some
positive s. In fact, SHA-224 and SHA-384 both already do this; SHA-224 is
roughly SHA-256 with 32 output bits dropped, and SHA-384 is roughly SHA-
512 with 128 output bits dropped. For 128 bits of security, you could hash
with SHA-512, drop 256 bits of the output, and return the remaining 256 bits
as the result of the truncated hash function. The result would be a 256-bit hash
function which, because of birthday attacks, would meet our 128-bit security
design goal.
5.5 Which Hash Function Should I Choose?
Many of the submissions to NIST's SHA-3 competition have revolutionary
new designs, and they address the weaknesses we've discussed here and
other concerns. However, the competition is still going on and NIST has not
selected a final SHA-3 algorithm. Much additional analysis is necessary in
order to have sufficient confidence in the SHA-3 submissions. In the short
term, we recommend using one of the newer SHA hash function family
members—SHA-224, SHA-256, SHA-384, or SHA-512. Moreover, we suggest
you choose a hash function from the SHA^ family, or use SHA-512 and truncate
the output to 256 bits. In the long term, we will very likely recommend the
winner of the SHA-3 competition.
5.6 Exercises
Exercise 5.1 Use a software tool to generate two messages M and M, M ^ M,
that produce a collision for MD5. To generate this collision, use one of the
known attacks against MD5. A link to example code for finding MD5 collisions
is available at: http: //www. schneier.com/ce.html.
Exercise 5.2 Using an existing cryptography library, write a program to
compute the SHA-512 hash value of the following message in hex:
48 65 6C 6C 6F 2C 20 77 6F 72 6C 64 2E 20 20 20.

Exercise 5.3 Consider SHA-512-n, a hash function that first runs SHA-512
and then outputs only the first n bits of the result. Write a program that
uses a birthday attack to find and output a collision on SHA-512-n, where
n is a multiple of 8 between 8 and 48. Your program may use an existing
cryptography library. Time how long your program takes when n is 8,16, 24,
32,40, and 48, averaged over five runs for each n. How long would you expect
your program to take for SHA-512-256? For SHA-512-384? For SHA-512 itself?
Exercise 5.4 Let SHA-512-n be as in the previous exercise. Write a program
that finds a message M (a pre-image) that hashes to the following value under
SHA-512-8 (in hex):
A9.
Write a program that finds a message M that hashes to the following value
under SHA-512-16 (in hex):
3D 4B.
Write a program that finds a message M that hashes to the following value
under SHA-512-24 (in hex):
3A 7F 27.
Write a program that finds a message M that hashes to the following value
under SHA-512-32 (in hex):
C3 CO 35 7C.
Time how long your programs take when n is 8, 16, 24, and 32, averaged
over five runs each. Your programs may use an existing cryptography library.
How long would you expect a similar program to take for SHA-512-256? For
SHA-512-384? For SHA-512 itself?
Exercise 5.5 In Section 5.2.1, we claimed that m and m' both hash to H2. Show
why this claim is true.
Exercise 5.6 Pick two of the SHA-3 candidate hash function submissions
and compare their performance and their security under the currently best
published attacks. Information about the SHA-3 candidates is available at
http://www.schneier.com/ce.html.
