# 6 Message Authentication Codes

CHAPTER

Message Authentication Codes
A message authentication code, or MAC, is a construction that detects tampering
with messages. Encryption prevents Eve from reading the messages but does
not prevent her from manipulating the messages. This is where the MAC
comes in. Like encryption, MACs use a secret key, K, known to both Alice
and Bob but not to Eve. Alice sends not just the message m, but also a MAC
value computed by a MAC function. Bob checks that the MAC value of the
message received equals the MAC value received. If they do not match, he
discards the message as unauthenticated. Eve cannot manipulate the message
because without K she cannot find the correct MAC value to send with the
manipulated message.
In this chapter we will only consider authentication. The mechanisms for
combining encryption and authentication will be dealt with in Chapter 7.
6.1 What a MAC Does
A MAC is a function that takes two arguments, a fixed-size key K and an
arbitrarily sized message m, and produces a fixed-size MAC value. We'll write
the MAC function as mac(K, m). To authenticate a message, Alice sends not
only the message m but also the MAC code mac(jK, m), also called the tag.
Suppose Bob, also with key K, receives a message m! and a tag T. Bob uses the
MAC verification algorithm to verify that T is a valid MAC under key K for
message m'.

We start with a look at the MAC function in isolation. Be warned that using
a MAC function properly is more complicated than just applying it to the
message. We'll get to those problems later on, in Section 6.7.
6.2 The Ideal MAC and MAC Security
There are various ways to define the security of a MAC. We describe here our
preferred definition. This definition is based on the notion of an ideal MAC
function, which is very similar to the notion of an ideal block cipher. The
primary difference is that block ciphers are permutations, whereas MACs are
not. This is our preferred definition because it encompasses a broad range of
attacks, including weak key attacks, related-key attacks, and more.
The ideal MAC is a random mapping. Let n be the number of bits in the
result of a MAC. Our definition of an ideal MAC is:
Definition 8 An ideal MAC function is a random mapping from all possible inputs
to n-bit outputs.
Remember that, in this definition, the MAC takes two inputs, a key and a
message. In practice, the key K is not known to the attacker or, more precisely,
it is not fully known. There could be a weakness in the rest of the system that
provides partial information about K to the attacker.
We define the security of a MAC as follows.
Definition 9 An attack on a MAC is a non-generic method of distinguishing the
MAC from an ideal MAC function.
Cryptography is a broad field. There are more formal definitions that
theoreticians use. When possible, we prefer the definition above because it is
broader and more aligned with the full range of attacks one might consider. Our
attack model includes some forms of attacks not captured by the conventional,
formal definitions, such as related-key attacks and attacks that assume that the
attacker has partial knowledge about the key. That is why we prefer our style
of security definitions, which are robust even if the function is abused or used
in an unusual environment.
The more restrictive standard definition is one in which an attacker selects
n different messages of her choosing, and is given the MAC value for each of
these messages. The attacker then has to come up with n + 1 messages, each
with a valid MAC value.

6.3 CBC-MAC and CMAC
CBC-MAC is a classic method of turning a block cipher into a MAC. The key
K is used as the block cipher key. The idea behind CBC-MAC is to encrypt
the message m using CBC mode and then throw away all but the last block of
ciphertext. For a message P\, ..., Pkf the MAC is computed as:
H0 := IV
MAC := Hk
Sometimes the output of the CBC-MAC function is taken to be only part (e.g.,
half) of the last block. The most common definition of CBC-MAC requires the
IV to be fixed at 0.
In general, one should never use the same key for both encryption and
authentication. It is especially dangerous to use CBC encryption and CBC-
MAC authentication with the same key. The MAC ends up being equal to
the last ciphertext block. What's more, depending on when and how CBC
encryption and CBC-MAC are applied, using the same key for both can lead to
privacy compromises for CBC encryption and authenticity compromises for
CBC-MAC.
Using CBC-MAC is a bit tricky, but it is generally considered secure when
used correctly and when the underlying cipher is secure. Studying the strengths
and weaknesses of CBC-MAC can be very educational. There are a number
of different collision attacks on CBC-MAC that effectively limit the security to
half the length of the block size [20]. Here is a simple collision attack: let M be
a CBC-MAC function. If we know that M(a) = M(b) then we also know that
M(a || c) = M(b || c). This is due to the structure of CBC-MAC. Let's illustrate
this with a simple case: c consists of a single block. We have
M(a\\c) = EK(c®M(a))
M(b\\c) = EK(c®M(b))
and these two must be equal, because M(a) = M(b).
The attack proceeds in two stages. In the first stage, the attacker collects
the MAC values of a large number of messages until a collision occurs. This
takes 2^ steps for a 128-bit block cipher because of the birthday paradox.
This provides the a and b for which M(a) = M(b). If the attacker can now get
the sender to authenticate a \\ c, he can replace the message with b \\ c without
changing the MAC value. The receiver will check the MAC and accept the
bogus message b \\ c. (Remember, we work in the paranoia model. It is quite

acceptable for the attacker to create a message and get it authenticated by the
sender. There are many situations in which this is possible.) There are many
extensions to this attack that work even with the addition of length fields and
padding rules [20].
This is not a generic attack, as it does not work on an ideal MAC function.
Finding the collision is not the problem. That can be done for an ideal MAC
function in exactly the same way. But once you have two messages a and b, for
which M(a) = M{b), you cannot use them to forge a MAC on a new message,
whereas you can do that with CBC-MAC.
As another example attack, suppose c is one block long and M(a || c) =
M(b || c). Then M(a \\ d) = M(b \\ d) for any block d. The actual attack is similar
to the one above. First the attacker collects the MAC values of a large number
of messages that end in c until a collision occurs. This provides the values of
a and b. The attacker then gets the sender to authenticate a \\ d. Now he can
replace the message with b \\ d without changing the MAC value.
There are some nice theoretical results which argue that, in the particular
proof model used, CBC-MAC provides 64 bits of security when the block size
is 128 bits [6] and when the MAC is only ever applied to messages that are
the same length. Unfortunately, this is short of our desired design strength,
though in practice it's not immediately clear how to achieve our desired design
strength with 128-bit block ciphers. CBC-MAC would be fine if we could use
a block cipher with a 256-bit block size.
There are other reasons why you have to be careful how you use CBC-MAC.
You cannot just CBC-MAC the message itself if you wish to authenticate
messages with different lengths, as that leads to simple attacks. For example,
suppose a and b are both one block long, and suppose the sender MACs a, b,
and a \\ b. An attacker who intercepts the MAC tags for these messages can
now forge the MAC for the message b \\ (M(b) © M(a) © b), which the sender
never sent. The forged tag for this message is equal to M(a \\ b), the tag for a \\ b.
You can figure out why this is true as an exercise, but the problem arises from
the fact that the sender MACs messages that are different lengths.
If you wish to use CBC-MAC, you should instead do the following:
1. Construct a string s from the concatenation of / and m, where / is the length
of m encoded in a fixed-length format.
2. Pad s until the length is a multiple of the block size. (See Section 4.1 for
details.)
3. Apply CBC-MAC to the padded string s.
4. Output the last ciphertext block, or part of that block. Do not output any of
the intermediate values.
The advantage of CBC-MAC is that it uses the same type of computations
as the block cipher encryption modes. In many systems, encryption and MAC

are the only two functions that are ever applied to the bulk data, so these are
the two speed-critical areas. Having them use the same primitive functions
makes efficient implementations easier, especially in hardware.
Still, we don't advocate the use of CBC-MAC directly, because it is difficult to
use correctly. One alternate that we recommend is CMAC [42]. CMAC is based
on CBC-MAC and was recently standardized by NIST. CMAC works almost
exactly like CBC-MAC, except it treats the last block differently. Specifically,
CMAC xors one of two special values into the last block prior to the last block
cipher encryption. These special values are derived from the CMAC key, and
the specific one used by CMAC depends on whether the length of the message
is a multiple of the block cipher's block length or not. The xoRing of these
values into the MAC disrupts the attacks that compromise CBC-MAC when
used for messages of multiple lengths.
6.4 HMAC
Given that the ideal MAC is a random mapping with keys and messages as
input and that we already have hash functions that (try to) behave like random
mappings with messages as input, it is an obvious idea to use a hash function
to build a MAC. This is exactly what HMAC does [5, 81]. The designers of
HMAC were of course aware of the problems with hash functions, which
we discussed in Chapter 5. For this reason, they did not define HMAC to be
something simple like mac(jK, m) as h(K \\ m), h(m \\ K), or even h(K \\ m \\ K),
which can create problems if you use one of the standard iterative hash
functions [103].
Instead, HMAC computes h(K © a \\ h(K © b \\ rrij), where a and b are specified
constants. The message itself is only hashed once, and the output is hashed
again with the key. For details, see the specifications in [5, 81]. HMAC works
with any of the iterative hash functions we discussed in Chapter 5. What's
more, because of HMAC's design, it's not subject to the same collision attacks
that have recently undermined the security of SHA-1 [4]. This is because, in
the case of HMAC, the beginning of the message to hash is based on a secret
key and is not known to the attacker. This means that HMAC with SHA-1 is
not as bad as straight SHA-1. But given that attacks often get better over time,
we now view HMAC with SHA-1 as too risky and do not recommend its use.
The HMAC designers carefully crafted HMAC to resist attacks, and proved
security bounds on the resulting construction. HMAC avoids key recovery
attacks that reveal K to the attacker, and avoids attacks that can be done
by the attacker without interaction with the system. However, HMAC—like
CMAC—is still limited to n/2 bits of security, as there are generic birthday
attacks against the function that make use of the internal collisions of the

iterated hash function. The HMAC construction ensures that these require 2"/2
interactions with the system under attack, which is more difficult to do than
performing 2n/2 computations on your own computer.
The HMAC paper [5] presents several good examples of the problems
that arise when the primitives (in this case, the hash function) have
unexpected properties. This is why we are so compulsive about providing simple
behavioral specifications for our cryptographic primitives.
We like the HMAC construction. It is neat, efficient, and easy to implement.
It is widely used with the SHA-1 hash function, and by now you will find it in
a lot of libraries. Still, to achieve our 128-bit security level, we would only use
it with a 256-bit hash function such as SHA-256.
6.5 GMAC
NIST recently standardized a new MAC, called GMAC [43], that is very
efficient in hardware and software. GMAC was designed for 128-bit block
ciphers.
GMAC is fundamentally different from CBC-MAC, CMAC, and HMAC.
The GMAC authentication function takes three values as input—the key, the
message to authenticate, and a nonce. Recall that a nonce is a value that is only
ever used once. CBC-MAC, CMAC, and HMAC do not take a nonce as input.
If a user MACs a message with a key and a nonce, the nonce will also need
to be known by the recipient. The user could explicitly send the nonce to the
recipient, or the nonce might be implicit, such as a packet counter that both
the sender and the recipient maintain.
Given its different interface, GMAC doesn't meet our preferred definition
of MAC in Section 6.2, which involves being unable to distinguish it from
an ideal MAC function. Instead, we have to use the unforgeability definition
mentioned at the end of that section. Namely, we consider a model in which
an attacker selects n different messages of his choosing, and is given the MAC
value for each of these messages. The attacker then has to come up with n + 1
messages, each with a valid MAC value. If an attacker can't do this, then the
MAC is unforgeable.
Under the hood, GMAC uses something called an universal hash
function [125]. This is very different from the types of hash functions we discussed
in Chapter 5. The details of how universal hash functions work are outside
our scope, but you can think of GMAC as computing a simple mathematical
function of the input message. This function is much simpler than anything
like SHA-1 or SHA-256. GMAC then encrypts the output of that function with
a block cipher in CTR mode to get the tag. GMAC uses a function of its nonce
as the IV for CTR mode.

GMAC is standardized and is a reasonable choice in many circumstances.
But we also want to offer some words of warning. Like HMAC and CMAC,
GMAC only provides at most 64 bits of security. Some applications may
wish to use tags that are shorter than 128 bits. However, unlike HMAC and
CMAC, GMAC offers diminished security for these short tag values. Suppose
an application uses GMAC but truncates the tags so that they are 32 bits long.
One might expect the resulting system to offer 32 bits of security, but in fact it
is possible to forge the MAC after 216 tries [48]. Our recommendation is to not
use GMAC when you need to produce short MAC values.
Finally, requiring the system to provide a nonce can be risky because security
can be undone if the system provides the same value for the nonce more than
once. As we discussed in Section 4.7, real systems fail time and time again for
not correctly handling nonce generation. We therefore recommend avoiding
modes that expose nonces to application developers.
6.6 Which MAC to Choose?
As you may have gathered from the previous discussion, we would choose
HMAC-SHA-256: the HMAC construction using SHA-256 as a hash function.
We really want to use the full 256 bits of the result. Most systems use 64- or
96-bit MAC values, and even that might seem like a lot of overhead. As far
as we know, there is no collision attack on the MAC value if it is used in the
traditional manner, so truncating the results from HMAC-SHA-256 to 128 bits
should be safe, given current knowledge in the field.
We are not particularly happy with this situation, as we believe that it should
be possible to create faster MAC functions. But until suitable functions are
published and analyzed, and become broadly accepted, there is not a whole
lot we can do about it. GMAC is fast, but provides only at most 64 bits of
security and isn't suitable when used to produce short tags. It also requires a
nonce, which is a common source of security problem.
Some of the submissions for NIST's SHA-3 competition have special modes
that allow them to be used to create faster MACs. But that competition is still
ongoing and it is too early to say with much confidence which submissions
will be deemed secure.
6.7 Using a MAC
Using a MAC properly is much more complicated than it might initially seem.
We'll discuss the major problems here.
When Bob receives the value mac(jK, m), he knows that somebody who knew
the key K approved the message m. When using a MAC, you have to be very

careful that this statement is sufficient for all the security properties that you
need. For example, Eve could record a message from Alice to Bob, and then
send a copy to Bob at a later time. Without some kind of special protection
against these sorts of attacks, Bob would accept it as a valid message from
Alice. Similar problems arise if Alice and Bob use the same key K for traffic in
two directions. Eve could send the message back to Alice, who would believe
that it came from Bob.
In many situations, Alice and Bob want to authenticate not only the message
m, but also additional data d. This additional data includes things like the
message number used to prevent replay attacks, the source and destination of
the message, and so on. Quite frequently these fields are part of the header of
the authenticated (and often encrypted) message. The MAC has to authenticate
d as well as m. The general solution is to apply the MAC to d || m instead of
just to m. (Here we're assuming that the mapping from d and m to d \\ m is
one-to-one; otherwise, we'd need to use a better encoding.)
The next issue is best captured in the following design rule:
The Horton Principle: Authenticate what is meant, not what is said.
A MAC only authenticates a string of bytes, whereas Alice and Bob want to
authenticate a message with a specific meaning. The gap between what is said
(i.e., the bytes sent) and what is meant (i.e., the interpretation of the message)
is important.
Suppose Alice uses the MAC to authenticate m:=a\\b\\c, where a, b, and
c are some data fields. Bob receives m, and splits it into a, b, and c. But how
does Bob split m into fields? Bob must have some rules, and if those rules
are not compatible with the way Alice constructed the message, Bob will
get the wrong field values. This would be bad, as Bob would have received
authenticated bogus data. Therefore, it is vital that Bob split m into the fields
that Alice put in.
This is easy to do in simple systems. Fields have a fixed size. But soon you
will find a situation in which some fields need to be variable in length, or a
newer version of the software will use larger fields. Of course, a new version
will need a backward compatibility mode to talk to the old software. And here
is the problem. Once the field length is no longer constant, Bob is deriving it
from some context, and that context could be manipulated by the attacker. For
example, Alice uses the old software and the old, short field sizes. Bob uses
the new software. Eve, the attacker, manipulates the communications between
Alice and Bob to make Bob believe that the new protocol is in use. (Details
of how this works are not important; the MAC system shouldn't depend on
other parts of the system being secure.) Bob happily splits the message using
the larger field sizes, and gets bogus data.

This is where the Horton Principle [122] comes in.1 You should authenticate
the meaning, not the message. This means that the MAC should authenticate
not only m, but also all the information that Bob uses in parsing m into its
meaning. This would typically include data like protocol identifier, protocol
version number, protocol message identifier, sizes for various fields, etc. One
partial solution is to not just concatenate the fields but use a data structure like
XML that can be parsed without further information.
The Horton Principle is one of the reasons why authentication at lower
protocol levels does not provide adequate authentication for higher-level
protocols. An authentication system at the IP packet level cannot know how
the e-mail program is going to interpret the data. This precludes it from
checking that the context in which the message is interpreted is the same as the
context in which the message was sent. The only solution is to have the e-mail
program provide its own authentication of the data exchanged—in addition
to the authentication on the lower levels, of course.
To recap: whenever you do authentication, always think carefully about
what other information should be included in the authentication. Be sure that
you code all of this information, including the message, into a string of bytes in
a way that can be parsed back into the fields in a unique manner. Do not forget
to apply this to the concatenation of the additional data and the message we
discussed at the start of this section. If you authenticate d || m, you had better
have a fixed rule on how to split the concatenation back into d and m.
6.8 Exercises
Exercise 6.1 Describe a realistic system that uses CBC-MAC for message
authentication and that is vulnerable to a length extension attack against
CBC-MAC.
Exercise 6.2 Suppose c is one block long, a and b are strings that are a
multiple of the block length, and M(a \\ c) = M(b || c). Here M is CBC-MAC.
Then M(a \\ d) = M(b \\ d) for any block d. Explain why this claim is true.
Exercise 6.3 Suppose a and b are both one block long, and suppose the
sender MACs a, b, and a \\ b with CBC-MAC. An attacker who intercepts
the MAC tags for these messages can now forge the MAC for the message
b || (M(b) © M(a) © b), which the sender never sent. The forged tag for this
!For readers who did not grow up in the U.S.: this is named after one of the characters of
Dr. Seuss, who was a writer of children's books [116].

message is equal to M(a || b), the tag for a \\ b. Justify mathematically why this
is true.
Exercise 6.4 Suppose message a is one block long. Suppose that an attacker
has received the MAC t for a using CBC-MAC under some random key
unknown to the attacker. Explain how to forge the MAC for a two-block
message of your choice. What is the two-block message that you chose? What
is the tag that you chose? Why is your chosen tag a valid tag for your two-block
message?
Exercise 6.5 Using an existing cryptography library, compute the MAC of
the message
4D 41 43 73 20 61 72 65 20 76 65 72 79 20 75 73
65 66 75 6C 20 69 6E 20 63 72 79 70 74 6F 67 72
61 70 68 79 21 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20
using CBC-MAC with AES and the 256-bit key
80 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 01.
Exercise 6.6 Using an existing cryptography library, compute the MAC of
the message
4D 41 43 73 20 61 72 65 20 76 65 72 79 20 75 73
65 66 75 6C 20 69 6E 20 63 72 79 70 74 6F 67 72
61 70 68 79 21
using HMAC with SHA-256 and the key
0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b
0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b 0b.
Exercise 6.7 Using an existing cryptography library, compute the MAC of
the message
4D 41 43 73 20 61 72 65 20 76 65 72 79 20 75 73
65 66 75 6C 20 69 6E 20 63 72 79 70 74 6F 67 72
61 70 68 79 21
using GMAC with AES and the 256-bit key
80 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 01
and the nonce
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 01.
