# 7 The Secure Channel

CHAPTER

The Secure Channel
Finally we come to the first of the real-world problems we will solve. The
secure channel is probably the most common of all practical problems.
7.1 Properties of a Secure Channel
Informally, we can define the problem as creating a secure connection between
Alice and Bob. We'll have to formalize this a bit before it becomes clear what
we are talking about.
7.1.1 Roles
First, most connections are bi-directional. Alice sends messages to Bob, and
Bob sends messages to Alice. You don't want to confuse the two streams of
messages, so there must be some kind of asymmetry in the protocol. In real
systems, maybe one party is the client and the other the server, or maybe it is
easier to speak of the initiator (the party that initiated the secure connection)
and the responder. It doesn't matter how you do it, but you have to assign the
Alice and Bob roles to the two parties in question in such a way that each of
them knows who is playing which role.
Of course, there is always Eve, who tries to attack the secure channel in
any way possible. Eve can read all of the communications between Alice and
Bob and arbitrarily manipulate these communications. In particular, Eve can
delete, insert, or modify data that is being transmitted.

100 Partll Message Security
We always talk about transmitting messages from Alice to Bob, and most of
the time our mental image is of two separate computers sending messages to
each other over a network of some sort. Another very interesting application
is storing data securely. If you think of storing data as transmitting it to
the future, then all the discussions here apply. Alice and Bob might be the
same person, and the transmission medium could be a backup tape or a USB
stick. You still want to protect the medium from outside eavesdroppers and
manipulations. Of course, when you send data to the future, you cannot have
an interactive protocol, since the future cannot send a message back to the past.
7.1.2 Key
To implement a secure channel, we need a shared secret. In this case we
will assume that Alice and Bob share a secret key K, but that nobody else
knows this key. This is an essential property. The cryptographic primitives
can never identify Alice as a person. They can at most identify the key. Thus
Bob's verification algorithm will tell him something like: "This message was
sent by somebody who knows the key K and who played the role of Alice."
This statement is only useful if Bob knows that knowledge of K is restricted,
preferably to himself and Alice.
How the key is established is not our business here. We just assume the key
is there. We will talk about key management in great detail in Chapter 14. The
requirements for the key are as follows:
■ The key K is known only to Alice and Bob.
■ Every time the secure channel is initialized, a new value is generated for
the key K.
The second item is also important. If the same key is used over and over
again, then messages from older sessions can be replayed to Alice or Bob, and
lead to much confusion. Therefore, even in situations where you have a fixed
password as key, you need a key negotiation protocol between Alice and Bob
to set up a suitable unique key K, and you must re-run this protocol every
time a secure channel is established. A key such as K that is used for a single
communication session is called a session key. Again, how K is generated will
be discussed in Chapter 14.
The secure channel is designed to achieve a security level of 128 bits.
Following our discussion in Section 3.5.7, we will use a 256-bit key. Thus, K is
a 256-bit value.
7.1.3 Messages or Stream
The next question is whether we look at the communications between Alice
and Bob as a sequence of discrete messages (such as e-mails) or as a continuous
stream of bytes (such as streaming media). We will only consider systems that

handle discrete messages. These can trivially be converted to handle a stream
of bytes by cutting the data stream into separate messages and reassembling
the stream at the receiver's end. In practice, almost all systems use a discrete
message system at the cryptographic layer.
We also assume that the underlying transport system that conveys the
messages between Alice and Bob is not reliable. Even a reliable communication
protocol like TCP/IP does not form a reliable communication channel from a
cryptographic point of view. After all, the attacker can easily change, remove,
or insert data in a TCP stream without interrupting the flow of data. TCP is
only reliable with respect to random events such as loss of packet. It does not
protect against an active adversary. From our adversarial point of view, there
is no such thing as a reliable communication protocol. (This is a good example
of how cryptographers view the world.)
7.1.4 Security Properties
We can now formulate the security properties of the channel. Alice sends
a sequence of messages mi,m2, ... that are processed by the secure channel
algorithms and then sent to Bob. Bob processes the received messages through
the secure channel algorithms, and ends up with a sequence of messages
m\fniv ....
The following properties must hold:
■ Eve does not learn anything about the messages m, except for their timing
and size.
■ Even when Eve attacks the channel by manipulating the data that is being
communicated, the sequence m'v m2, ... of messages that Bob receives is
a subsequence of m\, m2, ..., and Bob learns exactly which subsequence
he received. (A subsequence is best defined by saying that it can be
constructed from the original sequence by the removal of zero or more
elements.)
The first property is secrecy. Ideally, Eve should not learn anything about
the messages. In real life, this is very hard to achieve. It is extremely hard
to hide information such as the size or the timing of the messages. The
known solutions require Alice to send a continuous stream of messages at
the maximum bandwidth that she will ever use. If she doesn't have any
messages to send, she should invent some trivial ones and send those. This
might be acceptable for military applications, but it is not acceptable for most
civilian applications. Given that Eve can see the size and timing of messages
on a communication channel, she can find out who is communicating with
whom, how much, and when. This is called traffic analysis. It yields a host of
information, and is extremely hard to prevent. This is a well-known problem
with other secure channels, like SSL/TLS, IPsec, and SSH. We will not solve it in
this book, so Eve will be able to perform traffic analysis on our secure channel.

The second property ensures that Bob only gets proper messages, and that
he gets them in their correct order. Ideally, we would want Bob to receive
the exact sequence of messages that Alice sent. But none of the real-world
communications protocols are reliable in a cryptographic sense. Eve can always
delete a message in transit. As we cannot prevent the loss of messages, Bob will
necessarily have to make do with getting only a subsequence of the messages.
Note that the remaining messages that he does receive are in order. There
are no duplicates, no modified messages, and no bogus messages sent by
someone other than Alice. As a further requirement, Bob learns exactly which
messages he has missed. This can be important in some applications where the
interpretation of the message depends on the order in which they are received.
In most situations, Alice wants to ensure that Bob gets all the
information she sent him. Most systems implement a scheme whereby Bob sends
acknowledgments (either explicit or implicit) to Alice, and Alice resends any
information for which she didn't receive an acknowledgment from Bob. Note
that our secure channel never takes the initiative in resending a message. Alice
will have to do that herself, or at least the protocol layer that makes use of the
secure channel will have to do that.
So why not make the secure channel reliable by implementing the resend
functionality inside the secure channel? Because that would complicate the
secure channel description. We like to keep the security-critical modules
simple. Message acknowledgments and resends are standard communication
protocol techniques, and they can be implemented on top of our secure channel.
Also, this is a book about cryptography, not about basic communication
protocol techniques.
7.2 Order of Authentication and Encryption
Obviously we will apply both encryption and authentication to the message.
There are three approaches [7, 82]: we can encrypt first and then authenticate
the ciphertext (encrypt-then-authenticate); authenticate first and then encrypt
both the message and the MAC value (authenticate-then-encrypt); or both
encrypt the message and authenticate the message and then combine (such
as concatenate) the two results (encrypt-and-authenticate). There is no simple
answer for which method is best.
There are two main arguments in favor of encrypting first. There are
theoretical results that show that, given certain specific definitions of secure
encryption and authentication, the encrypt-first solution is secure, whereas
the other approaches are insecure. If you look at the details, it turns out that
authenticate-first is only insecure if the encryption scheme has a specific type
of weakness. In practical systems, we never use encryption schemes with such

weaknesses. However, these weak encryption schemes satisfy a particular
formal security definition. Applying the MAC to the ciphertext of such a
weak encryption scheme fixes it and makes it secure. Having these theoretical
results is valuable. But these theoretical results don't always apply to real-life
encryption schemes. In fact, there are similar proofs that these problems do not
occur at all for stream ciphers (such as CTR mode) and CBC-mode encryption
when the nonce or IV is authenticated.
The second argument in favor of encrypting first is that it is more efficient
in discarding bogus messages. For normal messages, Bob has to both decrypt
the message and check the authentication, irrespective of the order they were
applied in. If the message is bogus (i.e., has a wrong MAC field) then Bob
will discard it. With encrypt-first, the decryption is done last on the receiver
side, and Bob never has to decrypt bogus messages, since he can identify and
discard them before decryption. With authenticate-first, Bob has to decrypt
the message before he can check the authentication. This is more work for
bogus messages. The situation in which this is relevant is when Eve sends
Bob a very large number of bogus messages. With encrypt-first, Bob saves
the work of decrypting them, which reduces the CPU load. Under some very
special circumstances, this makes a denial-of-service (DOS) attack a little bit
harder, though only by a factor of at most approximately two. Further, in
many real-life situations, a more effective DOS attack works by saturating the
communication channel rather than by bogging down Bob's CPU.
The main argument for encrypt-and-authenticate is that the encryption and
authentication processes can happen in parallel. This can increase performance
in some situations. Under the encrypt-and-authenticate composition approach,
an attacker can view the MAC tag of the initial message itself. This is because
the MAC is not encrypted (unlike the authenticate-then-encrypt approach)
and because the MAC is not of an encrypted value (unlike the encrypt-
then-authenticate approach). MACs are designed to protect authenticity, not
privacy. This means the MAC in an encrypt-and-authenticate approach could
leak private information about the underlying message, thereby compromising
the privacy of the secure channel. As with authenticate-first, there are also some
underlying encryption schemes that are insecure when used in an encrypt-and-
authenticate approach. With judicious choice of the underlying MAC and the
underlying encryption scheme, and by including additional data like the nonce
in the input to the MAC, the encrypt-and-authenticate approach can be secure.
There are two main arguments in favor of authenticating first. In the encrypt-
first configuration, the MAC input and MAC value are both visible to Eve.
In the authenticate-first configuration, Eve only gets to see the ciphertext and
the encrypted MAC value; the MAC input (i.e., the plaintext) and actual MAC
value are hidden. This makes it much harder to attack the MAC than in the
encrypt-first situation. The real choice is which of the two functions is applied
last. If encryption is applied last, then Eve gets to attack the encryption function

104 Partll Message Security
without further hindrance. If the authentication function is applied last, she
gets to attack the authentication function without further hindrance. In many
cases, one can argue that authentication is more important than encryption.
We therefore prefer to expose the encryption function to Eve's direct attacks,
and protect the MAC as much as possible. Of course, these issues are moot if
both the underlying encryption scheme and MAC are secure, but we take an
approach of professional paranoia and would like a secure channel with some
robustness even if we do not assume that.
When might authentication be more important than encryption? Imagine a
situation in which a secure channel is being used. Consider how much damage
Eve could do if she could read all the traffic. Then think about how much
damage Eve could do if she could modify the data being communicated. In
most situations, modifying data is a devastating attack, and does more damage
than merely reading it.
The second argument in favor of authenticating first is the Horton Principle.
You should authenticate what you mean, not what you say. Authenticating
the ciphertext breaks this rule, and creates a vulnerability. The danger is
that Bob might check that the ciphertext is correctly authenticated, but then
decrypt the ciphertext with a different key than what Alice used to encrypt
the message. Bob will get a different plaintext than Alice sent, even though
the authentication checked out. This shouldn't happen, but it can. There is
a particular (unusual) configuration of IPsec that has this problem [51]. This
vulnerability has to be fixed. You could include the encryption key in the
additional data being authenticated, but we don't like using keys for anything
but their normal use. It introduces extra risks; you don't want a faulty MAC
function leaking information about the encryption key. The standard solution
is to derive both the encryption key and the authentication key for the secure
channel from a single secure channel key, as we do in Section 7.4.1. This
removes the vulnerability, but it also introduces a cross-dependency. The
authentication suddenly depends on the key derivation system.
You can argue for hours which order of operations is better. All orders
can result in good systems, all can result in bad systems. Each has its own
advantages and disadvantages. We choose to authenticate first for the rest of
this chapter. We like the simplicity of authenticate-first, and its security under
our practical paranoia model.
7.3 Designing a Secure Channel: Overview
The solution consists of three components: message numbering,
authentication, and encryption. We will walk through the design of one possible secure
channel and, in the process, illustrate how to think about the underlying issues.

7.3.1 Message Numbers
Message numbers are vital for various reasons. They provide a source for
IVs for the encryption algorithm; they allow Bob to reject replayed messages
without the necessity of keeping a large database; they tell Bob which messages
were lost in transit; and they ensure that Bob receives the messages in
their correct order. For these reasons, the message numbers must increase
monotonically (i.e., later messages have larger message numbers) and must be
unique (no two messages may have the same message number).
Assigning message numbers is easy. Alice numbers the first message as 1,
the second message as 2, etc. Bob keeps track of the message number of the
last message he received. Any new message must have a message number that
is larger than the message number of the previous message. By accepting only
increasing message numbers, Bob ensures that Eve cannot replay him an old
message.
For our secure channel design, we will use a 32-bit number for the message
number. The first message is numbered 1. The number of messages is limited
to 232 — 1. If the message number overflows, then Alice will have to stop using
this key and rerun the key negotiation protocol to generate a new key. The
message number must be unique, so we cannot allow it to wrap back to 0.
We could have used a 64-bit message number, but that has a higher
overhead. (We would have to include 8 bytes of message number with each
message, instead of only 4 bytes.) 32 bits is enough for most applications.
Besides, the key should be changed regularly anyway.1 You can, of course, use
40 or 48 bits if you want to; it doesn't matter much.
Why start numbering at 1 when most C programmers like to start at 0?
This is a small implementation trick. If there are N numbers that could be
assigned, then both Alice and Bob need to be able to keep track of N +1
states. After all, the number of messages sent so far could be any of the
set { 0, ..., N }. By restricting ourselves to 232 — 1 messages, this state can be
encoded in a single 32-bit number. Had we started numbering the messages
at 0, then each implementation would require an additional flag to indicate
that either no messages had been sent so far, or that the message number
space was exhausted. Extra flags add a lot of tricky extra code that is executed
very rarely. If it is rarely used, it will have been tested only a few times, and
therefore there's a higher chance it won't work. In short, there is an entire area
of easy mistakes that we can eliminate by starting our numbering at 1.
Throughout the rest of this chapter we'll write i for the message number.
1 All keys should be updated at reasonable intervals. Heavily used keys should be updated more
often. Restricting a key to 232 - 1 messages is quite reasonable.

106 Partll Message Security
7.3.2 Authentication
We need a MAC for the authentication function. As you might expect, we
will use HMAC-SHA-256 with the full 256-bit result. The input to the MAC
consists of the message ra, and the extra authentication data x,. As we explained
in Chapter 6, there is often some contextual data that has to be included in
the authentication. This is the context data that Bob will use to interpret
what the message means; it typically includes something that identifies the
protocol, the protocol version number, and the negotiated field sizes. We are
just specifying the secure channel here; the actual value for x, will have to be
provided by the rest of the application. From our point of view, each x; is a
string and both Alice and Bob have the same value for x,-.
Let £(-) be the function that returns the length (in bytes) of a string of data.
The MAC value a is computed as
a{ := mac(z || i(x{) || Xi || mi)
where / and £(*,) are both 32-bit unsigned integers in least-significant-byte-first
format. The £(*,) ensures that the string i || £(*,) || x, || ra, uniquely parses into
its fields. Without l(Xj), there would be many ways to split it into i, xlt and m„
and as a result, the authentication would not be unambiguous. Of course, xx
should be encoded in such a way that it can be parsed into its different fields
without further context information, but that is not something we can ensure
at this level. The application using this secure channel will have to guarantee
that.
7.3.3 Encryption
For encryption, we will use AES in CTR mode. But wait, in Section 4.7 didn't
we say that CTR mode is dangerous because of the nonce? Yes, we did—sort
of. We said that exposing the control of the nonce to developers is risky,
and that we have seen too many applications that are insecure because they
did not generate the nonce correctly. However, our secure channel handles
the nonce internally—it never gives control of nonce generation to any other
party. We use the message number as the unique nonce value that CTR mode
needs. So our secure channel uses CTR mode. But we still wouldn't expose the
generation of nonces to external systems. We recommend that you never use
CTR mode directly.
We limit the size of each message to 16 • 232 bytes, which limits the block
counter to 32 bits. Of course, we could use a 64-bit counter, but 32 bits is easier
to implement on many platforms, and most applications don't need to process
such huge messages.

The key stream consists of the bytes k0, kx, For a message with nonce /,
the key stream is defined by
Kq, . . . , /C236_i
:= E(K,0 || i || 0) || E(K,l || i || 0) || • • • || E(X,232 - 1 || i || 0)
where each plaintext block of the cipher is built from a 32-bit block number,
the 32-bit message number, and 64 bits of zeros. The key stream is a very
long string. We will only use the first £(m;) + 32 bytes of the key stream. (We
shouldn't have to mention that you don't have to compute the rest of the key
stream ) We concatenate m, and au and xor these bytes with k0, ..., ke{mi)+3i.
7.3.4 Frame Format
We cannot just send the encrypted m, || aif because Bob needs to know the
message number. The final message sent will consist of / encoded as a 32-bit
integer, least significant byte first, followed by the encrypted m, and a-x.
7.4 Design Details
We can now discuss the details of the secure channel. Again, we stress that this
is not the only way to implement a secure channel, but instead an opportunity
to dive into the challenges and nuances with building a secure channel. For
convenience, we've defined the channel to be bi-directional, so the same key
can be used for both directions. If we define the channel to be one-directional,
then you can bet that somebody will use the same key for both directions and
utterly destroy the security. Making the channel bi-directional reduces this
risk. On the flip side, if you're using a secure channel defined by someone else,
be extra careful not to use the same key in both directions.
We describe all our algorithms using a pseudocode notation that should
be easy to read for anyone familiar with the conventions of programming.
Program blocks are denoted both by the indent level and by paired key words
such as if/fi and do/od.
7.4.1 Initialization
The first algorithm we show is the initialization of the channel data. This has
two main functions: setting up the keys and setting up the message numbers.
We derive four subsidiary keys from the channel key: an encryption key and
an authentication key to send messages from Alice to Bob, and an encryption
key and an authentication key to send messages from Bob to Alice.

108 Partll Message Security
function InitializeSecureChannel
input: K Key of the channel, 256 bits.
R Role. Specifies if this party is Alice or Bob.
output: S State for the secure channel.
First compute the four keys that are needed. The four strings are ASCII strings
without any length or zero-termination.
KeySendEnc «- SHA<r256(K II "Enc Alice to Bob")
KeyRecEnc «- SHA<r256(K II "Enc Bob to Alice")
KeySendAuth «- SHA^-256(K || "Auth Alice to Bob")
KeyRecAuth «- SHA^-256(K || "Auth Bob to Alice")
Swap the encryption and decryption keys if this party is Bob.
if JR = "Bob" then
swap(KeySendEnc, KeyRecEnc)
swap(KeySend Auth, KeyRecAuth)
fi
Set the send and receive counters to zero. The send counter is the number of the
last sent message. The receive counter is the number of the last received
message.
(MsgCntSend,MsgCntRec) <- (0,0)
Package the state.
S <- (KeySendEnc,
KeyRecEnc,
KeySendAuth,
KeyRecAuth,
MsgCntSend,
MsgCntRec)
return S
There is also a function to wipe the state information S. We will not
specify this in any detail. All it does is wipe the memory that S used to store
information. It is vital that this information be wiped because the keys were
stored in that area. On many systems, just deallocating the memory doesn't
necessarily wipe it, so you must erase S when you are done with it.
7.4.2 Sending a Message
We now turn to the processing required to send a message. This algorithm
takes the session state, a message to send, and additional data to be
authenticated, and produces the encrypted and authenticated message ready for
transmission. The recipient must have the same additional data at hand to
check the authentication.

function SendMessage
input: S Secure session state.
m Message to be sent.
x Additional data to be authenticated.
output: t Data to be transmitted to the receiver.
First check the message number and update it.
assert MsgCntSend < 232 — 1
MsgCntSend «- MsgCntSend + 1
i <— MsgCntSend
Compute the authentication. The values £(x) and i are encoded in four bytes, least
significant byte first.
a <- HMAC-SHA-256(KeySendAuth,z || l(x) \\ x \\ m)
t <r-m\\a
Generate the key stream. Each plaintext block of the block cipher consists of a
four-byte counter, four bytes of i, and eight zero bytes. Integers are
LSByte first, E is AES encryption with a 256-bit key.
K <- KeySendEnc
k +- EK(0 || i || 0) || EK(1 || i || 0) || • • •
Form the final text. Again, i is encoded as four bytes, LSByte first.
t *- i || (t 0 FlRST-£(0-BYTES(/c))
return t
Given our earlier discussions, this is relatively straightforward. We check for
exhaustion of the message counter. We cannot stress enough how important
this check is. If the counter ever wraps, the entire security falls apart—and
this is a mistake we've seen often. The authentication and encryption are as
described in our previous discussion. Finally, we send i with the encrypted
and authenticated message so that the receiver will know the message number.
Note that the session state is updated because the MsgCntSend value is
modified. Again, this is vital, as the message number must be unique. In fact,
almost everything in these algorithms is vital for the security.
Our secure channel uses CTR mode for encryption. If the encryption scheme
requires padding, be sure to verify the contents of the padding when you
decrypt.
7.4.3 Receiving a Message
The receiving algorithm requires the encrypted and authenticated message that
SendMessage produced and the same additional data x to be authenticated.
We assume the receiver knows x through some out-of-band means. For

example, if x contains the protocol version number, then surely Bob must
know this if he's participating in the protocol.
function ReceiveMessage
input: S Secure session state.
t Text received from the transmitter.
x Additional data to be authenticated.
output: m Message that was sent.
The received message must contain at least a 4-byte message number and a 32-byte
MAC field. This check ensures that all the future splitting operations
will work.
assert 1(f) > 36
Split t into i and the encrypted message plus authenticator. The split is well-defined
because i is always 4 bytes long.
i\\t<-t
Generate the key stream, just as the sender did.
K <- KeyRecEnc
k +- EK(0 || i || 0) || Ex(l || i || 0) || •..
Decrypt the message and MAC field, and split. The split is well-defined because a
is always 32 bytes long,
m || a «- t © Firsts(0-bytes(/c)
Recompute the authentication. The values £(x) and i are encoded in four bytes,
least significant byte first,
a' <- HMAC-SHA-256(KeyRecAuth,z || l(x) \\ x \\ m)
if a' ^ a then
destroy k, m
return AuthenticationFailure
else if i < MsgCntRec then
destroy k, m
return MessageOrderError
fi
MsgCntRec <- i
return m
We have used the canonical order for the operations here. You could put
the check on the message number before the decryption, but then this function
would report the wrong error if / were mangled during transmission. Instead
of notifying the caller that the message was mangled, it would notify the caller
that the message is in the wrong order. As the caller might wish to handle the
two situations differently, this routine should not give the wrong information.
The reason some people like to put the check earlier is that it allows false
messages to be discarded more quickly. We don't consider this to be of great

importance; if you receive so many false packets that the speed of discarding
them becomes significant, you already have much bigger problems.
There is one very important issue for the receiver. The ReceiveMessage
function may not release any information about the key stream or the plaintext
message until the authentication has been verified. If the authentication fails, a
failure indication is returned, but neither the key stream nor the plaintext may
be revealed. An actual implementation should wipe the memory areas used
to store these elements. So why is this so important? The plaintext message
reveals the key stream, because it is assumed that every attacker knows the
ciphertext. The danger is that the attacker will send a fake message (with an
incorrect MAC value) but still learn the key stream from the data released by
the receiver. This is the paranoia model at work again. Any data released or
leaked by this routine is automatically assumed to end up in possession of the
attacker. By destroying the data held in k and m before returning with an error,
this routine ensures that this data can never be leaked.
7.4.4 Message Order
Like the transmitter, the receiver updates the state S by modifying the
MsgCntRec variable. The receiver ensures that the message numbers of
the messages it accepts are strictly increasing. This certainly ensures that no
message is accepted twice, but if the stream of messages is reordered during
transmission, otherwise perfectly valid messages will be lost.
It is relatively easy to fix this, but at a cost. If you let the receiver accept
messages out of order, then the application that uses the secure channel must
be able to handle these out-of-order messages. Many applications cannot deal
with this. Some applications are designed to handle it, but have subtle bugs
(often security-relevant) when messages are reordered. In most situations, we
prefer to fix the underlying transport layer and prevent accidental reordering
of messages, so that the secure channel does not have to deal with this problem.
There is one situation that we know of in which the receiver allows messages
to arrive out of order, and for a very good reason. This is IPsec, the IP security
protocol [73] that encrypts and authenticates IP packets. As IP packets can be
reordered during transport, and as all applications that use IP are very well
aware of this property, IPsec maintains a replay protection window rather
than just remembering the counter value of the last received message. If c
is the message number of the last received message, then IPsec maintains
a bitmap for the message numbers c - 31, c - 30, c - 29, ..., c - 1, c. Each bit
indicates whether a message with the corresponding message number has
been received. Messages with numbers smaller than c — 31 are always refused.
Messages in the range c — 31 toe — 1 are only accepted if the corresponding
bit is 0 (and this bit is then set, of course). If the new message has a message
number larger than c, then c is updated and the bitmap is shifted to maintain

the invariant. Such a bitmap construction allows some limited reordering of
the messages without adding too much state to the receiver.
Another option is to terminate the communications if a message is dropped.
This is particularly suited when the secure channel runs on top of a reliable
transport like TCP. Unless there is malicious activity, messages should arrive
in order and without any loss. So if a message is dropped or arrives out of
order, terminate the communications.
7.5 Alternatives
The secure channel definition we have given is not always practical; especially
when implementing a secure channel in embedded hardware, it becomes
relatively costly to implement SHA-256. As an alternative, there has recently
been interest in creating dedicated block cipher modes for providing both
privacy and authenticity at the same time.
These dedicated privacy-and-authenticity block cipher modes take a single
key as input, just like CBC mode and CBC-MAC These modes generally also
take a message as input, additional data to be authenticated, and a nonce.
These modes are not as simple as just using CBC mode and CBC-MAC with
the same key, however. Using the same key for both a regular encryption
mode and a regular MAC can lead to security problems.
The most well-known initial combined mode is OCB [109]. This mode is
very efficient. Each plaintext block can be processed in parallel, which is
attractive for high-speed hardware. The existence of patents has limited OCB's
adoption.
Because of the patent issues surrounding OCB, and because of the need for
a dedicated, single-key block cipher mode for encryption and authentication,
Doug Whiting, Russ Housley, and Niels developed a mode called CCM [126].
It is a combination of CTR mode encryption and CBC-MAC authentication,
but with care taken to allow for the use of the same key with both CTR mode
and CBC-MAC. Compared to OCB, it requires twice as many computations to
encrypt and authenticate a message, but as far as we know there are no patent
issues at all with CCM. The designers know of no patents that cover CCM,
and they have not applied, nor will they apply, for a patent. Jakob Jonsson
provided a proof of security for CCM [65]. NIST has since standardized CCM
as a block cipher mode [41].
To improve on the efficiency of CCM, Doug Whiting, John Viega, and Yoshi
developed another mode called CWC [80]. CWC builds on CTR mode to
provide encryption. Under the hood, CWC uses universal hashing to achieve
authenticity [125]. We mentioned but did not discuss universal hashing in
Chapter 6 when we introduced GMAC [43]. CWC's use of universal hashing

makes CWC fully parallelizable, like OCB, but avoids the patents surrounding
OCB. David McGrew and John Viega improved on CWC with a more efficient
universal hashing function for hardware implementations. Their improved
mode is called GCM [43]. NIST has now standardized GCM as a block cipher
mode.
Just like our secure channel from earlier in this chapter, OCB, CCM, CWC,
and GCM can all take two strings as input—a message to be sent and additional
data to be authenticated. The GMAC message authentication scheme is actually
just GCM mode where the main message is the empty string.
These modes are all reasonable choices. Because they are standardized and
unencumbered by patents, we prefer CCM and GCM. Unfortunately, GCM's
authentication capability shares the limitations of GMAC that we discussed
in Section 6.5. Therefore, although it is possible to reduce the size of the
authenticator for GCM from 128 bits to something less, we recommend not
doing so. Our recommendation is to only use GCM with the full 128-bit
authentication tag.
Another important point: OCB, CCM, CWC, GCM, and similar modes
do not by themselves provide the full secure channel. They provide the
encryption/authentication functionality, and require a key and a unique
nonce for each packet. We discussed the risks of relying on external systems
to correctly generate nonces in Section 4.7. It is easy, however, to adapt our
secure channel algorithms to use one of these block cipher modes rather than
the separate MAC and encryption functions. Instead of the four subsidiary
keys generated in InitializeSecureChannel, you will need two keys, one for
each direction of traffic. The nonce can be constructed by padding the message
number to the correct size.
Stepping back, we observe that the secure channel is one of the most
useful applications of cryptography, and it is used in almost all cryptographic
systems. You can construct a secure channel from good encryption and
authentication primitives, and there are also dedicated privacy-and-authenticity block
cipher modes that you can build upon. There are many details to pay attention
to, and all the details must of course be done correctly. A separate challenge,
which we will consider later, is establishing a symmetric key.
7.6 Exercises
Exercise 7.1 In our design of a secure channel, we said that the message
numbers must not repeat. What bad things can happen if the message numbers
do repeat?
Exercise 7.2 Modify the algorithms for the secure channel in this chapter to
use the encrypt-then-authenticate order for encryption and authentication.

Exercise 7.3 Modify the algorithms for the secure channel in this chapter
to use the a dedicated, single-key mode for providing both encryption and
authentication. You can use OCB, CCM, CWC, or GCM as a black box.
Exercise 7.4 Compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages among
the different orders of applying encryption and authentication when creating
a secure channel.
Exercise 7.5 Find a new product or system that uses (or should use) a
secure channel. This might be the same product or system you analyzed
for Exercise 1.8. Conduct a security review of that product or system as
described in Section 1.12, this time focusing on the security and privacy issues
surrounding the secure channel.
Exercise 7.6 Suppose Alice and Bob are communicating using the secure
channel described in this chapter. Eve is eavesdropping on the
communications. What types of traffic analysis information could Eve learn by
eavesdropping on the encrypted channel? Describe a situation in which
information exposure via traffic analysis is a serious privacy problem.
