# 8 Implementation Issues (I)

CHAPTER

Implementation Issues (I)
Now that we have come this far, we would like to talk a bit about
implementation issues. Implementing cryptographic systems is sufficiently different from
implementing normal programs to deserve its own treatment.
The big problem is, as always, the weakest-link property (see Section 1.2).
It is very easy to screw up the security at the implementation level. In
fact, implementation errors such as buffer overflows are one of the biggest
security problems in real-world systems. With few exceptions, you don't hear
about cryptography systems that are broken in practice. This is not because
the cryptography in most systems is any good; we've reviewed enough of
them to know this is not the case. It is just easier in most cases to find an
implementation-related hole than it is to find a cryptographic vulnerability,
and attackers are smart enough not to bother with the cryptography when
there is this much easier route.
So far in this book we have restricted our discussion to cryptography, but in
this chapter we will focus more on the environment in which the cryptography
operates. Every part of the system affects security, and to do a really good job,
the entire system must be designed from the ground up not just with security
in mind, but with security as one of the primary goals. The "system" we're
talking about is very big. It includes everything that could damage the security
properties if it were to misbehave.
One major part is, as always, the operating system. But historically, none
of the operating systems in widespread use was designed with security as a
primary goal. And the diversity of operating systems is enormous—from the
operating systems we interact with on our desktop computers to operating
systems on embedded devices and phones. The logical conclusion to draw

from this is that it is impossible to implement a secure system. We don't know
how to do it, and we don't know anyone else who knows how to do it, either.
Real-life systems include many components that were never designed for
security, and that makes it impossible to achieve the level of security that we
really need. So should we just give up? Of course not. When we design a
cryptographic system, we do our very best to make sure that at least our part
is secure. This might sound like an odd mentality: all we care about is our little
domain. But we do care about the other parts of the system; we just can't do
anything about them in the context of this book. That is one of the reasons for
writing this book: to get other people to understand the insidious nature of
security, and how important it is to do it right.
Another important reason to get at least the cryptography right is one
we mentioned before: attacks on the cryptography are especially damaging
because they can be invisible. If the attacker succeeds in breaking your
cryptography, you are unlikely to notice. This can be compared to a burglar
who has a set of keys to your house. If the burglar exercises reasonable caution,
how would you ever find out?
Our long-term goal is to make secure computer systems. To achieve that
goal, everybody will have to do their part. This book is about making the
cryptography secure. Other parts of the system will have to be made secure,
too. The overall security of the system is going to be limited by the weakest
link, and we will do our utmost to ensure that the weakest link will never be
the cryptography.
Another important reason to do the cryptography right is that it is very
difficult to switch cryptographic systems once they've been implemented. An
operating system runs on a single computer. Cryptographic systems are often
used in communication protocols to let many computers communicate with
each other. Upgrading the operating system of a single computer is feasible,
and in practice it is done relatively often. Modifying the communication
protocols in a network is a nightmare, and as a result many networks still
use the designs of the 1970s and 1980s. We must keep in mind that any new
cryptographic system we design today, if adopted widely, is quite likely to
still be in use 30 or 50 years from now. We hope that by that time the other
parts of the system will have achieved a much higher level of security, and we
certainly don't want cryptography to be the weakest link.
8.1 Creating Correct Programs
The core of the implementation problem is that we in the IT industry don't
know how to write a correct program or module. (A "correct" program is one
that behaves exactly according to its specifications.) There are several reasons
for the difficulty we seem to have in writing correct programs.

8.1.1 Specifications
The first problem is that for most programs, there is no clear description of
what they are supposed to do. If there are no specifications, then you cannot
even check whether a program is correct or not. For such programs, the whole
concept of correctness is undefined.
Many software projects have a document called the functional specification.
In theory, this should be the specification of the program. But in practice,
this document often does not exist, is incomplete, or specifies things that are
irrelevant for the behavior of the program. Without clear specifications, there
is no hope of getting a correct program.
There are really three stages in the specification process:
Requirements Requirements are an informal description of what the program
is supposed to achieve. It is really a "what can I do with it" document,
rather than a "how exactly do I do something with it" document.
Requirements are often a bit vague and leave details out in order to
concentrate on the larger picture.
Functional specification The functional specification gives a detailed and
exhaustive definition of the behavior of the program. The functional
specification can only specify things that you can measure on the outside
of the program.
For each item in the functional specification, ask yourself whether you
could create a test on the finished program that would determine whether
that item was adhered to or not. The test can only use the external behavior
of the program, not anything from the inside. If you can't create a test for
an item, it does not belong in the functional specification.
The functional specification should be complete. That is, every piece
of functionality should be specified. Anything not in the functional
specification does not have to be implemented.
Another way to think of the functional specification is as the basis for
testing the finished program. Any item can, and should, be tested.
Implementation design This document has many names, but it specifies how
the program works internally. It contains all of the things that cannot be
tested from the outside. A good implementation design will often split
the program into several modules, and describe the functionality of each.
In turn, these module descriptions can be seen as the requirements for the
module, and the whole cycle starts all over again, this time by splitting
the module itself into multiple sub-modules.
Of these three documents, the functional specification is without a doubt
the most important one. This is the document against which the program

will be tested when it is finished. You can sometimes get by with informal
requirements, or an implementation design that is nothing but a few sketches
on a whiteboard. But without functional specifications, there is no way to even
describe what you have achieved in the end when the program is finished.
8.1.2 Test and Fix
The second problem in writing correct programs is the test-and-fix
development method that is in almost universal use. Programmers write a program,
and then test whether it behaves correctly. If it doesn't, they fix the bugs and
test again. As we all know, this does not lead to a correct program. It results in
a program that kind of works in the most common situations.
Back in 1972, Edsger Dijkstra commented in his Turing Award lecture
that testing can only show the presence of bugs, never the absence of bugs
[35]. This is very true, and ideally we would like to write programs that
we can demonstrate to be correct. Unfortunately, current techniques in
proving the correctness of programs are not good enough to handle day-to-day
programming tasks, let alone a whole project.
Computer scientists do not know how to solve this. Maybe it will be possible
in the future to prove that a program is correct. Maybe we just need a far
more extensive and thorough testing infrastructure and methodology. But
even without having a full solution, we can certainly do our very best with the
tools we do have.
There are some simple rules about bugs that any good software engineering
book includes:
■ If you find a bug, first implement a test that detects the bug. Check that
the bug is detected. Then fix the bug, and check that the test no longer
finds the bug. And then keep running that test on every future version
to make sure the bug does not reappear.
■ Whenever you find a bug, think about what caused it. Are there any
other places in the program where a similar bug might reside? Go check
them all.
■ Keep track of every bug you find. Simple statistical analysis of the bugs
you have found can show you which part of the program is especially
buggy, or what type of error is made most frequently, etc. Such feedback
is necessary for a quality control system.
This is not even a bare minimum, but there is not a lot of methodology to draw
from. There are quite a few books that discuss software quality. They don't all
agree with each other. Many of them present a particular software development
methodology as the solution, and we are always suspicious of such one-cure-
does-it-all schemes. The truth is almost always somewhere in the middle.

8.1.3 Lax Attitude
The third problem is the incredibly lax attitude of many in the computer
industry. Errors in programs are frequently accepted as a matter of course. If
your word processor crashes and destroys a day's worth of work, everybody
seems to think this is quite normal and acceptable. Often they blame the
user: "You should have saved your work more often." Software companies
routinely ship products with known bugs in them. This wouldn't be so bad
if they only sold computer games, but nowadays our work, our economy,
and—more and more—our lives depend on software. If a car manufacturer
finds a defect (bug) in a car after it was sold, they will recall the car and fix
it. Software companies get away with disclaiming any and all liability in their
software license, something they wouldn't be allowed to do if they produced
any other product. This lax attitude means there are still not enough serious
efforts being made at producing correct software.
8.1.4 So How Do We Proceed?
Don't ever think that all you need is a good programmer or code reviews
or an ISO 9001-certified development process or extensive testing or even
a combination of all of them. Reality is much more difficult. Software is too
complex to be tamed by a few rules and procedures. We find it instructive to
look at the best engineering quality control system in the world: the airline
industry. Everybody in that industry is involved in the safety system. There are
very strict rules and procedures for almost every operation. There are multiple
backups in case of failures. Every nut and bolt of the airplane has to be flight-
qualified before it can ever be used. Anytime a mechanic takes a screwdriver
to the plane, his work is checked and signed off by a supervisor. Every
modification is carefully recorded. Any accident is meticulously investigated
to find all the underlying causes, which are then fixed. This fanatical pursuit
of quality has a very high cost. An airplane is probably an order of magnitude
more expensive than it would be if you just sent the drawings to an ordinary
engineering firm. But the pursuit of quality has also been amazingly effective.
Flying is an entirely routine operation today, in a machine where every failure
is potentially fatal—a machine where you cannot just hit the brakes and stop
when something goes wrong. One where the only safe way back to the ground
is the quite delicate operation of landing on one of the rare specially prepared
spots in the world. The airline industry has been amazingly effective at making
flying secure. We would do well to learn all we can from them. Maybe writing
correct software would cost an order of magnitude more than what we are used
to now. But given the cost to society of the bugs in software that we see today,
we are sure it would be cost-effective in the long run.

8.2 Creating Secure Software
So far, we have only talked about correct software. Just writing correct software
is not good enough for a security system. The software must be secure as well.
What is the difference? Correct software has a specified functionality. If you
hit button A, then B will happen. Secure software has an additional
requirement: a lack of functionality. No matter what the attacker does, she cannot do
X. This is a very fundamental difference; you can test for functionality, but
not for lack of functionality. The security aspects of the software cannot be
tested in any effective way, which makes writing secure software much more
difficult than writing correct software. The inevitable conclusion is:
Standard implementation techniques
are entirely inadequate to create secure code.
We actually don't know how to create secure code. Software quality is a vast
area that would take several books to cover. We don't know enough about it
to write those books, but we do know the cryptography-specific issues and the
problems that we see most frequently, and that is what we will discuss in the
rest of this chapter.
Before we start, let us make our point of view clear: unless you are willing
to put real effort into developing a secure implementation, there is little point
in bothering with the cryptography. Designing cryptographic systems might
be fun, but cryptography is generally only a small part of a larger system.
8.3 Keeping Secrets
Anytime you work with cryptography, you are dealing with secrets. And
secrets have to be kept. This means that the software that deals with the secrets
has to ensure that they don't leak out.
For the secure channel we have two types of secrets: the keys and the data.
Both of these secrets are transient secrets; we don't have to store them for a
long time. The data is only stored while we process each message. The keys are
only stored for the duration of the secure channel. Here we will only discuss
keeping transient secrets. For a discussion on storing secrets long-term, see
Chapter 21.
Transient secrets are kept in memory. Unfortunately, the memory on most
computers is not very secure. We will discuss each of the typical problems
in turn.

8.3.1 Wiping State
A basic rule of writing security software: wipe any information as soon as you
no longer need it. The longer you keep it, the higher the chance that someone
will be able to access it. What's more, you should definitely wipe the data
before you lose control over the underlying storage medium. For transient
secrets, this involves wiping the memory locations.
This sounds easy to do, but it leads to a surprising number of problems. If
you write the entire program in C, you can take care of the wiping yourself.
If you write a library for others to use, you have to depend on the main
program to inform you that the state is no longer needed. For example, when
the communication connection is closed, the crypto library should be informed
so that it can wipe the secure channel session state. The library can contain
a function for this, but there's a reasonable chance that the programmer of
the application won't call this function. After all, the program works perfectly
well without calling this function.
In some object-oriented languages, things are a bit easier. In C++, there is a
destructor function for each object, and the destructor can wipe the state. This
is certainly standard practice for security-relevant code in C++. As long as the
main program behaves properly and destroys all objects it no longer needs, the
memory state will be wiped. The C++ language ensures that all stack-allocated
objects are properly destroyed when the stack is unwound during exception
handling, but the program has to ensure that all heap-allocated objects are
destroyed. Calling an operating system function to exit the program might not
even unwind the call stack. And you have to ensure that all sensitive data is
wiped even if the program is about to exit. After all, the operating system gives
no guarantees that it will wipe the data soon, and some operating systems don't
even bother wiping the memory before they give it to the next application.
Even if you do all this, the computer might still frustrate your attempts.
Some compilers try too hard to optimize. A typical security-relevant function
performs some computations in local variables, and then tries to wipe them.
You can do this in C with a call to the memset function. Good compilers will
optimize the memset function to in-line code, which is more efficient. But some
of them are too clever by half. They detect that the variable or array that is
being wiped will never be used again, and "optimize" the memset away. It's
faster, but suddenly the program does not behave the same way anymore. It is
not uncommon to see code that reveals data that it happens to find in memory.
If the memory is given to some library without having been wiped first, the
library might leak the data to an attacker. So check the code that your compiler
produces, and make sure the secrets are actually being wiped.

122 Partll Message Security
In a language like Java, the situation is even more complicated. All objects
live on the heap, and the heap is garbage-collected. This means that the
finalization function (similar to the C++ destructor) is not called until the
garbage collector figures out that the object is no longer in use. There are no
specifications about how often the garbage collector is run, and it is quite
conceivable that secret data remains in memory for a very long time. The use
of exception handling makes it hard to do the wiping by hand. If an exception
is thrown, then the call-stack unwinds without any way for the programmer
to insert his own code, except by writing every function as a big try clause.
The latter solution is so ugly that it is impractical. It also has to be applied
throughout the program, making it impossible to create a security library for
Java that behaves properly. During exception handling, Java happily unwinds
the stack, throwing away the references to the objects without cleaning up the
objects themselves. Java is really bad in this respect. The best solution we've
been able to come up with is to at least ensure that the finalization routines
are run at program exit. The main method of the program uses a try-finally
statement. The finally block contains some code to force a garbage collect,
and to instruct the garbage collector to attempt to complete all the finalization
methods. (See the functions System.gc() and System.runFinalizationO for
more details.) There is still no guarantee that the finalization methods will be
run, but it is the best we've been able to find.
What we really need is support from the programming language itself. In
C++ it is at least theoretically possible to write a program that wipes all states
as soon as they are no longer needed, but many other features of the language
make it a poor choice for security software. Java makes it very difficult to
wipe the state. One improvement would be to declare variables as "sensitive,"
and have the implementation guarantee that they will be wiped. Even better
would be a language that always wipes all data that is no longer needed. That
would avoid a lot of errors without significantly affecting efficiency.
There are other places where secret data can end up. All data is eventually
loaded into a CPU register. Wiping registers is not possible in most
programming languages, but on register-starved CPUs like the x86, it is very unlikely
that any data will survive for any reasonable amount of time.
During a context-switch (when the operating system switches from running
one program to running the next program), the values in the registers of the
CPU are stored in memory where their values might linger for a long time. As
far as we know, there is nothing you can do about this, apart from fixing the
operating system to ensure the confidentiality of that data.
8.3.2 Swap File
Most operating systems (including all current Windows versions and all UNIX
versions) use a virtual memory system to increase the number of programs
that can be run in parallel. While a program is running, not all of its data is kept

in memory. Some is stored in a swap file. When the program tries to access
data that is not in memory, the program is interrupted. The virtual memory
system reads the required data from the swap file into a piece of memory, and
the program is allowed to continue. What's more, when the virtual memory
system decides that it needs more free memory, it will take an arbitrary piece
of memory from a program and write it to the swap file.
Of course, not all virtual memory systems or configurations keep the
data secret, or encrypt it before it is written to the disk. Most software is
designed for a cooperative environment, not the adversarial environment that
cryptographers work in. So our problem is the following: the virtual memory
system could just take some of the memory of our program and write it to the
swap file on disk. The program never gets told, and does not notice. Suppose
this happens to the memory in which the keys are stored. If the computer
crashes—or is switched off—the data remains on the disk. Most operating
systems leave the data on disk even when you shut them down properly.
There may be no mechanism to wipe the swap file, so the data could linger
indefinitely on disk. Who knows who will have access to this swap file in
future? We really cannot afford the risk of having our secrets written to the
swap file.1
So how do we stop the virtual memory system from writing our data to
disk? On some operating systems there are system calls that you can use to
inform the virtual memory system that specified parts of memory are not
to be swapped out. Some operating systems support a secure swap system
where the swapped-out data is cryptographically protected, but these systems
might require the user to toggle the appropriate system configuration flags. If
neither of these options is available on all the systems that you wish to run
your application, there might not be much you can do to protect against this
particular avenue of attack.
Assuming you can lock the memory and prevent it from being swapped
out, which memory should be locked? All the memory that can ever hold
secrets, of course. This brings up a secondary problem. Many programming
environments make it very hard to know where exactly your data is being
stored. Objects are often allocated on a heap, data can be statically allocated,
and many local variables end up on the stack. Figuring out the details is
complicated and very error-prone. Probably the best solution is to simply lock
all the memory of your application. Even that is not quite as easy as it sounds,
because you could lose a number of operating system services such as the
automatically allocated stack. And locking all the memory makes the virtual
memory system ineffective.
It shouldn't be this difficult. The proper solution is, of course, to make a
virtual memory system that protects the confidentiality of the data. This is an
!In fact, we should never write secrets to any permanent media without encrypting them, but
that is an issue we will discuss later.

124 Part H Message Security
operating system change, and beyond our control. Even if the next version
of your operating system were to have this feature, you should carefully
check that the virtual memory system does a good job of keeping secrets.
And, depending on your application, you may still have to deal with the fact
that your application needs to run on older systems or systems in insecure
configurations.
8.3.3 Caches
Modern computers don't just have a single type of memory. They have a
hierarchy of memories. At the bottom is the main memory—often gigabytes in
size. But because the main memory is relatively slow, there is also a cache. This
is a smaller but faster memory. The cache keeps a copy of the most recently
used data from the main memory. If the CPU wants to access the data, it first
checks the cache. If the data is in the cache, the CPU gets the data relatively
quickly. If the data is not in the cache, it is read (relatively slowly) from main
memory, and a copy is stored in the cache for future use. To make room in the
cache, a copy of some other piece of data is thrown away.
This is important because caches keep copies of data, including copies of our
secret data. The problem is that when we try to wipe our secrets, this wiping
might not take place properly. In some systems, the modifications are only
written to the cache and not to the main memory. The data will eventually be
written to main memory, but only when the cache needs more room to store
other data. We don't know all the details of these systems, and they change
with every CPU. There is no way to know if there is some interaction between
the memory allocation unit and the cache system that might result in some
wipe operations escaping the write-to-main-memory part when the memory
is deallocated before the cache is flushed. Manufacturers never specify how
to wipe data in a guaranteed manner. At least, we have never seen any
specifications like that, and as long as it is not specified, we can't trust it.
A secondary danger of caches is that under some circumstances a cache
learns that a particular memory location has been modified, perhaps by the
other CPU in a multi-CPU system. The cache then marks the data it has for
that location as "invalid," but typically the actual data is not wiped. Again,
there might exist a copy of our secrets that has not been wiped.
There is very little you can do about this. It is not a great danger, because in
most systems, minus physical attacks, only the OS code can access the cache
mechanisms directly. And we have to trust the operating system anyway, so
we could trust it with this as well. We are nevertheless concerned about these
designs, because they clearly do not provide the functionality that is required
to implement security systems properly.

8.3.4 Data Retention by Memory
Something that surprises many people is that simply overwriting data in
memory does not delete the data. The details depend to some extent on the
exact type of memory involved, but basically, if you store data in a memory
location, that location slowly starts to "learn" the data. When you overwrite
or switch off the computer, the old value is not completely lost. Depending
on the circumstances, just powering the memory off and back on again can
recover some or all of the old data. Other memories can "remember" old data
if you access them using (often undocumented) test modes [57].
Several mechanisms cause this phenomenon. If the same data is stored for a
time in the same location in SRAM (Static RAM), then this data becomes the
preferred power-up state of that memory. A friend of ours encountered this
problem with his home-built computer long ago [17]. He wrote a BIOS that
used a magic value in a particular memory location to determine whether a
reset was a cold reboot or a warm reboot.2 After a while the machine refused
to boot after power-up because the memory had learned the magic value, and
the boot process therefore treated every reset as a warm reboot. As this did not
initialize the proper variables, the boot process failed. The solution in his case
was to swap some memory chips around, scrambling the magic value that the
SRAM had learned. For us, it was a lesson to remember: memory retains more
data than you think.
Similar processes happen in DRAM (Dynamic RAM), although they are
somewhat more complicated. DRAM works by storing a small charge on a
very small capacitor. The insulating material around the capacitor is stressed
by the resulting field. The stress results in changes to the material, specifically
causing the migration of impurities [57]. An attacker with physical control
over the memory can potentially recover this data. Additionally, because of
how DRAM capacitors discharge, their values may remain for seconds at room
temperature if power is removed or even longer if the memory is cooled.
These are important problems. The latter class of issues was recently
demonstrated in the context of cold boot attacks [59]. These researchers were able
to recover secret cryptographic keys from the memories of computers after
they were rebooted. These researchers were also able to physically extract
the memory from one computer, put that memory in another computer,
and recover the cryptographic keys. If your computer is ever compromised
(e.g., stolen), you do not want the data that you had in memory to be
2In those days home-built machines were programmed by entering the binary form of machine
language directly. This led to many errors, and the one sure way to recover from a program that
crashed was to reset the machine. A cold reboot is one after power-up. A warm reboot is the sort
performed when the user presses the reset button. A warm reboot does not reinitialize all the
state, and therefore does not wipe the settings the user made.

126 Partll Message Security
compromised as well. To achieve this goal, we have to make the computer
forget information.
We can only give a partial solution, which works if we make some reasonable
assumptions about the memory. This solution, which we call a Boojum,3 works
for relatively small amounts of data, such as keys. Our description of Boojum
has been updated slightly since the first edition of this book, and includes a
defense against the cold boot attack from [59]. For Boojum, let m be the data we
want to store. Instead of storing m, we generate a random string R and store
both R and h(R) © m where h is a hash function. These two values are stored
in different memory locations, preferably not too close together. One trick is
to change jR regularly. At regular intervals, say every 1 second, we generate
a new random R, and update the memory to store jR © R and h(R © jR') © m.
This ensures that each bit of the memory is written with a sequence of random
bits. To wipe the memory, you simply write a new m with the value zero.
To read information from this storage, you read both parts, hash the first,
and xor them together to get m. Writing is done by xoRing the new data with
h(R) and storing it in the second location.
Care should be taken that the bits of jR and h(R) © m are not adjacent on the
RAM chip. Without information about how the RAM chip works, this can be
difficult, but most memories store bits in a rectangular matrix of bits, with some
address bits selecting the row and other address bits selecting the column.
If the two pieces are stored at addresses that differ by 0x5555, it is highly
unlikely that the two will be stored adjacent on the chip. (This assumes that the
memory does not use the even-indexed address bits as row number and the
odd-indexed address bits as column number, but we have never seen a design
like that.) An even better solution might be to choose two random addresses
in a very large address space. This makes the probability that the two locations
are adjacent very small, independent of the actual chip layouts of the memory.
This is only a partial solution, and a rather cumbersome one at that. It is
limited to small amounts of data. But using this solution ensures that there is
no physical point on the memory chip that is continually stressed or unstressed
depending on the secret data. Further, as long as k bits of jR are not recoverable,
the attacker would have to exhaustively search for those k bits before being
able to recover h(R) © m.
There is still no guarantee that the memory will be wiped. If you read the
documentation of a memory chip, there are no specifications that prevent the
chip from retaining all data ever stored in it. No chip does that, of course, but
it shows that we can at most achieve a heuristic security.
We have concentrated on the main memory here. The same solution will
work for the cache memory, except that you cannot control the position on
the chip where the data will be stored. This solution does not work for the
3 After Lewis Carroll's The Hunting of the Snark [24].

CPU registers, but they are used so often for so much different data that we
doubt they will pose a data retention problem. On the other hand, extension
registers, such as floating point registers or MMX-style registers, are used far
less frequently, so they could pose a problem.
If you have large amounts of data that need to be kept secret, then the
solution of storing two copies and xoRing new random strings into both copies
regularly becomes too expensive. A better solution is to encrypt a large block of
data and store the ciphertext in memory that potentially retains information.
Only the key needs to be stored in a way that avoids data retention, for
example, using a Boojum. For details, see [32].
8.3.5 Access by Others
There's yet another problem with keeping secrets on a computer: other
programs on the same machine might access the data. Some operating systems
allow different programs to share memory. If the other program can read your
secret keys, you have a serious problem. Often the shared memory has to be
set up by both programs, which reduces the risk. In other situations, the shared
memory might be set up automatically as a result of loading a shared library.
Debuggers are especially dangerous. Modern operating systems often
contain features designed to be used by debuggers. Various Windows versions
allow you to attach a debugger to an already running process. The debugger
can do many things, including reading the memory. Under UNIX, it is
sometimes possible to force a core-dump of a program. The core-dump is a file that
contains a memory image of the program data, including all of your secrets.
Another danger comes from especially powerful users. Called superusers,
or administrators, these users can access things on the machine that normal
users cannot. Under UNIX, for example, the superuser can read any part of
the memory.
In general, your program cannot effectively defend itself against these types
of attacks. If you are careful, you may be able to eliminate some of these
problems, but often you'll find yourself limited in what can be achieved. Still,
you should consider these issues on the particular platform you are working on.
8.3.6 Data Integrity
In addition to keeping secrets, we should protect the integrity of the data we
are storing. We use the MAC to protect the integrity of the data during transit,
but if the data can be modified in memory, we still have problems.
In this discussion, we will assume that the hardware is reliable. If the
hardware is unreliable, there is very little you can do. If you are unsure about
the hardware reliability, perhaps you should spend part of your time and
memory simply to verify it, although that is really the operating system's job.

128 Partll Message Security
One thing we try to do is make sure the main memory on our machines is
ECC (error-correcting code) memory.4 If there is a single bit failure, then the
error-correcting code will detect and correct the error. Without ECC memory,
any bit error leads to the CPU reading the wrong data.
Why is this important? There is an enormous number of bits in a modern
computer. Suppose the engineering is done really well, and each bit has only
a 10"15 chance of failing in each second. If you have 128 MB of memory, then
you have about 109 bits of memory, and you can expect one bit failure every 11
days. The error rate increases with the amount of memory in the machine, so
it is even worse if you have 1 GB of memory, with one failure every 32 hours.
Servers typically use ECC memory because they have more memory and run
for longer periods of time. We like to have the same stability in all machines.
Of course, this is a hardware issue, and you typically don't get to specify the
type of memory on the machine that will run the final application.
Some of the dangers that threaten data confidentiality also endanger the
data integrity. Debuggers can sometimes modify your program's memory.
Superusers can directly modify memory, too. Again, there is nothing you can
do about it, but it is useful to be aware of the situation.
8.3.7 What to Do
Keeping a secret on a modern computer is not as easy as it sounds. There are
many ways in which the secret can leak out. To be fully effective, you have to
stop all of them. Unfortunately, current operating systems and programming
languages do not provide the required support to stop the leakage completely.
You have to do the best you can. This involves a lot of work, all of it specific
to the environment you work in.
These problems also make it very difficult to create a library with the
cryptographic functions in it. Keeping the secrets safe often involves modifications
to the main program. And of course, the main program also handles data
that should be kept confidential; otherwise, it wouldn't need the cryptography
library in the first place. This is the familiar issue of security considerations
affecting every part of the system.
8.4 Quality of Code
If you create an implementation for a cryptographic system, you will have to
spend a great deal of time on the quality of the code. This book is not about
programming, but we will say a few words about code quality here.
4You have to make sure that all components of the computer support ECC memory. Beware of
slightly cheaper memory modules that do not store the extra information but instead recompute
it on the fly. This defeats the whole purpose of ECC memory.

8.4.1 Simplicity
Complexity is the main enemy of security. Therefore, any security design
should strive for simplicity. We are quite ruthless about this, even though this
does not make us popular. Eliminate all the options that you can. Get rid of all
those baroque features that few people use. Stay away from committee designs,
because the committee process always leads to extra features or options in
order to achieve compromise. In security, simplicity is king.
A typical example is our secure channel. It has no options. It doesn't allow
you to encrypt the data without authenticating it, or to authenticate the data
without encrypting it. People always ask for these features, but in many
cases they do not realize the consequences of using partial security features.
Most users are not informed enough about security to be able to select the
correct security options. The best solution is to have no options and make the
system secure by default. If you absolutely have to, provide a single option:
secure or insecure.
Many systems also have multiple cipher suites, where the user (or someone
else) can choose which cipher and which authentication function to use. If at
all possible, eliminate this complexity. Choose a single mode that is secure
enough for all possible applications. The computational difference between
the various encryption modes is not that large, and cryptography is rarely the
bottleneck for modern computers. Apart from getting rid of the complexity,
it also gets rid of the danger that users might configure their application to
use weak cipher suites. After all, if choosing an encryption and authentication
mode is so difficult that the designer can't do it, it will be even more challenging
for a user to make an informed decision.
8.4.2 Modularization
Even after you have eliminated a lot of options and features, the resulting
system will still be quite complex. There is one main technique for making the
complexity manageable: modularization. You divide the system into separate
modules, and design, analyze, and implement each module separately.
You should already be familiar with modularization; in cryptography it
becomes even more important to do it right. Earlier we talked about
cryptographic primitives as modules. The module interface should be simple and
straightforward. It should behave according to the reasonable expectations of
a user of the module. Look closely at the interface of your modules. Often
there are features or options that exist to solve some other module's problems.
If possible, rip them out. Each module should solve its own problems. We
have found that when module interfaces start to develop weird features, it is
time to redesign the software because they are almost always a result of design
deficiencies.

130 Partll Message Security
Modularization is so important because it is the only efficient way we have of
dealing with complexity. If a particular option is restricted to a single module,
it can be analyzed within the context of this module. However, if the option
changes the external behavior of one module, it can affect other modules as
well. If you have 20 modules, each with a single binary option that changes the
module behavior, there are over a million possible configurations. You would
have to analyze each of these configurations for security—an impossible task.
We have found that many options are created in the quest for efficiency.
This is a well-known problem in software engineering. Many systems contain
so-called optimizations that are useless, counterproductive, or insignificant
because they do not optimize those parts of the system that form the bottleneck.
We have become quite conservative about optimizations. Usually we don't
bother with them. We create a careful design, and try to ensure that work
can be done in large "chunks." A typical example is the old IBM PC BIOS.
The routine to print a character on the screen took a single character as an
argument. This routine spent almost all of its time on overhead, and only
a very small fraction on actually putting the character on the screen. If the
interface of the routine had allowed a string as argument, then the entire string
could have been printed in only slightly more time than it took to print a
single character. The result of this bad design was that all DOS machines had
a terribly slow display. This same principle applies to cryptographic designs.
Make sure that work can be done in large enough chunks. Then only optimize
those parts of your program that you can measure as having a significant effect
on the performance.
8.4.3 Assertions
Assertions are a good tool to help improve the quality of your code.
When implementing cryptographic code, adopt an attitude of professional
paranoia. Each module distrusts the other modules, and always checks
parameter validity, enforces calling sequence restrictions, and refuses unsafe
operations. Most of the times these are straightforward assertions. If the
module specifications state that you have to initialize the object before you use
it, then using an object before initialization will result in an assertion error.
Assertion failures should always lead to an abort of the program with ample
documentation of which assertion failed, and for what reason.
The general rule is: any time you can make a meaningful check on the
internal consistency of the system, you should add an assertion. Catch as
many errors as you can, both your own and those of other programmers. An
error caught by an assertion will not lead to a security breach.
There are some programmers who implement assertion checking in
development, but switch it off when they ship the product. This is not the security
perspective. What would you think of a nuclear power station where the
operators train with all the safety systems in place, but switch them off when

they go to work on the real reactor? Or a parachutist who wears his emergency
parachute while training on the ground, but leaves it off when he jumps out
of the airplane? Why would anyone ever switch off the assertion checking on
production code? That is the only place where you really need it! If an
assertion fails in production code, then you have just encountered a programming
error. Ignoring the error will most likely result in some kind of wrong answer,
because at least one assumption the code makes is wrong. Generating wrong
answers is probably the worst thing a program can do. It is much better to at
least inform the user that a programming error has occurred, so he does not
trust the erroneous results of the program. Our recommendation is to leave all
your error checking on.
8.4.4 Buffer Overflows
Buffer overflow problems have been known for decades. Perfectly good
solutions to avoid them have been available for the same amount of time.
Some of the earliest higher-level programming languages, such as Algol
60, completely solved the problem by introducing mandatory array bounds
checking. Even so, buffer overflows cause a huge number of security problems
on the Internet. There also exist a larger number of software attacks beyond
buffer overflows, such as format string attacks and integer overflow attacks.
But these are things we cannot change. We can give you advice on how to
write good cryptographic code. Avoid any programming language that allows
buffer overflows. Specifically: don't use C or C++. And don't ever switch off
the array bounds checking of whichever language you use instead. It is such a
simple rule, and will probably solve half of all your security bugs.
8.4.5 Testing
Extensive testing is always part of any good development process. Testing can
help find bugs in programs, but it is useless to find security holes. Never confuse
testing with security analysis. The two are complementary, but different.
There are two types of tests that should be implemented. The first is a generic
set of tests developed from the module's functional specifications. Ideally, one
programmer implements the module and a second programmer implements
the tests. Both work from the functional specification. Any misunderstanding
between the two is a clear indication that the specifications have to be clarified.
The generic tests should attempt to cover the entire operational spectrum of
the module. For some modules, this is simple; for others, the test program will
have to simulate an entire environment. In much of our own code, the test
code is about as big as the operational code, and we have not found a way of
significantly improving that.
A second set of tests is developed by the programmer of the module itself.
These are designed to test any implementation limits. For example, if a module

uses a 4 KB buffer internally, then extra tests of the boundary conditions at the
start and end of the buffer will help to catch any buffer-management errors.
Sometimes it requires knowledge of the internals of a module to devise specific
tests.
We frequently write test sequences that are driven by a random generator.
We will discuss pseudorandom number generators (prngs) extensively in
Chapter 9. Using a prng makes it very easy to run a very large number of
tests. If we save the seed we used for the prng, we can repeat the same test
sequence, which is very useful for testing and debugging. Details depend on
the module in question.
Finally, we have found it useful to have some "quick test" code that can
run every time the program starts up. In one of Niels's projects, he had to
implement AES. The initialization code runs AES on a few test cases and
checks the output against the known correct answers. If the AES code is ever
destabilized during the further development of the application, this quick test
is very likely to detect the problem.
8.5 Side-Channel Attacks
There is a whole class of attacks that we call side-channel attacks [72]. These
are possible when an attacker has an additional channel of information about
the system. For example, an attacker could make detailed measurements of
the time it takes to encrypt a message. Depending on how the system is
implemented, this timing information could allow an attacker to infer private
information about the message itself or the underlying encryption key. If the
cryptography is embedded in a smart card, then the attacker can measure how
much current the card draws over time. Magnetic fields, RF emissions, power
consumption, timing, and interference on other data channels can all be used
for side-channel attacks.
Not surprisingly, side-channel attacks can be remarkably successful against
systems that are not designed with these attacks in mind. Power analysis of
smart cards is extremely successful [77].
It is very difficult, if not impossible, to protect against all forms of side-
channel attacks, but there are some simple precautions you can take. Years
ago, when Niels worked on implementing cryptographic systems in smart
cards, one of the design rules was that the sequence of instructions that
the CPU executed could only depend on information already available to
the attacker. This stops timing attacks, and makes power analysis attacks
more complicated because the sequence of instructions being executed can
no longer leak any information. It is not a full solution, and modern power
analysis techniques would have no problem breaking the smart cards that

were fielded in those days. Still, that fix was about the best that could be done
with the smart cards of the day. Resistance against side-channel attacks will
always come from a combination of countermeasures—some of them in the
software that implements the cryptographic system, and some of them in the
actual hardware.
Preventing side-channel attacks is an arms race. You try to protect yourself
against the known side channels, and then a smart person somewhere discovers
a new side channel, so then you have to go back and take that one into account
as well. In real life, the situation is not that bad, because most side-channel
attacks are difficult to perform. Side channels are a real danger to smart cards
because the card is under full control of the adversary, but only a few types
of side channels are practical against most other computers. In practice, the
most important side channels are timing and RF emissions. (Smart cards are
particularly vulnerable to measuring the power consumption.)
8.6 Beyond this Chapter
We hope this chapter has made it clear that security does not start or stop with
the cryptographic design. All aspects of the system have to do their part to
achieve security.
Implementing cryptographic systems is an art in itself. The most important
aspect is the quality of the code. Low-quality code is the most common cause
of real-world attacks, and it is rather easy to avoid. In our experience, writing
high-quality code takes about as long as writing low-quality code, if you count
the time from start to finished product, rather than from start to first buggy
version. Be fanatical about the quality of your code. It can be done, and it
needs to be done, so go do it!
There are a number of great books for further reading. Among these are
Software Security: Building Security In by McGraw [88], The Security Development
Lifecycle by Howard and Lipner [62], and The Art of Software Security Assessment:
Identifying and Preventing Software Vulnerabilities by Dowd, McDonald, and
Schuh [37].
8.7 Exercises
Exercise 8.1 Describe how each of the issues in Section 8.3 applies to your
personal computer's hardware and software configuration.
Exercise 8.2 Find a new product or system that manipulates transient secrets.
This might be the same product or system you analyzed for Exercise 1.8.
Conduct a security review of that product or system as described in Section 1.12,

134 Partll Message Security
this time focusing on issues surrounding how the system might store these
secrets (Section 8.3).
Exercise 8.3 Find a new product or system that manipulates secret data. This
might be the same product or system you analyzed for Exercise 1.8. Conduct
a security review of that product or system as described in Section 1.12, this
time focusing on issues surrounding code quality (Section 8.4).
Exercise 8.4 Monitor the bugtraq mailing list for one week. Create a table
listing all the different types of vulnerabilities that are announced or fixed
during that week, as well as the number of such vulnerabilities for each
type. What sorts of larger inferences can you draw from this table? See
http: / /www. schneier. com/ ce. html for additional information about the
bugtraq mailing list.
