# 10 Primes

Primes
The following two chapters explain public-key cryptographic systems. This
requires some mathematics to get started. It is always tempting to dispense
with the understanding and only present the formulas and equations, but we
feel very strongly that this is a dangerous thing to do. To use a tool, you should
understand the properties of that tool. This is easy with something like a hash
function. We have an "ideal" model of a hash function, and we desire the
actual hash function to behave like the ideal model. This is not so easy to do
with public-key systems because there are no "ideal" models to work with. In
practice, you have to deal with the mathematical properties of the public-key
systems, and to do that safely you must understand these properties. There is
no shortcut here; you must understand the mathematics. Fortunately, the only
background knowledge required is high school math.
This chapter is about prime numbers. Prime numbers play an important
role in mathematics, but we are interested in them because some of the most
important public-key crypto systems are based on prime numbers.
10.1 Divisibility and Primes
A number a is a divisor of b (notation a | b, pronounced "a divides b") if you
can divide b by a without leaving a remainder. For example, 7 is a divisor
of 35 so we write 7 | 35. We call a number a prime number if it has exactly
two positive divisors, namely 1 and itself. For example, 13 is a prime; the two

divisors are 1 and 13. The first few primes are easy to find: 2,3,5,7,11,13,
Any integer greater than 1 that is not prime is called a composite. The number
1 is neither prime nor composite.
We will use the proper mathematical notation and terminology in the
chapters ahead. This will make it much easier to read other texts on this
subject. The notation might look difficult and complicated at first, but this part
of mathematics is really easy.
Here is a simple lemma about divisibility:
Lemma 1 Ifa\b and b | c then a | c.
Proof, \ia\b, then there is an integer s such that as = b. (After all, b is divisible
by a so it must be a multiple of a.) And if b \ c then there is an integer t such that
bt = c. But this implies that c = bt = (as)t = a(st) and therefore a is a divisor of
c. (To follow this argument, just verify that each of the equal signs is correct.
The conclusion is that the first item c must be equal to the last item a(st).) □
The lemma is a statement of fact. The proof argues why the lemma is true.
The little square box signals the end of the proof. Mathematicians love to use
lots of symbols.1 This is a very simple lemma, and the proof should be easy to
follow, as long as you remember what the notation a \ b means.
Prime numbers have been studied by mathematicians throughout the ages.
Even today, if you want to generate all primes below one million, you should
use an algorithm developed just over 2000 years ago by Eratosthenes, a friend
of Archimedes. (Eratosthenes was also the first person to accurately measure
the diameter of the earth. A mere 1700 years later Columbus allegedly used a
much smaller—and wrong—estimate for the size of the earth when he planned
to sail to India by going due west.) Euclid, another great Greek mathematician,
gave a beautiful proof that showed there are an infinite number of primes.
This is such a beautiful proof that we'll include it here. Reading through it will
help you reacquaint yourself with the math.
Before we start with the real proof we will give a simple lemma.
Lemma 2 Let nbea positive number greater than 1. Let d be the smallest divisor of
n that is greater than 1. Then d is prime.
Proof First of all, we have to check that d is well defined. (If there is a number
n that has no smallest divisor, then d is not properly defined and the lemma is
nonsensical.) We know that n is a divisor of n, and n > 1, so there is at least
one divisor of n that is greater than 1. Therefore, there must also be a smallest
divisor greater than 1.
1 Using symbols has advantages and disadvantages. We'll use whatever we think is most
appropriate for this book.

To prove that d is prime, we use a standard mathematician's trick called
reductio ad absurdum or proof by contradiction. To prove a statement X, we
first assume that X is not true and show that this assumption leads to a
contradiction. If assuming that X is not true leads to a contradiction, then
obviously X must be true.
In our case, we will assume that d is not a prime. If d is not a prime, it
has a divisor e such that 1 < e < d. But we know from Lemma 1 that if e | d
and d | n then e \ n, so e is a divisor of n and is smaller than d. But this is a
contradiction, because d was defined as the smallest divisor of n. Because a
contradiction cannot be true, our assumption must be false, and therefore d must
be prime. □
Don't worry if you find this type of proof a bit confusing; it takes some
getting used to.
We can now prove that there are an infinite number of primes.
Theorem 3 (Euclid) There are an infinite number of primes.
Proof. We again assume the opposite of what we try to prove. Here we assume
that the number of primes is finite, and therefore that the list of primes is finite.
Let's call them px, p2, /?3,..., Pk, where k is the number of primes. We define the
number n := pip-ip^ • • • p* + 1, which is the product of all our primes plus one.
Consider the smallest divisor greater than 1 of n; we'll call it d again. Now
d is prime (by Lemma 2) and d\n. But none of the primes in our finite list of
primes is a divisor of n. After all, they are all divisors of n — 1, so if you divide
n by one of the p{s in the list, you are always left with a remainder of 1. So d is
a prime and it is not in the list. But this is a contradiction, as the list is defined
to contain all the primes. Thus, assuming that the number of primes is finite
leads to a contradiction. We are left to conclude that the number of primes is
infinite. □
This is basically the proof that Euclid gave over 2000 years ago.
There are many more results on the distribution of primes, but interestingly
enough, there is no easy formula for the exact number of primes in a specific
interval. Primes seem to occur fairly randomly. There are even very simple
conjectures that have never been proven. For example, the Goldbach conjecture
is that every even number greater than 2 is the sum of two primes. This is easy to
verify with a computer for relatively small even numbers, but mathematicians
still don't know whether it is true for all even numbers.
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic is also useful to know: any integer
greater than 1 can be written in exactly one way as the product of primes
(if you disregard the order in which you write the primes). For example,
15 = 3 • 5; 255 = 3 • 5 • 17; and 60 = 2 • 2 • 3 • 5. We won't prove this here. Check
any textbook on number theory if you want to know the details.

10.2 Generating Small Primes
Sometimes it is useful to have a list of small primes, so here is the Sieve of
Eratosthenes, which is still the best algorithm for generating small primes. The
220 in the pseudocode below is a stand-in for any appropriate small constant.
function SmallPrimeList
input: n Limit on primes to generate. Must satisfy 2 < n < 220.
output: P List of all primes < n.
Limit the size ofn.Ifn is too large we run out of memory.
assert 2 < n < 220
Initialize a list of flags all set to one.
(b2,b3 bn)<-(l,l 1)
i <-2
while i2 <ndo
We have found a prime i. Mark all multiples ofi composite.
for; e 2/,3/,4/,..., \n/i\i do
bj <-0
od
Look for the next prime in our list. It can be shown that this loop never results
in the condition i > n, which would access a nonexistent b{.
repeat
until bi = 1
od
All our primes are now marked with a one. Collect them in a list.
P<-U
f or k e 2,3,4,..., n do
if bk = 1 then
P <- P || k
fi
od
return P
The algorithm is based on a simple idea. Any composite number c is divisible
by a prime that is smaller than c. We keep a list of flags, one for each of the
numbers up to n. Each flag indicates whether the corresponding number could
be prime. Initially all numbers are marked as potential primes by setting the
flag to 1. We start with i being the first prime 2. Of course, none of the multiples
of i can be prime so we mark 2/, 3i, 4/, etc. as being composite by setting their
flag to 0. We then increment / until we have another candidate prime. Now

this candidate is not divisible by any smaller prime, or it would have been
marked as a composite already. So the new i must be the next prime. We keep
marking the composite numbers and finding the next prime until i2 > n.
It is clear that no prime will ever be marked as a composite, since we only
mark a number as a composite when we know a factor of it. (The loop that
marks them as composite loops over 2i, 3/, Each of these terms has a factor
/ and therefore cannot be prime.)
Why can we stop when i2 > n? Well, suppose a number k is composite, and
let p be its smallest divisor greater than 1. We already know that p is prime
(see Lemma 2). Let q := k/p. We now have p < q; otherwise, q would be a
divisor of k smaller than p, which contradicts the definition of p. The crucial
observation is that p < y/k, because if p were larger than Vk we would have
k = p • q > \fk -q>Vk'p>Vk'Vk = k. This last inequality would show that
k > k, which is an obvious fallacy. So p < Vk.
We have shown that any composite k is divisible by a prime < Vk. So any
composite < n is divisible by a prime < V^- When i2 > n then / > *Jn. But we
have already marked the multiples of all the primes less than i as composite in
the list, so every composite < n has already been marked as such. The numbers
in the list that are still marked as primes are really prime.
The final part of the algorithm simply collects them in a list to be returned.
There are several optimizations you can make to this algorithm, but we have
left them out to make things simpler. Properly implemented, this algorithm is
very fast.
You might wonder why we need the small primes. It turns out that small
primes are useful to generate large primes with, something we will get
to soon.
10.3 Computations Modulo a Prime
The main reason why primes are so useful in cryptography is that you can
compute modulo a prime.
Let p be a prime. When we compute modulo a prime we only use the
numbers 0,1,...,/? — 1. The basic rule for computations modulo a prime is
to do the computations using the numbers as integers, just as you normally
would, but every time you get a result r you take it modulo p. Taking a modulo
is easy: just divide the result r by p, throw away the quotient, and keep the
remainder as the answer. For example, if you take 25 modulo 7 you divide
25 by 7, which gives us a quotient of 3 with a remainder of 4. The remainder
is the answer, so (25 mod 7) = 4. The notation {a mod b) is used to denote an
explicit modulo operation, but modulo computations are used very often, and
there are several other notations in general use. Often the entire equation will

be written without any modulo operations, and then (mod p) will be added
at the end of the equation to remind you that the whole thing is to be taken
modulo p. When the situation is clear from the context, even this is left out,
and you have to remember the modulo yourself.
You don't need to write parentheses around a modulo computation. We
could just as well have written a mod b, but as the modulo operator looks very
much like normal text, this can be a bit confusing for people who are not used
to it. To avoid confusion we tend to either put (a mod b) in parentheses or
write a (mod b), depending on which is clearer in the relevant context.
One word of warning: Any integer taken modulo p is always in the range
0,... ,p — 1, even if the original integer is negative. Some programming
languages have the (for mathematicians very irritating) property that they allow
negative results from a modulo operation. If you want to take —1 modulo p,
then the answer is p — 1. More generally: to compute {a mod p), find integers
q and r such that a = qp + r and 0 < r < p. The value of (a mod p) is defined to
be r. If you fill in a = — 1 then you find that q = — 1 and r = p — 1.
10.3.1 Addition and Subtraction
Addition modulo p is easy. Just add the two numbers, and subtract p if the
result is greater than or equal to p. As both inputs are in the range 0,..., p - 1,
the sum cannot exceed 2p — 1, so you have to subtract p at most once to get the
result back in the proper range.
Subtraction is similar to addition. Subtract the numbers, and add p if the
result is negative.
These rules only work when the two inputs are both modulo p numbers
already. If they are outside the range, you have to do a full reduction modulo p.
It takes a while to get used to modulo computations. You get equations like
5 + 3 = 1 (mod 7). This looks odd at first. You know that 5 plus 3 is not 1. But
while 5 + 3 = 8 is true in the integer numbers, working modulo 7 we have
8 mod 7 = 1, so 5 + 3 = 1 (mod 7).
We use modulo arithmetic in real life quite often without realizing it. When
computing the time of day, we take the hours modulo 12 (or modulo 24). A
bus schedule might state that the bus leaves at 55 minutes past the hour and
takes 15 minutes. To find out when the bus arrives, we compute 55 + 15 = 10
(mod 60), and determine it arrives at 10 minutes past the hour. For now we will
restrict ourselves to computing modulo a prime, but you can do computations
modulo any number you like.
One important thing to note is that if you have a long equation like 5 + 2 +
5 + 4 + 6 (mod 7), you can take the modulo at any point in the computation.

For example, you could sum up 5 + 2 + 5 + 4 + 6 to get 22, and the compute
22 (mod 7) to get 1. Alternately, you could compute 5 + 2 (mod 7) to get 0,
then compute 0 + 5 (mod 7) to get 5, and then 5 + 4 (mod 7) to get 2, and then
2 + 6 (mod 7) to get 1.
10.3.2 Multiplication
Multiplication is, as always, more work than addition. To compute (ab mod p)
you first compute ab as an integer, and then take the result modulo p. Now
ab can be as large as (p — l)2 = p2 - 2p + 1. Here you have to perform a long
division to find (q, r) such that ab = qp + r and 0 < r < p. Throw away the q;
the r is the answer.
Let's give you an example: Let p = 5. When we compute 3 • 4 (mod p) the
result is 2. After all, 3 • 4 = 12, and (12 mod 5) = 2. So we get 3 • 4 = 2 (mod p).
As with addition, you can compute the modulus all at once or iteratively.
For example, given a long equation 3 • 4 • 2 • 3 (mod p), you can compute
3 • 4 • 2 • 3 = 72 and then compute (72 mod 5) = 2. Or you could compute
(3 • 4 mod 5) = 2, then (2 • 2 mod 5) = 4, and then (4 • 3 mod 5) = 2.
10.3.3 Groups and Finite Fields
Mathematicians call the set of numbers modulo a prime p a finite field and
often refer to it as the "mod p" field, or simply "mod p." Here are some useful
reminders about computations in a mod p field:
■ You can always add or subtract any multiple of p from your numbers
without changing the result.
■ All results are always in the range 0,1,..., p — 1.
■ You can think of it as doing your entire computation in the integers and
only taking the modulo at the very last moment. So all the algebraic rules
you learned about the integers (such as a(b + c) = ab + ac) still apply.
The finite field of the integers modulo p is referred to using different
notations in different books. We will use the notation Zp to refer to the finite
field modulo p. In other texts you might see GF(p) or even Z/pZ.
We also have to introduce the concept of a group—another mathematical
term, but a simple one. A group is simply a set of numbers together with an
operation, such as addition or multiplication.2 The numbers in Zp form a group
together with addition. You can add any two numbers and get a third number
2There are a couple of further requirements, but they are all met by the groups we will be talking
about.

in the group. If you want to use multiplication in a group you cannot use the 0.
(This has to do with the fact that multiplying by 0 is not very interesting, and
that you cannot divide by 0.) However, the numbers 1,..., p — 1 together with
multiplication modulo p form a group. This group is called the multiplicative
group modulo p and is written in various ways; we will use the notation Z* A
finite field consists of two groups: the addition group and the multiplication
group. In the case of Zp the finite field consists of the addition group, defined
by addition modulo p, and the multiplication group Z*.
A group can contain a subgroup. A subgroup consists of some of the elements
of the full group. If you apply the group operation to two elements of the
subgroup, you again get an element of the subgroup. That sounds complicated,
so here is an example. The numbers modulo 8 together with addition (modulo
8) form a group. The numbers { 0,2,4,6 } form a subgroup. You can add any
two of these numbers modulo 8 and get another element of the subgroup. The
same goes for multiplicative groups. The multiplicative subgroup modulo 7
consists of the numbers 1,..., 6, and the operation is multiplication modulo 7.
The set {1,6 } forms a subgroup, as does the set {1,2,4 }. You can check that
if you multiply any two elements from the same subgroup modulo 7, you get
another element from that subgroup.
We use subgroups to speed up certain cryptographic operations. They can
also be used to attack systems, which is why you need to know about them.
So far we've only talked about addition, subtraction, and multiplication
modulo a prime. To fully define a multiplicative group you also need the
inverse operation of multiplication: division. It turns out that you can define
division on the numbers modulo p. The simple definition is that a/b (mod p) is
a number c such that c-b — a (mod p). You cannot divide by zero, but it turns
out that the division a/b (mod p) is always well defined as long as b ^ 0.
So how do you compute the quotient of two numbers modulo pi This is
more complicated, and it will take a few pages to explain. We first have to go
back more than 2000 years to Euclid again, and to his algorithm for the GCD.
10.3.4 The GCD Algorithm
Another high-school math refresher course: The greatest common divisor (or
GCD) of two numbers a and b is the largest k such that k \ a and k \ b. In other
words, gcd(fl, b) is the largest number that divides both a and b.
Euclid gave an algorithm for computing the GCD of two numbers that is
still in use today, thousands of years later. For a detailed discussion of this
algorithm, see Knuth [75].
function GCD
input: a Positive integer.
b Positive integer.

output: k The greatest common divisor of a and b.
assert a > 0 a b > 0
while a ^ 0 do
(a, b) «- (b mod a, a)
od
return b
Why would this work? The first observation is that the assignment does not
change the set of common divisors of a and b. After all, (b mod a) is just b — sa
for some integer s. Any number k that divides both a and b will also divide
both a and (b mod 0). (The converse is also true.) And when a = 0, then b is
a common divisor of a and b, and b is obviously the largest such common
divisor. You can check for yourself that the loop must terminate because a and
b keep getting smaller and smaller until they reach zero.
Let's compute the GCD of 21 and 30 as an example. We start with {a, b) =
(21,30). In the first iteration we compute (30 mod 21) = 9, so we get (a,b) =
(9,21). In the next iteration we compute (21 mod 9) = 3, so we get (a, b) = (3,9).
In the final iteration we compute (9 mod 3) = 0 and get {a, b) = (0,3). The
algorithm will return 3, which is indeed the greatest common divisor of 21 and 30.
The GCD has a cousin: the LCM or least common multiple. The LCM of a and
b is the smallest number that is both a multiple of a and a multiple of b. For
example, lcm(6,8) = 24. The GCD and LCM are tightly related by the equation
lcm(a,b) =
gcd(fl,b)
which we won't prove here but just state as a fact.
10.3.5 The Extended Euclidean Algorithm
This still does not help us to compute division modulo p. For that, we need what
is called the extended Euclidean algorithm. The idea is that while computing
gcd(fl, b) we can also find two integers u and v such that gcd(fl, b) = ua + vb.
This will allow us to compute a/b (mod p).
function extendedGCD
input: a Positive integer argument.
b Positive integer argument.
output: k The greatest common divisor of a and b.
(u, v) Integers such that ua + vb = k.
assert a > 0 a b > 0
{c,d)<-{a,b)
{uc,vc,udfvd) <- (1,0,0,1)
while c ^ 0 do

Invariant: uca + vcb = c a uda + vdb = d
q <- \d/c\
(c, d) <- (d — qc, c)
(uc, vc, ud, vd) <- (ud - quc, vd - qvc, uc, vc)
od
return d,{ud,vd)
This algorithm is very much like the GCD algorithm. We introduce new
variables c and d instead of using a and b because we need to refer to the
original a and b in our invariant. If you only look at c and d, this is exactly
the GCD algorithm. (We've rewritten the d mod c formula slightly, but this
gives the same result.) We have added four variables that maintain the given
invariant; for each value of c or d that we generate, we keep track of how to
express that value as a linear combination of a and b. For the initialization this
is easy, as c is initialized to a and d to b. When we modify c and d in the loop it
is not terribly difficult to update the u and v variables.
Why bother with the extended Euclidean algorithm? Well, suppose we
want to compute \/b mod p where 1 < b < p. We use the extended Euclidean
algorithm to compute extendedGCD^, p). Now, we know that the GCD of b
and p is 1, because p is prime and it therefore has no other suitable divisors.
But the extendedGCD function also provides two numbers u and v such
that ub + vp = gcd(b,p) = 1. In other words, ub = 1 — vp or ub = 1 (mod p).
This is the same as saying that u = l/b (mod p), the inverse of b modulo p.
The division a/b can now be computed by multiplying a by u, so we get
a/b = au (mod p), and this last formula is something that we know how to
compute.
The extended Euclidean algorithm allows us to compute an inverse modulo
a prime, which in turn allows us to compute a division modulo p. Together
with the addition, subtraction, and multiplication modulo p, this allows us to
compute all four elementary operations in the finite field modulo p.
Note that u could be negative, so it is probably a good idea to reduce u
modulo p before using it as the inverse of b.
If you look carefully at the extendedGCD algorithm, you'll see that if you
only want u as output, you can leave out the vc and vd variables, as they do not
affect the computation of u. This slightly reduces the amount of work needed
to compute a division modulo p.
10.3.6 Working Modulo 2
An interesting special case is computation modulo 2. After all, 2 is a prime,
so we should be able to compute modulo it. If you've done any programming
this might look familiar to you. The addition and multiplication tables modulo
2 are shown in Figure 10.1. Addition modulo 2 is exactly the exclusive-or (xor)

function you find in programming languages. Multiplication is just a simple
and operation. In the field modulo 2 there is only one inversion possible
(1/1 = 1) so division is the same operation as multiplication. It shouldn't
surprise you that the field Z2 is an important tool to analyze certain algorithms
used by computers.

0 1
0 0
0 1
+

0 1
0 1
1 0
Figure 10.1: Addition and multiplication modulo 2
10.4 Large Primes
Several cryptographic primitives use very large primes, and we're talking
about many hundreds of digits here. Don't worry, you won't have to compute
with these primes by hand. That's what the computer is for.
To do any computations at all with numbers this large, you need a mul-
tiprecision library. You cannot use floating-point numbers, because they do
not have several hundred digits of precision. You cannot use normal integers,
because in most programming languages they are limited to a dozen digits or
so. Few programming languages provide native support for arbitrary
precision integers. Writing routines to perform computations with large integers is
fascinating. For a good overview, see Knuth [75, Section 4.3]. However,
implementing a multiprecision library is far more work than you might expect. Not
only do you have to get the right answer, but you always strive to compute
it as quickly as possible. There are quite a number of special situations you
have to deal with carefully. Save your time for more important things, and
download one of the many free libraries from the Internet, or use a language
like Python that has built-in large integer support.
For public-key cryptography, the primes we want to generate are 2000-4000
bits long. The basic method of generating a prime that large is surprisingly
simple: take a random number and check whether it is prime. There are very
good algorithms to determine whether a large number is prime or not. There
are also very many primes. In the neighborhood of a number n, approximately
one in every In n numbers is prime. (The natural logarithm of n, or In n for
short, is one of the standard functions on any scientific calculator. To give
you an idea of how slowly the logarithm grows when applied to large inputs:
the natural logarithm of 2k is slightly less than 0.7 • k.) A number that is
2000 bits long falls between 21999 and 22000. In that range, about one in every
1386 of the numbers is prime. And this includes a lot of numbers that are
trivially composite, such as the even numbers.

Generating a large prime looks something like this:
function generateLargePrime
input: / Lower bound of range in which prime should lie.
u Upper bound of range in which prime should lie.
output: p A random prime in the interval /,..., u
Check for a sensible range.
assert 2 < / < u
Compute maximum number of attempts
r^l00(Llog2uJ+l)
repeat
r <- r - 1
assert r > 0
Choose n randomly in the right interval
nenl,...,u
Continue trying until we find a prime.
until isPrime(h)
return n
We use the operator en to indicate a random selection from a set. Of course,
this requires some output from the prng.
The algorithm is relatively straightforward. We first check that we get a
sensible interval. The cases / < 2 and / > u are not useful and lead to problems.
Note the boundary condition: the case / = 2 is not allowed.3 Next we compute
how many attempts we are going to make to find a prime. There are intervals
that do not contain a prime. For example, the interval 90,..., 96 is prime-free.
A proper program should never hang, independent of its inputs, so we limit
the number of tries and generate a failure if we exceed this number. How
many times should we try? As stated before, in the neighborhood of u about
one in every 0.71og2 u numbers is prime. (The function log2 is the logarithm
to the base 2. The simplest definition is that log2(x) := lnx/ In 2). The number
log2 u is difficult to compute but |_log2 u\ + 1 is much easier; it is the number
of bits necessary to represent u as a binary number. So if u is an integer
that is 2017 bits long, then |_log2 u\ + 1 = 2017. The factor 100 ensures that it is
extremely unlikely that we will not find a prime. For large enough intervals, the
probability of a failure due to bad luck is less than 2~128, so we can ignore this
risk. At the same time, this limit does ensure that the generateLargePrime
function will terminate. We've been a bit sloppy in our use of an assertion to
3The Rabin-Miller algorithm we use below does not work well when it gets 2 as an argument.
That's okay, we already know that 2 is prime so we don't have to generate it here.

generate the failure; a proper implementation would generate an error with
explanations of what went wrong.
The main loop is simple. After the check that limits the number of tries, we
choose a random number and check whether it is prime using the isPrime
function. We will define this function shortly.
Make sure that the number n you choose is uniformly random in the range
/,..., u. Also make sure that the range is not too small if you want your prime
to be a secret. If the attacker knows the interval you use, and there are fewer
than 2128 primes in that interval, the attacker could potentially try them all.
If you wish, you can make sure the random number you generate is odd by
setting the least significant bit just after you generate a candidate n. As 2 is not
in your interval, this will not affect the probability distribution of primes you
are choosing, and it will halve the number of attempts you have to make. But
this is only safe if u is odd; otherwise, setting the least significant bit might
bump n just outside the allowed range. Also, this will generate some small
bias away from / if / is odd.
The isPrime function is a two-step filter. The first phase is a simple test
where we try to divide n by all the small primes. This will quickly weed out the
great majority of numbers that are composite and divisible by a small prime. If
we find no divisors, we employ a heavyweight test called the Rabin-Miller test.
function isPrime
input: n Integer > 3.
output: b Boolean whether n is prime.
assert n > 3
for/? e { all primes < 1000 } do
if p is a divisor of n then
return p = n
fi
od
return Rabin-Miller^)
If you are lazy and don't want to generate the small primes, you can cheat
a bit. Instead of trying all the primes, you can try 2 and all odd numbers
3,5,7,..., 999, in that order. This sequence contains all the primes below 1000,
but it also contains a lot of useless composite numbers. The order is important
to ensure that a small composite number like 9 is properly detected as being
composite. The bound of 1000 is arbitrary and can be chosen for optimal
performance.
All that remains to explain is the mysterious Rabin-Miller test that does the
hard work.

10.4.1 Primality Testing
It turns out to be remarkably easy to test whether a number is prime. At least,
it is remarkably easy compared to factoring a number and finding its prime
divisors. These easy tests are not perfect. They are all probabilistic. There is a
certain chance they give the wrong answer. By repeatedly running the same
test we can reduce the probability of error to an acceptable level.
The primality test of choice is the Rabin-Miller test. The mathematical basis
for this test is well beyond the scope of this book, although the outline is fairly
simple. The purpose of this test is to determine whether an odd integer n is
prime. We choose a random value a less than n, called the basis, and check a
certain property of a modulo n that always holds when n is prime. However,
you can prove that when n is not a prime, this property holds for at most 25%
of all possible basis values. By repeating this test for different random values
of a, you build your confidence in the final result. If n is a prime, it will always
test as a prime. If n is not a prime, then at least 75% of the possible values for
a will show so, and the chance that n will pass multiple tests can be made as
small as you want. We limit the probability of a false result to 2~128 to achieve
our required security level.
Here is how it goes:
function Rabin-Miller
input: n An odd number > 3.
output: b Boolean indicating whether n is prime or not.
assert n > 3 a n mod 2 = 1
First we compute (s, t) such that s is odd and 2ls = n — 1.
(s,t)<-(n- 1,0)
while s mod 2 = 0 do
M)<-(s/2,f + l)
od
We keep track of the probability of a false result in k. The probability is at most
2~k. We loop until the probability of a false result is small enough.
k<-0
while k < 128 do
Choose a random a such that 2 < a < n — 1.
a en 2,..., n - 1
The expensive operation: a modular exponentiation.
v <- as mod n
When v = 1, the number n passes the test for basis a.
if v ^ 1 then
The sequence v, v1,..., v* must finish on the value 1, and the last value
not equal to 1 must ben — 1 ifn is a prime.

i+-0
while v j=. n — 1 do
if i: = t - 1 then
return false
else
{v, i) <- (v1 mod n, i + 1)
fi
od
fi
When we get to this point, n has passed the primality test for the basis a. We
have therefore reduced the probability of a false result by a factor of
22, so we can add 2 to k.
k<-k + 2
od
return true
This algorithm only works for an odd n greater or equal to 3, so we test
that first. The isPrime function should only call this function with a suitable
argument, but each function is responsible for checking its own inputs and
outputs. You never know how the software will be changed in future.
The basic idea behind the test is known as Fermat's little theorem.4 For
any prime n and for all 1 < a < n, the relation an~l mod n = 1 holds. To fully
understand the reasons for this requires more math than we will explain here.
A simple test (also called the Fermat primality test) verifies this relation for a
number of randomly chosen a values. Unfortunately, there are some obnoxious
numbers called the Carmichael numbers. These are composite but they pass
the Fermat test for (almost) all basis a.
The Rabin-Miller test is a variation of the Fermat test. First we write n — 1
as 2fs, where s is an odd number. If you want to compute an~l you can first
compute as and then square the result t times to get as'2' = an~l. Now if as = 1
(mod n) then repeated squaring will not change the result so we have an~l = 1
(mod n). If as ^ 1 (mod n), then we look at the numbers as, as'2, as'22, as'2\..., as*2'
(all modulo n, of course). If n is a prime, then we know that the last number
must be 1. If n is a prime, then the only numbers that satisfy x2 = 1 (mod n)
are 1 and n — l.5 So if n is prime, then one of the numbers in the sequence
must be n — 1, or we could never have the last number be equal to 1. This is
really all the Rabin-Miller test checks. If any choice of a demonstrates that n is
composite, we return immediately. If n continues to test as a prime, we repeat
the test for different a values until the probability that we have generated a
4There are several theorems named after Fermat. Fermat's last Theorem is the most famous one,
involving the equation an +bn = cn and a proof too large to fit in the margin of the page.
5It is easy to check that (n - l)2 = 1 (mod n).

wrong answer and claimed that a composite number is actually prime is less
than2"128.
If you apply this test to a random number, the probability of failure of this
test is much, much smaller than the bound we use. For almost all composite
numbers n, almost all basis values will show that n is composite. You will
find a lot of libraries that depend on this and perform the test for only 5 or 10
bases or so. This idea is fine, though we would have to investigate how many
attempts are needed to reach an error level of 2"128 or less. But it only holds as
long as you apply the isPrime test to randomly chosen numbers. Later on we
will encounter situations where we apply the primality test to numbers that
we received from someone else. These might be maliciously chosen, so the
isPrime function must achieve a 2~128 error bound all by itself.
Doing the full 64 Rabin-Miller tests is necessary when we receive the number
to be tested from someone else. It is overkill when we try to generate a prime
randomly. But when generating a prime, you spend most of your time rejecting
composite numbers. (Almost all composite numbers are rejected by the very
first Rabin-Miller test that you do.) As you might have to try hundreds of
numbers before you find a prime, doing 64 tests on the final prime is only
marginally slower than doing 10 of them.
In an earlier version of this chapter, the Rabin-Miller routine had a second
argument that could be used to select the maximum error probability. But it was
a perfect example of a needless option, so we removed it. Always doing a good
test to a 2~128 bound is simpler, and much less likely to be improperly used.
There is still a chance of 2~128 that our isPrime function will give you the
wrong answer. To give you an idea of how small this chance actually is, the
chance that you will be killed by a meteorite while you read this sentence is
far larger. Still alive? Okay, so don't worry about it.
10.4.2 Evaluating Powers
The Rabin-Miller test spends most of its time computing as mod n. You cannot
compute as first and then take it modulo n. No computer in the world has
enough memory to even store as, much less the computing power to compute
it; both a and s can be thousands of bits long. But we only need as mod n; we
can apply the mod n to all the intermediate results, which stops the numbers
from growing too large.
There are several ways of computing as mod n, but here is a simple
description. To compute as mod n, use the following rules:
■ If s = 0 the answer is 1.
■ If s > 0 and s is even, then first compute y := as/2 mod n using these very
same rules. The answer is given by as mod n = y2 mod n.

■ If s > 0 and s is odd, then first compute y := fl(s 1)/2 mod n using these
very same rules. The answer is given by as mod n = a • y2 mod n.
This is a recursive formulation of the so-called binary algorithm. If you look
at the operations performed, it builds up the desired exponent bit by bit from
the most significant part of the exponent down to the least significant part. It
is also possible to convert this from a recursive algorithm to a loop.
How many multiplications are required to compute as mod n? Let k be the
number of bits of s; i.e., 2k~1 <s<2k. Then this algorithm requires at most
2k multiplications modulo n. This is not too bad. If we are testing a 2000-bit
number for primality, then s will also be about 2000 bits long, and we only
need 4000 multiplications. That is still a lot of work, but certainly within the
capabilities of most desktop computers.
Many public-key cryptographic systems make use of modular
exponentiations like this. Any good multiprecision library will have an optimized routine
for evaluating modular exponentiations. A special type of multiplication called
Montgomery multiplication is well suited for this task. There are also ways of
computing as using fewer multiplications [18]. Each of these tricks can save
10%-30% of the time it takes to compute a modular exponentiation, so used
in combination they can be important.
Straightforward implementations of modular exponentiation are often
vulnerable to timing attacks. See Section 15.3 for details and possible remedies.
10.5 Exercises
Exercise 10.1 Implement SmallPrimeList. What is the worst-case
performance of SmallPrimeList? Generate a graph of the timings for your
implementation and n = 2,4,8,16,..., 220.
Exercise 10.2 Compute 13635 + 16060 + 8190 + 21363 (mod 29101) in two
ways and verify the equivalence: by reducing modulo 29101 after each addition
and by computing the entire sum first and then reducing modulo 29101.
Exercise 10.3 Compute the result of 12358 • 1854 • 14303 (mod 29101) in
two ways and verify the equivalence: by reducing modulo 29101 after each
multiplication and by computing the entire product first and then reducing
modulo 29101.
Exercise 10.4 Is {1,3,4 } a subgroup of the multiplicative group of integers
modulo 7?
Exercise 10.5 Use the GCD algorithm to compute the GCD of 91261 and
117035.

Exercise 10.6 Use the ExtendedGCD algorithm to compute the inverse of 74
modulo the prime 167.
Exercise 10.7 Implement GenerateLargePrime using a language or library
that supports big integers. Generate a prime within the range / = 2255 and
u = 2256 - 1.
Exercise 10.8 Give pseudocode for the exponentiation routine described in
Section 10.4.2. Your pseudocode should not be recursive but should instead
use a loop.
Exercise 10.9 Compute 2735 (mod 569) using the exponentiation routine
described in Section 10.4.2. How many multiplications did you have to
perform?
