# 11 Diffie-Hellman

CHAPTER

Diffie-Hellman
For our discussion of public-key cryptography, we're going to follow the
historical path. Public-key cryptography was really started by Whitfield Diffie
and Martin Hellman when they published their article "New Directions in
Cryptography" in 1976 [33].
So far in this book, we've only talked about encryption and authentication
with shared secret keys. But where do we get those shared secret keys from?
If you have 10 friends you want to communicate with, you can meet them all
and exchange a secret key with each of these friends for future use. But like all
keys, these keys should be refreshed regularly, so at some point you will have
to meet and exchange keys all over again. A total of 45 keys are needed for a
group of 10 friends. But as the group gets larger, the number of keys grows
quadratically. For 100 people all communicating with each other, you need
4950 keys. Specifically, in a group of N people, we would need N(N — l)/2
keys. This quickly becomes unmanageable.
Diffie and Hellman posed the question of whether it would be possible to
do this more efficiently. Suppose you have an encryption algorithm where
the encryption and decryption keys are different. You could publish your
encryption key and keep your decryption key secret. Anyone could then send
you an encrypted message, and only you could decrypt it. This would solve
the problem of having to distribute so many different keys.
Diffie and Hellman posed the question, but they could only provide a
partial answer. Their partial solution is today known as the Diffie-Hellman
key exchange protocol, often shortened to DH protocol [33].

The DH protocol is a really nifty idea. It turns out that two people
communicating over an insecure line can agree on a secret key in such a way that both
of them end up with the same key, without divulging it to someone who is
listening in on their conversation.
11.1 Groups
If you've read the last chapter, it won't surprise you that primes are involved.
For the rest of this chapter, p is a large prime. Think of p as being 2000 to
4000 bits long. Most of our computations in this chapter will be modulo p—in
many places we will not specify this again explicitly. The DH protocol uses Z*,
the multiplicative group modulo p that we discussed in Section 10.3.3.
Choose any g in the group and consider the numbers l/g/g2,^3,..., all
modulo p, of course. This is an infinite sequence of numbers, but there is
only a finite set of numbers in Z*. (Remember, Z* is the numbers 1,... ,p — 1
together with the operation of multiplication modulo p.) At some point, the
numbers must start to repeat. Let us assume this happens at gl = g> with
i < j. As we can do division modulo p, we can divide each side by gl and get
1 = gi~l. In other words, there is a number q := j - i such that gq = 1 (mod p).
We call the smallest positive value q for which gq = 1 (mod p) the order of g.
(Unfortunately, there is quite a bit of terminology associated with this stuff.
We feel it is better to use the standard terminology than invent our own words;
this will avoid confusion when reading other books.)
If we keep on multiplying gs, we can reach the numbers l.g.g2,...,g?~l.
After that, the sequence repeats as g? = 1. We say that g is a generator and that
it generates the set 1, g, g2,..., g^_1. The number of elements that can be written
as a power of g is exactly q, the order of g.
One property of multiplication modulo p is that there is at least one g that
generates the entire group. That is, there is at least one g value for which
q = p — 1. So instead of thinking of Z* as the numbers 1,... ,p — 1, we can also
think of them as l,g,g2,... ,gv~1- A g that generates the entire group is called a
primitive element of the group.
Other values of g can generate smaller sets. Observe that if we multiply two
numbers from the set generated by g, we get another power of g, and therefore
another element from the set. If you go through all the math, it turns out that the
set generated by g is another group. That is, you can multiply and divide in this
group just as you can in the large group modulo p. These smaller groups are
called subgroups (see Section 10.3.3). They will be important in various attacks.
There is one last thing to explain. For any element g, the order of g is a
divisor of p — 1. This isn't too hard to see. Choose g to be a primitive element.
Let h be any other element. As g generates the whole group, there is an x such

that h = gx. Now consider the elements generated by h. These are 1, h, h2, h3,...
which are equal to l/g'/g2*,^3*, (All our computations are still modulo p,
of course.) The order of h is the smallest q at which hq = 1, which is the same
as saying it is the smallest q such that gxq = 1. For any t, g* = 1 is the same as
saying t = 0 (mod p — 1). So q is the smallest q such that xq = 0 (mod p - 1).
This happens when q = (p - 1)/ gcd(x, p - 1). So ^ is obviously a factor of p - 1.
Here's a simple example. Let's choose p = 7. If we choose g = 3 then g is
a primitive element because l,g,g*,... ^ = 1,3,2,6,4,5. (Again, all
computations are modulo p.) The element h = 2 generates the subgroup 1, h, h2 = 1,2,4
because /z3 = 23 mod 7 = 1. The element h = 6 generates the subgroup 1,6. These
subgroups have sizes 3 and 2 respectively, which are both divisors of p — 1.
This also explains parts of the Fermat test we talked about in Section 10.4.1.
Fermat's test is based on the fact that for any a we have av~l = 1. This is
easy to check. Let g be a generator of Z*, and let x be such that g* = a. As
g is a generator of the entire group, there is always such an x. But now
ap-\ = gxip-i) __ (gP-^y = \x = i.
11.2 Basic DH
For the original DH protocol, we first choose a large prime p, and a primitive
element g that generates the whole group Z* Both p and g are public constants
in this protocol, and we assume that all parties, including the attackers, know
them. The protocol is shown in Figure 11.1. This is one of the usual ways in
which we write cryptographic protocols. There are two parties involved: Alice
and Bob. Time progresses from the top to the bottom. First Alice chooses a
random x in Z*, which is the same as choosing a random number in 1,..., p — 1.
She computes gx mod p and sends the result to Bob. Bob in turn chooses a
random y in Z*. He computes gy mod p and sends the result to Alice. The final
result k is defined as gKy. Alice can compute this by raising the gy she got from
Bob to the power x that she knows. (High-school math: (gy)x = gxy.) Similarly,
Bob can compute k as (g*)y. They both end up with the same value k, which
they can use as a secret key.
But what about an attacker? The attacker gets to see gx and gy, but not x or y.
The problem of computing gxy given gx and gy is known as the Diffie-Hellman
problem, or DH problem for short. As long as p and g are chosen correctly,
there is no known efficient algorithm to compute this. The best method known
is to first compute x from g*, after which the attacker can compute k as (gy)x just
like Alice did. In the real numbers, computing x from gx is called the logarithm
function, which you find on any scientific calculator. In the finite field Z*, it is
called a discrete logarithm, and in general the problem of computing x from gx
in a finite group is known as the discrete logarithm problem, or DL problem.

Alice Bob
f
>
<
k <- (gvy k <- (gy
Figure 11.1: The original Diffie-Hellman protocol.
The original DH protocol can be used in many ways. We've written it as an
exchange of messages between two parties. Another way of using it is to let
everybody choose a random x, and publish gx (mod p) in the digital equivalent
of a phone book. If Alice wants to communicate with Bob securely, she gets
gy from the phone book, and using her x, computes gxv. Bob can similarly
compute gxy without any interaction with Alice. This makes the system usable
in settings such as e-mail where there is no direct interaction.
11.3 Man in the Middle
The one thing that DH does not protect against is the so-called man-in-the-
middle attack.1 Look back at the protocol. Alice knows she is communicating
with somebody, but she does not know with whom she is communicating.
Eve can sit in the middle of the protocol and pretend to be Bob when speaking
to Alice, and pretend to be Alice when speaking to Bob. This is shown in
Figure 11.2. To Alice, this protocol looks just like the original DH protocol.
There is no way in which Alice can detect that she is talking to Eve, not Bob.
The same holds for Bob. Eve can keep up these pretenses for as long as she
likes. Suppose Alice and Bob start to communicate using the secret key they
think they have set up. All Eve needs to do is forward all the communications
between Alice and Bob. Of course, Eve has to decrypt all the data she gets
from Alice that was encrypted with key k, and then encrypt it again with key
V to send to Bob. She has to do the same with the traffic in the other direction
as well, but that is not a lot of work.
With a digital phone book, this attack is harder. As long as the publisher of
the book verifies the identity of everybody when they send in their g*, Alice
knows she is using Bob's gx. We'll discuss other solutions when we talk about
digital signatures and PKIs later on in this book.
!The terminology may look similar, but a man-in-the-middle attack is different than a meet-in-
the-middle attack from Section 2.7.2.

Eve Bob
gv
>
gy
<
k *- (g»y k «- (gy
Figure 11.2: Diffie-Hellman protocol with Eve in the middle.
There is at least one setting where the man-in-the-middle attack can be
addressed without further infrastructure. If the key k is used to encrypt a
phone conversation (or a video link), Alice can talk to Bob and recognize
him by his voice. Let h be a hash function of some sort. If Bob reads the
first few digits of h(k) to Alice, then Alice can verify that Bob is using the
same key she is. Alice can read the next few digits of h(k) to Bob, to allow
Bob to do the same verification. This works, but only in situations where
you can tie knowledge of the key k to the actual person on the other side.
In most computer communications, this solution is not possible. And if Eve
ever succeeds in building a speech synthesizer that can emulate Bob, it all
falls apart. Finally, the biggest problem with this solution is that it requires
discipline from the users, which is risky since users regularly ignore security
procedures. In general, it is much better to have technical mechanisms for
thwarting man-in-the-middle attacks.
11.4 Pitfalls
Implementing the DH protocol can be a bit tricky. For example, if Eve intercepts
the communications and replaces both gx and gy with the number 1, then both
Alice and Bob will end up with k = 1. The result is a key negotiation protocol
that looks as if it completed successfully, except that Eve knows the resulting
key. That is bad, and we will have to prevent this attack in some way.
A second problem is if the generator g is not a primitive element of Z* but
rather generates only a small subgroup. Maybe g has an order of one million.
Alice
(gwY
—►
«-
r

In that case, the set { \,g,£,... ,^~l } only contains a million elements. As
A: is in this set, Eve can easily search for the correct key. Obviously, one of
the requirements is that g must have a high order. But who chooses p and g?
All users are using the same values, so most of them get these values from
someone else. To be safe, they have to verify that p and g are chosen properly.
Alice and Bob should each check that p is prime, and that g is a primitive
element modulo p.
The subgroups modulo p form a separate problem. Eve's attack of replacing
gx with the number 1 is easy to counter by having Bob check for this. But Eve
could also replace gx with the number h, where h has a small order. The key
that Bob derives now comes from the small set generated by h, and Eve can try
all possible values to find k. (Of course, Eve can play the same attack against
Alice.) What both Alice and Bob have to do is verify that the numbers they
receive do not generate small subgroups.
Let's have a look at the subgroups. Working modulo a prime, all
(multiplicative) subgroups can be generated from a single element. The entire group Z*
consists of the elements 1,..., p - 1 for a total of p - 1 elements. Each subgroup
is of the form 1, h, h1, h3,..., \f~l for some h and where q is the order of h. As
we discussed earlier, it turns out that q must be a divisor of p — 1. In other
words: the size of any subgroup is a divisor of p — 1. The converse also holds:
for any divisor d of p — 1 there is a single subgroup of size d. If we don't want
any small subgroups, then we must avoid small divisors of p — 1.
There is another reason for wanting large subgroups. It turns out that if the
prime factorization of p — 1 is known, then computing the discrete log of gx
can be broken down into a set of discrete log computations over subgroups.
This is a problem. If p is a large prime, then p — 1 is always even, and
therefore divisible by 2. Thus there is a subgroup with two elements; it consists
of the elements 1 and p — 1. But apart from this subgroup that is always
present, we can avoid other small subgroups by insisting that p — 1 have no
other small factors.
11.5 Safe Primes
One solution is to use a safe prime for p. A safe prime is a (large enough) prime
p of the form 2q + 1 where q is also prime. The multiplicative group Z* now
has the following subgroups:
■ The trivial subgroup consisting only of the number 1.
■ The subgroup of size 2, consisting of 1 and p — 1.
■ The subgroup of size q.
■ The full group of size 2q.

The first two are trivial to avoid. The third is the group we want to use.
The full group has one remaining problem. Consider the set of all numbers
modulo p that can be written as a square of some other number (modulo p, of
course). It turns out that exactly half the numbers in 1,... ,p - 1 are squares,
and the other half are non-squares. Any generator of the entire group is a
non-square. (If it were a square, then raising it to some power could never
generate a non-square, so it does not generate the whole group.)
There is a mathematical function called the Legendre symbol that determines
whether a number modulo p is a square or not, without ever needing to find
the root. There are efficient algorithms for computing the Legendre symbol.
So if g is a non-square and you send out gx, then any observer, such as Eve,
can immediately determine whether x is even or odd. If x is even, then gx is a
square. If x is odd, then gx is a non-square. As Eve can determine the
squareness of a number using the Legendre symbol function, she can determine
whether x is odd or even; Eve cannot learn the value x, except for the least
significant bit. The solution for avoiding this problem is to use only squares
modulo p. This is exactly the subgroup of order q. Another nice property is
that q is prime, so there are no further subgroups we have to worry about.
Here is how to use a safe prime. Choose {p, q) such that p = 2q +1 and
both p and q are prime. (You can use the isPrime function to do this on a
trial-and-error basis.) Choose a random number a in the range 2,...,p — 2
and set g = a2 (mod p). Check that g ^ 1 and g ^ p - 1. (If g is one of these
forbidden values, choose another a and try again.) The resulting parameter
set {p, q,g) is suitable for use in the Diffie-Hellman protocol.
Every time Alice (or Bob) receives a value that is supposed to be a power
of g, she (or he) must check that the value received is indeed in the subgroup
generated by g. When you use a safe prime as described above, you can use the
Legendre symbol function to check for proper subgroup membership. There
is also a simpler but slower method. A number r is a square if and only if
rq = 1 (mod p). You also want to forbid the value 1, as its use always leads to
problems. So the full test is: r ^ 1 a rq mod p = 1.
11.6 Using a Smaller Subgroup
The disadvantage of using the safe prime approach is that it is inefficient. If the
prime p is n bits long, then q is n — 1 bits long and so all exponents are n — 1
bits long. The average exponentiation will take about 3n/2 multiplications of
numbers modulo p. For large primes p, this is quite a lot of work.
The standard solution is to use a smaller subgroup. Here is how that is done.
We start by choosing ^asa 256-bit prime. (In other words: 2255 < q < 2256).
Next we find a (much) larger prime p such that p = Nq + 1 for some arbitrary

value N. To do this, we choose N randomly in the suitable range, compute p
as Nq + 1, and check whether p is prime. As p must be odd, it is easy to see
that N must be even. The prime p will be thousands of bits long.
Next, we have to find an element of order q. We do that in a similar fashion
to the safe prime case. Choose a random a in Z* and set g := aN. Now verify
that g ^ 1 and g? = 1. (The case g = p — 1 is covered by the second test, as q is
odd.) If g is not satisfactory, choose a different a and try again. The resulting
parameter set {p, q,g) is suitable for use in the Diffie-Hellman protocol.
When we use this smaller subgroup, the values that Alice and Bob will
exchange are all in the subgroup generated by g. But Eve could interfere and
substitute a completely different value. Therefore, every time Alice or Bob
receives a value that is supposed to be in the subgroup generated by g, he or
she should check that it actually is. This check is the same as in the safe prime
case. A number r is in the proper subgroup if r ^ 1 Arq mod p = 1. Of course,
they should also check that r is not outside the set of modulo-p numbers, so
the full check becomes l<r<pAr* = l.
For all numbers r in the subgroup generated by g we have that rq = 1. So if
you ever need to raise number r to a power e, you only have to compute remodq,
which can be considerably less work than computing re directly if e is much
larger than q.
How much more efficient is the subgroup case? The large prime p is at
least 2000 bits long. In the safe-prime situation, computing a general gx takes
about 3000 multiplications. In our subgroup case, gx takes about 384 multiplies
because x can be reduced modulo q and is therefore only 256 bits long. This is
a savings of a factor of nearly eight. When p grows larger, the savings increase
further. This is the reason that subgroups are widely used.
11.7 The Size of p
Choosing the right sizes for the parameters of a DH system is difficult. Up to
now, we have been using the requirement that an attacker must spend 2128
steps to attack the system. That was an easy target for all the symmetric key
primitives. Public-key operations like the DH system are far more expensive
to start with, and the computational cost grows much more quickly with the
desired security level.
If we keep to our requirement of forcing the attacker to use 2128 steps to attack
the system, the prime p should be about 6800 bits long. In practical systems
today, that would be a real problem from a performance point of view.
There is a big difference between key sizes for symmetric primitives and
key sizes for public-key primitives like DH. Never, ever fall into the trap of
comparing a symmetric key size (such as 128 or 256 bits) to the size of a public

key that can be thousands of bits. Public-key sizes are always much larger than
symmetric-key sizes.2
Public-key operations are far slower than the encryption and authentication
functions we presented earlier. In most systems, the symmetric-key operations
are insignificant, whereas the public-key operations can have a real effect on
performance. We must therefore look much more closely at the performance
aspects of public-key operations.
Symmetric-key sizes are typically fixed in a system. Once you design your
system to use a particular block cipher and hash function, you also fix the key
size. That means that the symmetric key size is fixed for the life of the system.
Public-key sizes, on the other hand, are almost always variable. This makes it
much easier to change the key size. Our intent in this book is to design a system
that will be used for 30 years, and the data must be kept secure for 20 years
after it has first been processed. The symmetric key size must be chosen large
enough to protect the data up to 50 years from now. But the variable-sized
public keys only have to protect the data for the next 20 years. After all, all
keys have a limited lifetime. A public key might be valid for one year, and
should protect data for 20 more years. This means that the public key only
needs to protect data 21 years, rather than the 50 years needed for symmetric
keys. Each year, you generate a new public key, and you can choose larger
public keys as computing technology progresses.
The best estimates of how large your prime p needs to be can be found in
[85]. A prime of 2048 bits can be expected to secure data until around 2022; 3072
bits is secure until 2038; and 4096 bits until 2050. The 6800 bits we mentioned
above is derived from the formulas in [85]. That is the size of p if you want to
force the attacker to perform 2128 steps in an attack.
Be very careful with these types of predictions. There is some reasonable
basis for these numbers, but predicting the future is always dangerous. We
might be able to make some sensible predictions about key sizes for the next
10 years, but making predictions about what things will be like 50 years from
now is really rather silly. Just compare the current state of the art in computers
and cryptography with the situation 50 years ago. The predictions in [85] are
by far the best estimates we have; nevertheless, treat them with caution.
So what are we to do? As cryptographic designers, we have to choose a key
size that will be secure for at least the next 20 years. Obviously 2048 bits is
a lower bound. Larger is better, but larger keys have a significant extra cost.
In the face of so much uncertainty, we would like to be conservative. So here
is our advice: as of today, use 2048 bits as an absolute minimum. (And don't
forget that as time passes this minimum will grow.) If at all possible from a
performance point of view, use 4096 bits, or as close to 4096 bits as you can
2This holds for the public-key schemes we discuss in this book. Other public-key schemes, such
as those based on elliptic curves, can have completely different key size parameters.

afford. Furthermore, make absolutely sure that your system can handle sizes
up to 8192 bits. This will save the day if there are unexpected developments in
attacking public-key systems. Improvements in cryptanalysis will most likely
lead to attacks on smaller key sizes. Switching to a very much larger key size
can be done while the system is in the field. It will cost some performance,
but the basic operation of the system will be preserved. This is far better than
losing all security and having to reengineer the system, which is what you
would have to do if the system could not use larger keys.
Some applications require data to be kept secret for much longer than
20 years. In these cases, you need to use the larger keys now.
11.8 Practical Rules
Here are our practical rules for setting up a subgroup you can use for the DH
protocol.
Choose q as a 256-bit prime. (There are collision-style attacks on the exponent
in DH, so all our exponents should be 256 bits long to force the attacker to
use at least 2128 operations.) Choose p as a large prime of the form Nq + 1 for
some integer N. (See Section 11.7 for a discussion of how large p should be.
Computing the corresponding range for N is trivial.) Choose a random g such
that g ^ 1 and g*1 = 1. (The easy way to do this is to choose a random ot, set
g = aN, and check g for suitability. Try another a if g fails the criteria.)
Any party receiving the subgroup description (p, q,g) should verify that:
■ Both p and q are prime, q is 256 bits long, and p is sufficiently large. (Don't
trust keys that are too small.)
■ q is a divisor of (p — 1).
-#^land^ = l.
This should be done even if the description is provided by a trusted source.
You would be amazed at how often systems fail in some interesting way,
especially when they are under attack. Checking a set {p, q,g) takes a little time,
but in most systems the same subgroup is used for a long time, so these checks
need only be performed once.
Any time a party receives a number r that is supposed to be in the subgroup,
it should be verified that 1 < r < p and rq = 1. Note that r = 1 is not allowed.
Using these rules, we get the version of the Diffie-Hellman protocol shown
in Figure 11.3. Both parties start by checking the group parameters. Each of
them only has to do this once at start-up, not every time they run a DH
protocol. (They should do it after every reboot or reinitialization, however,
because the parameters could have changed.)

Alice
known: (p,q,g)
check (p,q,g) parameters
X€n { l,...,q-l }
>
Y:=gy
<
1 < Y<p, Y« = l
k «- (Y)x
Figure 11.3: Diffie-Hellman in a subgroup.
The rest of the protocol is very much the same as the original DH protocol
in Figure 11.1. Alice and Bob now use the subgroup, so the two exponents
x and y are in the range 1,..., q — 1. Both Alice and Bob check that the number
they receive is in the proper subgroup to avoid any small-subgroup attacks by
Eve.
The notation we use for the checks is a relational operator (such as = or <)
with a question mark above it. This means that Alice (or Bob) should check
that the relation holds. If it does, then everything is all right. If the relation is
not correct, then Alice has to assume that she is under attack. The standard
behavior is to stop the execution of the protocol, not send any other messages,
and destroy all protocol-specific data. For example, in this protocol Alice
should destroy x and Y if the last set of checks fails. See Section 13.5.5 for a
detailed discussion of how to handle these failures.
This protocol describes a secure variant of DH, but it should not be used in
exactly this form. The result k has to be hashed before it is used by the rest of
the system. See Section 14.6 for a more detailed discussion.
11.9 What Can Co Wrong?
Very few books or articles talk about the importance of checking that the
numbers you receive are in the correct subgroup. Niels first found this
problem in the Internet Key Exchange (IKE) protocol of IPsec [60]. Some of
the IKE protocols include a DH exchange. As IKE has to operate in the real
world, it has to deal with lost messages. So IKE specifies that if Bob receives
no answer, he should resend his last message. IKE does not specify how Alice
should process the message that Bob sent again. And it is easy for Alice to
make a serious mistake.
Bob
known: (p,cj,g)
check (p,q,g) parameters
1 <X<p,Xi = 1
yen \\,...,q-\)
k «- (Xy

For simplicity, let us suppose Alice and Bob use the DH protocol in the
subgroup illustrated in Figure 11.3 without checking that X and Y are proper
values. Furthermore, after this exchange Alice starts using the new key k
to send an encrypted and authenticated message to Bob that contains some
further protocol data. (This is a very common situation, and similar situations
can occur in IKE.)
Here is the dangerous behavior by Alice: when she receives a resend of the
second message containing Y, she simply recomputes the key k and sends the
appropriate reply to Bob. Sounds entirely harmless, right? But the attacker Eve
can now start to play games. Let d be a small divisor of (p — 1). Eve can replace
Y by an element of order d. Alice's key k is now limited to d possible values,
and is completely determined by Y and (x mod d). Eve tries all possible values
for (x mod d), computes the key k that Alice would have gotten, and tries to
decrypt the next message that Alice sends. If Eve guesses (x mod d) correctly,
this message will decrypt properly, and Eve has learned (x mod d).
But what if p - 1 contains a number of small factors {di,d2,... ,dk)l Then
Eve can run this attack repeatedly for each of these factors and learn
(x mod di),...,(x mod dk). Using the general form of the Chinese
Remainder Theorem (see Section 12.2) she can combine this knowledge to obtain
(x mod did2d3 • • • dk). So if the product of all small divisors of p — 1 is large, Eve
can get a significant amount of information about x. As x is supposed to be
secret, this is always a bad development. In this particular case, Eve can finish
by forwarding the original Y to Alice and letting Alice and Bob complete the
protocol. But Eve has collected enough information about x that she can now
find the key k that Alice and Bob use.
To be quite clear: this is not an attack on IKE. It is an attack on an
implementation of IKE that is allowed by the standard [60]. Still, in our
opinion the protocol should include enough information for a competent
programmer to create a secure implementation. Leaving this type of information out is
dangerous, as somebody somewhere will implement it the wrong way. (We
have not verified whether this attack applies to newer versions of IKE.)
For this attack to work, Eve has to be lucky enough to have a p — 1 with
sufficient small divisors. We are designing against an adversary that can
perform 2128 steps of computing. This allows Eve to take advantage of all
divisors of p — 1 up to 2128 or so. We've never seen a good analysis of the
probabilities of how much information Eve could get, but a quick estimate
indicates that on average Eve will be able to get approximately 128 bits of
information about x from the factors smaller than 2128. She can then attack the
unknown part of x using a collision-style attack, and as x is only 256 bits long,
this leads to a real attack. At least, it would if we didn't check that X and Y
were in the proper subgroup.

The attack becomes even easier if Eve was the person selecting the subgroup
(p, q, g). She may have put the small divisors into p — 1 herself when she selected
p in the first place. Or maybe she sat on the committee that recommended
certain parameters for a standard. This isn't as crazy as it seems. The U.S.
government, in the form of NIST, helpfully provides primes that can be used
with DSA, a signature scheme that uses subgroups like this. Other parts of that
same U.S. government (e.g., NSA, CIA, FBI) have a vested interest in being
able to break into private communications. We certainly don't want to imply
that these primes are bad, but it is something that you would want to check
before you use them. This is easy to do; in fact, NIST published an algorithm
for choosing parameters that does not insert additional small factors, and you
can check whether the algorithm was indeed followed. But few people ever do.
In the end, the simplest solution is to check that every value you receive is
in the proper subgroup. All other ways of stopping small subgroup attacks
are much more complicated. You could try to detect the small factors of p — 1
directly, but that is way too complicated. You could require the person who
generated the parameter set to provide the factorization of p — 1, but that adds
a great deal of complexity to the whole system. Verifying that the received
values are in the right subgroup is a bit of work, but it is by far the simplest
and most robust solution.
11.10 Exercises
Exercise 11.1 Assume 200 people wish to communicate securely using
symmetric keys, one symmetric key for each pair of people. How many
symmetric keys would this system use in total?
Exercise 11.2 What are the subgroups generated by 3, 7, and 10 in the
multiplicative group of integers modulo p = 11?
Exercise 11.3 Why is a number r a square modulo p,p = 2q + 1 and p and q
both prime, if and only if rq = 1 (mod p).
Exercise 11.4 What problems, if any, could arise if Alice uses the same x and
gx for all her communications with Bob, and Bob uses the same y and gy for all
his communications with Alice?
Exercise 11.5 Alice and Bob wish to agree on a 256-bit AES key. They are
trying to decide between using 256-bit, 512-bit, or some other length DH public
keys gx and gy. What would be your recommendation to them?
