# 13 Introduction to Cryptographic Protocols

CHAPTER

Introduction to Cryptographic
Protocols
Cryptographic protocols consist of an exchange of messages between
participants. We've already seen a simple cryptographic protocol in Chapter 11.
Creating secure protocols is challenging. The main problem is that as a
designer or implementer, you are not in control. Up to now we have been
designing a system, and have had control over the behavior of various parts.
Once you start communicating with other parties, you have no control over
their behavior. The other party has a different set of interests than you do, and
he could deviate from the rules to try to get an advantage. When working on
protocols, you must assume that you are dealing with the enemy.
13.1 Roles
Protocols are typically described as being executed by Alice and Bob, or
between a customer and a merchant. Names like "Alice," "Bob," "customer,"
and "merchant" are not really meant to identify a particular individual or
organization. They identify a role within the protocol. If Mr. Smith wants
to communicate with Mr. Jones, he might run a key agreement protocol.
Mr. Smith could take the role of Alice, and Mr. Jones the role of Bob. The
next day the roles might be reversed. It is important to keep in mind that
a single entity can take on any of the roles.1 This is especially important to
remember when you analyze the protocol for security. We've already seen the
!In protocols with three or more participants, it is even possible for a single person to take on
more than one role at the same time.

man-in-the-middle attack on the DH protocol. In that attack, Eve takes on the
roles of both Alice and of Bob. (Of course, Eve is just another role, too.)
13.2 Trust
Trust is the ultimate basis for all dealings that we have with other people.
If you don't trust anybody with anything at all, why bother interacting with
them? For example, buying a candy bar requires a basic level of trust. The
customer has to trust the merchant to provide the candy and give proper
change. The merchant has to trust the customer to pay. Both have recourse if
the other party misbehaves. Shoplifters are prosecuted. Cheating merchants
risk bad publicity, lawsuits, and getting punched in the nose.
There are several sources of trust:
Ethics Ethics has a large influence in our society. Although very few, if any,
people behave ethically all the time, most people behave ethically most
of the time. Attackers are few. Most people pay for their purchases, even
when it would be laughably easy to steal them.
Reputation Having a "good name" is very important in our society. People
and companies want to protect their reputation. Often the threat of bad
publicity gives them an incentive to behave properly.
Law In civilized societies, there is a legal infrastructure that supports lawsuits
and prosecution of people who misbehave. This gives people an incentive
to behave properly.
Physical Threat Another incentive to behave properly is the fear of harm if
you cheat and are caught. This is one of the sources of trust for drug
deals and other illegal trades.
MAD A Cold War term: Mutually Assured Destruction. In milder forms,
it is the threat to do harm to both yourself and the other party. If
you cheat your friend, she might break off the friendship, doing you
both harm. Sometimes you see two companies in a MAD situation,
especially when they file patent infringement lawsuits against each
other.
All of these sources are mechanisms whereby a party has an incentive not
to cheat. The other party knows this incentive, and therefore feels he can trust
his opponent to some extent. This is why these incentives all fail when you
deal with completely irrational people: you can't trust them to act in their own
best interest, which undermines all these mechanisms.

It is hard to develop trust over the Internet. Suppose Alice lives abroad and
connects to the ACME website. ACME has almost no reason to trust Alice; of the
mechanisms of trust we mentioned, only ethics remains. Legal recourse against
private individuals abroad is almost impossible, and prohibitively expensive
in most cases. You can't effectively harm their reputation or threaten them,
even with MAD.
There is nevertheless a basis of trust between Alice and ACME, because
ACME has a reputation to protect. This is important to remember when you
design a protocol for e-commerce. If there are any failure modes (and there
always are), the failure should be to ACME's advantage, because ACME has an
incentive to settle the matter properly by manual intervention.2 If the failure is
to Alice's advantage, the issue is less likely to be settled properly. Furthermore,
ACME will be vulnerable to attackers who try to induce the failure mode and
then profit by it.
Trust is not a black-and-white issue. It is not that you either trust someone
or you don't trust him. You trust different people to different degrees. You
might trust an acquaintance with $100 but not with your lottery ticket that
just won a $5,000,000 prize. We trust the bank to keep our money safe, but we
get receipts and copies of canceled checks because we don't fully trust their
administration. The question "Do you trust him?" is incomplete. It should be
"Do you trust him with X?"
13.2.1 Risk
Trust is fundamental to business, but it is usually expressed as risk rather than
trust. Risk can be seen as the converse of trust. Risks are evaluated, compared,
and traded in many forms.
When working on cryptographic protocols, it is easier to talk in terms of
trust than in terms of risks. But a lack of trust is simply a risk, and that
can sometimes be handled by standard risk-management techniques such as
insurance. We talk about trust when we design protocols. Always keep in
mind that business people think and talk in terms of risks. You'll have to
convert between the two perspectives if you want to be able to talk to them.
13.3 Incentive
The incentive structure is another fundamental component of any analysis
of a protocol. What are the goals of the different participants? What would
they like to achieve? Even in real life, analyzing the incentive structure gives
insightful conclusions.
2Almost all telephone, mail, and electronic commerce to individuals follows this rule by having
the customer pay for the order before it is shipped.

Several times every week we get press reports that announce things like,
"New research has shown that " Our first reaction is always to ask: who
paid for the research? Research whose results are advantageous to the party
who paid for it is always suspect. Several factors are at play here. First, the
researchers know what their customer wants to hear, and know they can
get repeat contracts if they produce "good" results. This introduces a bias.
Second, the sponsor of the research is not going to publish any negative
reports. Publishing only the positive reports introduces another bias. Tobacco
companies published "scientific" reports that nicotine was not addictive.
Microsoft pays for research that "proves" that open source software is bad in
some way. Don't ever trust research that supports the company that paid for it.
The authors are personally quite familiar with these pressures. During our
years as consultants, we performed many security evaluations for paying
customers. We were often harsh—the average product we evaluated was
quite bad—and our evaluations often had significantly negative components.
That didn't always make us popular with our customers. One of them even
called Bruce and said: "Stop your work and send me your bill. I've found
someone who is cheaper and who writes better reports." Guess which meaning
of "better" was intended here?
We see exactly the same problem in other areas. As we wrote the first edition
of this book, the press was filled with stories about the accounting and banking
industries. Analysts and accountants were writing reports favorable for their
clients rather than unbiased evaluations. We blame the incentive structure that
gave these people a reason to bias their reports. Looking at the incentives is
quite instructive, and something we've done for years. With a bit of practice,
it is surprisingly easy, and it yields valuable insights.
If you pay your management in stock options, you give them the following
incentive structure: increase the share price over the next three years and make
a fortune; decrease the share price, and get a golden handshake. It is a "Heads I
win a lot, tails I win a little" incentive, so guess what some managers do? They
go for a high-risk, short-term strategy. If they get the opportunity to double
the amount they gamble they will always take it, because they will only collect
the winnings and never pay the loss. If they can inflate the share price for a
few years with bookkeeping tricks, they will, because they can cash out before
they are found out. Some of the gambles fail, but others pay the bills.
A similar thing happened with the savings and loan industry in the United
States in the 1980s. The federal government liberalized the rules, allowing
S&Ls to invest their money more freely. At the same time, the government
guaranteed the deposits. Now look at the incentive structure. If the investments
pay off, the S&L makes a profit, and no doubt management gets a nice
bonus. If the investments lose money, the federal government pays off the
depositors. Not surprisingly, a bunch of S&Ls lost a lot of money on high-risk
investments—and the federal government picked up the bill.

Fixing the incentive structure is often relatively easy. For example, instead
of the company itself paying for the audit, the stock exchange can arrange and
pay for the audit of the books. Give the auditors a significant bonus for every
error they find and you'll get a much more accurate report.
Examples of undesirable incentive structures abound. Divorce lawyers have
an incentive to make the divorce very acrimonious, as they are paid for every
hour spent fighting over the estate. It is a safe bet that they will advise you to
settle as soon as the legal fees exceed the value of the estate.
In American society, lawsuits are common. If an accident happens, every
participant has a great incentive to hide, deny, or otherwise avoid the blame.
Strict liability laws and huge damage awards might seem good for society at
first, but it greatly hinders our ability to figure out why the accident happened,
and how we can avoid it in future. Liability laws that are supposed to protect
consumers make it all but impossible (as an example) for a company like
Firestone to admit there is a problem with their product so we can all learn
how to build better tires.
Cryptographic protocols interact in two ways with incentive structures.
First, they rely on incentive structures. Some electronic payment protocols do
not stop the merchant from cheating the customer, but provide the customer
with proof of the cheating. This works because it creates a cryptographic
forensic trail. The merchant now has an incentive not to have people out there
with proof they were cheated. The proof could be used either in a court case
or just to damage the reputation of the merchant.
Second, cryptographic protocols change the incentive structure. They make
certain things impossible, removing them from the incentive structure. They
can also open up new possibilities and new incentives. Once you have online
banking, you create an incentive for a thief to break into your computer and
steal your money by that method.
At first, incentives look as if they are mostly materialistic, but that is only part
of it. Many people have nonmaterialistic motives. In personal relationships,
the most fundamental incentives have little to do with money. Keep an open
mind, and try to understand what drives people. Then create your protocols
accordingly.
13.4 Trust in Cryptographic Protocols
The function of cryptographic protocols is to minimize the amount of trust
required. This is important enough to repeat. The function of cryptographic
protocols is to minimize the amount of trust required. This means minimizing
both the number of people who need to trust each other and the amount of
trust they need to have.

One powerful tool for designing cryptographic protocols is the paranoia
model. When Alice takes part in a protocol, she assumes that all other
participants are conspiring together to cheat her. This is really the ultimate
conspiracy theory. Of course, each of the other participants is making the same
assumption. This is the default model in which all cryptographic protocols are
designed.
Any deviations from this default model must be explicitly documented. It
is surprising how often this step is overlooked. We sometimes see protocols
used in situations where the required trust is not present. For example,
most secure websites use the SSL protocol. The SSL protocol requires trusted
certificates. But a certificate is easy to get. The result is that the user is
communicating securely with a website, but he doesn't know which website
he is communicating with. Numerous phishing scams against PayPal users
have exploited this vulnerability, for example.
It is very tempting not to document the trust that is required for a particular
protocol, as it is often "obvious." That might be true to the designer of the
protocol, but like any module in the system, the protocol should have a clearly
specified interface, for all the usual reasons.
From a business point of view, the documented trust requirements also list
the risks. Each point of required trust implies a risk that has to be dealt with.
13.5 Messages and Steps
A typical protocol description consists of a number of messages that are sent
between the participants of the protocol and a description of the computations
that each participant has to do.
Almost all protocol descriptions are done at a very high level. Most of the
details are not described. This allows you to focus on the core functionality of
the protocol, but it creates a great danger. Without careful specifications of all
the actions that each participant should take, it is extremely difficult to create
a safe implementation of the protocol.
Sometimes you see protocols specified with all the minor details and checks.
Such specifications are often so complicated that nobody fully understands
them. This might help an implementer, but anything that is too complicated
cannot be secure.
The solution is, as always, modularization. With cryptographic protocols,
as with communication protocols, we can split the required functionality into
several protocol layers. Each layer works on top of the previous layer. All
the layers are important, but most of the layers are the same for all protocols.
Only the topmost layer is highly variable, and that is the one you always find
documented.

13.5.1 The Transport Layer
Network specialists must forgive us for reusing one of their terms here. For
cryptographers, the transport layer is the underlying communication system
that allows parties to communicate. This consists of sending strings of bytes
from one participant to another. How this is done is irrelevant for our purposes.
What we as cryptographers care about is that we can send a string of bytes
from one participant to the other. You can use UDP packets, a TCP data stream,
e-mail, or any other method. In many cases, the transport layer needs some
additional encoding. For example, if a program executes multiple protocols
simultaneously, the transport layer must deliver the message to the right
protocol execution. This might require an extra destination field of some sort.
When using TCP, the length of the message needs to be included to provide
message-oriented services over the stream-oriented TCP protocol.
To be quite clear, we expect that transport layer to transmit arbitrary strings
of bytes. Any byte value can occur in the message. The length of the string is
variable. The string received should, of course, be identical to the string that
was sent; deleting trailing zero bytes, or any other modification, is not allowed.
Some transport layers include things like magic constants to provide an
early detection of errors or to check the synchronization of the TCP stream. If
the magic constant is not correct on a received message, the rest of the message
should be discarded.
There is one important special case. Sometimes we run a cryptographic
protocol over a cryptographically secured channel like the one we designed in
Chapter 7. In cases like that, the transport layer also provides confidentiality,
authentication, and replay protection. That makes the protocol much easier to
design, because there are far fewer types of attack to worry about.
13.5.2 Protocol and Message Identity
The next layer up provides protocol and message identifiers. When you receive
a message, you want to know which protocol it belongs to and which message
within that protocol it is.
The protocol identifier typically contains two parts. The first part is the
version information, which provides room for future upgrades. The second
part identifies which particular cryptographic protocol the message belongs
to. In an electronic payment system, there might be protocols for withdrawal,
payment, deposit, refund, etc. The protocol identifier avoids confusion among
messages of different protocols.
The message identifier indicates which of the messages of the protocol in
question this is. If there are four messages in a protocol, you don't want there
to be any confusion about which message is which.

Why do we include so much identifying information? Can't an attacker forge
all of this? Of course he can. This layer doesn't provide any protection against
active forgery; rather, it detects accidental errors. It is important to have good
detection of accidental errors. Suppose you are responsible for maintaining a
system, and you suddenly get a large number of error messages. Differentiating
between active attacks and accidental errors such as configuration and version
problems is a valuable service.
Protocol and message identifiers also make the message more self-contained,
which makes much of the maintenance and debugging easier. Cars and
airplanes are designed to be easy to maintain. Software is even more complex—all
the more reason why it should be designed for ease of maintenance.
Probably the most important reason to include message identifying
information has to do with the Horton Principle. When we use authentication (or
a digital signature) in a protocol, we typically authenticate several messages
and data fields. By including the message identification information, we avoid
the risk that a message will be interpreted in the wrong context.
13.5.3 Message Encoding and Parsing
The next layer is the encoding layer. Each data element of the message has to
be converted to a sequence of bytes. This is a standard programming problem
and we won't go into too much detail about that here.
One very important point is the parsing. The receiver must be able to parse
the message, which looks like a sequence of bytes, back into its constituent
fields. This parsing must not depend on contextual information.
A fixed-length field that is the same in all versions of the protocol is easy
to parse. You know exactly how long it is. The problems begin when the size
or meaning of a field depends on some context information, such as earlier
messages in the protocol. This is an invitation to trouble.
Many messages in cryptographic protocols end up being signed or otherwise
authenticated. The authentication function authenticates a string of bytes,
and usually it is simplest to authenticate the message at the level of the
transport layer. If the interpretation of a message depends on some contextual
information, the signature or authentication is ambiguous. We've broken
several protocols based on this type of failure.
A good way to encode fields is to use Tag-Length-Value or TLV encoding.
Each field is encoded as three data elements. The tag identifies the field in
question, the length is the length of the value encoding, and the value is the
actual data to be encoded. The best-known TLV encoding is ASN.l [64], but it
is incredibly complex and we shy away from it. A subset of ASN.l could be
very useful.

Another alternative is XML. Forget the XML hype; we're only using XML
as a data encoding system. As long as you use a fixed Document Template
Definition (DTD), the parsing is not context-dependent, and you won't have
any problems.
13.5.4 Protocol Execution States
In many implementations, it is possible for a single computer to take part in
several protocol executions at the same time. To keep track of all the protocols
requires some form of protocol execution state. The state contains all the
information necessary to complete the protocol.
Implementing protocols requires some kind of event-driven programming,
as the execution has to wait for external messages to arrive before it can
proceed. This can be implemented in various ways, such as using one thread
or process per protocol execution, or using some kind of event dispatch system.
Given an infrastructure for event-driven programming, implementing a
protocol is relatively straightforward. The protocol state contains a state
machine that indicates the type of message expected next. As a general rule,
no other type of message is acceptable. If the expected type of message arrives,
it is parsed and processed according to the rules.
13.5.5 Errors
Protocols always contain a multitude of checks. These include verifying the
protocol type and message type, checking that it is the expected type of
message for the protocol execution state, parsing the message, and performing
the cryptographic verifications specified. If any of these checks fail, we have
encountered an error.
Errors need very careful handling, as they are a potential avenue of attack.
The safest procedure is not to send any reply to an error and immediately delete
the protocol state. This minimizes the amount of information the attacker can
get about the protocol. Unfortunately, it makes for an unfriendly system, as
there is no indication of the error.
To make systems usable, you often need to add error messages of some
sort. If you can get away with it, don't send an error message to the other
parties in the protocol. Log an error message on a secure log so the system
administrator can diagnose the problem. If you must send an error message,
make it as uninformative as possible. A simple "There was an error" message
is often sufficient.
One dangerous interaction is between errors and timing attacks. Eve can
send a bogus message to Alice and wait for her error reply. The time it takes

Alice to detect the error and send the reply often provides detailed information
about what was wrong and exactly where it went wrong.
Here is a good illustration of the dangers of these interactions. Years ago,
Niels worked with a commercially available smart card system. One of the
features was a PIN code that was needed to enable the card. The four-digit PIN
code was sent to the card, and the card responded with a message indicating
whether the card was now enabled or not. Had this been implemented well, it
would have taken 10,000 tries to exhaust all the possible PIN codes. The smart
card allowed five failed PIN attempts before it locked up, after which it would
require special unlocking by other means. The idea was that an attacker who
didn't know the PIN code could make five attempts to guess the four-digit
PIN code, which gave her a 1 in 2000 probability of guessing the PIN code
before the card locked up.
The design was good, and similar designs are widely used today. A 1 in
2000 chance is good enough for many applications. But unfortunately, the
programmer of that particular smart card system made a problematic design
decision. To verify the four-digit PIN code, the program first checked the first
digit, then the second, etc. The card reported the PIN code failure as soon
as it detected that one of the digits was wrong. The weakness was that the
time it took the smart card to send the "wrong PIN" error depended on how
many of the digits of the PIN were correct. A smart attacker could measure
this time and learn a lot of information. In particular, the attacker could find
out at which position the first wrong digit was. Armed with that knowledge,
it would take the attacker only 40 attempts to exhaustively search the PIN
space. (After 10 attempts the first digit would have to be right, after another
10 attempts the second, etc.) After five tries, her chances of finding the correct
PIN code rose to 1 in 143. That is much better for the attacker than the 1 in
2000 chance she should have had. If she got 20 tries, her chances rose to 60%,
which is a lot more than the 0.2% she should have had.
Even worse, there are certain situations where having 20 or 40 tries is not
infeasible. Smart cards that lock up after a number of failed PIN tries always
reset the counter once the correct PIN has been used, so the user gets another
five tries to type the correct PIN the next time. Suppose your roommate has
a smart card like the one described above. If you can get at your roommate's
smart card, you can run one or two tries before putting the smart card back.
Wait for him to use the card for real somewhere, using the correct PIN and
resetting the failed-PIN attempt counter in the smart card. Now you can do
one or two more tries. Soon you'll have the whole PIN code because it takes at
most 40 tries to find it.
Error handling is too complex to give you a simple set of rules. This is
something we as a community do not know enough about yet. At the moment,
the best advice we can give is to be very careful and reveal as little information
as possible.

13.5.6 Replay and Retries
A replay attack occurs when the attacker records a message and then later
resends that same message. Message replays have to be protected against.
They can be a bit tricky to detect, as the message looks exactly like a proper
one. After all, it is a proper one.
Closely related to the replay attack is the retry. Suppose Alice is performing
a protocol with Bob, and she doesn't get a response. There could be many
reasons for this, but one common one is that Bob didn't receive Alice's last
message and is still waiting for it. This happens in real life all the time, and we
solve this by sending another letter or e-mail, or repeating our last remark. In
automated systems this is called a retry. Alice retries her last message to Bob
and again waits for a reply.
So Bob can receive replays of messages sent by the attacker and retries sent
by Alice. Somehow, Bob has to deal properly with them and ensure correct
behavior without introducing a security weakness.
Sending retries is relatively simple. Each participant has a protocol execution
state of some form. All you need to do is keep a timer and send the last message
again if you do not receive an answer within a reasonable time. The exact time
limit depends on the underlying communication infrastructure. If you use
UDP packets (a protocol that uses IP packets directly), there is a reasonable
probability that the message will get lost, and you want a short retry time, on
the order of a few seconds. If you send your messages over TCP, then TCP
retries any data that was not received properly using its own timeouts. There is
little reason to do a retry at the cryptographic protocol level, and most systems
that use TCP do not do this. Nevertheless, for the rest of this discussion we
are going to assume that retries are being used, as the general techniques of
handling received retries also work even if you never send them.
When you receive a message, you have to figure out what to do with it. We
assume that each message is recognizable, so that you know which message
in the protocol it is supposed to be. If it is the message you expect, there is
nothing out of the ordinary and you just follow the protocol rules. Suppose it
is a message from the "future" of the protocol; i.e., one that you only expect at
a later point in time. This is easy; ignore it. Don't change your state, don't send
a reply, just drop it and do nothing. It is probably part of an attack. Even in
weird protocols where it could be part of a sequence of errors induced by lost
messages, ignoring a message has the same effect as the message being lost in
transit. As the protocol is supposed to recover from lost messages, ignoring a
message is always a safe solution.
That leaves the case of "old" messages: messages you already processed
in the protocol you are running. There are three situations in which this
could occur. In the first one, the message you receive has the same message
identification as the previous one you responded to, and it is identical in

content to the message you responded to, too. In this case, the message is
probably a retry, so you send exactly the same reply you sent the first time.
Note that the reply should be the same. Don't recompute the reply with a
different random value, and don't just assume that the message you get is
identical to the first one you replied to. You have to check.
The second case is when you receive a message that has the same message
identification as the message you last responded to, but the message contents
are different. For example, suppose in the DH protocol Bob receives the first
message from Alice, and then later receives another message that claims to
be the first message in the protocol, but which contains different data while
still passing the relevant integrity checks. This situation is indicative of an
attack. No retry would ever create this situation, as the resent message is never
different from the first try. Either the message you just received is bogus, or
the earlier one you responded to is bogus. The safe choice is to treat this as a
protocol error, with all the consequences we discussed. (Ignoring the message
you just received is safe, but it means that fewer forms of active attacks are
detected as such. This has a detrimental effect on the detection and response
parts of the security system.)
The third case is when you receive a message that is even older than the
previous message you responded to. There is not much you can do with this.
If you still have a copy of the original message you received at that phase in
the protocol, you can check if it is identical to that one. If it is, ignore it. If it is
different, you have detected an attack and should treat it as a protocol error.
Many implementations do not store all the messages that were received in a
protocol execution, which makes it impossible to know whether the message
you receive now is or is not identical to the one originally processed. The
safe option is to ignore these messages. You'd be surprised how often this
actually happens. Sometimes messages get delayed for a long time. Suppose
Alice sends a message that is delayed. After a few seconds, she sends a retry
that does arrive, and both Alice and Bob continue with the protocol. Half a
minute later, Bob receives the original message. This is a situation in which
Bob receives a copy of—in protocol terms—a very old message.
Things get more complicated if you have a protocol in which there are more
than two participants. These exist, but are beyond the scope of this book. If you
ever work on a multiparty protocol, think carefully about replay and retries.
One final comment: it is impossible to know whether the last message of a
protocol arrived or not. If Alice sends the last message to Bob, then she will
never get a confirmation that it arrived. If the communication link is broken
and Bob never receives the last message, then Bob will retry the previous
message but that will not reach Alice either. This is indistinguishable to Alice
from the normal end of the protocol. You could add an acknowledgment from

Bob to Alice to the end of the protocol, but then this acknowledgment becomes
the new last message and the same problem arises. Cryptographic protocols
have to be designed in a way that this ambiguity does not lead to insecure
behavior.
13.6 Exercises
Exercise 13.1 Describe a protocol you engage in on a regular basis. This
might be ordering a drink at a local coffee shop or boarding an airplane. Who
are the explicit actors directly involved in this protocol? Are there other actors
involved peripherally in this protocol, such as during the setup phase? For
simplicity, list at most 5 actors. Create a matrix, where each row is labeled by
an actor and each column is labeled by an actor. For each cell, describe how
the actor in the row trusts the actor in the column.
Exercise 13.2 Consider the security of your personal computer. List the
attackers who might break into your computer, their incentives, and the
associated costs and risks to the attacker.
Exercise 13.3 Repeat exercise 13.2, except for a bank instead of your personal
computer.
Exercise 13.4 Repeat exercise 13.2, except for a computer at the Pentagon
instead of your personal computer.
Exercise 13.5 Repeat exercise 13.2, except for a computer belonging to a
criminal organization instead of your personal computer.
