# 14 Key Negotiation

CHAPTER

Key Negotiation
Finally, we are ready to tackle the key negotiation protocol. The purpose of
this protocol is to derive a shared key that can then be used for the secure
channel we defined in Chapter 7.
Complete protocols get quite complicated, and it can be confusing to present
the final protocol all at once. Instead, we will present a sequence of protocols,
each of which adds a bit more functionality. Keep in mind that the intermediate
protocols are not fully functional, and will have various weaknesses.
There are different methods for designing key negotiation protocol, some
with supporting proofs of security and some without. We designed our
protocol from the ground up—not only because it leads to a cleaner explanation,
but also because it allows us to highlight nuances and challenges at each stage
of the protocol's design.
14.1 The Setting
There are two parties in the protocol: Alice and Bob. Alice and Bob want to
communicate securely. They will first conduct the key negotiation protocol to
set up a secret session key k, and then use k for a secure channel to exchange
the actual data.
For a secure key negotiation, Alice and Bob must be able to identify each
other. This basic authentication capability is the subject of the third part of
this book. For now, we will just assume that Alice and Bob can authenticate
messages to each other. This basic authentication can be done using RSA

signatures (if Alice and Bob know each other's keys or are using a PKI), or
using a shared secret key and a MAC function.
But wait! Why do a key negotiation if you already have a shared secret
key? There are many reasons why you might want to do this. First of all, the
key negotiation can decouple the session key from the existing (long-term)
shared key. If the session key is compromised (e.g., because of a flawed secure
channel implementation), the shared secret still remains safe. And if the shared
secret key is compromised after the key negotiation protocol has been run, the
attacker who learns the shared secret key still does not learn the session key
negotiated by the protocol. So yesterday's data is still protected if you lose
your key today. These are important properties: they make the entire system
more robust.
There are also situations in which the shared secret key is a relatively weak
one, like a password. Users don't like to memorize 30-letter passwords, and
tend to choose much simpler ones. A standard attack is the dictionary attack,
where a computer searches through a large number of simple passwords.
Although we do not consider them here, some key negotiation protocols can
turn a weak password into a strong key.
14.2 A First Try
There are standard protocols you might use to do key negotiation. A well-
known one based on the DH protocol is the Station-to-Station protocol [34].
Here we will walk you through the design of a different protocol for illustrative
purposes. We'll start with the simplest design we can think of, shown in
Figure 14.1. This is just the DH protocol in a subgroup with some added
authentication. Alice and Bob perform the DH protocol using the first two
messages. (We've left out some of the necessary checks, for simplicity.) Alice
then computes an authentication on the session key k and sends it to Bob, who
checks the authentication. Similarly, Bob sends an authentication of k to Alice.
We don't know the exact form of the authentication at the moment.
Remember, we said we assume that Alice and Bob can authenticate messages to each
other. So Bob is able to check Autha(/c) and Alice is able to check Authb(/c).
Whether this is done using digital signatures or using a MAC function is not
our concern here. This protocol merely turns an authentication capability into
a session key.
There are some problems with this protocol:
■ The protocol is based on the assumption that (p,q,g) are known to both
Alice and Bob. Choosing constants for these values is a bad idea.
■ It uses four messages, whereas it is possible to achieve the goal using
only three.

Alice
Known: (p,cj,g)
xen [l,...,q-l }
X:=^
Y:=gy
k<-Yx
Autha(A:)
Authb(A:)
Bob
Known: (p,q,g)
yen [l,...,q-l }
check Autha(/c)
check Authb(/c)
Figure 14.1: A first attempt at key negotiation.
■ The session key is used as an input to the authentication function. This
is not a problem if the authentication function is strong, but suppose
the authentication function leaks a few bits about the session key. That
would be bad. It certainly would require a new analysis of the entire
protocol. A good rule of thumb is to use a secret only for a single thing.
Here k will be used as a session key, so we don't want to use it as an
argument to the authentication function.
■ The two authentication messages are too similar. If, for example, the
authentication function is a simple MAC using a secret key known
to both Alice and Bob, then Bob could just send the authentication
value he received from Alice, and he would not need the secret key to
complete the protocol. Thus Alice would not be convinced by the last
authentication message.
■ Implementations have to be careful not to use k until the authentication
messages have been exchanged. This is not a major issue and is a rather
simple requirement, but you wouldn't believe what sometimes happens
when people try to optimize a program.
We will fix all of these problems over the course of this chapter.
14.3 Protocols Live Forever
We've emphasized the importance of designing systems to withstand the
future. This is even more important for protocols. If you limit the size of
database fields to 2000 bytes, it might be a problem for some users, but you

can remove the limit in the next version. Not so for protocols. Protocols
are run between different participants, and every new version needs to be
interoperable with the old version. Modifying a protocol and still keeping it
compatible with older versions is rather complicated. Before you know it, you
have to implement several versions of the protocol, with a system to decide
which version to use.
The protocol version switch becomes a point of attack, of course. If an older
protocol is less secure, an attacker has an incentive to force you to use that
older protocol. You'd be surprised at how many systems we've seen that suffer
from what's known as a version-rollback attack.
It is of course impossible to know all the future requirements, so it might
be necessary to define a second version of a protocol at some point. However,
the cost of having several protocol versions is high, especially in overall
complexity.
Successful protocols live almost forever (we don't care about unsuccessful
ones). It is extremely difficult to completely remove a protocol from the world.
So it is even more important to design protocols to be future-proof. This is why
we can't specify a fixed set of DH parameters for our key negotiation protocol.
Even if we chose them to be very large, there is always a danger that future
cryptanalytical improvements might force us to change them.
14.4 An Authentication Convention
Before we go on, we will introduce an authentication convention. Protocols
often have many different data elements, and it can be hard to figure out exactly
which data elements need to be authenticated. Some protocols break because
they neglect to authenticate certain data fields. We use a simple convention to
solve these problems.
In our protocols, every time a party sends an authentication, the
authentication data consists of all the data exchanged so far: all the previous messages,
and all the data fields that precede the authentication in the authenticator's
message. The authenticator will also cover (be computed over) the identities of
the communicants. In the protocol shown in Figure 14.1, Alice's authenticator
would not be on k, but on Alice's identifier, Bob's identifier, X, and Y. Bob's
authenticator would cover Alice's identifier, Bob's identifier, X, Y, and Autha.
This convention removes many avenues of attack. It also costs very little.
Cryptographic protocols don't exchange that much data, and authentication
computations almost always start by hashing the input string. Hash functions
are so fast that the extra cost is insignificant.
This convention also allows us to shorten the notation. Instead of
writing something like Autha(X, Y) we simply write Autha. As the data to

be authenticated is specified by the convention, we no longer need to
write it down explicitly. All further protocols in this book will use this
convention.
Just as a reminder: authentication functions only authenticate a string
of bytes. Each string of bytes to be authenticated must start with a unique
identifier that identifies the exact point in the protocol where this authenticator
is used. Also, the encoding of the previous messages and the data fields
into this string of bytes must be such that the messages and fields can
be recovered from the string without further context information. We've
already talked about this in detail, but it is an important point that is easily
overlooked.
14.5 A Second Attempt
How do we fix the problems of the previous protocol? We don't want to use a
constant DH parameter set, so we'll let Alice choose it and send it to Bob. We'll
also collapse the four messages into two, as shown in Figure 14.2. Alice starts
by choosing DH parameters and her DH contribution, and sends it all to Bob
with an authentication. Bob has to check that the DH parameters are properly
chosen and that X is valid. (See Chapter 11 for details of these checks.) The rest
of the protocol is similar to the previous version. Alice receives Y and AuthB/
checks them, and computes the DH result.
Alice Bob
Choose suitable (p,q,g)
xen {l,...,q-l }
(p,q,g)fX:=gx,
Autha
>
Check (p, q,g), X, Autha
yen {l,...,q-\ }
Y := gy, Authb
<
Check Y, Authb
k <- Yx k+-X>
Figure 14.2: A second attempt at key negotiation.
We no longer have fixed DH parameters. We use only two messages, we
don't use the authentication key directly in any way, and our authentication
convention ensures that the strings being authenticated are not similar.

But now we have some new problems:
■ What do we do if Bob wants a larger DH prime than Alice? Perhaps Bob
has stricter security policies and thinks the DH prime chosen by Alice
isn't secure enough. Bob will have to abort the protocol. Maybe he could
send an error message along the lines of "Require DH prime to be at least
k bits long/' but that gets messy and complicated. Alice would have to
restart the protocol with new parameters.
■ There is a problem with the authentication. Bob isn't sure he is talking to
Alice at all. Anybody can record the first message that Alice sends and
then later send it to Bob. Bob thinks the message comes from Alice (after
all, the authentication checked), and finishes the protocol, thinking he
shares a key k with Alice. The attacker doesn't learn k, as he doesn't know
x, and without k the attacker cannot break into the rest of the system that
uses k. But Bob's logs will show a completed authenticated protocol with
Alice, and that is a problem by itself, as it provides erroneous information
to investigating administrators.
Bob's problem is called a lack of "liveness." He isn't sure that Alice is
"alive," and that he's not talking to a replaying ghost. The traditional way to
solve this is to make sure that Alice's authenticator covers a random element
chosen by Bob.
14.6 A Third Attempt
We will fix these problems with a few more changes. Instead of Alice choosing
the DH parameters, she will simply send her minimal requirements to Bob, and
Bob will choose the parameters. This does increase the number of messages
to three. (It turns out that most interesting cryptographic protocols require at
least three messages. We don't know why, they just do.) Bob only sends a
single message: the second one. This message will contain his authenticator,
so Alice should send a randomly chosen element in the first message. We use
a random nonce for this.
This leads to the protocol shown in Figure 14.3. Alice starts by choosing s,
the minimal size of the prime p she wants to use. She also chooses a random
256-bit string as nonce Na and sends them both to Bob. Bob chooses a suitable
DH parameter set and his random exponent, and sends the parameters, his DH
contribution, and his authenticator to Alice. Alice completes the DH protocol
as usual with the added authenticator.
There is one more problem to be solved. The final result k is a variable-sized
number. Other parts of the system might find this difficult to work with.
Furthermore, k is computed using algebraic relations, and leaving algebraic

structure in a cryptographic system always scares us. There are a few places
where you absolutely need such structure, but we avoid it wherever possible.
The danger of algebraic structure is that an attacker might find some way
of exploiting it. Mathematics can be an extremely powerful tool. Over the
past few decades, we have seen many new proposals for public-key systems,
almost all of which have been broken—mostly due to the algebraic structure
they contained. Always remove any algebraic structure that you can.
Alice Bob
s *- mm p size
Ken0 2256-l
s,Na
(P/?/£)/X:=g\
Authb
Choose (p,q,g)
xen [l,...,q-l }
Check (p,q,g), X, Authb
yen [l,...,q-l }
Y := g\ Autha
->
Check Y, Autha
k <- X* k <- Yx
Figure 14.3: A third attempt at key negotiation.
The obvious solution is to hash the final key. This reduces it to a fixed size,
and also destroys any remaining algebraic structure.
14.7 The Final Protocol
The final protocol is shown in short form in Figure 14.4. This is the form that is
easiest to read and understand. However, we've left a lot of verification steps
out of the protocol to make it easy to read and to focus on the key properties.
We simply write "Check {p,q,g)," which stands for several verifications. To
show you all the required cryptographic checks, the long form of the protocol
is given in Figure 14.5.
Bob needs to choose a suitable size for p. This depends on the minimum
size required by Alice and his own required minimum size. Of course, Bob
should ensure that the value of s is reasonable. We don't want Bob to be
required to start generating 100,000-bit primes just because he received an

unauthenticated message with a large value for s in it. Similarly, Alice should
not have to start checking very large primes just because Bob sent them.
Therefore, both Alice and Bob limit the size of p. Using a fixed maximum
limits flexibility; if cryptanalytical progress suddenly forces you to use larger
primes, then a fixed maximum is going to be a real problem. A configurable
maximum brings with it all the problems of a configuration parameter that
almost nobody understands. We've chosen to use a dynamic maximum. Both
Alice and Bob refuse to use a prime that is more than twice as long as the prime
they would prefer to use. A dynamic maximum provides a nice upgrade path
and avoids excessively large primes. You can argue about whether the choice
of the factor two is best. Maybe you should use three; it doesn't matter much.
Alice Bob
s «— min p size
Naen0 2256-l
s,Na
(p,q,g),X:=gx,
Authb
Y := gy, Autha
Choose (p,q,g)
xen [\,...,q-\\
Check Y, Autha
k «- SHAd-256(YAr)
Check (p,q,g), X, Authb
yen [l,...,q-l }
k *- SHA<r256(X*)
Figure 14.4: The final protocol in short form
The rest of the protocol is just an expansion of the earlier short form. If Bob
and Alice are smart, they'll both use caches of suitable DH parameters. This
saves Bob from having to generate new DH parameters every time, and it
saves Alice having to check them every time. Applications can even use a fixed
set of DH parameters, or encode them as defaults in a configuration file, in
which case you don't have to send them explicitly. A single DH parameter set
identifier would be enough. But be careful when optimizing. Optimizations
can end up modifying the protocol enough to break it. There are no simple
rules we can give you to check if an optimization breaks a protocol or not.
Protocol design is still more an art than a science, and there are no hard rules
to live by.

Alice
s„ •*- min p size
NaeK0,...,2256-l-
Check Authb
s„-l k\og2pk2-s„
255 k log2 q k 256
Check p, q both prime
q](p-l)Ag^lA^ll
y 6TC {1,...,<? - 1 }
k <- SHAd-256(Xy)
Sa,Na
Choose (p, q,
Authb
Y := g", Autha
Bob
St <— min p size
s <- max(sfl/ sb)
s<2-sb
,g)withlog2p > s- 1
xen { \,...,q-\ }
Check Autha
y jl i a y = l
Jfc <- SHArf-256(Y*)
Figure 14.5: The final protocol in long form.
14.8 Different Views of the Protocol
There are a number of instructive ways to look at a protocol like this. There
are a few properties that the protocol should have, and we can look at why the
protocol provides them all.
14.8.1 Alice's View
Let's look at the protocol from Alice's point of view. She receives a single
message from Bob. She's sure this message is from Bob because it is authenticated,
and the authentication includes her random nonce Na. There is no way anyone
could forge this message or replay an old message.

Alice checks that the DH parameters are properly chosen, showing that
the DH protocol has all its expected properties. So when she keeps y secret
and sends out Y, she knows that only persons who know an x such that
g* = X can compute the resulting key k. This is the basic DH protocol
property. Bob authenticated X, and Alice trusts Bob to only do this when he is
following the protocol. Thus, Bob knows the appropriate x, and is keeping it
secret. Therefore, Alice is sure that only Bob knows the final key k that she
derives.
So Alice is convinced she is really talking to Bob, and that the key she derives
can be known only to her and Bob.
14.8.2 Bob's View
Now let's look at Bob's side. The first message he receives gives him almost
no useful information; it basically states that someone out there has chosen a
value sa and some random bits Na.
The third message (the second one Bob receives) is different. This is a
message that definitely came from Alice, because Alice authenticated it, and
we assumed at the outset that Bob can verify an authentication by Alice. The
authentication includes X, a random value chosen by Bob, so the third message
is not a replay but has been authenticated by Alice specifically for this protocol
run. Also, Alice's authentication covers the first message that Bob received, so
now he knows that the first message was proper, too.
Bob knows the DH parameters are safe; after all, he chose them. So just
like Alice, he knows that only someone who knows a y such that gy = Y can
compute the final key k. But Alice authenticated the Y she sent, and Bob trusts
Alice, so she is the only person who knows the corresponding y. This convinces
Bob that Alice is the only other person who can compute k.
14.8.3 Attacker's View
Finally, we look at the protocol from the viewpoint of an attacker. If we just
listen in on the communications, we see all the messages that Alice and Bob
exchange. But the key k is computed using the DH protocol, so as long as
the DH parameters are safe, a passive attack like this is not going to reveal
anything about k. In other words: we'll have to try an active attack.
One instructive exercise is to look at each data element and try to change
it. Here we are quickly stopped by the two authentications. Alice's final
authentication covers all the data that was exchanged between Alice and Bob.
That means we can't change any data elements, other than to try a replay
attack of a prerecorded protocol run. But the nonce and the random X value
stop any replay attempts.

That doesn't mean we can't try to play around. We could, for example,
change sa to a larger value. As long as this larger value is acceptable to
Bob, most of the protocol would complete normally. There are just three
problems. First of all, increasing sa isn't an attack because it only makes the
DH prime larger, and therefore the DH parameters stronger. The second and
third problems are the two authentications, which will both fail.
There are some other things that might look like attacks at first. For example,
suppose Alice sends Bob sa and Na. Bob sends sa and Na to Charlie. Charlie
replies to Bob with {p,q,g), X, and Authc. Bob now turns this around and
forwards (p,q,g) and X to Alice, along with a new authenticator Authb that
he computes. Alice replies to Bob with Y and Autha. Bob then sends Y and a
new authenticator Authb that he computes to Charlie. What's the result of all
this? Alice thinks she's sharing a key k with Bob when in fact she's sharing it
with Charlie. And Charlie thinks he's sharing a key with Bob when he's in fact
sharing it with Alice. Is this an attack? Not really. Notice that Bob could just
do the normal key negotiation with both Alice and Charlie, and then forward
all the messages on the secure channel (decrypting each message he receives
from Alice and re-encrypting it to Charlie, and vice-versa). This has the same
effect; Alice thinks she is communicating with Bob, and Charlie thinks he is
communicating with Bob, but they are sending messages to each other instead.
And in this scenario Bob knows more (and can do more) than if he ran the
"attack." It is true that Alice might send a message to Charlie that makes
Charlie believe that Bob agreed to something, but that can only be to Bob's
detriment. And an attack that harms the attacker is not one we worry about.
In the real world, you will find many protocols where there are unauthen-
ticated data elements. Most designers wouldn't bother authenticating sa in
our protocol, because changing it would not lead to an attack. (Both Alice
and Bob independently verify that the size of p is large enough for them.)
Allowing attackers to play around is always a bad idea. We don't want to give
them any more tools than necessary. And we can certainly imagine a situation
where not authenticating sa could be dangerous. For example, assume that
Bob prefers to use DH parameters from a list built into the program, and only
generates new parameters when necessary. As long as Alice and Bob choose
to use DH prime sizes that are still in the list, Bob never generates a new
parameter set. But this also means that Bob's parameter generation code and
Alice's parameter verification code are never used and therefore unlikely to
be properly tested. A bug in the parameter generation and testing code could
remain hidden until an attacker increases sa. Yes, this is an unlikely scenario,
but there are thousands of unlikely scenarios that are all bad for security. And
thousands of low-probability risks add up to a high-probability risk. This is
why we are so paranoid about stopping any type of attack anytime we can.
It gives us defense in depth.

14.8.4 Key Compromise
So what happens if some other part of the system is compromised? Let's have
a look.
If Alice merely loses her authentication key without it becoming known
to an attacker, she simply loses the ability to run this protocol. She can still
use session keys that were already established. This is very much how you'd
expect the protocol to behave. The same holds for Bob if he loses his key.
If Alice loses the session key, without it becoming known to an attacker, she
will have to run the key negotiation protocol again with Bob to establish a new
session key.
Things get worse if an attacker manages to learn a key. If Alice's
authentication key is compromised, the attacker can impersonate Alice from that
moment on until the time that Bob is informed and stops accepting Alice's
authentications. This is an unavoidable consequence. If you lose your car keys,
anyone who finds them can use the car. That is one of the main functions of
keys: they allow access to certain functions. This protocol does have the
desirable property that past communications between Alice and Bob still remain
secret. Even knowing Alice's authentication key doesn't let the attacker find
the session key k for a protocol that has already finished, even if the attacker
recorded all the messages. This is called forward secrecy.1 The same properties
hold with regard to Bob's authentication key.
Finally, we consider the situation where the session key is compromised.
The key k is the hash of gxy/ where both x and y are randomly chosen.
This provides no information about any other key. It certainly provides no
information about Alice's or Bob's authentication keys. The value of k in one
protocol run is completely independent of the k in another protocol run (at
least, it is if we assume that Alice and Bob use a good prng).
Our protocol offers the best possible protection against key compromises.
14.9 Computational Complexity of the Protocol
Let's have a look at the computational complexity of our solution. We'll assume
that the DH parameter selection and verification are all cached, so we don't
count them in the workload of a single protocol run. That leaves the following
computations, which Alice and Bob must each perform:
■ Three exponentiations in the DH subgroup.
■ One authentication generation.
1 You sometimes see the term perfect forward secrecy, or PFS, but we don't use words like "perfect"
because it never is.

■ One authentication verification.
■ Various relatively efficient operations, such as random number
generation, comparisons, and hash functions.
If symmetric-key authentication is used, the run time of the protocol is
dominated by the DH exponentiations. Let's look at how much work that is.
Bob and Alice each have to do three modular exponentiations with a 256-bit
exponent. This requires about 1150 modular multiplications.2 To get an idea
of how much work this really is, we'll compare this to the computational
cost of an RSA signature where the RSA modulus and the DH prime are
the same size. For an s-bit modulus, the signature algorithm requires 3s/2
multiplications if you do not use the CRT (Chinese Remainder Theorem).
Using the CRT representation saves a factor of four, so the cost of an RSA
signature on s-bit numbers is similar to the cost of doing 3s/8 multiplications.
This leads us to an interesting conclusion: RSA signatures are relatively slower
than DH computations when the moduli are large, and relatively faster when
the moduli are small. The break-even point is around 3000 bits. This is because
DH always uses 256-bit exponents, and for RSA the exponent grows with the
modulus size.
We conclude that for the public-key sizes we use, the DH computations cost
roughly the same as an RSA signature computation. The DH operations are
still the dominant factors in the computations for the protocol, but the cost is
quite reasonable.
If RSA signatures are used for the authentication, the computational load
more or less doubles. (We can ignore RSA verifications as they are very
fast.) This still isn't excessive. CPU speeds are rapidly increasing, and in
most practical implementations you'll see that communications delays and
overhead take up more time than the computations.
14.9.1 Optimization Tricks
There are a few optimizations that can be applied to the DH operations.
Using addition chain heuristics, each exponentiation can be done using fewer
multiplications. Furthermore, Alice computes both X^ and Xy. You can use
addition sequence heuristics to compute these two results simultaneously and
save about 250 multiplications. See Bos [18] for a detailed discussion.
There are also various tricks that make it faster to generate a random y and
compute gy, but these tricks require so much extra system complexity that
we'd rather not use them.
2This is for the simple binary exponentiation algorithm. A better-optimized algorithm reduces
this to less than 1000 multiplications.

14.10 Protocol Complexity
This protocol is also an excellent example of why protocol design is so
hideously difficult. Even a simple protocol like this quickly expands to a full
page, and we didn't even include all the rules for DH parameter generation or
the checks for the authentication scheme that are unknown at our abstraction
level. Yet it is already difficult to keep track of everything that goes on. More
complicated protocols get much larger. One particular smart card payment
system that Niels worked on had a dozen or so protocols specified in 50 pages
of symbols and protocol specifications, and that was using a proprietary,
highly compact notation! There were 50 more densely written pages needed
to cover the security-critical implementation issues.
Full documentation of a set of cryptographic protocols can run into hundreds
of pages. Protocols quickly get too complicated to keep in your head, and that
is dangerous. Once you don't understand it all, it is almost inevitable that a
weakness slips in. The above-mentioned project was probably too complex to
be fully understood, even by the designers.
A few years later Niels worked with another, commercially available smart
card system. This was a well-known and established system that was widely
used for many different smart card applications. One day Marius Schilder,
a colleague, showed up with a question—or rather, with a large hole in the
system. It turns out that two of the protocols had a destructive interference
with each other. One protocol computed a session key from a long-term card
key, a bit like the key negotiation protocol of this chapter. A second protocol
computed an authentication value from the long-term card key. With a bit of
tweaking, you could use the second protocol to let the smart card compute
the session key, and then send half of the bits to you. With half of the key bits
known, breaking the rest of the system was trivial. Oops! This bug was fixed in
the next version, but it is a good illustration of the problems of large protocol
specifications.
Real-world systems always have very large protocol specifications.
Communicating is very complex, and adding cryptographic functions and
distrust makes things even harder. Our advice: be very careful with protocol
complexity.
One of the fundamental problems in this area is that there are no good
modularization notations for protocols, so everything ends up being mixed
together. We've already seen that here in this chapter: the DH parameter size
negotiation, DH key exchange, and authentication are all merged together.
This is not just a combination of loose parts; the specification and
implementation mash them all together. It is rather like a really bad and complex

computer program without any modularization. We all know what that leads
to, but we've developed modularization techniques to deal with program
complexity. Unfortunately, we lack modularization techniques for protocols,
and developing such modularization techniques may not be an easy task.
14.11 A Gentle Warning
We've tried to make the design of the protocol look as easy as possible. Please
don't be fooled by this. Protocol design is fiendishly difficult, and requires a lot
of experience. Even with lots of experience, it is very easy to get wrong. Though
we've tried very hard to get everything right in this book, there is always a
possibility that the key negotiation protocol we designed here is wrong. It is
important to have professional paranoia and treat all protocols with skepticism.
14.12 Key Negotiation from a Password
So far, we've assumed there is an authentication system to base the key
negotiation on. In many situations, all you have is a password. You could
just use a MAC keyed with the password to run this protocol, but there is a
problem: given a transcript from this protocol (acquired by eavesdropping on
the communications), you can test for any particular password. Just compute
the authentication value and see whether it is correct.
The problem with passwords is that people don't choose them from a very
large set. There are programs that search through all likely passwords. Ideally
we'd like a key negotiation protocol where an eavesdropper cannot perform
an offline dictionary attack.
Such protocols exist; probably the best-known example is SRP [129]. They
provide a significant security improvement. We do not describe password-
based key negotiation protocols here. If you are interested in using a password-
based key negotiation protocol, you should also be aware of the fact that there
are multiple patents in this area.
14.13 Exercises
Exercise 14.1 In Section 14.5, we stated that a property of the protocol could
result in providing erroneous information to investigating administrators.
Give a concrete scenario where this could be a problem.

Exercise 14.2 Suppose Alice and Bob implement the final protocol in
Section 14.7. Could an attacker exploit a property of this protocol to mount a
denial-of-service attack against Alice? Against Bob?
Exercise 14.3 Find a new product or system that uses (or should use) a
key negotiation protocol. This might be the same product or system you
analyzed for Exercise 1.8. Conduct a security review of that product or system
as described in Section 1.12, this time focusing on the security and privacy
issues surrounding the key negotiation protocol.
