# 18 The Dream of PKI

HAPTER

The Dream of PKI
In this chapter we will give the standard presentation of what a PKI is, and
how it solves the key management problem. It is important to understand
this first. In the next chapter we'll talk about the challenges with PKIs in
practice, but for this chapter we'll visit the perfect world where a PKI solves
all your problems.
18.1 A Very Short PKI Overview
A PKI is a Public-Key Infrastructure, It is an infrastructure that allows you to
recognize which public key belongs to whom. The classical description is as
follows.
There is a central authority that is called the Certificate Authority, or CA
for short. The CA has a public/private key pair (e.g., an RSA key pair) and
publishes the public key. We will assume that everybody knows the CA's
public key. As this key remains the same over long periods of time, this is easy
to accomplish.
To join the PKI, Alice generates her own public /private key pair. She keeps
the private key secret, and takes the public key PKA to the CA and says: "Hi,
I'm Alice and PKA is my public key." The CA verifies that Alice is who she
says she is and then signs a digital statement that states something like "Key
PKA belongs to Alice." This signed statement is called the certificate. It certifies
that the key belongs to Alice.
If Alice now wants to communicate with Bob, she can send him her public
key and the certificate. Bob has the CA's public key, so he can verify the

signature on the certificate. As long as Bob trusts the CA, he also trusts that
PKA actually belongs to Alice.
Using the same procedures, Bob gets his public key certified by the CA,
and sends his public key and certificate to Alice. They now know each other's
public key. These keys in turn can be used to run the key negotiation protocol
to establish a session key for secure communications.
What is required is a central CA that everybody trusts. Each participant
needs to get his or her public key certified, and each participant needs to know
the CA's public key. After that, everybody can securely communicate with
everybody else.
That sounds simple enough.
18.2 PKI Examples
To make the rest of this chapter easier to understand, we'll first give some
examples of how PKIs can be implemented and used.
18.2.1 The Universal PKI
The ultimate dream is a universal PKI. A large organization, like the post
office, certifies everybody's public key. The beauty of this is that every person
only needs to get a single key certified, as the same key can be used for
every application. Because everybody trusts the post office, or whatever other
organization becomes the universal CA, everybody can communicate securely
with everybody else, and they all live happily ever after.
If our description sounds a bit like a fairy tale, that is because it is. There is
no universal PKI, and there never will be.
18.2.2 VPN Access
A more realistic example would be a company that has a VPN (Virtual Private
Network) to allow its employees to access the corporate network from home
or from their hotel room when they are traveling. The VPN access points must
be able to recognize the people who have access and exactly what level of
access they have. The IT department of the company acts as the CA and gives
every employee a certificate that allows the VPN access points to recognize
the employee.
18.2.3 Electronic Banking
A bank wants to allow its customers to perform financial transactions on the
bank's website. Properly identifying the customer is vital in this application,
as is the ability to produce proof acceptable in court. The bank itself can act as
the CA and certify the public keys of its customers.

18.2.4 Refinery Sensors
A refinery complex is very large. Spread out between miles of pipes and access
roads are hundreds of sensors that measure things like temperature, flow rate,
and pressure. Spoofing sensor data is a very serious attack on the refinery. It
might not be too difficult to send false sensor data to the control room, tricking
the operators into taking actions that lead to a large explosion. Therefore, it
is imperative that the control room get the proper sensor readings. We can
use standard authentication techniques to ensure that the sensor data has not
been tampered with, but to be sure that the data actually comes from the
sensor, some kind of key infrastructure is needed. The company can act as a
CA and build a PKI for all the sensors so each sensor can be recognized by the
control room.
18.2.5 Credit Card Organization
A credit card organization is a cooperative venture between a few thousand
banks spread out all over the world. All of these banks must be able to
exchange payments. After all, a user who has a credit card from bank A must
be able to pay the merchant that banks with bank B. Bank A will need to settle
with bank B in some way, and that requires secure communications. A PKI
allows all banks to identify each other and perform secure transactions. In this
situation, the credit card organization can act as the CA that certifies the keys
of each bank.
18.3 Additional Details
In real life, things become somewhat more complicated, so various extensions
to the simple PKI scheme are often used.
18.3.1 Multilevel Certificates
In many situations, the CA is split into multiple pieces. For example, the central
credit card organization is not going to certify each bank directly. Instead, they
will have regional offices to deal with the individual banks. You then get a
two-level certificate structure. The central CA signs a certificate on the regional
CA's public key that says something like: "Key PKX belongs to regional office
X and is allowed to certify other keys." Each regional office can then certify
individual bank keys. The certificate on the bank's key consists of two signed
messages: the central CA's delegation message that authorizes the regional
office's key, and the regional office's certification of the bank's key. This is
called the certificate chain, and such a chain can be extended to any number
of levels.

Such multilevel certificate structures can be very useful. They basically
allow the CA functionality to be split into a hierarchy, which is easy to handle
for most organizations. Almost all PKI systems have a multilevel structure.
One disadvantage of this structure is that the certificates grow larger and
require more computations to verify, but this is a relatively small cost in most
situations. Another disadvantage is that each extra CA that you add to the
system provides another point of attack, and thereby reduces overall system
security.
One way to reduce the disadvantage of the large multilevel certificates that
we have not seen in practice would be to collapse the certificate hierarchy. To
continue with this example, once the bank has its two-level certificate, it could
send it to the central CA. The central CA verifies the two-level certificate and
replies with a single certificate on the bank's key, using the master CA key.
Once the key hierarchy is collapsed like this, the performance cost of adding
extra levels to the hierarchy becomes very small. But then again, adding extra
layers might not be such a good idea; many-layered hierarchical structures are
rarely effective.
You have to be careful when chaining certificates together like this. They
add more complexity, and complexity is in general risky. Here is an example.
Secure sites on the Internet use a PKI system to allow browsers to identify
the correct website. In practice, this system isn't very secure, if only because
most users don't verify the name of the website they are using. But a while
back, a fatal bug showed up in a library that validates certificates on all
Microsoft operating systems. Each element of the certificate chain contains a
flag that specifies whether the key it certifies is a CA key or not. CA keys are
allowed to certify other keys. Non-CA keys are not allowed to certify other
keys. This is an important difference. Unfortunately, the library in question
didn't check this flag. So an attacker could buy a certificate for the domain
nastyattacker.com and use it to sign a certificate for amazon.com. Microsoft
Internet Explorer used the faulty library. It would accept nastyattacker. corn's
certification of a fake Amazon key and show the fake website as the real
Amazon website. Thus, a worldwide security system that cost a fortune to
build was completely outflanked by a simple little bug in a single library. Once
the bug was published, a patch was released (it took several tries to fix all the
problems), but this remains a good example of a minor bug destroying the
security of an entire system.
18.3.2 Expiration
No cryptographic key should be used indefinitely; there is always a risk
that the key will be compromised. Regular key changes let you recover from
compromise, albeit slowly. A certificate should not be valid forever, either,
because both the CA's key and the public key that is being certified expire.

Apart from these cryptographic reasons, expiration is important in keeping
information up-to-date. When a certificate expires, a new one will have to
be reissued, and this creates an opportunity to update the information in the
certificate. A typical expiration interval is somewhere between a few months
and a few years.
Almost all certificate systems include an expiration date and time. Nobody
should accept the certificate after this date and time. This is why participants
in a PKI need a clock.
Many designs include other data in the certificate. Often certificates have a
not-valid-before time, in addition to the expiration time. There can be different
classes of certificates, certificate serial numbers, date and time of issue, etc.
Some of this data is useful, some useless.
The most commonly used format for certificates is X.509 v3, which is overly
complicated. See Peter Gutmann's style guide [58] for a discussion of X.509.
If you work on a system that doesn't have to be interoperable with other
systems, you might strongly consider forgetting about X.509. Of course, X.509
is standardized, and it's hard to fault you for using a standard.
18.3.3 Separate Registration Authority
Sometimes you will see a system with a separate registration authority. The
problem is a political one. It is the HR department of a company that decides
who is an employee. But the IT department has to run the C A; that is a technical
job that they are not going to allow the HR department to do.
There are two good solutions to this. The first one is to use a multilevel
certificate structure and let the HR department be its own sub-CA. This
automatically provides the necessary flexibility to support multiple sites. The
second solution is much like the first one, except that once a user has a two-
level certificate, he exchanges it for a one-level certificate at the central CA.
This eliminates the overhead of checking a two-level certificate each time it is
used, at the cost of adding a simple two-message protocol to the system.
The really bad solution is to add a third party to the cryptographic
protocol. The project specifications will talk about the CA and another party
that might be called something like the RA (Registration Authority). The CA
and RA are treated as completely separate entities, which can add more than
100 pages of documentation to the system. That is bad in itself. Then there
is the need to specify the RA-CA interaction. We've even seen three-party
protocols in which the RA authorizes the CA to issue a certificate. This is a
good example of the problem of imposing user requirements on a technical
solution. User requirements only specify the outside behavior of a system.
The company needs to have separate functionality for the HR and IT
departments. But that does not mean the software has to have different code for
the HR and IT departments. In many situations, and certainly in this one, the

two departments can use much of the same functionality, and thus much of
the same code. Using a single set of certificate functions leads to a design
that is simpler, cheaper, more powerful, and more flexible than one based
directly on the original requirements that included both a CA and an RA
entity. A two-level CA scheme allows HR and IT to share most of the code
and protocols. The differences, in this case, are mostly in the user interface and
should be easy to implement. That translates to maybe a few hundred lines of
extra code, not a few hundred extra pages of specifications that turn into tens
of thousands of lines of code.
18.4 Summary
What we have described is a dream, but a very important dream. PKI is the
first and last word on key management for most of our industry. People have
been brought up on this dream and see it as something so obvious that it
doesn't need stating. To be able to understand them, you must understand the
PKI dream, because a lot of what they say is within the context of the dream.
And it feels so good to think that you have a solution to the key management
problem —
18.5 Exercises
Exercise 18.1 Suppose a CA is malicious. What bad things could the CA
accomplish?
Exercise 18.2 Assume a universal PKI. Can any security problems arise
because of the use of this single PKI across multiple applications?
Exercise 18.3 What policy or organizational challenges might impede or
prevent the deployment of a worldwide universal PKI?
Exercise 18.4 In addition to the examples in Sections 18.2.2-18.2.5, give three
example scenarios for which a PKI might be viable.
