# 19 PKI Reality

CHAPTER

PKI Reality
While very useful, there are some fundamental problems with the basic idea
of a PKI. Not in theory, but then, theory is something very different from
practice. PKIs simply don't work in the real world the way they do in the ideal
scenario discussed in Chapter 18. This is why much of the PKI hype has never
matched the reality.
When talking about PKIs, our view is much broader than just e-mail and the
Web. We also consider the role of PKIs in authorization and other systems.
19.1 Names
We'll start with a relatively simple problem: the concept of a name. The PKI
ties Alice's public key to her name. What is a name?
Let's begin in a simple setting. In a small village, everybody knows
everybody else by sight. Everybody has a name, and the name is either unique or
will be made unique. If there are two Johns, they will quickly come to be called
something like Big John and Little John. For each name there is one person, but
one person might have several names; Big John might also be called Sheriff or
Mr. Smith.
The name we are talking about here is not the name that appears on legal
documents. It is the name that people use to refer to you. A name is really
any kind of signifier that is used to refer to a person, or more generally, to an
entity. Your "official" name is just one of many names, and for many people
it is one that is rarely used.

As the village grows into a town, the number of people increases until you
no longer know them all. Names start losing their immediate association with
a person. There might only be a single J. Smith in town, but you might not
know him. Names now start to lead a life of their own, divorced from the
actual person. You start talking about people you have never actually met.
Maybe you end up talking in the bar about the rich Mr. Smith who just moved
here and who is going to sponsor the high school football team next year. Two
weeks later, you find out that this is the same person who joined your baseball
team two months ago, and whom you know by now as John. People still have
multiple names, after all. It just isn't obvious which names belong together,
and which person they refer to.
As the town grows into a city, this changes even more. Soon you will only
know a very small subset of the people. What is more, names are no longer
unique. It doesn't really help to know that you are looking for a John Smith
if there are a hundred of them in the city. The meaning of a name starts
to depend on the context. Alice might know three Johns, but at work when
she talks about "John," it is clear from the context that she means John who
works upstairs in sales. Later at home, it might mean John the neighbor's kid.
The relationship between a name and a person becomes even fuzzier.
Now consider the Internet. Over a billion people are online. What does
the name "John Smith" mean there? Almost nothing: there are too many of
them. So instead of more traditional names we use e-mail addresses. You now
communicate with j smi th53 3 @yahoo. com. That is certainly a unique name, but
in practice it does not link to a person in the sense of someone you will ever
meet. Even if you could find out information such as his address and phone
number, he is just as likely to live on the other side of the world. You are never
going to meet him in person unless you really set out to do so. Not
surprisingly, it is not uncommon for people to take on different online personalities.
And as always, each person has multiple names. Most users acquire multiple
e-mail addresses after a while. (We have more than a dozen among us.) But
it is extremely difficult to find out whether two e-mail addresses refer to the
same person. And to make things more complicated, there are people who
share an e-mail address, so that "name" refers to them both.
There are large organizations that try to assign names to everybody. The
best-known ones are governments. Most countries require each person to
have a single official name, which is then used on passports and other official
documents. The name itself is not unique—there are many people with the
same name—so in practice it is often extended with things like address,
driver's license number, and date of birth. This still does not guarantee a
unique identifier for a person, however.1 Also, several of these identifiers
can change over the course of a person's life. People change their addresses,
Driver's license numbers are unique, but not everybody has one.

driver's license numbers, names, and even gender. Just about the only thing
that doesn't change is the date of birth, but this is compensated for by the fact
that plenty of people lie about their date of birth, in effect changing it.
Just in case you thought that each person has a single
government-sanctioned official name, this isn't true, either. Some people are stateless and
have no papers at all. Others have dual nationalities, with two governments
each trying to establish an official name—and for various reasons, they may
not agree on what the official name should be. The two governments might
use different alphabets, in which case the names cannot be the same. Some
countries require a name that fits the national language and will modify foreign
names to a similar "proper" name in their own language.
To avoid confusion, many countries assign unique numbers to individuals,
like the Social Security number (SSN) in the United States or the SoFi number
in the Netherlands. The whole point of this number is to provide a unique and
fixed name for an individual, so his actions can be tracked and linked together.
To a large degree these numbering schemes are successful, but they also have
their weaknesses. The link between the actual human and the assigned number
is not very tight, and false numbers are used on a large scale in certain sectors
of the economy. And as these numbering schemes work on a per-country
basis, they do not provide global coverage, nor do the numbers themselves
provide global uniqueness.
One additional aspect of names deserves mention. In Europe, there are
privacy laws that restrict what kind of information an organization can store
about people. For example, a supermarket is not allowed to ask for, store,
or otherwise process an SSN or SoFi number for its loyalty program. This
restricts the reuse of government-imposed naming schemes.
So what name should you use in a PKI? Because many people have many
different names, this becomes a problem. Maybe Alice wants to have two
keys, one for her business and one for her private correspondence. But she
might use her maiden name for her business and her married name for her
private correspondence. Things like this quickly lead to serious problems if
you try to build a universal PKI. This is one of the reasons why smaller
application-specific PKIs work much better than a single large one.
19.2 Authority
Who is this CA that claims authority to assign keys to names? What makes
that CA authoritative with respect to these names? Who decides whether
Alice is an employee who gets VPN access or a customer of the bank with
restricted access?
For most of our examples, this is a question that is simple to answer. The
employer knows who is an employee and who isn't; the bank knows who is

a customer. This gives us our first indication of which organization should be
the CA. Unfortunately, there doesn't seem to be an authoritative source for the
universal PKI. This is one of the reasons why a universal PKI cannot work.
Whenever you are planning a PKI, you have to think about who is
authorized to issue the certificates. For example, it is easy for a company to be
authoritative with regard to its employees. The company doesn't decide what
the employee's name is, but it does know what name the employee is known
by within the company. If "Fred Smith" is officially called Alfred, this does not
matter. The name "Fred Smith" is a perfectly good name within the context of
the employees of the company.
19.3 Trust
Key management is the most difficult problem in cryptography, and a PKI
system is one of the best tools that we have to solve it with. But everything
depends on the security of the PKI, and therefore on the trustworthiness
of the CA. Think about the damage that can be done if the CA starts to
forge certificates. The CA can impersonate anyone in the system, and security
completely breaks down.
A universal PKI is very tempting, but trust is really the area where it fails.
If you are a bank and you need to communicate with your customers, would
you trust some dot-com on the other side of the world? Or even your local
government bureaucracy? What is the total amount of money you could lose if
the CA does something horribly wrong? How much liability is the CA willing
to take on? Will your local banking regulations allow you to use a foreign CA?
These are all enormous problems. Just imagine the damage that can occur if
the CA's private key is published on a website.
Think of it in traditional terms. The CA is the organization that hands out
the keys to the buildings. Most large office buildings have guards, and most
guards are hired from an outside security service. The guards verify that the
rules are being obeyed: a rather straightforward job. But deciding who gets
which keys is not something that you typically outsource to another company,
because it is a fundamental part of the security policy. For the same reason,
the CA functionality should not be outsourced.
No organization in the world is trusted by everybody. There isn't even one
that is trusted by most people. Therefore, there will never be a universal PKI.
The logical conclusion is that we will have to use lots of small PKIs. And this
is exactly the solution we suggest for our examples. The bank can be its own
CA; after all, the bank trusts itself, and all the customers already trust the bank

with their money. A company can be its own CA for the VPN, and the credit
card organization can also run its own CA.
An interesting observation here is that the trust relationships used by the
CA are ones that already exist and are based on contractual relationships. This
is always the case when you design cryptographic systems: the basic trust
relationships you build on are all based on contractual relationships.
19.4 Indirect Authorization
Now we come to a big problem with the classic PKI dream. Consider
authorization systems. The PKI ties keys to names, but most systems are not
interested in the name of the person. The banking system wants to know
which transactions to authorize. The VPN wants to know which directories to
allow access to. None of these systems cares who the key belongs to, only what
the keyholder is authorized to do.
To this end, most systems use some kind of access control list, or ACL.
This is just a database of who is authorized to do what. Sometimes it is
sorted by user (e.g., Bob is allowed the following things: access files in the
directory /homes/bob, use of the office printer, access to the file server), but
most systems keep the database indexed by action (e.g., charges to this account
must be authorized by Bob or Betty). Often there are ways to create groups of
people to make the ACLs simpler, but the basic functionality remains the same.
So now we have three different objects: a key, a name, and permission to
do something. What the system wants to know is which key authorizes which
action, or in other words, whether a particular key has a particular permission.
The classic PKI solves this by tying keys to names and using an ACL to tie
names to permissions. This is a roundabout method that introduces additional
points of attack [45].
The first point of attack is the name-key certificate provided by the PKI. The
second point of attack is the ACL database that ties names to permissions. The
third point of attack is name confusion: with names being such fuzzy things,
how do you compare whether the name in the ACL is the same as the name in
the PKI certificate? And how do you avoid giving two people the same name?
If you analyze this situation, you will clearly see that the technical design
has followed the naive formulation of the requirements. People think of
the problem in terms of identifying the key holder and who should have
access—that is how a security guard would approach the problem. Automated
systems can use a much more direct approach. A door lock doesn't care who
is holding the key, but allows access to anyone with the key.

19.5 Direct Authorization
A much better solution is generally to directly tie the permissions to the key,
using the PKI. The certificate no longer links the key to a name; it links the key
to a set of permissions [45].
All systems that use the PKI certificates can now decide directly whether to
allow access or not. They just look at the certificate provided and see if the key
has the appropriate permissions. It is direct and simple.
Direct authorization removes the ACL and the names from the authorization
process, thereby eliminating these points of attack. Some of the problems will,
of course, reappear at the point where certificates are issued. Someone must
decide who is allowed to do what, and ensure that this decision is encoded
in the certificates properly. The database of all these decisions becomes the
equivalent of the ACL database, but this database is less easy to attack. It is
easy to distribute to the people making the decisions, removing the central
ACL database and its associated vulnerabilities. Decision makers can just
issue the appropriate certificate to the user without further security-critical
infrastructure. This also removes much of the reliance on names, because the
decision makers are much further down in the hierarchy and have a much
smaller set of people to deal with. They often know the users personally, or at
least by sight, which helps a great deal in avoiding name confusion problems.
So can we just get rid of the names in the certificates, then?
Well, no. Though the names will not be used during normal operations,
we do need to provide logging data for audits and such. Suppose the bank
just processed a salary payment authorized by one of the four keys that has
payment authority for that account. Three days later, the CFO calls the bank
and asks why the payment was made. The bank knows the payment was
authorized, but it has to provide more information to the CFO than just a few
thousand random-looking bits of public-key data. This is why we still include
a name in every certificate. The bank can now tell the CFO that the key used to
authorize the payment belonged to "J. Smith," which is enough for the CFO
to figure out what happened. But the important thing here is that the names
only need to be meaningful to humans. The computer never tries to figure
out whether two names are the same, or which person the name belongs to.
Humans are much better at dealing with the fuzzy names, whereas computers
like simple and well-specified things such as sets of permissions.
19.6 Credential Systems
If you push this principle further, you get a full-fledged credential system.
This is the cryptographer's super-PKI. Basically, it requires that you need a
credential in the form of a signed certificate for every action you perform.

If Alice has a credential that lets her read and write a particular file, she
can delegate some or all of her authority to Bob. For example, she could
sign a certificate on Bob's public key that reads something like "Key PKBob is
authorized to read file X by delegated authority of key PKAiice." If Bob wants
to read file X, he has to present this certificate and a certificate proof that Alice
has read access to file X.
A credential system can add additional features. Alice could limit the time
validity of the delegation by including the validity period in the certificate.
Alice might also limit Bob's ability to delegate the authority to read file X.2
In theory, a credential system is extremely powerful and flexible. In practice,
they are rarely used. There are several reasons for this.
First of all, credential systems are quite complex and can impose a noticeable
overhead. Your authority to access a resource might depend on a chain of
half-a-dozen certificates, each of which has to be transmitted and checked.
The second problem is that credential systems invite a micromanagement
of access. It is so easy to split authorities into smaller and smaller pieces that
users end up spending entirely too much time deciding exactly how much
authority to delegate to a colleague. This time is often wasted, but a bigger
problem is the loss of the colleague's time when it turns out he doesn't have
enough access to do his job. Maybe this micromanagement problem can be
solved with better user education and better user interfaces, but that seems
to be an open problem. Some users avoid the micromanagement problem by
delegating (almost) all their authority to anyone who needs any kind of access,
effectively undermining the entire security system.
The third problem is that you need to develop a credential and delegation
language. The delegation messages need to be written in some sort of logical
language that computers can understand. This language needs to be powerful
enough to express all the desired functionality, yet simple enough to allow
fast chaining of conclusions. It also has to be future-proof. Once a credential
system is deployed, every program will need to include code to interpret the
delegation language. Upgrading to a new version of the delegation language
can be very difficult, especially since security functionality spreads into every
piece of a system. Yet it is effectively impossible to design a delegation
language that is general enough to satisfy all future requirements, since we
never know what the future will bring. This remains an area of research.
The fourth problem with credential systems is probably insurmountable.
Detailed delegation of authority is simply too complex a concept for the
average user. There doesn't seem to be a way of presenting access rules to
2This is an often-requested feature, but we believe it may not always be a good one. Limiting
Bob's ability to delegate his authority just invites him to run a proxy program so that other
people can use his credential to access a resource. Such proxy programs undermine the security
infrastructure and should be banned, but this is only tenable if there are no operational reasons to
run a proxy. And there are always operational reasons why someone needs to delegate authority.

users in a manner they can understand. Asking users to make decisions about
which authorities to delegate is bound to fail. We see that in the real world
already. In some student houses it is customary for one person to go to the
ATM and get cash for several people. The other students lend him their ATM
card and PIN code. This is an eminently risky thing to do, yet it is done by some
of the supposedly more well-educated people in our society. As consultants,
we've visited many companies and sometimes had work-related reasons to
have access to the local network. It is amazing how much access we got. We've
had system administrators give us unrestricted access to the research data,
when all we needed to do was look at a file or two. If system administrators
have a hard time getting this right, ordinary users certainly will, too.
As cryptographers, we'd love the idea of a credential system if only the users
were able to manage the complexity. There is undoubtedly a lot of interesting
research to do on human interactions with security systems.
There is, however, one area where credentials are very useful and should be
mandatory. If you use a hierarchical CA structure, the central CA signs
certificates on the keys of the sub-CAs. If these certificates do not include any kind of
restriction, then each sub-CA has unlimited power. This is problematic; we've
just multiplied the number of places where system-critical keys are stored.
In a hierarchical CA structure, the power of a sub-CA should be limited by
including restrictions in the certificate on its key. This requires a credential-like
delegation language for CA operations. Exactly what type of restrictions you'd
want to impose depends on the application. Just think about what type of
sub-CAs you want to create and how their power should be limited.
19.7 The Modified Dream
Let's summarize all the criticism of PKIs we've presented so far and present
a modified dream. This is a more realistic representation of what a PKI
should be.
First of all, each application has its own PKI with its own CA. The world
consists of a large number of small PKIs. Each user is a member of many
different PKIs at the same time.
The user must use different keys for each PKI, as he cannot use the same
key in different systems without careful coordination in the design of the two
systems. The user's key store will therefore contain dozens of keys, requiring
tens of kilobytes of storage space.
The PKI's main purpose is to tie a credential to the key. The bank's PKI
ties Alice's key to the credential that allows access to Alice's account. Or the
company's PKI ties Alice's key to a credential that allows access to the VPN.
Significant changes to a user's credentials require a new certificate to be issued.
Certificates still contain the user's name, but this is mainly for management
and auditing purposes.

This modified dream is far more realistic. It is also more powerful, more
flexible, and more secure than the original dream. It is very tempting to believe
that this modified dream will solve your key management problems. But in
the next section, we will encounter the hardest problem of all—one that will
never be solved fully and will always require compromises.
19.8 Revocation
The hardest problem to solve in a PKI is revocation. Sometimes a certificate has
to be withdrawn. Maybe Bob's computer was hacked and his private key was
compromised. Maybe Alice was transferred to a different department or even
fired from the company. You can think of all kinds of situations where you
want to revoke a certificate.
The problem is that a certificate is just a bunch of bits. These bits have been
used in many places and are stored in many places. You can't make the world
forget the certificate, however hard you try. Bruce lost a PGP key more than a
decade ago; he still gets e-mail encrypted with the corresponding certificate.3
Even trying to make the world forget the certificate is unrealistic. If a thief
breaks into Bob's computer and steals his private key, you can be certain he
also made a copy of the certificate on the corresponding public key.
Each system has its own requirements, but in general, revocation
requirements differ in four variables:
■ Speed of revocation. What is the maximum amount of time allowed between
the revocation command and the last use of the certificate?
■ Reliability of revocation. Is it acceptable that under some circumstances
revocation isn't fully effective? What residual risk is acceptable?
■ Number of revocations. How many revocations should the revocation
system handle at a time?
■ Connectivity. Is the party checking the certificates online at the time of
certificate verification?
There are three workable solutions to the revocation problem: revocation
lists, fast expiration, and online certificate verification.
19.8.1 Revocation List
A certificate revocation list, or CRL, is a database that contains a list of revoked
certificates. Everybody who wants to verify a certificate must check the CRL
database to see if the certificate has been revoked.
3PGP has its own strange PKI-like structure called the web of trust. Those interested in PGP's web
of trust should read [130].

A central CRL database has attractive properties. Revocation is almost
instantaneous. Once a certificate has been added to the CRL, no further
transactions will be authorized. Revocation is also very reliable, and there is
no direct upper limit on how many certificates can be revoked.
The central CRL database also has significant disadvantages. Everybody
must be online all the time to be able to check the CRL database. The CRL
database also introduces a single point of failure: if it is not available, no
actions can be performed. If you try to solve this by authorizing parties to
proceed whenever the CRL is unavailable, attackers will use denial-of-service
attacks to disable the CRL database and destroy the revocation capability of
the system.
An alternative is to have a distributed CRL database. You could make a
redundant mirrored database using a dozen servers spread out over the world
and hope it is reliable enough. But such redundant databases are expensive
to build and maintain and are normally not an option. Don't forget, people
rarely want to spend money on security.
Some systems simply send copies of the entire CRL database to every device
in the system. The U.S. military STU-III encrypted telephone works in this
manner. This is similar to the little booklets of stolen credit card numbers that
used to be sent to each merchant. It is relatively easy to do. You can just let
every device download the updated CRL from a Web server every half hour
or so, at the cost of increasing the revocation time. However, this solution
restricts the size of the CRL database. Most of the time you can't afford to copy
hundreds of thousands of CRL entries to every device in the system. We've
seen systems where the requirements state that every device must be capable
of storing a list of 50 CRL entries, which can be problematic.
In our experience, CRL systems are expensive to implement and maintain.
They require their own infrastructure, management, communication paths,
and so on. A considerable amount of extra functionality is required just to
handle the comparatively rarely used functionality of revocation.
19.8.2 Fast Expiration
Instead of revocation lists, you can use fast expiration. This makes use of the
already existing expiration mechanism. The CA simply issues certificates with
a very short expiration time, ranging anywhere from 10 minutes to 24 hours.
Each time Alice wants to use her certificate, she gets a new one from the CA.
She can then use it for as long as it remains valid. The exact expiration speed
can be tuned to the requirements of the application, but a certificate validity
period of less than 10 minutes does not seem to be very practical.
The major advantage of this scheme is that it uses the already available
certificate issuing mechanism. No separate CRL is required, which significantly
reduces the overall system complexity. All you need to do to revoke a

permission is inform the CA of the new access rules. Of course, everybody still
needs to be online all the time to get the certificates reissued.
Simplicity is one of our main design criteria, so we prefer fast expiration to a
CRL database. Whether fast expiration is possible depends mostly on whether
the application demands instantaneous revocation, or whether a delay is
acceptable.
19.8.3 Online Certificate Verification
Another alternative is online certificate verification. This approach, which is
embodied in the Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP), has seen a lot of
headway in some domains, such as Web browsers.
To verify a certificate, Alice queries a trusted party—such as the CA or a
delegated party—with the serial number of the certificate in question. The
trusted party looks up the status of the certificate in its own database, and
then sends a signed response to Alice. Alice knows the trusted party's public
key and can verify the signature on the response. If the trusted party says the
certificate is valid, Alice knows that the certificate has not been revoked.
Online certificate verification has a number of attractive properties. As with
CRLs, revocation is almost instantaneous. Revocation is also very reliable.
Online certificate verification also shares some disadvantages with CRLs.
Alice must be online to verify a certificate, and the trusted party becomes a
point of failure.
In general, we prefer online certificate verification to CRLs. Online certificate
verification avoids the problem of massively distributing the CRLs and avoids
the need to parse and verify the CRLs on the client. The design of online
certificate verification protocols can therefore be made cleaner, simpler, and
more scalable than CRLs.
In most situations online certificate verification is inferior to fast expiration,
however. With online certificate verification, you can't trust the key without a
trusted party's signature. If you view that signature as a new certificate on the
key, you have a fast-expiration system with very short expiration times. The
disadvantage of online certificate verification is that every verifier has to query
the trusted party, whereas for fast expiration the prover can use the same CA
signature for many verifiers.
19.8.4 Revocation Is Required
Because revocation can be hard to implement, it becomes very tempting not to
implement it at all. Some PKI proposals make no mention of revocation. Others
list the CRL as a future extension possibility. In reality, a PKI without some
form of revocation is pretty useless. Real-life circumstances mean that keys do
get compromised, and access has to be revoked. Operating a PKI without a

working revocation system is somewhat like operating a ship without a bilge
pump. In theory, the ship should be watertight and it shouldn't need a bilge
pump. In practice, there is always water collecting in the bottom of the ship,
and if you don't get rid of it, the ship eventually sinks.
19.9 So What Is a PKI Good For?
At the very beginning of our PKI discussion, we stated that the purpose of
having a PKI is to allow Alice and Bob to generate a shared secret key, which
they use to create a secure channel, which they in turn use to communicate
securely with each other. Alice wants to authenticate Bob (and vice versa)
without talking to a third party. The PKI is supposed to make this possible.
But it doesn't.
There is no revocation system that works entirely offline. It is easy to see why.
If neither Alice nor Bob contacts any outside party, neither of them can ever
be informed that one of their keys has been revoked. So the revocation checks
force them to go online. Our revocation solutions require online connections.
But if we are online, we don't need a big complex PKI. We can achieve our
desired level of security by simply setting up a central key server, such as
those described in Chapter 17.
Let's compare the advantages of a PKI over a key server system:
■ A key server requires everybody to be online in real time. If you can't
reach the key server, you can't do anything at all. There is no way Alice
and Bob can recognize each other. A PKI gives you some advantages.
If you use expiration for revocation, you only need to contact the
central server once in a while; for applications that use certificates with
validity periods of hours, the requirement for real-time online access
and processing is significantly relaxed. This is useful for non-interactive
applications like e-mail. This is also useful for certain authorization
systems, or cases where communications are expensive. Even if you use
a CRL database, you might have rules on how to proceed if the CRL
database cannot be reached. Credit card systems have rules like this. If
you can't get automatic authorization, any transaction up to a certain
amount is okay. These rules would have to be based on a risk analysis,
including the risk of a denial-of-service attack on the CRL system, but at
least you get the option of proceeding; the key server solution provides
no alternatives.
■ The key server is a single point of failure. Distributing the key server
is difficult, since it contains all the keys in the system. You really don't
want to start spreading your secret keys throughout the world. The

CRL database, in contrast, is much less security-critical and is easier to
distribute. The fast-expiration solution makes the CA a point of failure.
But large systems almost always have a hierarchical CA, which means
that the CA is already distributed, and failures affect only a small part of
the system.
■ In theory, a PKI should provide you with nonrepudiation. Once Alice
has signed a message with her key, she should not be able to later deny
that she signed the message. A key server system can never provide this;
the central server has access to the same key that Alice uses and can
therefore forge an arbitrary message to make it look as if Alice sent it.
In real life, nonrepudiation doesn't work because people cannot store
their secret keys sufficiently well. If Alice wants to deny that she signed
a message, she is simply going to claim that a virus infected her machine
and stole her private key.
■ The most important key of a PKI is the CA root key. This key does not
have to be stored in a computer that is online. Rather, it can be stored
securely and only loaded into an offline computer when needed. The root
key is only used to sign the certificates of the sub-CAs, and this is done
only rarely. In contrast, the key server system has the master key material
in an online computer. Computers that are offline are much harder to
attack than those that are online, so this makes a PKI potentially more
secure.
So there are a few advantages to PKIs. They are nice to have, but none
of them gives you a really critical advantage in some environments. These
advantages only come at a stiff price. A PKI is much more complex than
a key server system, and the public-key computations require a lot more
computational power.
19.10 What to Choose
So how should you set up your key management system? Should you use a
key server-type scheme or a PKI-type scheme? As always, this depends on
your exact requirements, the size of your system, your target application, and
soon.
For small systems, the extra complexity of a PKI is in general not warranted.
We think it is easier to use the key server approach. This is mainly because the
advantages of a PKI over the key server approach are more relevant for large
installations than for small ones.
For large systems, the additional flexibility of a PKI is still attractive. A PKI
can be a more distributed system. Credential-style extensions allow the central

CA to limit the authority of the sub-CAs. This in turn makes it easy to set
up small sub-CAs that cover a particular area of operations. As the sub-CA
is limited in the certificates it can issue by the certificate on its own key, the
sub-CA cannot pose a risk to the system as a whole. For large systems, such
flexibility and risk limitation are important.
If you are building a large system, we would advise you to look very
seriously at a PKI solution, but do compare it to a key server solution. You'll
have to see if the PKI advantages outweigh its extra cost and complexity. One
problem might be that you really want to use credential-style limitations for
your sub-CAs. To do this, you must be able to express the limitations in a
logical framework. There is no generic framework in which this can be done,
so this ends up being a customer-specific part of the design. It probably also
means that you cannot use an off-the-shelf product for your PKI, as they are
unlikely to have appropriate certificate restriction language.
19.11 Exercises
Exercise 19.1 What bad things could happen if Alice uses the same keys
with multiple PKIs?
Exercise 19.2 Suppose a system employs devices that are each capable of
storing a list of 50 CRL entries. How can this design decision lead to security
problems?
Exercise 19.3 Suppose a system uses a PKI with a CRL. A device in that
system is asked to verify a certificate but cannot access the CRL database
because of a denial-of-service attack. What are the possible courses of action
for the device, and what are the advantages and disadvantages of each course
of action?
Exercise 19.4 Compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages of
PKIs and key servers. Describe one example application for which you would
use a PKI. Describe one example application for which you would use a key
server. Justify each of your decisions.
Exercise 19.5 Compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages of
CRLs, fast revocation, and online certificate verification. Describe one example
application for which you would use a CRL. Describe one example application
for which you would use fast revocation. Describe one example application
for which you would use online certificate verification. Justify each of your
decisions.
