# 22 Standards and Patents

CHAPTER

Standards and Patents
Aside from cryptography itself, there are two things you really should know
about: standards and patents. We offer our perspectives on both here.
22.1 Standards
Standards are a double-edged sword. On one hand, no one will fault you
for using a standard. We said this in the context of AES. On the other hand,
many security standards don't work. This is a conundrum. We focus on
the engineering aspects of cryptography in this book. But if you do any
cryptographic engineering, you are going to encounter standards. So you need
to know a bit about them, and we consider them now.
22.1.1 The Standards Process
For those who have not been involved in the standards development process,
we'll first describe how many standards are made. It starts out with some
standardization body, such as the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO), or the European Committee for
Standardization (CEN). This standardization body sets up a committee in response
to some perceived need for a new or improved standard. The committee
goes by different names: working group, task group, or whatever. Sometimes
there are hierarchical structures of committees, but the basic idea remains the
same. Committee membership is typically voluntary. People apply to join, and

pretty much anyone is accepted. Often there are some procedural hoops to
jump through, but there is no significant selection of members. These
committees vary in size up to several hundred members, but big committees split
themselves into smaller subcommittees (called task groups, study groups, or
whatever). Most work is done in a committee of up to a few dozen people.
Standardization committees have regular meetings, once every few months.
All members travel to a city and meet in a hotel for a few days. In the months
between meetings, members of the committee will do some work, create
proposals and presentations, etc. At the meetings, the committee decides
which way to proceed. Usually there is a single editor who gets the job of
putting all the proposals together into a single standards document. Creating
a standard is a slow process and often takes many years.
So who turns up to join these committees? Well, being a member is expensive.
Apart from the time it takes, the travel and hotels are not cheap. So everybody
there is sent by their company. Companies have several motivations to be
represented. Sometimes they want to sell products that must interoperate with
products from other companies. This requires standards, and the best way to
keep track of the standardization process is to be there. Companies also want to
keep an eye on their competitors. You don't want to let your competitor write
the standards, because they will do something to put you at a competitive
disadvantage—perhaps skew it toward their own technology or requirements
or include techniques for which they themselves hold a patent. Sometimes
companies don't want a standard, so they show up at the committee meetings
to try to slow the process down to allow their proprietary solution time to
capture the market. In real life, all these motivations, plus several more, are
all mixed together in varying proportions to create a very complex political
environment.
Not surprisingly, quite a number of standardization committees fail. They
never produce anything, or produce something atrociously bad, or end up
being deadlocked and overtaken by the market, and then define whatever
system captured the market. Successful committees manage to produce a
standards document after a few years.
Once the standard has been written, everybody goes and implements it. This,
of course, leads to systems that do not interoperate, so there is a secondary
process where interoperability is tested and the different manufacturers adapt
their implementations to work together.
There are many problems with this process. The political structure of the
committee puts very little emphasis on creating a good technical standard.
The most important thing is to reach consensus. The standard is finished when
everybody is equally unhappy with the result. To pacify the different factions,
standards have many options, extended functionalities, useless alternatives,
etc. And as each faction has its own ideas, opinions, and focus points, the best

compromise is often contradictory. Many standards are internally inconsistent,
or even contradict themselves.
This whole process is made even more complex by the fact that companies
are creating implementations while the standardization process is still going
on, based on drafts of the standard. This makes it even harder to change
something, because somebody has already implemented it and doesn't want
to do it again. Of course, different companies will implement things in different
ways and then fight in the committee to get the standard adjusted to fit their
implementation. Sometimes the only compromise is to choose something that
no company has implemented, just to ensure that they are all equally unhappy.
Technical merit does not really feature in this type of discussion.
22.7.7.7 The Standard
One of the results is that most standards are extremely difficult to read. The
standards document is a design by committee, and there is little pressure
within the process to make the document clear, concise, accurate, or readable.
In fact, a highly unreadable document is easier to work with, because only a
few of the committee members will understand it, and they can work on it
without being bothered by the other members. Digging through hundreds of
pages of badly written documentation is no fun, so most committee members
end up not reading the full draft and only checking the limited portions of the
standard they are interested in.
22.7.7.2 Functionality
As we already mentioned, interoperability testing is always required. And
of course, different companies implement different things. Quite often, what
ends up being implemented is subtly different from what the standard defines,
and as each company is already marketing its products, it is sometimes too
late to change things. We've seen products of brand A that recognize the
implementations of brand B by their deviations from the standard, and then
adjust their own behavior to make things work.
Standards often include a very large number of options, but the actual
implementations will only use a particular set of options, with a few restrictions
and extensions, of course, because the standards document itself describes
something that doesn't work. And the difference between the actual
implementations and the standard are, of course, not documented.
Overall, the entire process works—kind of—but only for central
functionality. A wireless network will allow you to connect, but management
functionality is unlikely to work across products from different vendors.
Simple HTML pages will display correctly on all browsers, but more advanced

layout features give different results on different browsers. We've all become
so used to this that we hardly notice it.
This situation is unfortunate. As an industry, we seem unable to create
standards that are even readable or correct, let alone provide interoperability
of different products for all but the most basic functionality.
22.7.7. J Security
These failings mean that the typical method of producing standards simply
doesn't work for security purposes. In security, we have an active attacker who
will seek out the most remote corner of the standard. Security also depends on
the weakest link: any single mistake can be fatal.
We've already hammered on the importance of simplicity. Standards are
anything but simple. The committee process precludes simplicity and
invariably produces something that is more complex than anyone in the committee
can fully understand. For that reason alone, the result can never be secure.
When we've spoken to some standardization people about this problem,
we often get responses along the lines of: "Well, the techies always want to
make a perfect standard." ... "Political realities are that we have to make a
compromise." ... "That is just how the system works." ... "Look at what
we have achieved." ... "Things are working pretty well." In security, that
is not good enough. The very fact that interoperability testing is required
after the standard has been set demonstrates that committee standards don't
work in security. If the functional part of the standard (i.e., the easy part)
isn't good enough to result in interoperable systems without testing, then
the security part cannot possibly achieve security without testing. And as we
know, it isn't possible to test for security. Sure, it might be possible to create
an implementation that includes a subset of the functionality of the standard
that is also secure, but that is not sufficient for a security standard. A security
standard claims that if you adhere to it, you will achieve a certain level of
security. Security is simply too difficult to leave to a committee. So whenever
someone suggests using a committee-written cryptography standard, we are
always extremely reluctant to do so.
There are a few useful standards in this field, none of which was written
by a committee. Sometimes you get just a small group of people who create
a single coherent design. And sometimes the result is adopted as a standard
without a lot of political compromises. These standards can be quite good.
We'll discuss the most important two below.
22.1.2 SSL
SSL is the security protocol used by Web browsers to connect securely to Web
servers. The first widely used version was SSL 2, which contained several
security flaws. The improved version is known as SSL 3 [53]. It was designed

by three people without any further committee process. SSL 3 has been widely
used and is generally acknowledged as a good protocol.
A warning: SSL is a good protocol, but that does not mean that any system
that uses SSL is secure. SSL relies on a PKI to authenticate the server, and the
PKI client embedded in most browsers is so permissive that the overall security
level is rather low. One of our browsers has approximately 150 different root
certificates from 70 different CAs. So even before we start looking at active
attacks, there are 35 different organizations spread throughout the world that
we have to trust with all of our Web information.
SSL was never really standardized. It was simply implemented by Netscape,
and became a de facto standard. Standardization and further development of
SSL is being done under the name TLS by an IETF working group. The changes
between SSL and TLS seem fairly minor, and we have no reason to believe that
TLS is not as good as SSL 3. But given the IETF's recent record with designing
security protocols such as IPsec [51], there is a danger of the committee effect
once again asserting itself and unnecessarily complicating a good standard.
22.1.3 AES: Standardization by Competition
To us, AES is the shining example of how to standardize security systems.
AES is not a design by committee, but rather a design by competition. The
new SHA-3 standardization process is proving to be very similar. The process
is rather simple. First you specify what the system is supposed to achieve.
Developing the specifications can be done in a reasonably small group with
inputs from many different sources.
The next step is a call for proposals. You ask experts to develop complete
solutions that satisfy the given requirements. Once the proposals are in, all
that remains is to choose among the proposals. This is a straightforward
competition in which you judge them by a variety of criteria. As long as you
make security the primary criterion, the submitters have a vested interest in
finding security weaknesses in their competitors' proposals. With a bit of luck,
this will lead to useful feedback. In other situations, you might have to pay to
get security evaluations done by outside experts.
In the end, if things go right, you will be able to select a single proposal,
either unchanged or with minor changes. This is not the time to make
an amalgamation of the different proposals; that will just lead to another
committee design. If none of the proposals satisfies the requirements, and it
seems possible to create something better, you should probably ask for new
proposals.
This is exactly how NIST ran the AES competition, and it worked incredibly
well. The 15 original proposals were evaluated in a first round and reduced to
five finalists. A second round of evaluations on the finalists led to the selection
of the winner. Amazingly enough, any one of the five finalists would have

been a good standard, and certainly a better standard than any committee
design. Our main concern is that the AES standardization process may have
been just a little too quick, and there might not have been enough time to
thoroughly analyze all the finalists. But still the process was very good.
The competition model of standardization only works if you have enough
experts to create at least a few competing designs. But in our opinion, if you
don't have enough experts to generate several proposals, you should not be
standardizing any security systems. For reasons of simplicity and consistency,
which are crucial to the overall security, a security system must be designed
by a small group of experts. Then you need other experts to analyze the
proposal and attack it, looking for flaws. To have any hope of getting a good
result—whatever process you use—you need enough experts to form at least
three proposal groups. If you have that many experts, you should use the
competition model, as it is a model that has demonstrated it can produce good
security standards.
22.2 Patents
We had a long discussion about the role of patents in cryptography in the
first edition of this book. The ecosystem surrounding patents has changed
somewhat since then, and we've also learned more. In this book, we're going
to refrain from offering specific advice about patents. But we do want to make
you aware of the fact that patents play a role in cryptography. Patents may
affect which cryptographic protocols you choose to use or not use. We suggest
you contact your lawyer for specific advice regarding patents.
