# 23 Involving Experts

HAPTER

Involving Experts
There is something strange about cryptography: everybody thinks they know
enough about it to design and build their own system. We never ask a second-
year physics student to design a nuclear power plant. We wouldn't let a
trainee nurse who claims to have found a revolutionary method for heart
surgery operate on us. Yet people who have read a book or two think they can
design their own cryptographic system. Worse still, they are sometimes able
to convince management, venture capitalists, and even some customers that
their design is the neatest thing since sliced bread.
Among cryptographers, Bruce's first book, Applied Cryptography [111, 112],
is both famous and notorious. It is famous for bringing cryptography to the
attention of tens of thousands of people. It is notorious for the systems that
these people then designed and implemented on their own.
A recent example is 802.11, the wireless network standard. The initial design
included a secure channel called wired equivalent privacy (WEP) to encrypt
and authenticate wireless communications. The standard was designed by
a committee without any cryptographers. The results were horrible from a
security perspective. The decision to use the RC4 encryption algorithm was
not the best one, but not a fatal flaw in and of itself. However, RC4 is a
stream cipher and needs a unique nonce. WEP didn't allocate enough bits
for the nonce, with the result that the same nonce value had to be reused,
which in turn resulted in many packets being encrypted with the same key
stream. That defeated the encryption properties of the RC4 stream cipher
and allowed a smart attacker to break the encryption. A more subtle flaw
was not hashing the secret key and nonce together before using it as the

RC4 key, which eventually led to key-recovery attacks [52]. A CRC checksum
was used for authentication, but since CRC computations are linear, it was
trivial (using some linear algebra) to modify any packet without any chance of
detection. A single shared key was used for all users in a network, making key
updates much more difficult to do. The network password was used directly
as the encryption key for all communications, without using any kind of key
negotiation protocol. And finally, encryption was turned off by default, which
meant that most implementations never bothered turning encryption on in the
first place. WEP wasn't just broken; it was robustly broken.
Designing a replacement for WEP was not easy, because it had to be
retrofitted to existing hardware. But there was no choice; the security of the
original standard was abysmal. The replacement became WPA.
The WEP story is not exceptional. It got more press than most bad
cryptographic designs because 802.11 is such a successful product, but we have
seen many similar situations in other systems. As a colleague once told Bruce:
"The world is full of bad security systems designed by people who have read
Applied Cryptography."
Cryptography Engineering could have the same effect.
That makes this a very dangerous book. Some people will read this book,
and then turn around and design a cryptographic algorithm or protocol. When
they're finished, they'll have something that looks good to them, and maybe
even works, but will it be secure? Maybe they'll get 70% right. If they're very
lucky, they may get 90% right. But there is no prize for being almost right in
cryptography. A security system is only as strong as its weakest link; to be
secure, everything must be right. And that is something you simply can't learn
from reading books.
So why did we write this book if there's a chance it will lead to bad systems?
We wrote it because people who want to learn how to design cryptographic
systems must learn it somewhere, and we didn't know of any other suitable
books. Consider this book as an introduction to the field, even though it is
not a manual. We also wrote it for the other engineers involved in a project.
Every part of a security system is of critical importance, and everybody who
works on a project has to have a basic understanding of the security issues
and techniques involved. This includes the programmers, testers, technical
writers, management, and even salespeople. Each person needs to understand
enough about security issues to do his or her work properly. We hope this
book provides an adequate background to the practical side of cryptography.
We also hope we've instilled in you a sense of professional paranoia. If
you've learned that, then you've learned a lot. You can apply professional
paranoia to all aspects of your work. You will be extremely skeptical when
you design your own protocol or look at someone else's, and that can only
help improve security.

If we can leave you with one piece of advice, it is to use cryptographic experts
if at all possible. If your project involves cryptography, you will benefit greatly
from the insights of an experienced cryptographic designer. Involve one in
your project at the beginning. The earlier you consult a cryptographic expert,
the cheaper and easier it will be in the long run. Many a time we've been called
to projects well underway, only to poke holes in parts that had long since been
designed or implemented. The end result is always expensive, either in terms
of effort, project schedule, and cost, or in terms of the security for the user of
the end product.
Cryptography is fiendishly difficult to do right. Even the systems designed
by experts fail regularly. It doesn't matter how clever you are, or how
much experience you have in other fields. Designing and implementing
cryptographic systems requires specialized knowledge and experience, and
the only way to get experience is to do it over and over again. And that,
of course, also involves making mistakes. So why get an expert if he makes
mistakes as well? For the same reason you get a qualified surgeon to operate
on you. It is not that they don't make mistakes; it is that they make a lot fewer
and less serious mistakes. And they work in a conservative manner so that
the small mistakes do not lead to catastrophic results; they know enough to
fail well.
Implementing cryptographic systems is almost as much a specialty as
designing them is. Cryptographic designers are available for hire.
Cryptographic implementers are much harder to come by, in part because you
need more of them. A single designer can create work for ten to twenty
implementers. Most people don't think of cryptographic implementation as a
specialty. Programmers will move from database programming to GUI work
to cryptographic implementations. It's true that database programming and
GUI work are also specialties, but an experienced programmer can, with a bit
of study, get reasonable results. This does not hold for implementing
cryptography, where everything must be right, and there's an attacker trying to make
it wrong.
The best way we know to implement cryptographic systems is to take
competent programmers and train them for this task. This book might be part
of their training, but mostly it requires experience and the right professional
paranoia mindset. And just like any other specialized IT skill, it takes years
before someone is truly good at it. Given the long time it takes to gather this
experience, you must be able to retain these people once they achieve it. That's
another problem, and one we will gladly leave to others to solve.
Maybe even more important than this book, or any other, is the project
culture. "Security first" should not just be a slogan; it has to be woven into the
very fabric of the project and the project team. Everybody has to live, breathe,
talk, and think security all the time. This is incredibly hard to achieve, but it can

be done. DigiCash had a team like that in the 1990s. The aviation industry has
a similarly pervasive safety culture. This is something that cannot be achieved
in the short term, but it is certainly something that you can strive toward. This
book is merely a primer on the most important security issues intended for the
more technical people on the team.
As Bruce wrote in Secrets and Lies: "Security is a process, not a product." In
addition to the security culture, you also need a security process. The aviation
industry has an extensive safety process. Most of the IT industry doesn't even
have a process for producing software, let alone a process for high-quality
software, much less a process for security software. Writing good security
software is largely beyond the current state of the art in our industry. That
does not mean we should give up, though, and there has been some progress
lately. As information technology becomes more and more critical to our
infrastructure, our freedom, and our safety, we must continue to improve the
security of our systems. We have to do the best we can.
We hope this book can contribute somewhat to the improvement of our
security systems by teaching those who are working on security systems the
basics of practical cryptography.
