                                                                      CHAPTER 3

This chapter describes the Intel 64 and IA-32 architecture’s protected-mode memory management facilities,
including the physical memory requirements, segmentation mechanism, and paging mechanism.
See also: Chapter 5, “Protection” (for a description of the processor’s protection mechanism) and Chapter 20,
“8086 Emulation” (for a description of memory addressing protection in real-address and virtual-8086 modes).

3.1         MEMORY MANAGEMENT OVERVIEW
The memory management facilities of the IA-32 architecture are divided into two parts: segmentation and paging.
Segmentation provides a mechanism of isolating individual code, data, and stack modules so that multiple
programs (or tasks) can run on the same processor without interfering with one another. Paging provides a mech-
anism for implementing a conventional demand-paged, virtual-memory system where sections of a program’s
execution environment are mapped into physical memory as needed. Paging can also be used to provide isolation
between multiple tasks. When operating in protected mode, some form of segmentation must be used. There is
no mode bit to disable segmentation. The use of paging, however, is optional.
These two mechanisms (segmentation and paging) can be configured to support simple single-program (or single-
task) systems, multitasking systems, or multiple-processor systems that used shared memory.
As shown in Figure 3-1, segmentation provides a mechanism for dividing the processor’s addressable memory
space (called the linear address space) into smaller protected address spaces called segments. Segments can
be used to hold the code, data, and stack for a program or to hold system data structures (such as a TSS or LDT).
If more than one program (or task) is running on a processor, each program can be assigned its own set of
segments. The processor then enforces the boundaries between these segments and insures that one program
does not interfere with the execution of another program by writing into the other program’s segments. The
segmentation mechanism also allows typing of segments so that the operations that may be performed on a partic-
ular type of segment can be restricted.
All the segments in a system are contained in the processor’s linear address space. To locate a byte in a particular
segment, a logical address (also called a far pointer) must be provided. A logical address consists of a segment
selector and an offset. The segment selector is a unique identifier for a segment. Among other things it provides an
offset into a descriptor table (such as the global descriptor table, GDT) to a data structure called a segment
descriptor. Each segment has a segment descriptor, which specifies the size of the segment, the access rights and
privilege level for the segment, the segment type, and the location of the first byte of the segment in the linear
address space (called the base address of the segment). The offset part of the logical address is added to the base
address for the segment to locate a byte within the segment. The base address plus the offset thus forms a linear
address in the processor’s linear address space.

                   Logical Address
                   (or Far Pointer)

                Segment
                Selector     Offset       Linear Address
                                              Space

                                                                          Linear Address
                    Global Descriptor
                                                                    Dir      Table    Offset    Physical
                      Table (GDT)
                                                                                                Address
                                                                                                 Space
                                             Segment
                                                                                   Page Table     Page
                       Segment
                       Descriptor
                                                             Page Directory                     Phy. Addr.
                                             Lin. Addr.
                                                                                      Entry
                                                                  Entry
                       Segment
                   Base Address

                                                           Page

                                  Segmentation                                     Paging

                                         Figure 3-1. Segmentation and Paging

If paging is not used, the linear address space of the processor is mapped directly into the physical address space
of processor. The physical address space is defined as the range of addresses that the processor can generate on
its address bus.
Because multitasking computing systems commonly define a linear address space much larger than it is economi-
cally feasible to contain all at once in physical memory, some method of “virtualizing” the linear address space is
needed. This virtualization of the linear address space is handled through the processor’s paging mechanism.
Paging supports a “virtual memory” environment where a large linear address space is simulated with a small
amount of physical memory (RAM and ROM) and some disk storage. When using paging, each segment is divided
into pages (typically 4 KBytes each in size), which are stored either in physical memory or on the disk. The oper-
ating system or executive maintains a page directory and a set of page tables to keep track of the pages. When a
program (or task) attempts to access an address location in the linear address space, the processor uses the page
directory and page tables to translate the linear address into a physical address and then performs the requested
operation (read or write) on the memory location.
If the page being accessed is not currently in physical memory, the processor interrupts execution of the program
(by generating a page-fault exception). The operating system or executive then reads the page into physical
memory from the disk and continues executing the program.
When paging is implemented properly in the operating-system or executive, the swapping of pages between phys-
ical memory and the disk is transparent to the correct execution of a program. Even programs written for 16-bit IA-
32 processors can be paged (transparently) when they are run in virtual-8086 mode.

3.2           USING SEGMENTS
The segmentation mechanism supported by the IA-32 architecture can be used to implement a wide variety of
system designs. These designs range from flat models that make only minimal use of segmentation to protect

programs to multi-segmented models that employ segmentation to create a robust operating environment in
which multiple programs and tasks can be executed reliably.
The following sections give several examples of how segmentation can be employed in a system to improve
memory management performance and reliability.

3.2.1       Basic Flat Model
The simplest memory model for a system is the basic “flat model,” in which the operating system and application
programs have access to a continuous, unsegmented address space. To the greatest extent possible, this basic flat
model hides the segmentation mechanism of the architecture from both the system designer and the application
programmer.
To implement a basic flat memory model with the IA-32 architecture, at least two segment descriptors must be
created, one for referencing a code segment and one for referencing a data segment (see Figure 3-2). Both of
these segments, however, are mapped to the entire linear address space: that is, both segment descriptors have
the same base address value of 0 and the same segment limit of 4 GBytes. By setting the segment limit to 4
GBytes, the segmentation mechanism is kept from generating exceptions for out of limit memory references, even
if no physical memory resides at a particular address. ROM (EPROM) is generally located at the top of the physical
address space, because the processor begins execution at FFFF_FFF0H. RAM (DRAM) is placed at the bottom of the
address space because the initial base address for the DS data segment after reset initialization is 0.

3.2.2       Protected Flat Model
The protected flat model is similar to the basic flat model, except the segment limits are set to include only the
range of addresses for which physical memory actually exists (see Figure 3-3). A general-protection exception
(#GP) is then generated on any attempt to access nonexistent memory. This model provides a minimum level of
hardware protection against some kinds of program bugs.

                                                                    Linear Address Space
                                                                    (or Physical Memory)
                          Segment                                                      FFFFFFFFH
                          Registers                                         Code
                             CS            Code- and Data-Segment
                                                Descriptors              Not Present
                             SS

                             DS              Access     Limit             Data and
                             ES                Base Address                Stack       0

                             FS

                             GS

                                              Figure 3-2. Flat Model

                                                  Segment          Linear Address Space
                                                 Descriptors       (or Physical Memory)
                           Segment            Access     Limit
                           Registers                                       Code       FFFFFFFFH
                                                Base Address
                              CS
                                                                        Not Present
                              ES
                                                                        Memory I/O
                              SS              Access     Limit
                              DS                Base Address
                                                                         Data and
                              FS                                          Stack

                              GS                                                      0

                                         Figure 3-3. Protected Flat Model

More complexity can be added to this protected flat model to provide more protection. For example, for the paging
mechanism to provide isolation between user and supervisor code and data, four segments need to be defined:
code and data segments at privilege level 3 for the user, and code and data segments at privilege level 0 for the
supervisor. Usually these segments all overlay each other and start at address 0 in the linear address space. This
flat segmentation model along with a simple paging structure can protect the operating system from applications,
and by adding a separate paging structure for each task or process, it can also protect applications from each other.
Similar designs are used by several popular multitasking operating systems.

3.2.3         Multi-Segment Model
A multi-segment model (such as the one shown in Figure 3-4) uses the full capabilities of the segmentation mech-
anism to provide hardware enforced protection of code, data structures, and programs and tasks. Here, each
program (or task) is given its own table of segment descriptors and its own segments. The segments can be
completely private to their assigned programs or shared among programs. Access to all segments and to the
execution environments of individual programs running on the system is controlled by hardware.

                           Segment             Segment                    Linear Address Space
                           Registers          Descriptors                 (or Physical Memory)
                                           Access     Limit
                              CS
                                             Base Address                        Stack
                                           Access     Limit
                              SS
                                             Base Address

                                           Access     Limit
                              DS
                                             Base Address                        Code
                                           Access     Limit
                              ES
                                             Base Address
                                                                                  Data
                                           Access     Limit
                              FS
                                             Base Address
                                                                                  Data
                                           Access     Limit
                              GS
                                             Base Address
                                                                                  Data
                                           Access     Limit
                                             Base Address

                                           Access     Limit
                                             Base Address
                                                                                  Data
                                           Access     Limit
                                             Base Address

                                           Access     Limit
                                             Base Address

                                         Figure 3-4. Multi-Segment Model

Access checks can be used to protect not only against referencing an address outside the limit of a segment, but
also against performing disallowed operations in certain segments. For example, since code segments are desig-
nated as read-only segments, hardware can be used to prevent writes into code segments. The access rights infor-
mation created for segments can also be used to set up protection rings or levels. Protection levels can be used to
protect operating-system procedures from unauthorized access by application programs.

3.2.4       Segmentation in IA-32e Mode
In IA-32e mode of Intel 64 architecture, the effects of segmentation depend on whether the processor is running
in compatibility mode or 64-bit mode. In compatibility mode, segmentation functions just as it does using legacy
16-bit or 32-bit protected mode semantics.
In 64-bit mode, segmentation is generally (but not completely) disabled, creating a flat 64-bit linear-address
space. The processor treats the segment base of CS, DS, ES, SS as zero, creating a linear address that is equal to
the effective address. The FS and GS segments are exceptions. These segment registers (which hold the segment
base) can be used as additional base registers in linear address calculations. They facilitate addressing local data
and certain operating system data structures.
Note that the processor does not perform segment limit checks at runtime in 64-bit mode.

3.2.5       Paging and Segmentation
Paging can be used with any of the segmentation models described in Figures 3-2, 3-3, and 3-4. The processor’s
paging mechanism divides the linear address space (into which segments are mapped) into pages (as shown in
Figure 3-1). These linear-address-space pages are then mapped to pages in the physical address space. The
paging mechanism offers several page-level protection facilities that can be used with or instead of the segment-

protection facilities. For example, it lets read-write protection be enforced on a page-by-page basis. The paging
mechanism also provides two-level user-supervisor protection that can also be specified on a page-by-page basis.

3.3           PHYSICAL ADDRESS SPACE
In protected mode, the IA-32 architecture provides a normal physical address space of 4 GBytes (232 bytes). This
is the address space that the processor can address on its address bus. This address space is flat (unsegmented),
with addresses ranging continuously from 0 to FFFFFFFFH. This physical address space can be mapped to read-
write memory, read-only memory, and memory mapped I/O. The memory mapping facilities described in this
chapter can be used to divide this physical memory up into segments and/or pages.
Starting with the Pentium Pro processor, the IA-32 architecture also supports an extension of the physical address
space to 236 bytes (64 GBytes); with a maximum physical address of FFFFFFFFFH. This extension is invoked in
either of two ways:
•   Using the physical address extension (PAE) flag, located in bit 5 of control register CR4.
•   Using the 36-bit page size extension (PSE-36) feature (introduced in the Pentium III processors).
Physical address support has since been extended beyond 36 bits. See Chapter 4, “Paging” for more information
about 36-bit physical addressing.

3.3.1         Intel® 64 Processors and Physical Address Space
On processors that support Intel 64 architecture (CPUID.80000001H:EDX[29] = 1), the size of the physical
address range is implementation-specific and indicated by CPUID.80000008H:EAX[bits 7-0].
For the format of information returned in EAX, see “CPUID—CPU Identification” in Chapter 3 of the Intel® 64 and
IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A. See also: Chapter 4, “Paging.”

3.4           LOGICAL AND LINEAR ADDRESSES
At the system-architecture level in protected mode, the processor uses two stages of address translation to arrive
at a physical address: logical-address translation and linear address space paging.
Even with the minimum use of segments, every byte in the processor’s address space is accessed with a logical
address. A logical address consists of a 16-bit segment selector and a 32-bit offset (see Figure 3-5). The segment
selector identifies the segment the byte is located in and the offset specifies the location of the byte in the segment
relative to the base address of the segment.
The processor translates every logical address into a linear address. A linear address is a 32-bit address in the
processor’s linear address space. Like the physical address space, the linear address space is a flat (unsegmented),
232-byte address space, with addresses ranging from 0 to FFFFFFFFH. The linear address space contains all the
segments and system tables defined for a system.
To translate a logical address into a linear address, the processor does the following:
1. Uses the offset in the segment selector to locate the segment descriptor for the segment in the GDT or LDT and
   reads it into the processor. (This step is needed only when a new segment selector is loaded into a segment
   register.)
2. Examines the segment descriptor to check the access rights and range of the segment to insure that the
   segment is accessible and that the offset is within the limits of the segment.
3. Adds the base address of the segment from the segment descriptor to the offset to form a linear address.

                                            15            0                 31(63)                      0
                                  Logical    Seg. Selector                   Offset (Effective Address)
                                 Address

                                                  Descriptor Table

                                                       Segment       Base Address
                                                       Descriptor
                                                                                          +

                                                                            31(63)                     0
                                                                                     Linear Address

                             Figure 3-5. Logical Address to Linear Address Translation

If paging is not used, the processor maps the linear address directly to a physical address (that is, the linear
address goes out on the processor’s address bus). If the linear address space is paged, a second level of address
translation is used to translate the linear address into a physical address.
See also: Chapter 4, “Paging.”

3.4.1       Logical Address Translation in IA-32e Mode
In IA-32e mode, an Intel 64 processor uses the steps described above to translate a logical address to a linear
address. In 64-bit mode, the offset and base address of the segment are 64-bits instead of 32 bits. The linear
address format is also 64 bits wide and is subject to the canonical form requirement.
Each code segment descriptor provides an L bit. This bit allows a code segment to execute 64-bit code or legacy
32-bit code by code segment.

3.4.2       Segment Selectors
A segment selector is a 16-bit identifier for a segment (see Figure 3-6). It does not point directly to the segment,
but instead points to the segment descriptor that defines the segment. A segment selector contains the following
items:
Index          (Bits 3 through 15) — Selects one of 8192 descriptors in the GDT or LDT. The processor multiplies
               the index value by 8 (the number of bytes in a segment descriptor) and adds the result to the base
               address of the GDT or LDT (from the GDTR or LDTR register, respectively).
TI (table indicator) flag
              (Bit 2) — Specifies the descriptor table to use: clearing this flag selects the GDT; setting this flag
              selects the current LDT.

                                                  15                                  3 2 1 0

                                                                    Index               T RPL
                                                                                        I

                                            Table Indicator
                                              0 = GDT
                                              1 = LDT
                                            Requested Privilege Level (RPL)

                                               Figure 3-6. Segment Selector

Requested Privilege Level (RPL)
            (Bits 0 and 1) — Specifies the privilege level of the selector. The privilege level can range from 0 to
            3, with 0 being the most privileged level. See Section 5.5, “Privilege Levels”, for a description of the
            relationship of the RPL to the CPL of the executing program (or task) and the descriptor privilege
            level (DPL) of the descriptor the segment selector points to.
The first entry of the GDT is not used by the processor. A segment selector that points to this entry of the GDT (that
is, a segment selector with an index of 0 and the TI flag set to 0) is used as a “null segment selector.” The processor
does not generate an exception when a segment register (other than the CS or SS registers) is loaded with a null
selector. It does, however, generate an exception when a segment register holding a null selector is used to access
memory. A null selector can be used to initialize unused segment registers. Loading the CS or SS register with a null
segment selector causes a general-protection exception (#GP) to be generated.
Segment selectors are visible to application programs as part of a pointer variable, but the values of selectors are
usually assigned or modified by link editors or linking loaders, not application programs.

3.4.3         Segment Registers
To reduce address translation time and coding complexity, the processor provides registers for holding up to 6
segment selectors (see Figure 3-7). Each of these segment registers support a specific kind of memory reference
(code, stack, or data). For virtually any kind of program execution to take place, at least the code-segment (CS),
data-segment (DS), and stack-segment (SS) registers must be loaded with valid segment selectors. The processor
also provides three additional data-segment registers (ES, FS, and GS), which can be used to make additional data
segments available to the currently executing program (or task).
For a program to access a segment, the segment selector for the segment must have been loaded in one of the
segment registers. So, although a system can define thousands of segments, only 6 can be available for immediate
use. Other segments can be made available by loading their segment selectors into these registers during program
execution.

                                   Visible Part                 Hidden Part
                                Segment Selector    Base Address, Limit, Access Information   CS
                                                                                              SS
                                                                                              DS
                                                                                              ES
                                                                                              FS
                                                                                              GS

                                             Figure 3-7. Segment Registers

Every segment register has a “visible” part and a “hidden” part. (The hidden part is sometimes referred to as a
“descriptor cache” or a “shadow register.”) When a segment selector is loaded into the visible part of a segment
register, the processor also loads the hidden part of the segment register with the base address, segment limit, and
access control information from the segment descriptor pointed to by the segment selector. The information cached
in the segment register (visible and hidden) allows the processor to translate addresses without taking extra bus
cycles to read the base address and limit from the segment descriptor. In systems in which multiple processors
have access to the same descriptor tables, it is the responsibility of software to reload the segment registers when
the descriptor tables are modified. If this is not done, an old segment descriptor cached in a segment register might
be used after its memory-resident version has been modified.
Two kinds of load instructions are provided for loading the segment registers:
1. Direct load instructions such as the MOV, POP, LDS, LES, LSS, LGS, and LFS instructions. These instructions
   explicitly reference the segment registers.

2. Implied load instructions such as the far pointer versions of the CALL, JMP, and RET instructions, the SYSENTER
   and SYSEXIT instructions, and the IRET, INTn, INTO and INT3 instructions. These instructions change the
   contents of the CS register (and sometimes other segment registers) as an incidental part of their operation.
The MOV instruction can also be used to store the visible part of a segment register in a general-purpose register.

3.4.4       Segment Loading Instructions in IA-32e Mode
Because ES, DS, and SS segment registers are not used in 64-bit mode, their fields (base, limit, and attribute) in
segment descriptor registers are ignored. Some forms of segment load instructions are also invalid (for example,
LDS, POP ES). Address calculations that reference the ES, DS, or SS segments are treated as if the segment base
is zero.
The processor checks that all linear-address references are in canonical form instead of performing limit checks.
Mode switching does not change the contents of the segment registers or the associated descriptor registers.
These registers are also not changed during 64-bit mode execution, unless explicit segment loads are performed.
In order to set up compatibility mode for an application, segment-load instructions (MOV to Sreg, POP Sreg) work
normally in 64-bit mode. An entry is read from the system descriptor table (GDT or LDT) and is loaded in the
hidden portion of the segment register. The descriptor-register base, limit, and attribute fields are all loaded.
However, the contents of the data and stack segment selector and the descriptor registers are ignored.
When FS and GS segment overrides are used in 64-bit mode, their respective base addresses are used in the linear
address calculation: (FS or GS).base + index + displacement. FS.base and GS.base are then expanded to the full
linear-address size supported by the implementation. The resulting effective address calculation can wrap across
positive and negative addresses; the resulting linear address must be canonical.
In 64-bit mode, memory accesses using FS-segment and GS-segment overrides are not checked for a runtime limit
nor subjected to attribute-checking. Normal segment loads (MOV to Sreg and POP Sreg) into FS and GS load a
standard 32-bit base value in the hidden portion of the segment register. The base address bits above the standard
32 bits are cleared to 0 to allow consistency for implementations that use less than 64 bits.
The hidden descriptor register fields for FS.base and GS.base are physically mapped to MSRs in order to load all
address bits supported by a 64-bit implementation. Software with CPL = 0 (privileged software) can load all
supported linear-address bits into FS.base or GS.base using WRMSR. Addresses written into the 64-bit FS.base
and GS.base registers must be in canonical form. A WRMSR instruction that attempts to write a non-canonical
address to those registers causes a #GP fault.
When in compatibility mode, FS and GS overrides operate as defined by 32-bit mode behavior regardless of the
value loaded into the upper 32 linear-address bits of the hidden descriptor register base field. Compatibility mode
ignores the upper 32 bits when calculating an effective address.
A new 64-bit mode instruction, SWAPGS, can be used to load GS base. SWAPGS exchanges the kernel data struc-
ture pointer from the IA32_KERNEL_GS_BASE MSR with the GS base register. The kernel can then use the GS
prefix on normal memory references to access the kernel data structures. An attempt to write a non-canonical
value (using WRMSR) to the IA32_KERNEL_GS_BASE MSR causes a #GP fault.

3.4.5       Segment Descriptors
A segment descriptor is a data structure in a GDT or LDT that provides the processor with the size and location of
a segment, as well as access control and status information. Segment descriptors are typically created by
compilers, linkers, loaders, or the operating system or executive, but not application programs. Figure 3-8 illus-
trates the general descriptor format for all types of segment descriptors.

                        31                 24 23 22 21 20 19           16 15 14 13 12 11          8 7                0

                                                D   A          Seg.           D
                              Base 31:24      G / L V          Limit      P   P    S       Type         Base 23:16       4
                                                B   L          19:16          L

                        31                                         16 15                                             0

                                   Base Address 15:00                                  Segment Limit 15:00               0

                             L     — 64-bit code segment (IA-32e mode only)
                             AVL — Available for use by system software
                             BASE — Segment base address
                             D/B — Default operation size (0 = 16-bit segment; 1 = 32-bit segment)
                             DPL — Descriptor privilege level
                             G    — Granularity
                             LIMIT — Segment Limit
                             P     — Segment present
                             S     — Descriptor type (0 = system; 1 = code or data)
                             TYPE — Segment type

                                                Figure 3-8. Segment Descriptor

The flags and fields in a segment descriptor are as follows:
Segment limit field
            Specifies the size of the segment. The processor puts together the two segment limit fields to form
            a 20-bit value. The processor interprets the segment limit in one of two ways, depending on the
            setting of the G (granularity) flag:
               •   If the granularity flag is clear, the segment size can range from 1 byte to 1 MByte, in byte incre-
                   ments.
               •   If the granularity flag is set, the segment size can range from 4 KBytes to 4 GBytes, in 4-KByte
                   increments.
               The processor uses the segment limit in two different ways, depending on whether the segment is
               an expand-up or an expand-down segment. See Section 3.4.5.1, “Code- and Data-Segment
               Descriptor Types”, for more information about segment types. For expand-up segments, the offset
               in a logical address can range from 0 to the segment limit. Offsets greater than the segment limit
               generate general-protection exceptions (#GP, for all segments other than SS) or stack-fault excep-
               tions (#SS for the SS segment). For expand-down segments, the segment limit has the reverse
               function; the offset can range from the segment limit plus 1 to FFFFFFFFH or FFFFH, depending on
               the setting of the B flag. Offsets less than or equal to the segment limit generate general-protection
               exceptions or stack-fault exceptions. Decreasing the value in the segment limit field for an expand-
               down segment allocates new memory at the bottom of the segment's address space, rather than at
               the top. IA-32 architecture stacks always grow downwards, making this mechanism convenient for
               expandable stacks.
Base address fields
            Defines the location of byte 0 of the segment within the 4-GByte linear address space. The
            processor puts together the three base address fields to form a single 32-bit value. Segment base
            addresses should be aligned to 16-byte boundaries. Although 16-byte alignment is not required,
            this alignment allows programs to maximize performance by aligning code and data on 16-byte
            boundaries.
Type field     Indicates the segment or gate type and specifies the kinds of access that can be made to the
               segment and the direction of growth. The interpretation of this field depends on whether the
               descriptor type flag specifies an application (code or data) descriptor or a system descriptor. The
               encoding of the type field is different for code, data, and system descriptors (see Figure 5-1). See
               Section 3.4.5.1, “Code- and Data-Segment Descriptor Types”, for a description of how this field is
               used to specify code and data-segment types.

S (descriptor type) flag
              Specifies whether the segment descriptor is for a system segment (S flag is clear) or a code or data
              segment (S flag is set).
DPL (descriptor privilege level) field
             Specifies the privilege level of the segment. The privilege level can range from 0 to 3, with 0 being
             the most privileged level. The DPL is used to control access to the segment. See Section 5.5, “Priv-
             ilege Levels”, for a description of the relationship of the DPL to the CPL of the executing code
             segment and the RPL of a segment selector.
P (segment-present) flag
            Indicates whether the segment is present in memory (set) or not present (clear). If this flag is clear,
            the processor generates a segment-not-present exception (#NP) when a segment selector that
            points to the segment descriptor is loaded into a segment register. Memory management software
            can use this flag to control which segments are actually loaded into physical memory at a given
            time. It offers a control in addition to paging for managing virtual memory.
               Figure 3-9 shows the format of a segment descriptor when the segment-present flag is clear. When
               this flag is clear, the operating system or executive is free to use the locations marked “Available” to
               store its own data, such as information regarding the whereabouts of the missing segment.
D/B (default operation size/default stack pointer size and/or upper bound) flag
             Performs different functions depending on whether the segment descriptor is an executable code
             segment, an expand-down data segment, or a stack segment. (This flag should always be set to 1
             for 32-bit code and data segments and to 0 for 16-bit code and data segments.)
               •   Executable code segment. The flag is called the D flag and it indicates the default length for
                   effective addresses and operands referenced by instructions in the segment. If the flag is set,
                   32-bit addresses and 32-bit or 8-bit operands are assumed; if it is clear, 16-bit addresses and
                   16-bit or 8-bit operands are assumed.
                   The instruction prefix 66H can be used to select an operand size other than the default, and the
                   prefix 67H can be used select an address size other than the default.
               •   Stack segment (data segment pointed to by the SS register). The flag is called the B (big)
                   flag and it specifies the size of the stack pointer used for implicit stack operations (such as
                   pushes, pops, and calls). If the flag is set, a 32-bit stack pointer is used, which is stored in the
                   32-bit ESP register; if the flag is clear, a 16-bit stack pointer is used, which is stored in the 16-
                   bit SP register. If the stack segment is set up to be an expand-down data segment (described in
                   the next paragraph), the B flag also specifies the upper bound of the stack segment.
               •   Expand-down data segment. The flag is called the B flag and it specifies the upper bound of
                   the segment. If the flag is set, the upper bound is FFFFFFFFH (4 GBytes); if the flag is clear, the
                   upper bound is FFFFH (64 KBytes).

                          31                            16 15 14 13 12 11          8 7               0

                                                                D
                                       Available            0   P   S       Type         Available       4
                                                                L

                          31                                                                         0

                                                       Available                                         0

                       Figure 3-9. Segment Descriptor When Segment-Present Flag Is Clear

G (granularity) flag
             Determines the scaling of the segment limit field. When the granularity flag is clear, the segment
             limit is interpreted in byte units; when flag is set, the segment limit is interpreted in 4-KByte units.
             (This flag does not affect the granularity of the base address; it is always byte granular.) When the
             granularity flag is set, the twelve least significant bits of an offset are not tested when checking the

                 offset against the segment limit. For example, when the granularity flag is set, a limit of 0 results in
                 valid offsets from 0 to 4095.
L (64-bit code segment) flag
              In IA-32e mode, bit 21 of the second doubleword of the segment descriptor indicates whether a
              code segment contains native 64-bit code. A value of 1 indicates instructions in this code segment
              are executed in 64-bit mode. A value of 0 indicates the instructions in this code segment are
              executed in compatibility mode. If L-bit is set, then D-bit must be cleared. When not in IA-32e mode
              or for non-code segments, bit 21 is reserved and should always be set to 0.
Available and reserved bits
             Bit 20 of the second doubleword of the segment descriptor is available for use by system software.

3.4.5.1        Code- and Data-Segment Descriptor Types
When the S (descriptor type) flag in a segment descriptor is set, the descriptor is for either a code or a data
segment. The highest order bit of the type field (bit 11 of the second double word of the segment descriptor) then
determines whether the descriptor is for a data segment (clear) or a code segment (set).
For data segments, the three low-order bits of the type field (bits 8, 9, and 10) are interpreted as accessed (A),
write-enable (W), and expansion-direction (E). See Table 3-1 for a description of the encoding of the bits in the
type field for code and data segments. Data segments can be read-only or read/write segments, depending on the
setting of the write-enable bit.

                                      Table 3-1. Code- and Data-Segment Types
                     Type Field                        Descriptor                            Description
                                                         Type
    Decimal        11       10       9       8
                             E       W       A
        0           0        0       0       0            Data        Read-Only
        1           0        0       0       1            Data        Read-Only, accessed
        2           0        0       1       0            Data        Read/Write
        3           0        0       1       1            Data        Read/Write, accessed
        4           0        1       0       0            Data        Read-Only, expand-down
        5           0        1       0       1            Data        Read-Only, expand-down, accessed
        6           0        1       1       0            Data        Read/Write, expand-down
        7           0        1       1       1            Data        Read/Write, expand-down, accessed
                             C       R       A
        8           1        0       0       0            Code        Execute-Only
        9           1        0       0       1            Code        Execute-Only, accessed
       10           1        0       1       0            Code        Execute/Read
       11           1        0       1       1            Code        Execute/Read, accessed
       12           1        1       0       0            Code        Execute-Only, conforming
       13           1        1       0       1            Code        Execute-Only, conforming, accessed
       14           1        1       1       0            Code        Execute/Read, conforming
       15           1        1       1       1            Code        Execute/Read, conforming, accessed

Stack segments are data segments which must be read/write segments. Loading the SS register with a segment
selector for a nonwritable data segment generates a general-protection exception (#GP). If the size of a stack
segment needs to be changed dynamically, the stack segment can be an expand-down data segment (expansion-
direction flag set). Here, dynamically changing the segment limit causes stack space to be added to the bottom of

the stack. If the size of a stack segment is intended to remain static, the stack segment may be either an expand-
up or expand-down type.
The accessed bit indicates whether the segment has been accessed since the last time the operating-system or
executive cleared the bit. The processor sets this bit whenever it loads a segment selector for the segment into a
segment register, assuming that the type of memory that contains the segment descriptor supports processor
writes. The bit remains set until explicitly cleared. This bit can be used both for virtual memory management and
for debugging.
For code segments, the three low-order bits of the type field are interpreted as accessed (A), read enable (R), and
conforming (C). Code segments can be execute-only or execute/read, depending on the setting of the read-enable
bit. An execute/read segment might be used when constants or other static data have been placed with instruction
code in a ROM. Here, data can be read from the code segment either by using an instruction with a CS override
prefix or by loading a segment selector for the code segment in a data-segment register (the DS, ES, FS, or GS
registers). In protected mode, code segments are not writable.
Code segments can be either conforming or nonconforming. A transfer of execution into a more-privileged
conforming segment allows execution to continue at the current privilege level. A transfer into a nonconforming
segment at a different privilege level results in a general-protection exception (#GP), unless a call gate or task
gate is used (see Section 5.8.1, “Direct Calls or Jumps to Code Segments”, for more information on conforming and
nonconforming code segments). System utilities that do not access protected facilities and handlers for some types
of exceptions (such as, divide error or overflow) may be loaded in conforming code segments. Utilities that need to
be protected from less privileged programs and procedures should be placed in nonconforming code segments.

                                                       NOTE
        Execution cannot be transferred by a call or a jump to a less-privileged (numerically higher
        privilege level) code segment, regardless of whether the target segment is a conforming or
        nonconforming code segment. Attempting such an execution transfer will result in a general-
        protection exception.

All data segments are nonconforming, meaning that they cannot be accessed by less privileged programs or proce-
dures (code executing at numerically higher privilege levels). Unlike code segments, however, data segments can
be accessed by more privileged programs or procedures (code executing at numerically lower privilege levels)
without using a special access gate.
If the segment descriptors in the GDT or an LDT are placed in ROM, the processor can enter an indefinite loop if
software or the processor attempts to update (write to) the ROM-based segment descriptors. To prevent this
problem, set the accessed bits for all segment descriptors placed in a ROM. Also, remove operating-system or
executive code that attempts to modify segment descriptors located in ROM.

3.5         SYSTEM DESCRIPTOR TYPES
When the S (descriptor type) flag in a segment descriptor is clear, the descriptor type is a system descriptor. The
processor recognizes the following types of system descriptors:
•   Local descriptor-table (LDT) segment descriptor.
•   Task-state segment (TSS) descriptor.
•   Call-gate descriptor.
•   Interrupt-gate descriptor.
•   Trap-gate descriptor.
•   Task-gate descriptor.
These descriptor types fall into two categories: system-segment descriptors and gate descriptors. System-
segment descriptors point to system segments (LDT and TSS segments). Gate descriptors are in themselves
“gates,” which hold pointers to procedure entry points in code segments (call, interrupt, and trap gates) or which
hold segment selectors for TSS’s (task gates).

Table 3-2 shows the encoding of the type field for system-segment descriptors and gate descriptors. Note that
system descriptors in IA-32e mode are 16 bytes instead of 8 bytes.

                                 Table 3-2. System-Segment and Gate-Descriptor Types
                    Type Field                                               Description
      Decimal        11     10        9      8                32-Bit Mode                      IA-32e Mode
         0           0       0        0      0    Reserved                         Upper 8 bytes of an 16-byte
                                                                                   descriptor
         1           0       0        0      1    16-bit TSS (Available)           Reserved
         2           0       0        1      0    LDT                              LDT
         3           0       0        1      1    16-bit TSS (Busy)                Reserved
         4           0       1        0      0    16-bit Call Gate                 Reserved
         5           0       1        0      1    Task Gate                        Reserved
         6           0       1        1      0    16-bit Interrupt Gate            Reserved
         7           0       1        1      1    16-bit Trap Gate                 Reserved
         8           1       0        0      0    Reserved                         Reserved
         9           1       0        0      1    32-bit TSS (Available)           64-bit TSS (Available)
        10           1       0        1      0    Reserved                         Reserved
        11           1       0        1      1    32-bit TSS (Busy)                64-bit TSS (Busy)
        12           1       1        0      0    32-bit Call Gate                 64-bit Call Gate
        13           1       1        0      1    Reserved                         Reserved
        14           1       1        1      0    32-bit Interrupt Gate            64-bit Interrupt Gate
        15           1       1        1      1    32-bit Trap Gate                 64-bit Trap Gate

See also: Section 3.5.1, “Segment Descriptor Tables”, and Section 7.2.2, “TSS Descriptor” (for more information
on the system-segment descriptors); see Section 5.8.3, “Call Gates”, Section 6.11, “IDT Descriptors”, and Section
7.2.5, “Task-Gate Descriptor” (for more information on the gate descriptors).

3.5.1          Segment Descriptor Tables
A segment descriptor table is an array of segment descriptors (see Figure 3-10). A descriptor table is variable in
length and can contain up to 8192 (213) 8-byte descriptors. There are two kinds of descriptor tables:
•   The global descriptor table (GDT)
•   The local descriptor tables (LDT)

                                                    Global                      Local
                                                   Descriptor                 Descriptor
                                                  Table (GDT)                Table (LDT)

                              T
                              I                      TI = 0                     TI = 1
                           Segment
                           Selector
                                                                     56                      56

                                                                     48                      48

                                                                     40                      40

                                                                     32                      32

                                                                     24                      24

                                                                     16                      16

                                                                     8                       8
                                               First Descriptor in
                                               GDT is Not Used       0                       0

                                                GDTR Register                LDTR Register
                                                          Limit                      Limit
                                                 Base Address               Base Address
                                                                          Seg. Sel.

                                      Figure 3-10. Global and Local Descriptor Tables

Each system must have one GDT defined, which may be used for all programs and tasks in the system. Optionally,
one or more LDTs can be defined. For example, an LDT can be defined for each separate task being run, or some or
all tasks can share the same LDT.
The GDT is not a segment itself; instead, it is a data structure in linear address space. The base linear address and
limit of the GDT must be loaded into the GDTR register (see Section 2.4, “Memory-Management Registers”). The
base address of the GDT should be aligned on an eight-byte boundary to yield the best processor performance. The
limit value for the GDT is expressed in bytes. As with segments, the limit value is added to the base address to get
the address of the last valid byte. A limit value of 0 results in exactly one valid byte. Because segment descriptors
are always 8 bytes long, the GDT limit should always be one less than an integral multiple of eight (that is, 8N – 1).
The first descriptor in the GDT is not used by the processor. A segment selector to this “null descriptor” does not
generate an exception when loaded into a data-segment register (DS, ES, FS, or GS), but it always generates a
general-protection exception (#GP) when an attempt is made to access memory using the descriptor. By initializing
the segment registers with this segment selector, accidental reference to unused segment registers can be guar-
anteed to generate an exception.
The LDT is located in a system segment of the LDT type. The GDT must contain a segment descriptor for the LDT
segment. If the system supports multiple LDTs, each must have a separate segment selector and segment
descriptor in the GDT. The segment descriptor for an LDT can be located anywhere in the GDT. See Section 3.5,
“System Descriptor Types”, for information on the LDT segment-descriptor type.
An LDT is accessed with its segment selector. To eliminate address translations when accessing the LDT, the
segment selector, base linear address, limit, and access rights of the LDT are stored in the LDTR register (see
Section 2.4, “Memory-Management Registers”).
When the GDTR register is stored (using the SGDT instruction), a 48-bit “pseudo-descriptor” is stored in memory
(see top diagram in Figure 3-11). To avoid alignment check faults in user mode (privilege level 3), the pseudo-
descriptor should be located at an odd word address (that is, address MOD 4 is equal to 2). This causes the

processor to store an aligned word, followed by an aligned doubleword. User-mode programs normally do not store
pseudo-descriptors, but the possibility of generating an alignment check fault can be avoided by aligning pseudo-
descriptors in this way. The same alignment should be used when storing the IDTR register using the SIDT instruc-
tion. When storing the LDTR or task register (using the SLDT or STR instruction, respectively), the pseudo-
descriptor should be located at a doubleword address (that is, address MOD 4 is equal to 0).

                                       47                         16 15           0
                                            32-bit Base Address           Limit

                                       79                         16 15           0
                                            64-bit Base Address           Limit

                                    Figure 3-11. Pseudo-Descriptor Formats

3.5.2          Segment Descriptor Tables in IA-32e Mode
In IA-32e mode, a segment descriptor table can contain up to 8192 (213) 8-byte descriptors. An entry in the
segment descriptor table can be 8 bytes. System descriptors are expanded to 16 bytes (occupying the space of two
entries).
GDTR and LDTR registers are expanded to hold 64-bit base address. The corresponding pseudo-descriptor is 80
bits. (see the bottom diagram in Figure 3-11).
The following system descriptors expand to 16 bytes:
    — Call gate descriptors (see Section 5.8.3.1, “IA-32e Mode Call Gates”)
    — IDT gate descriptors (see Section 6.14.1, “64-Bit Mode IDT”)
    — LDT and TSS descriptors (see Section 7.2.3, “TSS Descriptor in 64-bit mode”).

